Triumph — of the" i — American Nation Lewis Paul Todd Merle Curti IIARCOl'RT BRACE JOVANOVICH, PIBI.ISHERS Orlando San Diego Chicago Dallas Lewis Paul Todd has acquired national distinction as a writer and teacher of Amencan history and related subjects. Dr. Todd is widely known among social studies teachers for his textbook writing and for his many articles and editorials in social studies journals, especially Social Education, the official journal of the National Council for the Social Studies, which Dr. Todd edited for many years. Merle Curti is Frederick Jackson Turner Professor of American History, Emeritus, at the University of Wisconsin (Madison). He has lectured at many American colleges, at Cambridge University, and at the University of Tokyo. Professor Curti has been president of the American Historical Association, the highest honor a historian in the United States can receive. He also has been granted many awards for distinguished scholarship and histoncal writing, among them the Pulitzer Prize in history for The Growth of American Thought. Phyllis A. Baitey Office ol Social Studies Baltimore County Public Schools Towson, Maryland Brenda Clack Teacher Flint Schools of Choice Flint, Michigan Marv Elbert Social Studies Coordinator District U-46 Elgin. Illinois Randall 6. Felton High School Curriculum Coordinator Leon County District Schools Tallahassee. Florida Vivian Gluck Assistant Principal Supervision Social Studies Stuyvesant High School New Ybrk, New York Supplement 6 1990 by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Inc Copyright C 1986 by Harcourt Brace Jovarxwich. Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any Information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher Requests tor permission to make copies of any part of Ihe work should be mailed to: Copyrights and Permissions Department. Harcoun Brace Jcvanovtch Publishers. Orlando, Florida 32887 Note: This work Is a revision of RISE OF THE AMERICAN NATION, LIBERTY EDITION by Lewis Paul Todd and Merle Curti. copyright c 1982.1977.1972. 1969. 1966, 1964. 1961, copyright 1950 by Harcoun Brace Jovanovtch, Inc, Some of the matenal in this work previously appeared In THE AMERICAN NATION: RECONSTRUCTION TO THE PRESENT by Lewis Paul Todd and Merle Curb, copyright < 1986 by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Inc For permission to reprint copyrighted material, grateful acknowledgment is made to the following sources: The Atlantic Monthly From 'Letters From the Dust Bowl" by Caroline A, Henderson Copyright e 1936 by Caroline A. Henderson Originally published in The Atlantic Monthly. Barnes a Noble, Inc.: From "An Account ol the Province ot Carolina by Samuei Wilson, 1682" (Relitied: "Carolina, 1682") trom Narratives ol Early Carolina, f650-f 708, edited by Alexander S Salley, Jr. Published by Charles Scribner's Sons. Sara Katz Teacher East High School Denver. Colorado William Kirtley Teacher Medtord Senior High School Medtord, Oregon Norma J. Peters Supervisor of Social Studies Roanoke County Public Schools Salem, Virginia Gary Smuts Department Head of Social Studies Cerritos High School Cerritos, California Continued on page 1058 Building the Colonies Exploring the Americas (Beginnings to 1624) 2 1. The first Americans discover and settle a new world. 3 American Profiles: Nampeyo 7 Americana; Totem Poles as Art 9 2. Portugal and Spain lead the way to the Americas. 10 3. Portuguese and Spaniards explore the New World, 14 4. Portugal and Spain plant their civilizations in the Americas. 17 5. England challenges Spain and gains a foothold in North America. 20 Decisive Moments: England's Rise to Power 22 Sources: Magna Carta (1215) 24 Developing History Study Skills: Using Textbook Features 26 Expansion of British Power (1620-1763) 30 1. Pilgrims and Puritans search for a better life in North America. 31 Sources The Mayflower Compact {1620) 34 2. English settlers build more colonies in New England. 36 Decisive Moments: Lessons from Salem 37 3. People from several nations settle the Middle Colonies. 40 Sources: English Bill of Rights (1689) 42 Americana Edward Hicks, Quaker Artist 43 4. A distinctive way of life develops in the Southern Colonies. 44 5. New France grows and threatens the British colonies. 47 6. Great Britain smashes French power In North America. 49 American Profiles: Benjamin Franklin 50 Developing History Study Skills: Charting Information 54 American Cultural Beginnings Changing Ways (1607-1763) The southern planters seem more English than American. Eliza Lucas The townspeople mix English with American ideas. The pioneers gradually become the new Americans. The Africans are denied a share in colonial life. Spirituals — the Soul of a People Eli Whitney's Machine Disappearing Forests The Indians play a major role in colonial history. Deganawidah's Vision Developing Hisioi y Si. Understanding Economic Terms Democracy In Colonial America Changing Ways (1607-1763) 1. Religious tolerance spreads through the colonies. The Rhode Island Charter (1663) The Maryland Toleration Act (1649) The Pennsylvania Charter of Privileges (1701) 2. Freedom to leam and to think strike fertile soil. Hornbooks and Lessons •Vmencari Pityiies: Phillis Wheatley Poor Richard's Almanac (1758) Summarizing Information Protection of A Free Press The colonists gain valuable experience in self-government. Fundamental Orders of Connecticut (1639) Colonial legislative assemblies gain power in America. 2. 3. 4. 4. Winning Independence Moving Toward Independence (1763-1775) Great Britain regulates colonial industry and trade. The British face new problems in governing their empire. Americana: Amencan Protest Movements The colonists oppose taxation without representation Tensions increase between Great Britain and the colonies. American Profiles: Crispus Attucks The gap between Great Britain and the colonies grows wider. Sources: Declaration and Resolves of the First Continental Congress (1774) Developing History Study Skills: Determining Cause-Effect Relationships The Struggle for Independence (1775-1783) British-American differences break out in open war. Tills Changing Land: The Aging of the Nation Sources: Patrick Henry's Speech before the Virginia Convention 11775) The colonists decide to fight for their independence. Decisive Moments The Choice was Theirs The Declaration of Independence British plans for an early victory end in disaster. Sources: Thomas Paine's "The Crisis" (1776) American Patriots defeat the British army. Events off the battlefield lead to an American victory. American Profiles: James Armistead Americana: The Pioneer's Partner Developing History Study Skills: Identifying Bias vii El Forming a Confederation (1775-1787) 150 1. The former colonies create new state governments. 151 American Profiles: Abigail Adams 152 Sources; Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom 11786) 153 2. The states unite under the Articles of Confederation. 155 Sources: Articles of Confederation (1781) 155 Sources: The Northwest Ordinance (1787) 157 3. The Confederation lacks the power to solve important problems. 159 Americana: The Era of Clipper Ships 160 Developing History Study Skills: Reviewing Map Basics 164 Creating a Federal Union (1787-1789) 168 1. A spirit of compromise prevails at the Constitutional Convention. 169 American Profiles: John Fitch 172 2. The states ratify the Constitution only after heated debate. 173 Americana Essays for All Time 174 3. The Constitution establishes a workable form of government. 175 4. The Constitution separates and balances the powers of government. 177 5. The Constitution seeks to safeguard individual liberty. 179 Developing History Study Skills: Reading Charts 181 6. The Constitution is a flexible, living document. 183 Decisive Moments The Doctrine of Judicial Review 184 The Constitution of the United States of America Bicentennial erf the Constitution 219 Building the Nation A Strong Start for the Nation (1789-1801) 222 1. The new federal government is organized. 223 2. Congress deals with the nation's money problems. 22< Americana George Bingham. Frontier Artist 228 3. The national government adopts a foreign policy. 229 Sources Washington's Farewell Address (1796) 230 Decisive Moment:. Opening the Northwest Territory 231 4. Political parties develop an active role. 232 5. The Federalist Party struggles to stay in power. 234 American Profiles: John Jay 235 6. Federalist ideas and methods persist under the Republicans. 237 Sources: Marbury v. Madison (1803) 238 Developing History Study Skill Analyzing a Painting 24C viii The Nation's Growth (1801-1817) 1. The nation doubles in size under President Jefferson. The Mighty Mississippi So u c Jefferson's First Inaugural Address (1801) 2. The natron grows stronger during Jefferson's administration. Decatur's Achievement 3. The war in Europe creates serious problems for the United States. American Profiles Tecumseh 4. Americans again fight the British in the War of 1812. American Symbol of a Nation Developing Histar y Study S Reading a Time Line Gaining Prosperity and Respect (18)7-1825) 1. The Industrial Revolution reaches the United States. A meric Protector of Inventions 2. New leaders develop the "American System." 3. The growing nation struggles with new and complex problems. McCulloch v Maryland (1819) 4. The United States warns Europe to stay out of the Western Hemisphere. The Monroe Doctrine (1823) 5. American education and arts reveal pride in the growing nation. American Profiles Benjamin Banneker Developing History Study Skill: Applying Economic Terms Growing Democratic Strength (1825-1845) 1. Andrew Jackson emerges as "the people's choice." The Hermitage 2. The people take a more active part in government. American Profiles John Chapman Decisive Moment: The Black Hawk War — Whose Land? 3. Andrew Jackson exercises his Presidential powers. Jackson vetoes the Bank Bill (1832) Sour.; Webster's Reply to Hayne (1830) 4. The Jacksonian era ends in an economic depression. Developing History Study Skills: Analyzing Information ix mmmam The Rise of Sectionalism Building New Northern Industries Changing Ways (1820's-1860's) 1. Improved transportation unites the nation and stimulates business. 2. Wage earners help create the early industrial system. This Changing Land The Great Lakes .'inn.:an prof; Sarah G. Bagley 3. Immigration swells the nation's rapidly growing population. Ameri. Ellis Island Developing History Study '.Kills Formulating a Thesis Statement Creating a Southern Economy Changing Ways (I820's-1860's) 1. The southern states develop into the Cotton Kingdom. American John C. Calhoun 2. The planters control the positions of power. Southern Plantations 3. The slaves play leading roles in the development of the South. Developing History Study Skills Developing a Structured Overview Expanding the Nation's Boundaries Changing Ways 11820's-1860 s) 1. Fur traders and settlers expand into the Oregon country. The Varied Lands of the West Amer ce Elizabeth Hart Spalding 2. American settlers create the Lone Star Republic of Texas. The Battle of San Jacinto 3. War with Mexico adds the entire Southwest to the nation. 4. A surge of migration brings California into the Union. A Monument in Gratitude I <evt'i'jping History Study Reading a Historical Map 3* 34' 34? 35t 35: 35? Working for Reform Changing Ways (1820's-1860's) 366 1. Reformers struggle to improve American life. 367 Decisive Moments Women's Quest for Education 368 Souk The Seneca Falls Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions (1848) 369 American Profiles Ernestine L Rose 371 2. Free public education makes a promising start 372 Sources Horace Mann on Education (1848) 372 3. A strong movement develops to abolish slavery. 374 4. The antislavery movement begins to divide the nation. 377 Americana: Lifelines to Freedom 379 5. Writers preach faith in democracy and the individual. 382 Sources; Whitman's Preface to Leaves of Grass f 1855) 384 Developing History Study Skills: Composing an Essay 385 The Nation Torn Apart Crisis and Compromise (1845-1861) 392 1. The North and South maintain an uneasy political balance. 393 2. The Compromise of 1850 eases mounting tensions. 395 3. The long period of compromise finally comes to an end. 398 American Profiles John C. Fremont 402 4. The North and South move steadily toward war. 403 Sources: Dred Scott v. Sanford 11857) 403 Americana: Harpers Ferry — A Strategic Location 404 5. Southern states withdraw from the Union and war begins. 405 Decisive Moments: The Firing on Fort Sumter 408 Developing History Study Skills: Analyzing Primary Sources 409 A Nation Divided (1861-1865) 412 1. The North and South develop their war strategies. 413 2. The North and South struggle through four years of conflict. 416 Sources: Lincoln's Gettysburg Address (1863) 419 Decisive Moments: Grant's Appointment 420 American Profiles; Clara Barton 421 3. Freeing the slaves becomes a goal for the Union. 422 4. The war brings severe hardship and suffering to the South. 426 5. Ufe behind Union lines undergoes important changes. 428 Americana: Battle of the Ironclads 430 Sources Homestead Act (1862) 430 This Changing Land: Regulating Water Rights 432 6. The Union faces political problems at home and abroad. 433 Developing History Study Skills Understanding Biographical Accounts 437 xi Rebuilding the Nation chapter Restoring the South to the Union 11865-1900) President Lincoln strives for lenient reconstruction Americana The Lincoln Memorial Developing :■ iistory Study Sic 11 Is: Analyzing Viewpoints The nation struggles to restore order to the South. The Radical Republicans enact a program of reconstruction. White southerners regain control of their state governments. American Profiles: Hiram Revels The New South advances in agriculture, industry, and education. Black southerners struggle for a place in the New South. Decisive Moments: A Setback for Racial Equality Severe Trials for Democracy (1865-1897) 1. Graft and corruption spread in the postwar years. American? The POny Express 2. A start is made toward restoring honest government. American Profile Thomas Nast 3. Efforts at political reform move forward. Developing History Study Skills: Analyzing Political Cartoons Settling the Last Frontier 11865-1900) 1. The Indians make their last stand on the Great Plains this Changing Land: The Great Plains Decisive Moments:Uniting East and West 2. The government tries to Americanize the Indians. American Profiles Sarah Winnemucca Ranchers build a cattle kingdom on the plains American? Wild West Shows Developing History Study Skills: Connecting Ideas in Paragraphs 4. Farmers plow the tough sod of the last frontier. 5. Miners find new treasure in the western mountains. The Rise of Industrialism The Growth of American industry Changing Ways |! 860's-1890 sJ 1. Transportation and communication systems bind the nation together. Decisive Mo men t Laying the Transatlantic Cable 2. Expanding business creates more products for more people. 3. New forms of business organization appear as industry expands. Mom-and-Pop Stores 4. Business pioneers give new directions to American life. Horatio Alger, Jr. Developing History Study Interpreting Economic Statistics The Struggle to Organize Workers Changing Ways (1860's-1890's) 1. Industrialism creates new problems for wage earners. 2. Immigration adds strength and variety to American society. Immigration Patterns — Then and Now 3. Wage earners organize to overcome their grievances. Amei. can. Thomas Anshutz, Labor's Artist 4. Organized labor faces opposition as it seeks reforms. American Profile Jacob Coxey Developing History Study Skills Understanding Economic Reports Farmers Revolt Against Big Business Changing Ways (I860's-I890's) 1. Farm life remains laborious, but simple. Winslow Homer, Landscapist 2. Farmers face complex new problems in the industrial age. 3. Farm organizationsjoin efforts to regulate the railroads. Alexander Graham Bell Sources Munn v. Illinois (1877) 4. Farm organizations put increasing pressure on government. 5. The farmers fail to win control of the national government. Developing 1 flstory Study Skills: Identifying Assumptions Life Styles in the New Industrial Age Changing Ways (1860's-l 890'sj 1. Cities grow and change under the impact of industrialism. American Profiles. Maria Mitchell 2. Education responds to the changing patterns of American life. 3. American writing reflects the new industrial age. 4. Architecture and other fine arts respond to a changing society. 5. New forms of recreation enrich American life. Americana Baseball, the National Sport Developing History Study Skills: Using a Photograph as a Documentary Source The Arrival of Reform chapter The Square Deal and the New Freedom (1897-1920) The progressives open the door to reform in America. Decisive Moments: Willard's Crusade — First Steps The progressives promote more democratic forms of government. Theodore Roosevelt promises Americans a "Square Deal." Theodore Roosevelt's "New Nationalism" Speech (1910) Roosevelt acts to conserve America's natural resources. Americana Thomas Moran, Western Artist The progressive movement gains and loses under Taft, Wilson's "New Freedom" expands opportunities for Americans. Wilson's "New Freedom" Speech (1912) Wilson on American Ideals (1914) American Profiles: Ida B. Wells-Barnett Developing History Study Ski s Expressing Viewpoints xiv New Directions In American Life Changing Ways 11900-1920) 614 1. New inventions and new ideas revolutionize American industry. 615 Americana: Rusticana, the Shape of Barns 618 2. The lives of farmers improve in the early 1900's. 618 3. Conditions improve for industrial workers in the United States. 620 American Profiles: Louis D. Brandeis 621 This Changing Land: The Rise of Cities 623 Developing History Study Skills Interpreting a Map for Economic Purposes 624 wil ■ Becoming a World Power American Expansion Overseas (1898-1914) 1. American interest in expansion abroad increases. 2. The war with Spain turns the United States into a colonial power. Americana: Symbol of Journalism's Best 3. The United States takes over the Philippines, Hawaii, and Samoa. 4. The United States plays a larger role in East Asia. American Profiles Pearl Buck Developing History study Skills: Determining Fallacies in Reasoning Expansion in the Caribbean (1898-1914) 1. Americans begin to build an empire in the Caribbean. American Profiles; John Milton Hay Decisive Moments The Conquest of Yellow Fever 2. The United States modifies and strengthens the Monroe Doctrine. Americana: The Nation s Printer 3. Conflict breaks out between the United States and Mexico. Developing History Study Skills Composing an Expository Essay xv Involvement in World War I (1914-1920) 1. Peacekeeping efforts fail and World War I breaks out. Jeannette Rankin The World's Ocean 2. The United States attempts to remain neutral. 3. The United States declares war and mobilizes its strength. Tomb of the Unknown Soldiers 4. American troops and ideals help the Allies win the war. 5. The United States refuses to join the League of Nations. The Choice that Made a Difference Comparing Historical Accounts TEN The Golden Twenties and the New Deal chapter A Decade of Prosperity Ends In a Crash (1920-1932) 696 1. The Democrats lose popularity and face growing unrest 697 Americana Ben Shahn, Artist for a Cause 700 2. Republicans assume responsibility for running the country. 701 American Profiles Amelia Earhart 702 3. The Great Depression shatters the prosperity of the 1920's. 705 Herbert Hoover's "Rugged Individualism" Speech 11928) 706 Developing History Study Skills: Reading Economic Graphs 711 xv i The Great Depression and the New Deal (1933-1941 ] New Deal measures provide relief and speedy recovery. Franklin D. Roosevelt's First Inaugural Address 11933) Will Rogers Recovery measures stimulate agriculture and industry. Grant Wood. Artist of Farm Life 3. The New Deal carries out reform measures. The Tennessee Valley Authority 4. Opposition increases toward New Deal policies and programs. Developing History Study Skills Classifying Economic Policies 5. New Deal reforms continue despite growing criticism. 6. The New Deal's great experiment comes to an end. Decades in Contrast Changing Ways (1920-1939) 1. Machines continue to transform countryside, town, and city. Amtric.-n Prof! Willa Cather 2. Industrialization speeds up changes in American society. De c .. ve V om en ts: Prohibition — A Timely Reform 3. The depression drastically alters people's lives. 4. America's minorities struggle against hard times and discrimination. Jacob Lawrence, Harlem Artist 5. Literature and the arts reflect changing ways and times. Developing History Study Skills: Investigating Oral History Isolationism Through World War II The Nation Moves Toward Isolationism (1920-1932) 766 1. America closes its doors to Europe's people and goods. 767 2. The United States moves toward the Good Neighbor Policy. 769 3. Americans cooperate with other nations in efforts to prevent war. 771 American Profiles Bernard M. Baruch 773 Americana The Washington Monument 774 Develop ng History Study Sk Reading a Special Purpose Map 775 chapter From Isolationism to War (1932-1941) J. The United States broadens its relations with other countries. Americana: The Nation's Commonwealth Sources: Proclamation of Philippine Independence 11946) Source: Abrogation of the Platt Amendment 11934) 2. Americans try to follow a policy of isolationism. 3. The nation finds isolationism difficult to maintain. Sources: Franklin D. Roosevelt's "Four Freedoms" Speech 11941) This Changing Land: Irrigation Projects 4. The United States becomes involved in World War II. American Profiles: Holocaust Survivors Developing History Study Skills: Using a Map as a Documentary chapter Americans In World War II (1941-1945) 1. The Allies overcome early disasters and begin an offensive. 2. Americans accept controls and win the "battle of production. American Profiles The Navajo "Code-Talkers" 3. The Allies gradually fight their way to victory in Europe, decisive Moments: No Advance Beyond the Elbe 4. Allied victories in the Pacific bring an end to World War II A m e r i c a na I wo Jima, History in Sculpture Developing History Study Skills: Evaluating Decisions xviii 1*1* Reshaping the Postwar World Responsibilities of World Leadership {1945-1960) 824 1. The United States helps to organize the United Nations. 825 2. The United States and the USSR, engage in a cold war. 826 Sources: The Marshall Plan (1947) 828 3. Growing nationalism and Communist aggression lead to war in Asia. 830 This Changing Land. The Vanishing Family Farm 832 4. The United States continues to meet the challenges of communism. 835 American Profiles : John Foster Dulles 836 Sources Dwight D. Eisenhower's Disarmament Proposals 11955) 840 Americana National Air and Space Museum 841 Developiihi Hir.tory Study Skill: Evaluating Historical Interpretations 842 Returning to Peace and Prosperity (1945-1960) 846 1. President Truman promotes a Fair Deal program. 847 Composing a Comparative Essay 851 2. President Eisenhower encourages modern Republicanism 853 American Profiles: Charles Richard Drew 854 3. The nation admits two states and prospers during Eisenhower's Presidency 858 Americana Jackson Pollock, Abstract Artist 861 Age of Advancement Changing Ways 11945-1960) 864 1. Science and technology make revolutionary advances. 865 American Profiles. Eleanor Roosevelt 866 2. The nation builds an economy of abundance. 868 3. Most Americans enjoy the advantages of a booming economy. 871 Americana: Life in Suburbia 872 4. Poverty in a land of abundance haunts the nation's minorities. 875 Decisive Moments: One Courageous No Started It All 878 Developing History Study Skills: Determining a Frame of Reference 879 THIRTEEN Into a New Era Domestic Developments (! 960-1984) 1. Kennedy calls the nation to a "New Frontier." Source' John F. Kennedy's Inaugural Address (1961) 2. Johnson urges Americans to build the "Great Society." 3. Nixon promises "to bring America together." American Prof, i Vietnam Veterans 4. The Watergate scandals force Nixon to resign. 5. President Ford completes Nixon's second term. 6. Presidents Carter and Reagan face critical domestic problems. Americana: Presidential Libraries Developing History Study Skills, Generalizing from the Visual Record A New Role in World Affairs () 960-1984) 1. The United States assumes global responsibilities. 2. The United States becomes deeply involved in Vietnam. Source The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution (1964) Americana The Selective Service System 3. World tensions are relaxed during the Nixon and Ford administrations. This Changing Lane Planet Earth and Beyond 4. President Carter's foreign policy produces mixed results. 5. World tensions increase during President Reagan's administration. American Profiles Jesse Jackson Developing History Study Skills: Interpreting News Stories chapter Reaching for Freedom's Promise Changing Ways (1960-1984) 1. New patterns of population growth and distribution alter ways of life. The Statue of Liberty 2. Black Americans demand equal rights and opportunities. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s "I Have a Dream" Speech (1963) Coretta Scott King 3. Hispanics share the struggle for freedom and justice. 4. Indians refuse to accept the role of "vanishing Americans." Comparing Maps 5. Women redouble efforts to win equal rights and opportunities. chapter Into the Future Changing Ways (1960-1984) 1. Americans begin to reexamine their goals. Claude Pepper 2. American economic issues remain a source of continuing concern. 3. The United States searches for an energy policy. The National Archives 4. Americans share a growing awareness of environmental issues. The Banning of DDT .. - i Making Economic Decisions The American Nation 990-999 History of the United States Flag 998 States of the United States 999 The American People 1000-06 The American Government 1007-13 The American Economy 1014-21 Important Events in American History 1022-30 Glossary 1031-40 Index 1041-57 | Acknowledgments 1058-60 Update Challenges of the Future (1984 ro the Present) 1. Bush replaces Reagan as the nation's leader. 2. Tension highlights America's world involvement. 3. Americans reexamine their goals and values 4. United States population patterns continue to change 1061 1062 1064 1067 1072 xxi AMERICAN PROFILES John Jay (1745 — 1829) John Jay's name is often missing from lists of famous colonial leaders. Jay contributed much, however, to the start of the new nation. He was first widely honored for his work on the peace commission at the end of the Revolutionary War. The resulting Treaty of Paris, due largely to Jay's negotiations, was favorable to the United States. In 1784 Congress appointed Jay Secretary of Foreign Affairs. He soon became convinced, however, that the United States needed a stronger central government. For this reason, he contributed five papers on foreign affairs to The Federalist After the new government was formed under the Constitution, George Washington appointed Jay the first Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. In 1794 Jay was sent on a diplomatic mission to Britain to avert war. While the treaty, now called Jay's Treaty, succeeded in averting war, its concessions — especially on freedom of the seas — caused angry American mobs to denounce Jay and burn him in effigy. Demoralized and realizing his chances of succeeding Washington as President were ruined, Jay resigned as Chief Justice. Jay's contributions, however, will always be recognized by students of American history. r. Although many members of his own 7 were demanding war, Adams tried once to secure peace. In 1799 he sent another of commissioners to Paris. By the time the Americans arrived, Napo- had overthrown the government and himself dictator of France. Napoleon ' to begin his rule free from conflicts foreign nations. Thus he was eager to a settlement with the United States. The Americans and the French agreed to Jon the old treaty of 1778. The United agreed to drop its claims against France illegally seizing American ships. Neverthe- the French continued to seize American TM that attempted to trade with the British. In spite of the agreement's shortcomings, ;Jsnt Adams had avoided full-scale war France. Like Washington before him, believed that the infant nation could rL~e only if it avoided European conflicts, iwiding war. President Adams sacrificed If popularity that he might have enjoyed <:!li his own party. Ik Allen and Sedition Acts. In 1798, while ■i-French feeling was running high, the Federalist majority in Congress passed a series of laws designed, they said, to unite the country. It was generally understood, however, that these new laws would also weaken the Republican Party. These measures, often called the Alien and Sedition Acts, included four different laws. Congress passed these laws against the advice of President Adams and other party leaders. The Naturalization Act stated that aliens, or foreigners, must reside in the United States for 14 years before they could become naturalized citizens. Up to that time, only 5 years of United States residence had been required. Congress said that this act would protect the country from enemy aliens in wartime. However, since most newcomers joined the Republican Party as soon as they became citizens, the real reason for the law was clear. The Federalist Party wanted to remain in office. The Alien Act authorized the President to expel "all such aliens as he shall judge dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States" or those involved in plots against the government. The Alien Enemies Act authorized the President, in time of war or invasion, to imprison or banish any foreigners the Pres- Gilbert Stuart painted this portrait of John Adams in 1815. Both Adams and his sometime political rival Thomas Jefferson died on July 4. 1826—the fiftieth anniversary of the republic. ident considered a danger to public security. The Federalists said that these two laws were necessary war precautions. It was clear, though, that they could also be used to silence anti-Federalist opinion. After all, a Federalist President would be able to decide which aliens were "dangerous" to American security. The Sedition Act was intended to silence American citizens themselves. Sedition means, among other things, the use of language to stir up discontent or rebellion against a government. Under the Sedition Act, fines and imprisonment could silence anybody who wrote, said, or printed anything "false, scandalous, and malicious" against the government, the Congress, or the President "with intent to de- fame." If these laws had been fully enforced, they would have ended all opposition to the Federalist Party. The Naturalization Act went into effect at once. The Alien Act and the Alien I Enemies Act were not enforced, but the men threat of them drove many French aliens from the country. Likewise, fear of punishmnl under the Sedition Act undoubtedly kept mam Americans silent. Twenty-five persons were prosecuted unde the Sedition Act. Ten —all Republicans and most of them newspaper publishers-wen fined and jailed. The Sedition Act thus inte- fered with freedom of the press and freedomi speech, two principles protected by the First Amendment and deeply cherished by Americans then and now. Many Americans believes that the Alien and Sedition Acts were unjusi attempts by the government to interfere with the rights of individuals —aliens and citizens alike. Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions. The Republicans were furious. They claimed that these measures destroyed free speech and greatly increased the power of the federal gw- ernment, particularly the power of the President. They voiced their protest in the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions. The Kentucky Resolutions, prepared by Thomas Jefferson, were adopted by the legislature of the new state of Kentucky in 1798 and 1799. The Virginia Resolutions, prepared!? •James Madison, were adopted by the legislature of Virginia in 1798. Together, these re*- lutions outlined the states' rights, or comped theory of the Constitution. This theory included the following ideas: (1) The federal government had been created by the state (2) The federal government was merely ai agent for the states, operating under a compact, or agreement, that had delegated to the federal government certain specific powers ant no more. (3) The federal government, or id agent, could be criticized by its creators, the states, if it committed unauthorized acts. Wht would determine when an act was unauthorized, or unconstitutional? Why, the states,t( course. Carried to an extreme, the states' rights,a compact, theory would give the states tht power to declare null and void, or not lawful and binding, any act of Congress that tat states felt was unconstitutional. The theory could lead to secession, or withdrawal, of vu or more states from the Union. Of count Hamilton and the Federalists completely p posed this interpretation of the Constitute Samuel F. B. Morse, an artist and the inventor of the telegraph, painted this picture ntitled "The Old House of RepresentativesIn the painting the members of the fyreme Court, including Chief Justice John Marshall (second from the right, top row), a"( with the members of Congress. *kh... [they! may twist and shape into any iom they please." In later decisions Marshall established two basic principles. He declared (2) that the ane Court had the power to set aside laws fstate legislatures when these laws were con- to the federal Constitution. He also (3) that the Supreme Court had the to reverse the decision of a state court. Significance of Marshall's work. Marshall ...gthened the federal government at the ex- Ee of the states by weakening the legal _ t for the states' rights, or compact, theory government. He helped to shape the loose •'lion of states into a national union. As the years passed and as the Supreme handed down its decisions, Jefferson's increased. From his home at Monti- Virginia, the former President wrote, great object of my fear is the federal ry. That body . . . ever acting, with ^ foot .. . gaining ground step by step, holding what it gains, is engulfing in- y the special [state | governments." Despite his fears, Jefferson could not alter the course of events. In decision after decision, the Supreme Court broadened the meaning of the Constitution. Owing largely to John Marshall's efforts, the federal government became increasingly powerful. When he later became President, Jefferson himself would help to strengthen the federal government. See underscored items, text p. *38. Identify: Judiciary Act of 1801, midnight judges, John Marshall, Marburv v. Madison For answers 10 questions, tee Answer Key, P.A37. 1. Analyzing Ideas: Why had the Federalist cause become unpopular by 1800? 2. Interpreting Ideas: (a) How did the election of 1800 become deadlocked? (b) How were similar difficulties prevented in the future? 3. Summarizing Ideas: Discuss how each of three decisions by Chief Justice John Marshall established basic principles that strengthen the federal government. The nation grows stronger during Jefferson's administration See Tcacnin? Suggestion* In TMRG, gp.TMU44. Thomas Jefferson's prompt action in the purchase of Louisiana was only one of several vigorous steps he took as President. He urged Congress to repeal a number of Federalist laws that he felt were harmful to the nation's best interests. He also did not hesitate to use military force to protect American rights. Federalist laws repealed. The Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798, which Jefferson strongly opposed, had expired before he became President. The Naturalization Act, also passed in 1798, was still in effect, and at Jefferson's urging Congress promptly repealed it. Congress also repealed the excise tax on whisky, which Jefferson regarded as unconstitutional. Congress likewise repealed the Judiciary Act of 1801. Thus the "midnight judges" appointed on the eve of Jefferson's inauguration could not assume office. Jefferson then turned his attention to the army and the navy. He persuaded Congress to cut funds for them and reduce them in size. Jefferson opposed a strong military establishment because it would greatly strengthen the federal government. Moreover, by reducing the armed forces, Jefferson could operate the government more economically. Federalist programs continued. The Republicans, however, did not wipe out all thewori of the Federalists. Jefferson acted with moderation. During his administration he continued many Federalist programs and kept many Federalists in office. Hoping to end the bitterness between the Federalists and the Republicans, Jefferson said in his Inaugural Address, "We are all Republicans; we are all Federalists." Then Jeflersa showed through his actions that he meant & bring unity to the nation. Although Jefferson had argued that tie Bank of the United States was unconstita- tional, he could do nothing to disturb it.forii" charter ran until 1811. While Secretary i State in Washington's administration, Jefferson had also opposed Hamilton's plan to haw the federal government assume the state debts. Nevertheless, Jefferson saw to it ths Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin pul off installments on the public debt as rapid! as possible. Defending American rights. In a war the pirates of North Africa, Jefferson actually pushed forward the Federalist ideal of; strong federal government. The Muslim rulers of the Barbery States of North Africa - Morocco, Algiers, Tunis, an; Tripoli —had long been seizing the ships" Christian nations and holding their crews fur ransom. Instead of declaring war on the prates, the European governments had decide! that it was cheaper to make the yearly payments of tribute, or bribes. Since 1783 the United States, whose merchants traded wiii the Mediterranean countries, had also beo paying this tribute. However, when the rule:- of Tripoli made exorbitant demands upon the j United States, Jefferson met the challenge. Hi sent a squadron of naval ships to attack tie harbor of Tripoli in the Mediterranean map, this page). This did not end the trouble, however. Is 1805 the ruler of Tripoli finally signed a peau treaty, but the piracy of other Barbary Stain continued until 1815. In that year an Amen- can fleet under Captain Stephen Decatur, rei- forced by European warships, finally endedtl payment of American tribute to the piraa along the Barbary coast. American ships could now sail the Medite ranean freely. Europeans regarded the Unite! States with new respect and admiration. Mow- The location of Lowell, Massachusetts, where two rivers, the Merrimack and the Concord, met made it a prime site for textile mills. Following the building of the first mill there, Lowell became one of the great textile centers in the country. This view shows several factories along the Merrimack. Such efforts met with little success. When large-scale Irish immigration got under way in the 1840's, penniless Irish men and women had to take whatever wages they could get. Often factory owners paid barely enough for workers to survive on. Both immigrants and native- born women, whether working in mills and factories or doing piecework at home for the clothing industry, received lower wages than men. Often the wages they were paid were just above starvation levels. Problems of black workers. The aims of the early labor unions did not include better working conditions for black workers. Since competition for jobs was often fierce, white workers resented the fact that blacks, to get jobs at all, often accepted lower wages. White workers refused to work in the same shops and factories with blacks. Black workers were barred from membership in the trade unions. Excluded from the unions, black workers often served as strikebreakers. On rare occasions when white workers and black workers did agree to organize, the white workers insisted on separate unions. Things were no better for black workers in the unskilled trades. During hard times blacks working at unskilled jobs in canul construction and railroad building were often fired and replaced by white workers. Because of these conditions, resentme* and bitterness on both sides led to labor riotsii Philadelphia, New York, and other cities.k 1855, for example, violence erupted whtt black wage earners took the jobs of white dock workers on the New York City waterfront J Weakness of organized labor. In these eaih years, the American labor movement was at yet strong enough to win many of the workm demands. There were several reasons for tha weakness. In the first place, many wage earners dd not realize that they formed a new and imp* tant group in the nation's economy und ik they had interests in common. This was the result of tradition. Most Americans had been farmers, and the early factories and miik drew most of their labor supply from the farm The Americans' strong spirit of mdependew: and individualism made it hard to drawworv ers into labor unions. Wage earners aa tinned to think of themselves as individmk who could look after their own interests. In the second place, cheap land wasalwsjs available. This cheap land did not actually^ tract many dissatisfied workers. Neverthtlea cheap land did draw westward thousands i farmers who might otherwise have turnedt) the cities for jobs. In the third place, until 1842 labor A Oltcuuion topic: The effectiveness of labor unions today not recognized by law. In that year the :b court of Massachusetts decided in case that labor unions had a legal right to in Massachusetts. This decision set a *nt. though not a strong one. Wage jts had to struggle in one state after an- rfor the right to organize. In the fourth place, the depression of 1837 thousands of men and women out of These unemployed workers could not af- topuv union dues. They usually had to acuity job they could get, regardless of what job paid. Finally, during the 1830's immigrants i to come to the United States in large crs. Many of them were willing to work low wages. Immigration, therefore, forced nthe wages of many native-born American and almost brought the labor move- toa halt. ttrarrscored Items, text pp. 318.20. ify: Waltham system, collective bargaining, ■y picket line. Sarah Bagley, strikebreaker Wmri to questions, see Answer Key, p.A47. Organizing Ideas: (a) What groups made up I oust of the factory labor force during the early 1600's? (b) Why did workers begin organizing labor unions during the 1820's and 1830's? (c) What did these unions want? (H) Why were the nrlv attempts to organize unions onlv partially ' sful? Comparing Ideas: (a) In what ways was the ■ stuation of women workers different from that tfmen workers?'(b) In what ways was it similar? Analyzing Ideas: (a) How were black workers [4amruinated against in jobs and unions? (b) I Ho* were they used by employers to weaken the i labor movement? Immigration swells the nation's rapidly growing population (SCtwtg Suggestions in T.MRG, pp.TM82-83. een 1790 and 1830, the population of the 1 States increased from about 4 million arly 13 million. Nearly all of this growth ted from births in the United States itself. ; these years fewer than 400,000 immi- ts entered the country. In the 1830's, however, the small stream of immigration swelled to a great flood. From 1830 to 1840, more than half a million immigrants poured into the United States. Forty- four percent came from Ireland, 30 percent from Germany, 15 percent from Great Britain, and the remainder from other European countries. Between 1840 and 1850, a million and a half immigrants arrived in the United States, 49 percent of them from Ireland. Irish Immigrants. The Irish came to escape terrible conditions in their homeland. In Ireland during those years, many people worked as tenant farmers on the estates of landowners who lived in England. The landowners did little or nothing to improve the conditions of their tenants, who burely managed to make a living. Then, in 1846, a terrible famine struck Ireland. Thousands died during the "Potato Famine," as it was called, Other thousands fled across the Atlantic to America. The people who left Ireland were attracted to the United States for several reasons. They liked what they had heard about American democracy. They were thrilled at the reports of plenty in the United States. Moreover. American contractors encouraged them to come and work on the roads, canals, and railroads. American manufacturers attracted them into the new mills and factories. Hardships of immigration. The immigrants endured terrible hardships in reaching the United States. The following news item from the Edinburgh Review of July 1854 gives an idea of their sufferings: "Liverpool was crowded with emigrants. . . . The poor creatures were packed in dense masses in ill- ventilated and unseaworthy vessels, under charge of improper masters, and the natural result followed. Pestilence Idiseasel chased the fugitive to complete the work of famine. Fifteen thousand out of ninety thousand emigrants ... in British bottoms Iships) in 1847 died on the passage or soon after arrival. The American vessels, owing to a stringent I strict I passenger law, were better managed; but the hospitals of New York and Boston were nevertheless crowded with patients from Irish es- tates." Poor, unable to move to the western lands, many Irish immigrants found homes in the slums of such growing cities as New York, Boston, Albany, Baltimore, St. Louis, Cincinnati, to Fjmlne" hod Its roots In Ireland's dependence on the potato tor food. The 1845 - 46 au caused by a disease that destroyed the poteto crop. German immigrants. Germans formed the second largest group of immigrants. Between 1845 and 1860. more than 1.3 million Germans landed in the United States. Many Germans came because, after 1815, Europe (and the German states in particular) was controlled by rulers who opposed democracy. Thousands of Germans who rebelled against political oppression fled when their revolutions failed. Other Germans came to escape military service. Above all, they carnet*' earn a better living. Most German immigrants settled in the middle western states —Ohio, Indiana. Illinas. Wisconsin, Iowa, and Missouri. Able, thrifty farmers, they built prosperous farms. Mam also settled in the cities. By the 1860's the; formed large communities in such cities a Buffalo, Detroit, Cleveland. Cincinnati, Chicago, and St. Louis. Immigrants resented. Most immigraiiaj quickly became American citizens. Becasa many had come to the United States in search of political freedom, they helped to strengthen political democracy. Because they were eager to work, they contributed to the wealth ofth* growing nation. Despite these contribution many native-born Americans resented the immigrants. They feared that large numbers d "foreigners" would change the older ways of living in America. Some Germans, for instance, aroused suspicion because they organized their own cluis gathered in social halls to talk and sing, established their own churches and schools, published their own newspapers, and continuedlf speak German. Many native-born Americans viewed these activities with misgivings. The Irish became the chief targets of Arne- ican resentment. Like many newcomers tor strange land, they tried to settle near the: friends from the Old Country. As a result growing numbers of Irish people settled in the cities. Many dressed as they had in Ireland Their accent sounded strange to other Amen cans. Many native-born Protestants disliked the Irish immigrants simply because mostrf them were Roman Catholics. Because thelrii were "different" in these and other ways, souk Americans at first looked upon the newcomer! with suspicion. Suspicion of this kind unfortunately has been the fate of every large immigrant group. Resentment against the immigrants ofts led to friction and violence. Riots broke out a several cities. As more immigrants amrti resentment against them increased. In 1845i national organization of native-born Amen cans was started. A year later, this society mt reorganized as a secret order called the Supreme Order of the Star-Spangled Banner or the Sons of the Sires of '76. Members solemn!; I promised to oppose foreigners and to support Millions of immigrants came to America in search of a better life. Many of these immigrants faced overcrowded and unsanitary conditions on the voyage from Europe. and New Orleans. Many Irish men went to work as unskilled laborers on roads, canals, and railroads. Many Irish women took jobs in factories, where they displaced native-born American wage earners. 322 A Oltcuitlon topic- Pretant-day attitude! toward Immigrant! AMERICANA Ellis Island For more than 16 million immigrants who entered the United States between 1892 and 1943, Ellis Island was their first glimpse of America. As the nation's chief immigration station for half a century, the tiny island in New York Harbor was viewed by many immigrants with both fear and exultation. They nicknamed it the "island ol tears." and with good reason. For every ten persons who landed at Ellis Island, two were refused admission to the United States. All immigrants were required to pass a medical examination, and many persons were turned away because they were too old or too ill. Those who passed the examination were then questioned by immigration inspectors. Immigrants who had prison records were immediately disqualified, as were persons who had no money or sponsors in the United States. The unfortunate persons who did not meet medical and immigration standards were put on ships to be transported back to their own countries. From 1943 to 1954, Ellis Island served as a detention station for aliens and deportees. In 1965 it became part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument. Today both are being restored. Together with the Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island continues to symbolize the pain and toy of the American immigrant expenence. ! American-born Protestants for public of- When asked about the society, members I answer, "I know nothing." Because of answers, the organization came to be i as the Know-Nothing Party. During the early 1850's, the Know-Nothing y, by now officially called the American y, was very strong in American political :.In the election of 1854, it polled one fourth (the total vote of New York and two fifths (Pennsylvania's vote. In Massachusetts it 1 every state officer and nearly the entire ature. However, the election of 1854 was ehigh tide of the movement. In the national ntion of the Know-Nothing Party in , southern members and northern mem- i split over the question of slavery. As lit of this split, the Know-Nothing Party ally lost its strength. way of life were causing the revolution taking place around them. Immigrants were only one of many new elements in the changing pattern of American society. However, many native- born Americans blamed all their troubles, both real and imaginary, on the flood of new immigrants. See underscored Items, text pp. 321. 323. Identify: Potato Famine, Know-Nothing Party, ging ways of life. From the 1830's to e.160's, familiar, traditional ways of Ameri- ■ltfe were replaced by new and unfamiliar Most older Americans did not realize chines, factories, and an urban, or city. urban For answers to questions, see Answer Key. pp.A47-4B. 1. Synthesizing Ideas: (a) What conditions led the Irish to immigrate to the United States? (b) Where did they settle? Why? 2. Analyzing Ideas: Why did some native-born Americans resent the immigrants? 3. Summarizing Ideas: (a) What was the major aim of the Know-Nothing Party? (b) How successful was it in achieving this aim? Organizing Ideas: What were some things that were causing changing ways of life from the I830's to the 1860's? 4. itton is king" was an expression heard often itheSouth during the 1840's and 1850's. The 0 indicated the importance attached by a great majority of the people in the southern states. Indeed, by the 0's the cotton grown, shipped, and sold by herners was worth more than all the rest 'nation's exports put together. l attaching importance to "King Cotton." emers were not thinking of themselves They knew that countless other peo- -ia the northern states, in Europe, and nd the world—depended upon southern 1 for a living. Merchants who traded and cotton and sailors who manned the i depended on cotton. Owners of cotton hie factories and the workers in them I a living from cotton. Storekeepers and lets who sold cotton goods wherever they Jfind buyers—in the United States, in Eu, in Africa, in India—were dependent on ] for a living. ithemers could ask in the 1840's and id's."What other product grown on the land l&shioned into finished articles affects so [people in so many different parts of the 'The answer was ''None." at changes had taken place in the km states since the 1790's. When the ution was adopted, tobacco, not cotton, en the most important southern crop, it time, also many people in the South 1 as in the North had thought that slav- 1 eventually disappear in the United [la the 1850's with King Cotton holding lover the southern economy, nearly 4 mil- black slaves lived and worked in the .The South, with its system of slave la- band its dependence on cotton as a cash crop, |becoming increasingly different from the dal North. |jn read about the changing ways of the k's Cotton Kingdom, look for the details lapport each of the following statements. |Thesouthern states develop into the Cotton dom. 'planters control the positions of power, [slaves play leading roles in the devel- Ett of the South The southern states develop Into the Cotton Kingdom See Teaching Suggestions In TMRG. pp.TM84-8S. The southern states, by the 1840's and 1850's, covered a vast area stretching southward from Maryland and the Ohio River to the Gulf of Mexico. Louisiana, Arkansas, and Texas were also part of this great region. The farm lands. Travelers in the South at this time were most impressed by the endless cotton fields, but they also saw many other staple crops, including tobacco, rice, and sugar cane. In Virginia, North Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Missouri, where the climate and soil were most favorable for tobacco growing, the fields were green with broad, flat tobacco leaves. Rice fields flourished in the swampy coastal areas of South Carolina and Georgia. To the west, in the delta of the M issis- sippi River, sugar cane ripened in the warm winds that swept in from the Gulf of Mexico. Travelers in Virginia might see large fields of wheat and corn. In Texas they could see herds of long-horned cattle. Southerners received much of their cash income from their staple crops —mainly cotton, tobacco, rice, and sugar cane. Most of these staple crops were grown on plantations. However, travelers in the South in the 1850's also saw many small subsistence farms, much like those in the Northeast and Middle West. On these farms families raised com and other food crops and livestock largely for their own use. Towns and industries. Since the southern economy depended mainly on agriculture, industries and towns grew more slowly in the South than in the North. But the southern states had many towns and a few important cities, among them Richmond. Virginia; Charleston, South Carolina; and New Orleans, Louisiana. The southern towns and cities had their shopkeepers, skilled workers, and professional people — doctors, lawyers, ministers, and teachers. Along the wharves and on the streets, visitors could see sawmills, paper mills, brickyards, leather tanneries, foundries, turpentine and whisky distilleries, and cotton mills. Cotton Production • 1800 - 1860 Slave Population • 1800 - 1860 1800 1800 e e # e 4 TYW - 200.000 bales of cotton • T — 200,000 slaves By the late 1850's, the cotton economy had reached the height of its power. The cotton lands, or cotton belt, stretched in a long crescent from North Carolina in the east to Texas in the west (see map. page 330). Travelers journeying in the fall along the dusty roads throughout the region saw the major wealth of the South in every field. Ripe cotton bolls shone white in the hot sunlight, ready to be picked, cleaned of seed, packed in bales, and shipped to mills in New England and Great Britain. Growth of population. During the first half of the 1800's, the Cotton Kingdom grew in population as well as in area. By 1860 the population of the South had risen to approximately 12 million. About 4 million were black slaves. The rest were, for the most part, descendants of pre- Revolutionary settlers. They were mostly of English and Scotch-Irish ancestry, although many people of French origin lived in the coastal plains of the Carolinas and around New Orleans. Also, groups of Germans had started settlements in Texas. On the whole, though, European immigrants were not attracted to the South. Up to this time, most of the immigrants to the United States had come from countries of northern Europe, like Ireland and Germany. The climate and ways of living in the northern states were more familiar to them than were the warmer climate and ways of living in the South. Of the more than 4 million immigrant) living in the United States by 1860, only 135 percent lived in the southern states. Southern social groups. In the South, as a other parts of the country, the population ni divided into a number of social and econon* groups. Except for the slaves, who had no opportunity to better their lot, energetic andaa- bitious people continually moved from lowerti higher economic groups. In the words of no southern historian, a family could mount "from log cabin to plantation mansion on a stairwij of cotton bales." Who were the men and women who bmis the Cotton Kingdom? What were the may* social and economic groups to be found in tb South in 1860? The slaves. From the day they first arrival:: the New World, the slaves were at the botun of the social and economic ladder. In 1730. when the new nation was in its first year unds. the Constitution, there were about 700,OB slaves and 60,000 free blacks in the origind thirteen states. Their numbers increased tip idly. By 1820 the slave population had not than doubled. By 1840 more than half of tk men, women, and children in Mississippi wen slaves. In that year the proportion ofslavesto A Discussion topic; Upward mobility in present-day American society Division of Oregon To Great Britain, 1846 To the United Stales. 1846 Seal* ol mil** jyo Seal* of kOocnMafv or tm _ r"tMr iiNt_0£ i.'iO ♦ Cu/umtu* 8- ^, The early settlers. During these same years, some white settlers brought black slaves with them. However, most of the settlers opposed slavery, and in 1845 it was prohibited by law in the Oregon country. The same law set up severe discriminations against free black settlers, ordering them to leave the country within two years. From the beginning the settlers in the Oregon country felt a need for government. In 1843 nine settlers drew up a resolution, which said in part, "We the people of Oregon territory, for the purposes of mutual protection and to secure peace and prosperity among ourselves, agree to adopt. .. laws and regulations, until such time as the United States of America extend their jurisdiction over us." Settling British-American claims. According to the agreement reached in 1818 and later renewed, Great Britain and the United States were to occupy the Oregon country jointly. By 1840 a new solution was needed to settle rival British-American claims. Many Americans were demanding that the British withdraw all claims to the land south of the line 54° 40'. This demand became a major issue in the Presidential election of 1844. The Democrats, led by James K. Polk ofTennessee, made western expansion the main issue i their campaign. Although some Americans spoke with bitter and even warlike words about this issue, calmer minds won out. Great Britain agreedis the Treaty of 1846 to give up its claims to the Oregon country south of the 49th parallel (see map, this page*. Thus by 1846 a boundary existed between the United States and Canadi from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean. At fin: this boundary was marked by a few small fortifications. Since then it has been completely unfortified. In 1848 that part of the Oregon country that now clearly belonged to the United States was organized as Oregon Territory See underscored items, text pp. 348-50. Identify: Mountain Men, Oregon Trail, John fc cob Astor, the Whitmans. Treaty of 1846 For answers to questions, see Answer Key. p.ASI* 1. Summarizing Ideas: (a) Which countn* claimed the Oregon country? (b) What was tit basis of their claims? 2. Organizing Ideas: How did each of the follji- ing help to lay the basis for American clainub the Oregon country: (a) Captain Gray, (b)Lem and Clark, (c) Mountain Men, (d) Astor, let sionaries, (f) settlers? 3. Interpreting Ideas: How did the United Sus* finally acquire the Oregon country? 4. Studying Maps: Look at the map on this pse. (a) Locate the boundaries of the Russian claim (b) Locate the United States-Canada bounds' established in 1846. Sou Teaching Suggestion* in TMRG, pp.TM89-90. In the early 1820's American traders and set-1 tiers were beginning to drift southwestwatt into Indian and Mexican lands. Their, began a chain of events that led the Ul States to acquire the vast area that is i Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, California,] vada, and Utah as well as parts of Color** and Wyoming. A The feelings of this period ere reflected In some of the campaign slogans of 1844-4,Flf ty-four Forty or Fight,4* **Reoccupation of Oregon/* "All of Oregon or None." omm, i were troops Scott's exican nd the ICimoo. tht famou* icout. wat of th" opinion that the land within the Gadsden Purchase was so dasolata ■plff could not make a living on it.** rtn the Americans' terms. These were writ- idown in the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo i-dah uxvpay ee-DAHL goh) in 1848. From the Mexican point of view, these ns were severe indeed. Mexico was forced to [ up Texas, New Mexico, and Upper Cali* a-two fifths of Mexico's land. In return nhi* huge area, called the Mexican Cession •map, page 360), the United States gave $15 million. The United States also to pay debts totaling over $3 million l Mexicans owed to Americans. It further to respect the religious preferences I the civil and property rights of Mexicans jithe newly acquired territory. The dreams of Americans who had believed htheir nation's "manifest destiny" had come true. The southwestern boundary of the United States reached to the Pacific. Finally, in 1853, Congress approved a payment to Mexico of $10 million for the Gadsden Purchase (see map, page 360). This was an area of land south of the Gila River needed to construct a southern transcontinental railroad. It was named for James Gadsden of South Carolina, who, as minister to Mexico, negotiated the purchase. * Culture conflicts. Two fifths of Mexico's territory and about 75,000 Spanish-speaking people passed into United States hands as a result of the war. Differences in the cultures of the Americans and the new Spanish-speaking citizens created serious problems. mm ■; m-Z u * , h KEARUy " Lo" AngaiM San Diego / The Mexican War American torces -4$ American victory Boon* Vtcta j0 ( i Qunrialupo Hidalgo 1 Mexico City scortJaVa'acnii Mexican forces S"i# or ioio"iMrto>" - See Teaching Suggestion* in TMRG, DP.TM9I-92. As early as the 1820's and 1830's a stream <t settlers had pushed west. They crossed the Great Plains and threaded their way through the Rocky Mountains to Oregon and beyond When the war with Mexico ended, this stream of settlers to the West would become a flood For the well-to-do Spanish families with ties to the Americans, adjustments were usually easy. Other Spanish-speaking people did not fare so well. Some lost part or all of their property. Also, Americans challenged land titles that had come down from Spanish or Mexican authorities by starting costly legal battles. Even when American courts upheld the original land titles, long-lasting bitterness remained. Under the treaty of 1848, Spanish-speaking citizens were granted all the rights of American citizenship. All to often, these were only "paper" rights. Their culture blended Spanish, Mexican, and Indian ways of life. It was regarded by many Americans as inferior to their own. This prejudice helped spark rebellions in Santa Barbara, Los Angeles, and Taos, New Mexico. Poor Mexican-Americans suffered even more. After the American takeover, many of them worked for low wages on American ranches, mines, and railroads. They found their own traditions of family loyalty, personal honor, and devout Catholicism less respected than in the past. During the turbulent early years of the American Southwest, Mexican- American bandits sometimes raided American settlements. These raids, in part, were protests against injustices suffered by the peons. In response, local American vigilante committees and Texas and New Mexico Rangers were organized to enforce law and order. Often, though, they resorted to harassment, beatings, and lynchings. Sec underscored Items, text pp. 354-58. Identify: manifest destiny, James K. Polk, Zachary Taylor, Spot Resolutions, Bear Flag Republic, Winfield Scott, Mexican Cession, peons For aniwen to qucitlons. "ee Aniwer Key, p.ASI. 1. Comparing Viewpoints: (a) How would President Polk have described the events leading to the Mexican War? (b) How would a Mexican have described the same events? 2. Summarizing Ideas: (a) What were the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo? (b) What was the significance of this treaty in American history? (c) Why did the Mexicans think the treaty terms were harsh? 3. Interpreting Ideas: Why was the Gadsden Purchase important? The Mormons and Utah. One of the largest groups was the Mormons. The Momwi Church, or the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, was founded in western New York in 1830 by young Joseph Smith.I Smith announced that he had found golden plates on which sacred scriptures were a-1 graved. When translated, these became knowt as the Book of Mormon. Thousands of convert joined the new religious faith. In Kirtland, Ohio, in Independence. Mi* souri, and in Nauvoo, Illinois, Mormons attempted to build an ideal society where titer could live and worship in their own way. h each place they were driven away by hostik neighbors. These neighbors did not understasd them and disliked the Mormon idea that they I were a chosen people with a special revelatia of truth. Many people further disapproved<f the Mormons because they openly accepted polygamy —the practice of a husband havnj more than one wife at the same time. In Mi* souri people who favored slavery disliked the Mormons simply because most Mormonscara from the Northeast, They feared that these I Mormons would oppose slavery. It made little I difference to the proslavery Missourians that I Joseph Smith and other Mormon leaders opposed the abolition of slavery. The Nauvoo community in Illinois prospered more than the other two. By 1844 it het become a thriving town of 15,000 persons, but trouble was brewing. Some Mormons oppose I polygamy and disliked Smith. Finally people I in nearby towns, fearing and resenting tb I prosperity of the Mormons, attacked Nauvoc I Joseph Smith and his brother Hvrura war I killed. Once again the Mormons were forced a I move west. Under the able leadership of Brigha I Young, the Mormons moved out of Nairn* I slaves in states or parts of states still fighting against the United States on January 1, 1863, would from that time on be forever eman- cipated-free, that is, wherever Union armies could liberate them or they could escape to the North. On January 1, 1863, Lincoln issued his final Emancipation Proclamation. Abolitionists, although pleased, were still skeptical of Lincoln's intentions. For one thing, the Emancipation Proclamation did not free slaves in the border states or in certain parts of Virginia and Louisiana that were under Union control. Lincoln made these exceptions because he was still worried about driving the border states out of the Union. He was also uncertain that the Constitution gave him the authority to free any slaves anywhere. Despite these criticisms most people in the United States and overseas now concluded that Lincoln had at last clearly stated a second vital issue of the war. The Thirteenth Amendment. When President Lincoln issued his Emancipation Proclamation, he based it upon his constitutional authority as commander in chief of United States military forces. Whether this authority gave him the right to free the slaves —whether, that is, his Proclamation had the force of law —was an unanswered question. To settle the slavery question once and for all, Congress early in 1865 approved an amendment to the Constitution, This Thirteenth Amendment freed slaves everywhere in and the colored race 1 do because I it helps to save this Union." onist gains. Deeply disappointed, the very forces in Congress challenged the ent's position. In April 1862 Congress ed slavery in the District of Columbia, owners for the loss of their slaves. In y of the same year, Congress confiscated the rty, including slaves, of all persons who in rebellion against the Union. A short later. Congress abolished slavery in States territories. Congress also sup- a plan for giving financial aid to states would adopt a program for setting slaves bover a period of years. To committed aboli- ■Buts. however, these moves by Congress In far from enough. ! Emancipation Proclamation. By Sep- iber 1862 Lincoln had reluctantly decided t a war fought at least partly to free the its would win European support and lessen danger of foreign intervention on the side be Confederacy. It would also strike a blow ^Confederacy and win wholehearted supt for the Union from growing numbers of srican abolitionists. Lincoln prepared an Emancipation Procla- txm but kept it secret, waiting for news of a it&n victory to add to its impact. On Sep- nher 22, 1862, five days after Union forces jped Lee's troops at the bloody Battle of An- ura,Lincoln issued a preliminary Proclama- Bof Emancipation. In it he declared that all ,1** to what they hoped was freedom, slaves crossed the Rappahannock Rioer in to Union lines in 1862. Earlier in the war, not knowing what to do with such the Union sometimes returned them to their masters. the United States and its territories. The amendment was finally ratified by the necessary three fourths of the states eight months after the end of the war. Continuing discrimination. The Emancipation Proclamation had little effect on the pattern of racial discrimination in the North. Tlius black and white abolitionists continued their campaign on federal, state, and local levels of government. As a result of these pressures, Congress repealed a law forbidding black Americans to be employed as mail carriers. Congress in 1865 also passed a law that required horse-drawn streetcars in Washington, D.C., to carry black passengers without discrimination. Sojourner Truth boldly defied conductors and passengers to test this law and was successful. The Department of State and the Department of Justice ruled in individual cases that black men were citizens. The Supreme Court of the United States for the first time permitted a black lawyer to argue a case before the Court. Because of these actions by branches of the federal government, the Dred Scott decision of 1857 was in effect overturned. That decision, you recall, had denied that a black person could be a citizen (page 403). With the help of white abolitionists, blacks campaigned in several states for the right to vote and to receive legal equality in courts. In California, Illinois, and Indiana, laws forbidding black Americans to enter these states were challenged. Blacks vigorously attacked segregated public schools. Where they were not able to bring about school desegregation, they demanded improvements in the inferior all- black schools their children attended—when they were able to attend any school at all. Not all of these campaigns for civil rights succeeded during the war or for a long time thereafter. However, they did start to break down barriers that had set black Americans apart as less than equal citizens. Aid to fugitives. Northern blacks also took part in efforts to bring relief to fugitive slaves, or contrabands, as they were called. During the war years, these people were held in federal camps. Often they faced conditions of gross neglect in these camps. Church groups and black and white abolitionists organized volunteer aid societies that sent clothing and medical supplies to the con- trabands. These societies also prodded the federal government into organizing work andre lief opportunities as well as schools for tie contrabands. Teachers in these schools woe dedicated young abolitionists from the North black and white. Nevertheless, the effort made on behalf of the contrabands were small compared with the need. Black noncombatants in the war. Whiles!- olitionists kept up their pressure on the gtre- emment, black Americans made important contributions to northern victory. Early in the war, some runaway slaves wit reached the Union lines in search of freedrai were sent back to Confederate lines. In Congress finally forbade these practices. In* doing, Congress supported such Union officer* as Beryamin Butler and John C. Fremont These officers had welcomed the fugitives aid put them to work at important noncombaUd j tasks. At that time, northern commands! were forbidden to use blacks, either slaved | free, as fighters. Before the war ended, about 200,000 bla served the northern fighting forces as no batants. Among them were cooks, teamstea nurses, scouts, spies, and steamboat pilots. Exclusion from military service. There wet several reasons why black Americans, slid and free, were at first forbidden to fight intk| war. First, official northern policy stated! the war was being fought to suppress reb and restore the Union. Thus the issues of slavery and of black participation in the war i officially downgraded, although they couldw be ignored. Second, President Lincoln aol other northern officials feared that the use a black soldiers would antagonize the loyal in- der states. Third, many white northern ft cruits made it clear that they did not wanta serve with black soldiers. Abolitionists, white and black, denor the policy of excluding hlacks from theUn forces. They declared that it was unfair prevent black men from fighting for theemu- cipation of their own people. The heavy demands of war eventual^ caused the North to accept black soldiersinti Union army. When it proved harder ad harder to recruit white northern soldiere.tR rejection of black volunteers could no lon^k justified. Several Union generals in the< quered areas of the South asked permissunli Juiij /8fi3. almost 90 courageous men of the all black 54th Massachusetts Regiment trying to capture South Carolina's Fort Wagner. black troops and to test their fighting abil- In Louisiana, Union commanders wanted jttfree blacks who had organized their own ent and were eager to fight. Slicks in military service. These increasing ~ures led at last to a change in northern ;ry policy. In the summer of 1862, the srDepartment authorized the raising of five ents of black troops in the Sea Islands ofT coast of South Carolina, occupied by Union In Massachusetts and other northern free blacks were organized into regi- " Before the war ended, about 186,000 Americans served in northern armed including 29,000 in the navy. The reluctant admission of blacks into the ion forces did not mean that they lived and ht on equal terms with white soldiers, k soldiers were less well trained than •soldiers and received less adequate med- services. They frequently were assigned menial, nonmilitary chores around camp. gh blacks served as noncommissioned "a, only a very small number actually ved commissions. Black soldiers were often badly treated, not by white soldiers but also by northern 'tecivilians. Through most of the war, black iers received less pay than white soldiers. black troops refused to accept any pay at until this injustice was ended. Finally, Congress in 1864 provided that black soldiers were to receive the same pay as white soldiers. Despite the discriminations against them, after 1862, black soldiers and sailors fought bravely in almost all battles of the war. Their courage and ability often astounded their officers and foes. For unusual valor in the Civil War, 21 black Americans received the Congressional Medal of Honor. Sos underscored Items, text pp. 423-24. Identify: Emancipation Proclamation, Thirteenth Amendment, contrabands, Sojourner Truth For answer* to questions, see Answer Key, P.A60. 1. Determining Cause and Effect: (a) How did the Civil War affect abolitionist activities? (b) How did abolitionist activities affect the war? 2. Interpreting Ideas: (a) Why did Lincoln at first oppose freeing the slaves? (b) Why did he change his mind and issue the Emancipation Proclamation? 3. Analyzing Ideas: Why was the Thirteenth Amendment passed? 4. Summarizing Ideas: (a) In what ways did blacks contribute to the war effort? (b) Why were blacks at first excluded from military service? 5. Organizing Ideas: (a) How were black troops discriminated against? (b) How did abolitionists fight racial discrimination on the home front? seaports. As the war continued, the Confederacy had difficulty keeping even its limited railroad mileage in operation. Southerners tore up branch lines and used branch line engines, cars, and rails to keep main lines in operation. The southern transportation problem grew increasingly severe. Before the war ended, people in Richmond rioted for food while barns in the Shenandoah Valley were filled with wheat. During the last few months of the war, the food shortage became so desperate that many Confederate soldiers deserted to get back home and help feed their families. The war brought sorrow and suffering to rich and poor alike. See undertcored Item*, text p. 426. Identify: conscription, writ of habeas corpus For an"wer" to quetOom, lee Answer Key, pp.A60-61. 1. Interpreting Ideas: (a) Describe the changes in the way the South raised troops during the war (b) Why did many southerners object to military conscription? 2. Analyzing Ideas: (a) What methods did the Confederate government use to raise money for the war? (b) Why was issuing huge amounts of paper money harmful to the South? 3. Organizing Ideas: How did each of the following help to defeat the South: (a> the Union blockade, (bi lack of industry, (c) lack of transportation? Life behind Union lines undergoes important changes Sec Teaching Suggestion* In TMRG, pp.TM 109-10. Northerners never experienced the hardship and suffering endured by most southerners. Nevertheless, the war created problems and brought many changes in northern life. Raising an army. During the war more than 2 million soldiers, including 186,000 blacks, served in the Union forces. The North, like the South, at first recruited its troops by volunteer enlistments. In March 1863, however, Congress passed a conscription law making all able-bodied male citizens between 20 and 45 liable for military service. As in the South, the law' allowed a drafted man to hire a substitute. The federal law also permitted a drafted nua to buy exemption from military service b paying $300 to the government. The Conscription Act aroused violent position, especially among recent immij from Ireland. The Irish newcomers did want to be forced to fight a war that likely to increase the number of free black workers, with whom they competed for on- skilled jobs. Moreover, black workers, unableti get jobs, at times broke strikes organized h Irish dockworkers and other laborers. Racui tensions then reached the boiling point. Riots, combining opposition to the draft with opposition to blacks, broke out in a number of cities. The most serious riot, beginning on July 13. 1863 in New York City, lasted for four terror-filled days. Mobs of whites burned an orphan asylum for black children. Ther demolished shops and houses of black Amen- cans as well as those of white abolitionists. Seventy-six people were killed. The bounty system. The draft provided otlr a small fraction of the Union troops. Mai more effective as a means of raising troops i the bounty system. To attract volunteers, federal, state, and local governments each paidi bounty to all who volunteered for service When the bounties were totaled, a man might receive as much as $1,000 for enlisting. While the bounty system was an effectm recruitment device, it did give rise to the da- honest practice of "bounty jumping." A volufr teer would enlist in one locality and collecti bounties. Then he would desert and re-enliS under another name in another locality and | collect additional bounties. Some bounty jumpers enlisted and deserted as many as 20 or 16 times before they were caught. Northern finances. To raise money for la war, the North relied on four sources of rew- nue: the tariff war bonds, an income tax.aaf issuance of paper money. From 1832 to 1861, southern planters aid many western farmers had opposed high tariffs. In 1861, however, with several soother states out of the Union, the Republican; Congress promptly passed the Morrill T Act. This raised import duties to an average^ 25 percent of the value of the imported | The Morrill Tariff Act protected America; manufacturers from the competition of Eur- pean rivals. After war broke out, Congi* the ,rge and om- "ard no a the 'arty node (b) page ; the Civil ire in ie na- *y did 1 gov- ilping from th the jlacka white ithern i were Thomas Hast depicted a black man casting his vote in an election shortly Ihe Cioil War, Who do you think the figures on the left represent? I||R! Johnson and former Confederate officer*) ^renting blacks from voting. For more ■ten years after white southern Democrats Uned control of southern governments in p, many blacks continued to vote. A few isheld public office. Early in the 1890's, however, the new Popu- I Party threatened the power of both the ■mtic and Republican parties (see Chap- rJO In the South, Populist organizers had If greatest success among poor white peo- i but some also worked hard to win the (prt uf black voters. Southern Democrats, cued by this development, attempted to rent blacks from voting. [fcginning with Mississippi in 1890, the ■km states adopted laws and framed new bitutions that in effect kepi most blacks ■ voting on grounds other than "race, color, ^previous condition of servitude." By the 1900's, the guarantees of civil rights in i Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments Ibecnme largely ineffective in the South. In IIareas, few blacks voted and fewer still Itpublic office, even in minor positions. Ilnumber of states adopted a poll tax —a l!tux imposed on every voter —and also a jtiiv test-and examination to determine bet a person can read or write. Since ■black southerners had little money and little, if any, education, these laws kept large numbers from voting. The poll tax and the literacy test also deprived many poor whites of the vote. To remedy this situation, several states, starting with Louisiana in 1898, added a grandfather clause to their constitutions. This clause declared that even if a man could not pay the poll tax or pass the literacy test, he could still vote if he had been eligible to do so on January 1, 1867, or if he were the son or the grandson of a man who had been eligible to vote on January 1, 1867. The grandfather clause was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in 1915. While it was in force, it kept many black southerners from voting. Segregating the races. Meanwhile, a pattern of segregation, or separation, of white and black southerners was taking shape. Except in a few instances, the Radical Republicans had not tried to bring white and black children together in southern public schools. However, black and white southerners used the same transportation facilities and other public services. The Civil Rights Act of 1875 had declared that "all persons within the jurisdiction of the United States shall be entitled to the full and equal enjoyment of the ac- IBomti ta qvtitiont in captioni ippur in pirtntSnai. >1 mown ti*r" 0ull*ti 465 Luftitttrt to individual question* when a caption contains more than one question. DECISIVE MOMENTS A Setback for Racial Equality The Jim Crow system of racial segregation in the South would not have been nearly so effective had it not been sanctioned by a senes of Supreme Court decisions in the late 1800's. The most important and far-reaching of these decisions was rendered in Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), in which the Court upheld a Louisiana law requiring railroads "to provide equal but separate accommodations for the white and colored races." The case began when a group of black citizens in New Orleans decided to test the constitutionality of the segregation law. which they believed to be in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment. They recruited a volunteer — Homer Plessy — to buy a railroad ticket and sit in the "whites only" section of the tram. Plessy did so and was arrested. commodations, advantages, facilities, and privileges of inns, public conveyances on land or water, theaters and other places of public amusement; subject only to the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to citizens of every race and color, regardless of any previous condition of servitude." Even after white southern rule was restored in 1877, southerners of both races often used the same transportation facilities and other public services. Then in 1883 the Supreme Court ruled against the Civil Rights Act of 1875 on the ground that the Fourteenth Amendment forbade only states, not individuals or corporations (such as railroads), from discriminating against black citizens. In spite of their decision, black and white southerners in many places continued to use the same public accommodations. In 1881 Tennessee passed the first of the so- called "Jim Crow" laws. Under this law, white southerners and black southerners were required to ride in separate railway cars. Other states followed Tennessee's example. By the 1890's all southern states required such separation, not only in schools but in streetcars, railroads, and railroad stations. Within a few years, this pattern of segregation spread to parks, playgrounds, and other public facilities. In 1896 the Supreme Court added legal support to segregation. In the case of Plessy v. Ferguson. the Court ruled that it was not a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to Ruling on the case four years later, the Court declared that the Fourteenth Amendment aa not have been intended to abolish distinctions bast upon color, or to enforce social, as distinguished to political equality In upholding the constitutionality of separat but-equal facilities, the Supreme Court open door for widespread racial repression in the As one historian wrote. "The South's adoption tf extreme racism was due not so much to a convese as it was to a relaxation of the opposition TheS" preme Court's attitude stated in the Plessy v F&g&t decision signaled the end of legal opposition to segrt gation. A half-century of legally-justified discnmre- tion had begun. provide separate but equal facilities fcr blacks. This 1896 ruling by the Supreme Court was a serious blow to the efforts of black Americans to improve their lives. Black southerners' reactions. Confronted^ segregation and denied their political and ail rights, some black southerners migrated a other nearby states, such as Oklahoma ait. Kansas, or moved to the growing nortlm cities. Most, however, stayed in the South d worked to develop their own black commuiw ties. Black southerners strengthened theiron churches, lodges, and mutual aid societies,M veloped their own businesses, and, agaml handicaps, tried to secure an education. Thar efforts began to produce results. In 1865onh about 5 percent of all black adults could red and write. By 1900 more than 50 percent p" sessed these basic skills. Southern bluck leaders also protested tit growing pattern of segregation and discr- nation and the denial of civil rights guaramed by the Fourteenth Amendment. On thelectua platform, in churches, in the press, and min- ventions, they demanded their constitutwul rights. In 1889 the former black abolitwnd Frederick Douglass, now an old man, asU whether "American justice, American liberty American civilization, American law. d American Christianity could be made to* elude and protect alike and forever all American citizens in the rights which have faea A Ironically, tha term "Jim Crow" derived from tho tug* nam* of a popular whit* performer In lh* taoo't, Thomat D. Rico, who performed in blackface. On the eve of the Civil War, the United States had about 30,000 miles (48,000 kilometers) of railroad track. About 28 million acres (11 million hectares) of federal lands had been granted to states for railroad construction. The feverish growth of the railroad as an economic and social phenomenon led the noted essayist Ralph Waldo Emerson to observe, "the Americans take to this little contrivance. the railroad, as if it were the cradle in which they were born." Vet in 1860 no railroad extended into the undeveloped territories west of the Mississippi River. Although the need for a federally-subsidized transcontinental railroad had been obvious for some time, northerners and southerners could not agree on a location for the route. Then in 1862 the federal government intervened. It commissioned two companies to build a railway stretching along the 42nd parallel between Omaha, Nebraska, and Sacramento, California. The Union Pacific Railroad company was to lay track westward from Omaha, while the Central Pacific Railroad company was to build eastward from Sacramento. Each company would receive generous loans and 6,400 (2,590 hectares) acres of free land for each mile of track laid. buffalo hide. These they coated with glue made from horses' hooves and hardened over the fire to an almost iron-like consistency. A favorite Indian tactic was to gallop around the enemy, hiding behind their horses and shields and deliberately drawing enemy fire. When the enemy's ammunition was exhausted, the Indians darted in to strike with arrows and long spears. Faced with these weapons and tactics, white intruders at first were at a disadvantage. Their long rifles could be reloaded and fired from the back of a galloping horse only with great difficulty. The invention of the revolver in the late 1830's ended the Indians' temporary superiority in weapons. The revolver could be reloaded easily at full gallop. Several bullets could be fired in rapid succession without reloading. Armed with this new weapon, settlers in the 1850's could move out onto the plains with more confidence. A new Indian policy. This new movement of white settlers brought about a change in government policy toward the Indians. In 1849 the Uniting East and West - HI Work was begun on the railroad in 1863. The proposed route covered towering mountain ranges and long stretches of desert. Supplies had to be transported great distances over this rugged and dangerous terrain. Nether section of the railroad could have been complied without the cheap labor of immigrant gang workers Tre Union Pacific hired many thousands of European migrants. mainly from Ireland, and the Central Pacific refec on Chinese workers. Indeed, one fourth of all Chine* immigrants in America in 1868 were building the transcontinental railroad. The railroad companies worked toward each other 3t late 1868 the construction had turned into a race to see which company could lay the most track in the shorts time and thus collect the largest federal subsidy. Fmaf) the two lines met on May 10,1869, at Promontory Pontr northern Utah. A silver sledgehammer was usedtodm in the last spike, which was made of gold espectaftfr the occasion. The Union Pacific won the race, te.rj completed 1.089 miles (1,753 kilometers) ol track tr" Central Pacific, which had more difficult terrain toast completed 689 miles (1,109 kilometers). And then** now had its first transcontinental railroad Bureau of Iadian_Affairs became part of th Department of the Interior. The bureau had responsibility for carrying out the federal pr>- emment's Indian policies. One early policy** concentration. This was the attempt to costal the Indian tribes to certain limited areas oftk West. In these areas the tribes would be freei carry on their own affairs and continue that lives as hunters. It was hoped the policy would reduce warfare among the tribes and wook clear routes for white settlers heading for California and Oregon. More settlers on the plains. An individa traveling on foot across the Great Plains was* grave danger of dying from thirst, sunstnih or cold. Thus the early pioneers who croarf the plains depended upon horses and oxent transportation. A rider on horseback. ho"ro could not transport goods in bulk. To Slid* need, caravans of covered wagons set outuja the plains, forming circles around campfiifl| at night for protection against Indian attad. As time passed, stagecoach lines offered j speedier form of transportation. jmtNC ownershio of a homestead, a person had to work (pm and live on the land for five years. Farmers plow the tough sod of the last frontier jfttjnln, Sugge"tlons In TMRG, pp.TM 124-2S. families, single men, and some single :n followed the cattle ranchers onto the esand plains. From 1870 to 1900, Amer, pioneers settled more land than had all '■us generations combined. In the 263 years from the first tiny settle- at Jamestown in 1607 until 1870, white rs claimed and occupied nearly 408 mil- acres (165 million hectares) of what had been Indian land. This pace was almost -Jy compared to the speed with which settlers conquered the prairies and the , In the 30 years between 1870 and 1900, rs settled an additional 430 million 1174 million hectares). This was an area y equal to the combined areas of Nor- Sweden. Denmark, the Netherlands, Bel- Gennany, and France. What was happening in America at this to make possible such rapid settlement? land. One attraction of the West was free .In 1862 Congress enacted the Homestead which granted 160 acres (64.8 hectares) r individual who wished to settle a farm, jjisit was called, a homestead. Farmers as well as land speculators rushed Ixrept the offer. Thousands were ex-soldiers ■sought new homes in the West. Thousands I others came from worn-out farms in the ■.particularly from New England, in the IP of finding more fertile land. Still other ndscame from Europe. In many areas of I Middle West, more than half of the pio- aettlers were immigrants —Germans, gians, Swedes, Danes, Czechs, Finns, .Russians. ads and settlement. Without the rail- however, the free land in the West, no how attractive, would have remained ted. During the 1870's and the 1880's, great transcontinental railroads crossed ~es and the plains. These railroads with their branch lines opened up the i country for settlement. &e rail lines into and through the wild country were built only at enormous R"*tr "tud"n1< to Mi immigration grapn on paga In 1888 these settlers in Custer County, Nebraska, used the side of a hill as the basis for their home. The house is part dugout and part sod walls. cost. Moreover, the investment was extremely risky. Investors did not know when, if ever, the new railroads would begin to make a profit and reward them for their risks. Thus the government, which was eager to have the railroads built, encouraged the pioneer railroad companies with cash subsidies and grants of land. At the time the grants were made to the railroads, the land itself was almost worthless. Before the railroad companies could profit from their grants, they had to persuade people to move into the unsettled areas. Because the land was close to the railroads and therefore would be valuable, the railroad companies could hope to sell it, even though free land was available in more remote areas. More important was the fact that once the land was settled, the railroads would gain revenue from passengers and freight. In addition, any land that the railroads could not sell immediately would rise in value as settlers built farms, villages, and towns along the right of way. With such things in mind, the railroads started extensive advertising campaigns. They sent literature and agents all over the United States and even into Europe. Life on the plains was pictured in glowing colors. As an added lure, prospective purchasers were sometimes 1001 of thi Reference Section tattoo* Have students compare the immigration figures lor the years between i960 and ilthtfioie for the years before the Civil War. did become supervisors of other workers and department managers. A few workers eventually rose to positions of wealth and power. In general, though, as factories grew larger and management was more impersonal, it became harder for individual workers or groups of workers to bargain with employers over increasing their wages and improving their working conditions. Effects of mechanization. The use of power- driven machines in factories also created new problems for wage earners. Factory work became increasingly specialized and increasingly monotonous. Often machines were geared to high rates of output, and workers ended the day exhausted from the pressures of keeping up with the machinery's high rate of speed. Moreover, the new machinery often produced much more with fewer workers. Thus the installation of the new machines could cause technological unemployment by throwing workers out of jobs. Sometimes new jobs were created because workers were needed to build and repair the machines. Also, the higher output of the machines increased the nationwide The Business Cycle production of goods. The increased production thereby created new jobs of many kinds. However, displaced workers often found it difficult to learn new skills and get new jobs. Machines were also physically dangerous Until about 1910 employers did little to safeguard workers from accidents. When an accident occurred, the owner usually blamed the worker. If disabled, the worker received no compensation to pay the costs of doctors and hospitalization. When a worker was killed, the worker's family was usually left without an income, for employers did not insure the lives of workers. Industrial hazards from machines and unsafe and unhealthy working conditions werea mqjor problem. Between 1900 and 1910, for example, 3 percent of all employed workers in the United States were killed or injured annually in industrial accidents. In 1911 a fire in the unsafe Triangle Building in New York City brought death to 146 women textile workers. In a strike just the year before, the women had protested against their unsafe working conditions. The owners, however, paid no heed to their protests. Effects of the railroads. Before the nationwide network of railroads was built, Amencsr, manufacturers usually sold their products only in nearby markets. With the railroad network, however, a competitive national market for goods was created. A manufacturer could use the railroads to sell products anywhere in the country, provided the manufacturer's prices were as low as those elsewhere. This creation of a competitive nations! market for goods also created a competitive national market for labor. For example, if cotton goods were being made cheaper in southern mills because of lower wages, then N'e* England manufacturers of cotton goods were inclined to lower wages to compete with the lower-priced output of the southern mills. Business cycles and the frontier. Like other citizens, workers were greatly influenced by what economists call the business cycle. Tbs was the expansion of business and industry during periods of prosperity and their contraction during periods of depression. Workers lived in constant dread of being laid off or having their wages sharply reduced whenever business conditions took a downturn. Even when business was good, unemployment per- A Disc union topic: Th" American writer Henry Oavid Tltoreau perceived very early soma of tna issues of the new ate. Ask students to explain what mijisi have prompted him to write In Walden (HS4}, "8ul lo! men have become the tool* of their topis." and brought misery to many industrial ers. Between 1870 and 1900, hundreds of thou- Js of jobless persons searched for work. In ,a fairly typical year, about 19 percent of workers in manufacturing and transpor- 'n were jobless. Aj long as the frontier remained open, ■^on worn-out eastern land could choose n migration to the frontier or migration the city. Many chose to continue farming moved west. After about 1900, however, i farm families had fewer and fewer op- Jties to find good, cheap western land, turned in larger numbers to the cities for swelling the work force of the cities and [down industrial wages. wages and long hours. During the last ~r of the 1800's, many wage earners com- bitterly about their low wages. Un- Imale workers might earn no more than a week. Skilled male workers—those whose required a certain amount of training and tion-might earn no more than $20 a In both skilled and unskilled jobs, the : scale for women workers was even lower. 1903. for example, a woman might receive 16for a 62-hour workweek in a cap factory, industrial expansion brought higher real ' to workers as a whole. Nevertheless, numbers of workers, like many farmers. that they were not receiving a fair ■ of the profits from the country's indus- ' growth. 1 Wages tended to be low for several reasons: mereasing power of employers over em- the competitive national labor mar- depressions, and the flood of immigrant rs into the labor market. Wage earners also complained about their urking hours. After 1865 an 11-hour day "common in American industry. Yet even i the 1880's, many textile workers worked 12 to 14 hours daily, and the 12-hour day common in the steel industry. | if was indeed a new and rapidly changing 'with which the American wage earner in the late 1800's. The problems of .earners were complex, and the workers, owners of the industries, and Americans in Jacked ready answers. s: wages measured in terms of actual purr, or what the money will huy. See underscored Items, text pp.533-34. Identify: company town, technological unemployment, Triangle Building fire, business cycle For answers to questions, see Answer Key, pp.A73-76. 1. Seeing Relationships: How did the move toward huge, corporation-owned factories change relations between owners and workers? 2. Summarizing Ideas: Discuss the problems faced by wage earners as a result of increasing mechanization. 3. Analyzing Ideas: How did each of the following affect workers: (a) railroads, (b) the business cycle, (c) the end of the Frontier? 4. Drawing Conclusions: What evidence do you find to show that industrialization could bring problems as well as benefits? Immigration adds strength and variety to American society Sec Teaching Suggestion* in TMHG, pp.TM 133-34. Between 1865 and 1900, immigrants came seeking jobs and new opportunities. In trying to find places for themselves in their new homeland and in the industrial age, the immigrants were often greeted with suspicion. The immigrants. Part of the difficulty was the overwhelming number of immigrants who poured into the country. From 1870 to 1899, more than 11 million women, men, and children entered the United States. The changing character of immigration as well as the swelling tide alarmed many Americans. Until the early 1880's, most immigrants came from northwestern Europe—Great Britain, Ireland, Scandinavia, Germany, and the Netherlands. After 1890 an increasingly large number came from southern and eastern Eu- rope—Russia (including Poland), Greece, Aus- tria-Hungary, and Italy. The languages, customs, and ways of living of these immigrants were quite different from those of immigrants from northwestern Europe. Effects of immigration on labor. The immigrants had an enormous influence on American life. Although some settled on farms, the great majority moved to the densely crowded slum areas of the cities. Here tenement owners atT/ titrS'S d In 1869 Joseph Becker painted this picture of cheering Chinese "gandy dancers," or railroad workers. Gandy dancers look their name from the Gandy Manufacturing Company, which made tools used in railroad construction. Chinese immigrants supplied much of the labor that built the western railroads. profited in higher rents from the competition for housing between native-born Americans and newcomers from Europe. Most immediate of all, however, was the immigrants' effect upon established workers. Immigrants competed for jobs, thereby lowering wages. To lie sure, immigrants helped to stimulate the economy by creating new demands for factory and farm products. Most wage earners, however, were more disturbed by the job competition of the immigrants than they were impressed with the stimulating effects of immigration. continental railroad. By 1870, 75,000 ChiasI • made* had settled in California, where they 20 percent of the labor force. Then in 1873 a depression hit thecoraij As unemployment mounted, California ers worried that the Chinese would :;e their jobs at low wages. Fear and msecTM were intensified because the Chinese, forn* sons not always of their own choosing. tirely to themselves. Thus they did not havti opportunity to learn and adapt to the wayji living accepted by most Californians. Tensions on the Pacific Coast. Chinese workers on the Pacific Coast, particularly in California, were early victims of the rising distrust of all immigrants. By the terms of the Burlingame Treaty of 1868, Chinese people had the right to immigrate to the United States. For some years Chinese laborers had been welcome additions to the labor supply. They had been forced to accept the hardest and least desirable johs for very low wages. They were the backbone of the construction gangs that built the western section of the first trans- Restricting Chinese immigration. 01 (kiss I was fanned into violence by crowds ofngn ployed California workers who gathered(T street corners and sand lots. The sand lefts J soon attacked the Chinese, killing sore burning the property of others. In cooperation with distressed fans*] California workers were able to influenajj writing of a new state constitution in Ifflj California's new' constitution discriminaj against the Chinese by prohibiting then Em owning property or working at certainjotd Text continues on pogdH A To halo itudantt undtritand what many immigrant! lacad, you may with to road to tha clan Mark Twain'* penatrating Indictment of Chlnaia Immigrant traatmant In Amarica. Tha artlcla, amItlad "Oltgracaful Partocutfon of a Boy," wa* publnhed In tha "Now York Galaxy" in 1164. THIS CHANGING LAND Immigration — Then and Now the history of the world has ever received as nts as the United States, i is the movement of people to a foreign The reasons lying behind immigration are as people themselves. New lands to farm and escape from religious or political persecu- 'n, or war; and a desire to satisfy simple it all reasons for immigration. Whatever the truth remains — the United States is a land of years ago the first trickle of immigrants . Their route of travel led out of Asia. across bridge connecting Siberia and Alaska. Dur- times about one million immigrants came to . At that time, the majority of immigrants England. Large numbers of Dutch, French, sidScotch-lrish also arrived in the colonies period. Beginning in 1619, thousands of from Africa to the colonies as slaves. The brought with them their languages and the hdilions that have formed the basic patterns i way of life. 1830s the number of immigrants began to More than half a million arrived in that .followed by 1,700,000 in the 1840's, and the 1850's. Most of these new arrivals came srn Europe. The table at the bottom of the rather dramatically the role of this region of source of immigrants during these decades, 'wave of immigration continued to sweep United States from 1860 to 1890. More than of Immigration, Selected Years * 1840 1850 ^uiooe 50,228 228,168 "em Europe 29,710 78,947 1.228 Zealand, •IrtraJs ina South | Caribbean 3,815 15,788 45,882 Total 84.066 369.980 ^■lltvriiriLj of the United Stator, Hfillltetaf of the Unttea State* 10 million immigrants arrived on the nation's shores during those 30 years. Most came from northern and western Europe. A shift, however, was beginning to appear as more immigrants arrived from southern and eastern European nations. The years from 1890 to 1930 were the greatest era of immigration known in history. Nearly 22 million immigrants poured into the United States during that 40-year period, a number that exceeded the immigration total from colonial times until 1890, But the source of these numbers shifted notably from earlier periods. Most of the new arrivals came from southern and eastern Europe. The table below will help you see these new immigration patterns. In 1924 Congress passed a law to begin in 1929 limiting the number of immigrants to 150.000 per year. This restrictive legislation sharply reduced the number of immigrants. Also, Ihe Great Depression tarnished for many immigrants the dream of a better life in the United States. Indeed, in 1933, in the heart of the depression, total arrivals numbered only 23,068 and after departures, the actual number of immigrants for the year was just 12.383. Another dramatic shift has taken place in immigration patterns in the last decade. Changes in immigration laws have allowed more immigrants from India and the Far East. The war in Vietnam, the take-over of Cuba by Castro, and low employment and poverty in Mexico and the Caribbean Islands have also contributed to this shift. The chart provides a graphic illustration of the mos! recent immigration patterns. 1840 -1980 1890 1910 1940 1970 1980 143.279 170,815 16,000 42,000 33,200 196.020 502,099 "TTTTv" 27,239 6.215 30,800 21,200 55.963 41,500 10,200 4.448 23,563 1.913 94.900 236.100 1,072 8,100 14,000 1,167 2.800 1.700 3,833 89,534 17,822 161,100 204,500 1,200 455,302 1,041,570 70,756 373,300 530,600 The opponents of Chinese immigration also succeeded in getting Congress to pass an exclusion bill in 1879. This bill prohibited all but a few Chinese from settling in the United States in any year. Because this bill violated the Burlingame Treaty of 1868. President Hayes vetoed it. Under pressure, however, the Chinese government agreed not to object if the United States regulated immigration. In 1882 Congress enacted a new Chinese Exclusion Act, which, with several extensions, continued in efTect until World War II. The Chinese Exclusion Act forbade the immigration of Chinese laborers and denied American citizenship to Chinese born in China. Only students and a few other groups of Chinese could enter the United States. Other restrictions. The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 was the first of a long series of restrictions on immigration, enacted mainly because of pressure from worker groups. Another was the repeal of the Contract Labor Law. The Contract Labor Law had been adopted by Congress in 1864, when booming wartime industries desperately needed workers. This law permitted American employers to recruit laborers in Europe. Under the law it was legal for employers to have workers abroad sign contracts agreeing to come to the United States to work for a specified employer for specified wages for a specified time. It was illegal for the workers to leave their jobs while the contract was in force. American workers objected to the law because (1) it came dangerously close to setting up a slave-labor system and (2) it subjected American workers to the unfair competition of cheap foreign labor. Following the repeal of the Contract Labor Law in 1885, American wage earners pressured Congress for other restrictive measures. One bill that kept coming up for 30 years would have forbidden entry to any immigrant who could not read and write. Congress actually did pass this law on several occasions, but each time the President then in office vetoed the bill. In 1917, however, Congress passed a literacy test bill over President Woodrow Wilson's veto, and the door to immigration was shut a little further. The role of immigrants. Except for the Chinese Exclusion Act, the restrictions placed on immigration from 1865 to 1900 were relatively minor. Without the more than 11 million immigrants who poured into the United States between 1870 and 1900, profits to owners" industry would have been much smaller. .As it was, employers could keep wages of immigrants lower than those of established Americans. Without immigrants America's industrial progress also would have been much slower. Immigrant muscles and brains helped to transform the United States from a predominantly agricultural country into a giant industrial power. Sec underscored Items, text pp. 535-36. Identify: immigration, sand lotters For answers to questions, tee Answer Key, p.A76, 1. Summarizing Ideas: Discuss three ways s which immigration affected American worker,. 2. Determining Cause and Effect: Why did Cub-! gross pass the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 3. Interpreting Ideas: (a) Explain the provishai of the Contract Labor Law of 1864. <bl Why was it repealed? 4. Analyzing Ideas: Immigrants have help"-d a transform the United States. Give evidence "| support this statement. See Teaching Suggestions In TMRO, pp.TM 134-3$. Faced with the problems of the new industrial t! age, wage earners in cities looked to organization as a solution to their problems. The National Labor Union. Labor organua- tions were not new. During the war years 1861-65, however, as industry boomed and the cost of living soared, the labor movement gained new momentum. In 1866 the National Labor Union was launched under the leadership of William Syi vis, an experienced and able organizer of ms molders. In 1868 the National Labor Union helped push through Congress a law setting an 8-hour workday for laborers and median® employed by or in behalf of the federal government. After unsuccessfully supporting a third- party movement in the election of 1872, this union faded away. A Among workers* problems were periodic wege reductions from fluctuations In the business cycle. For example, after the 1(73 Panic (from problems with over-speculetlon), skilled workers earning $3.50 to tS.OO par day had thalr wagas cut to *1,SO to $2.00 per day. Thomas Anshutz, Labor's Artist Thomas Anshutz (1851-1916) was a painter best known tor his stark, realistic canvases of everyday, working-class life in the United States. He began his formal training at the National Academy of Design in New York, but in 1875 he went to Philadelphia. There he enrolled in the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, where he spent most of his professional career. At the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts Anshutz became an apprentice to Thomas Eakins, the painter and sculptor renowned tor his mastery of human anatomy. Anshutz learned from his mentor the art of letting the human body speak for itself. Like Eakins. Anshutz rejected conventional beauty in his paintings. He insisted on portraying people in real-life situations. Noontime at the Mill, which depicts steelworkers taking a lunch break, is typical of Anshutz's factual, objective style. Many people regarded Anshutz s choice of subject matter — which often included black workers — as inappropriate. His paintings were unusual in an era when idealized portraits and idyllic scenes were popular Later, as head of the Pennsylvania Academy. Anshutz was known as a "maker of painters." He believed in discovering and developing the natural creative tendencies of each student. He carried on the legacy of Thomas Eakins, however, by providing the students with a foundation of essential skills. Many young artists who studied under Anshutz have become famous m their own right. i Knights of Labor. Far more important the National Labor Union was the hts of Labor, founded in 1869 in Philadel- by Uriah S. Stephens, a tailor. The hts of Labor tried to unite all American ,ers into one great union —foreign-born d native-born. blacks and whites, skilled and illed. women and men. Several women I local units or "assemblies" and a few i national leaders. The Knights aimed ^secure to the toilers a proper share of the that they create; more of the leisure it rightfully belongs to them." Among other gs. they favored an 8-hour workday. [lie Knights of Labor also tried to organize iruncooperative stores and manufacturing as some farmers already had done, r hoped to save for themselves the profits Inormally went to manufacturers and dis- ors and at the same time to produce lower-priced goods. However, most of their cooperative enterprises failed, largely because they did not have enough money to buy good machinery and to hire qualified managers. In some of their efforts the Knights of Labor were more successful. They were influential, for example, in causing Congress to pass the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882 and to repeal the Contract Labor Law in 1885. The Knights of Labor officially frowned on strikes, preferring to settle disputes between management and laborers through industrial arbitration.0 However, a successful railroad strike in 1885 did much to boost the group's membership. For the first time in American labor history, railroad operators met strike leaders on equal terms and agreed to labor's "arbitration: the judging of a dispute between two sides by an impartial person whose decision they agree in advance to occept. *3 BKimowmani alto rapratantad in attampt to rettor* the lociil tutut ina pride of Unit I ttm" whan tha machtna and commerca ware mora highly vatuad. Prtda in (arttwork wai oflah tha caiuatty of tha tubdlvlilon or labor Into tmall. boring talk!. . swim t) uUlUbt UiSf ■Smeared Items, text pp. 538-40. Bify: National I^abor Union, Uriah Stephens, , arbitration, Terence Powderly, Havmarket Iter, Samuel Gompers mi to question*. see Answer Key. P.A7 6. ilyzing Ideas: Why did some workers orga- |kil unions during the mid-1800's? (asking Ideas: Describe the (a) purpose, (hi es, and (c) reasons for the decline of the hts of Labor, nparing Ideas: (a) How did the American ^deration of Labor differ from the Knights of ir?(b) What is the difference between a craft i and an industrial union? (c) Give exam- i of each today. Organized labor faces opposition as it seeks reforms i"9 Suggestions In TMRG, p,TMI35. | the late 1880's, the workers attempts i unions and to seek recognition of their "s right to bargain for them met strong ^widespread opposition. : opposition. During the late 1880's, ans in general as well as the govern- I usually supported employers in conflicts 1 employers and unions or between em- tand workers striking for union recogni- iThis opposition to unions is not hard to and. Most Americans had grown up in lohler. rural America. Individual workers l had more control over their fates than jihw had in the giant corporations. Most ans also believed that employers had fright to hire and fire their employees as Bued. ny Americans resented union demands ! closed shop. The businesses that had }agreements with a union could hire only i members. Employers resented this re- ]on what they considered their right to hanyone they pleased. Many workers also 1 these closed-shop agreements, which I them to join a union. over, many Americans believed that ^workers were quite content with their lot. ||tfact that as late as 1914 only about one rout of ten belonged to a labor organization seemed to support this belief. Many Americans held that the best workers could still rise to become managers and even owners. Most Americans blamed the entire labor problem as well as industrial conflict itself on "power- hungry" labor leaders interested in their own personal advancement. Immigrants and labor unions. Many union leaders were of foreign birth. In several labor organizations, especially in the textile and coal-mining industries, immigrant workers were a source of strength. Immigrant workers took leading parts in the strikes of New York garment workers as well as in the textile workers' strike in Lawrence, Massachusetts. However, a great many immigrants opposed labor unions. Coming from rural backgrounds in Europe, most immigrants had no previous experience with labor organizations. Bewildered by their new environment, they often did not feel a need to join with native- born American workers in an effort to promote common interests. Many immigrants had left Europe partly to be as free as possible from all sorts of restrictions, Thus they did not like labor unions, with their dues, their rules, and their insistence that no one work for less than a certain wage. Many immigrants felt that however bad working conditions in the United States might be, they were better than working conditions back in Europe. Most immigrants, also, were unskilled workers. Thus the A. F. of L. made little or no effort to admit them to the craft unions. Finally, there was widespread prejudice among native-born American workers toward immigrant workers. This prejudice deepened when foreign-horn workers were recruited by business managers to break strikes. Women and unions. Many unions did not admit women to membership, but in a few craft unions women played important roles. Most notable was the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, in which Rose Schneiderman and Leona O'Reilly were leaders. The A. F. of L. expressed interest in organizing women but did not vigorously pursue this aim. In 1903 the National Women's Trade Union League was founded, largely by middle-class women. It assisted women workers in several ways, especially by providing financial support during strikes. The league stressed iiugr i r.c lift piiiw <iirni<l public distrust because of tome violent incidents that occurred before ■ktmf ttrong. (e.f,, the terrorizing of the Molly Maguires - - a secret miners* organization; Ipmrrtufe strike Into which federal troops were called; the Haymarket Square bornbing) 5H1 79Tnn* P ivum ir . The shopping and the business gave 'iesan opportunity to chat with neighbors, mtch up on the latest news, and perhaps to hsome horse trading in front of the hlack- ';!'h shop. The Sunday trip to church was another spot in the week. The entire family, ly scrubbed and dressed in their best es. drove to church in the wagon or buggy. they worshiped, sang hymns, listened to sermon, and afterward gathered in front of church for leisurely talk before driving once again. local school. On weekdays the children a one-room elementary school. To it, some of the boys and girls walked sev- miles along the country roads. School swere short, for the children had to help spring planting and fall harvesting. The ;r, usually a young woman, taught all The emphasis in 1870, as in earlier , was on "readin', 'ritin', and 'rithmetic." tig the school term, the teacher often lived the homes of the pupils, staying a month in home, then a month in another, and so on :ghout the term. The school was also a community center, otion day was a big occasion, and now- then there were spelling bees and other ts in which parents as well as their chil- could take part. llness of farm life. For most farm fami- however, farming in 1870 was a hard, Jy way of life. It was especially hard and on the prairies and plains. Hamlin Garland, who spent his boyhood on in Wisconsin, Iowa, and the Dakotas, in his writing the dreary loneliness in ted farming communities. In his famous ion of tales, Main-Traveled Roads, md wrote: [The main-traveled road in the West iasev- here) is hot and dusty in summer, and teand drear with mud in fall and spring, |rfm winter the winds sweep the snow across but it does sometimes cross a rich meadow the songs of the larks and bobolinks and irds are tangled... . .'Mainly it is long and wearyful, and has a ■little town at one end and a home of toil at ■ether. Like the main-traveled road of life, it unversed by many classes of people, but the k and the weary predominate." Immigrant farmers from Europe, who by 1870 were moving out onto the western prairies and plains, faced special difficulties. These immigrant pioneers had to adjust not only to a strange physical environment but also to a strange and bewildering social environment, Churches were different; schools were different; life in nearly every way was different from what they had known in the Old World. At first neither they nor their American-born neighbors understood each other's language and customs. Hardest of all. perhaps, were the lives of black settlers who ventured onto the prairies and plains. One great exodus of about 15,000 blacks from the southern states arrived in Kansas in 1879, where they hoped to start new lives free from discrimination. These black newcomers —penniless, weary, and often ill from their long journey — took up homesteads in the unfamiliar lands. To buy a calf, a pig, a few chickens, or a plow, the men worked for wages on nearby farms, on railroads, or in mines. Despite these hardships, many of the black settlers managed to carve out homes for their families in Kansas. Smaller groups of blacks settled in other parts of the West. Most of them endured some form of discrimination from their white neighbors. New problems. Most American farmers of the 187CI'k were not unhappy with their lot. 'They expected to work hard, and they expected to live more or less apart from their neighbors. The hardships that troubled them most were new ones growing out of the new industrial economy. See underscored Items, text p. 581. Identify: federal census For aniwen to ^questions, see Answer Key, p.A77. 1. Summarizing Ideas: (a) List three adjectives that describe farm life in 1870. (b) Explain why you selected each adjective, (c) Do any of the adjectives seem to be negative? Are any of them positive? Explain. 2. Analyzing Ideas: Why was the Saturday drive to town such an important part of farm life? 3. Comparing Ideas: <a) Compare the reasons for the movement of blacks to Kansas in 1879 to the reasons for the immigration of Europeans to America, (b) Compare the problems these blacks may have faced adjusting to their new homes to the problems the immigrants faced. During the latter half of the 1800's, the major colonial powers of Europe engaged in a lively race for empire. The United States, however, was not especially interested in entering the race. To be sure, in 1867 Secretary of State Seward persuaded Congress to annex the Midway Islands and to purchase Alaska. Congress made the purchase reluctantly, however, because Americans on the whole were indifferent to building an empire. Toward the end of the 1800's, American sentiment about expansion began to change. It was the Spanish-American War that finally started the United States down the road of colonialism. The war with Spain in 1898 began in protest against Spanish policy in Cuba. It ended with a treaty in which Spain agreed to give up its claim to Cuba and in which the United States gained the Philippine Islands as well as Guam and Puerto Rico. In addition to the Philippines and Guam, the United States acquired other territories in the Pacific area. Hawaii was annexed in 1898, and a portion of Samoa was acquired in 1899. To protect its growing interests in the Pacific, the United States insisted upon an equal opportunity to share in the business and trade of East Asia This Open Door Policy involved Americans in the troubled affairs of East Asia and committed the United States to a role of power politics in the Pacific. America's interest in colonies was not confined to the Pacific area. As you will read in the next chapter the Caribbean offered even larger and more inviting opportunities for the development of American interests. Spanish-American War Annexation of Hawaii <898 Open Door Policy in effect Boxer Rebellion 1900 Filipinos lose war for independence Congress sets up Filipino government 1902 Treaty of Portsmouth 1905 Jones Ac! Filipinos independerw soon 1916 1895 1900 1905 1910 1-^- 1915 itional foot of territory by conquest," he ared. "We have seen material interests ten constitutional freedom in the United tes," he went on to say. "Therefore we will know how to sympathize with those in the of America who hnve to contend with such rs. not only within their borders but from :de their borders also." He then urged the n American countries to settle the Mexi- problem in their own way. Although some European countries ptly recognized the Huerta government, :n refused to do so. He was convinced that Mexicans themselves would soon get rid Huerta. Meanwhile, the United States Id follow a policy of "watchful waiting." Wilson's refusal to intervene pleased most tin Americans. However, many Americans 'ized the President as they saw American and property destroyed in Mexico. can intervention. As the months , even President Wilson began to lose nee. Hundreds of small revolutionary ps roamed Mexico, hut they were not ized and Huerta remained in power. ~an citizens in Mexico were killed, and were rumors that Huerta might try to te, or seize, American property. The final crisis came in April 1914, when a sn official arrested several American 5 near Tampico, Mexico, which was under ial law. The sailors were soon released, Huerta refused to apologize for the in- To make matters worse, a German ship ■*ed at Veracruz with machine guns and military supplies for Huerta. President n then ordered United States marines to ;yy Veracruz. This action united Mex- public opinion against the United States. ABC mediation. At this critical stage, tina, Brazil, and Chile—sometimes the "ABC powers" —invited President n to send representatives to meet with can leaders and those of other nations to to reach a solution. Wilson accepted the in- 'a, and the conference was held at Falls, Canada. Among its other rec- ations, the conference urged Huerta to Huerta did retire, faced with the fact his forces were being beaten by those of rival, Carranza. Carranza then established himself in power co, and American forces withdrew from Veracruz. In 1915 Carranza guaranteed that Mexico would respect foreign lives and property, and the United States recognized him as leader of the Mexican government. American troops in Mexico. Carranza's reforms divided his followers, who began to quarrel among themselves. One of those who turned against Carranza was Francisco "Pancho" Villa (vee yah). Villa was angry at the United States for helping Carranza. Hoping to force American troops to intervene in Mexico, Villa and his followers in 1916 seized 18 Americans in northern Mexico and put them to death. Later, Villa crossed the border and raided Columbus, New Mexico, killing 17 Americans. President Wilson announced he would send an expedition into Mexico to capture Villa "dead or alive." Carranza reluctantly agreed, and General John J. Pershing led some 5,000 troops across the border. The deeper Pershing pushed into Mexican territory, the more hostile the Mexicans became. For a time the threat of war hung over both countries. Finally, in January 1917, American troops withdrew from Mexico without having captured the elusive Villa. Mexican immigration. One major result of the years of unrest in Mexico was the increased immigration of Mexicans into the United States. Many came as political exiles. Others came to escape from the uncertainties of life in a country tom by revolution. Still others came, in search of a better life in a more prosperous country. See underscored Hems, text pp. 659-fit. Identify: Porfirio Diaz, Victoriano Huerta, Ven- ustiano Carranza, ABC powers, "Pancho" Villa, John Pershing For answers to questions, see Answer Key. p.A92. 1. Organizing Ideas: Give examples to show how the economic interests of the United States and Mexico were closely interwoven. 2. Interpreting Ideas: (a) What differences and events contributed to the growing hostilities with Mexico? (b) Describe the circumstances that led to Wilson's policy of "watchful waiting." (c) Explain the policy, (d) Why did Wilson abandon "watchful waiting"? 3. Analyzing Ideas: How did the ABC powers help solve the conflict between the United States and Mexico? Ut under sco fed Items, text pp. 749 ■ 50. Identify: Fireside Chat, ''Hoovervilles" ntnwati to questions see Answer Key, O.A102. L Summarizing Ideas: How did some farmers react to the depression? 2. Analyzing Ideas: (a) What was the "Bonus Army'? (b) Was its stay in Washington, D.C., successful? Explain. 1 Determining Cause and Effect: What effects did the depression have on population growth in | the United States? Why? t Studying Graphics: Study the pictures in this [ section. Based on them, write a description of life during the depression. America's minorities struggle against hard times and discrimination jlTuchlng Suggestions In TMRG, op.TM 1 84-SS. " 11920's and 1930's were difficult times for orilies in the United States. Minorities did share in the prosperity of the "Golden Rwenties." lick migration to the North. Before World |¥ir I, many black families had moved from tSouth to the growing northern industrial ers. There they had hoped to escape pov- Xy and discrimination and to find jobs, hous- .and better education for their children. World War I, with its heavy demand for in- rial workers, had increased this migration, ring the war about half a million southern icks had found jobs in such places as the coal mes of West Virginia and Illinois, the steel tils of Pittsburgh, and the automobile facto- w of Detroit. The movement into urban areas continued the war. Between 1910 and 1930, the population of the northern states rose i a little over 1 million to nearly 2.5 mil. In the same years, the number of black earners in American industries grew iabout 600,000 to nearly 1 million. Black families did not find in the North all (opportunities they sought. Blacks got the st jobs and the lowest pay. Northern i wage earners sometimes staged protest against the hiring of blacks. Housing ges. brought on by wartime building restrictions, also led to tensions when blacks tried to move into white neighborhoods in search of places to live. Disappointed hopes. World War I, the war "to make the world safe for democracy," had naturally aroused the hopes of black Americans. Black soldiers returning from Europe, where they had been treated as equals, looked forward to new and greater freedom at home. They were angry and disappointed to find conditions in America little changed. They were especially discouraged to find a new Ku Klux Klan operating in the North as well as in the South. The new Klan harassed Jews, Catholics, foreign-born citizens, and anyone else it chose to call "dangerous" and "un- American." However, blacks were the special object of Klan violence. There were other reasons for black bitterness as well. In 1919-20 the nation's economy went into a postwar depression. This heightened the competition for jobs between blacks and whites and led to increased racial tension. The riots of 1919. The rising tensions burst out in violence during the summer of 1919. Riots in more than 20 cities, northern and southern, brought death and injury to hundreds of men and women and destroyed thousands of tenements in city slum areas. The riots generally began when blacks fought back against some especially discriminatory act. Frightened whites, convinced that black Americans were trying to threaten them and gain control, responded with more violence. Police forces, ill-equipped to deal with riots, usually sided with whites, causing blacks to take even more desperate actions. The riots solved no problems. Nor did they spur local or national officials to try to remedy even the more obvious causes of the trouble. As a result, black Americans were now more ready to follow leaders who insisted that blacks had a lawful right to defend themselves when the law itself failed to do so. Black pride. In the 1920's many blacks felt a growing sense of racial identity and pride along with an increasing interest in their African backgrounds. These feelings were strongly expressed by Marcus Garvey, a black immigrant from Jamaica in the West Indies. Garvey became convinced that blacks could never wip true freedom and equality in the I other difficulties blacks faced in the migration to the North the hostile city atmosphere ten provoked violence between blacks; harsh northern winters for which blacks were yi physically prepared; the lack of the closeness there had been In many rural southern Gains in civil rights. The growing sense of ~de and self-assertiveness led blacks in both North and the South to make headway in ir struggle for equal justice under the law. ck leaders denounced lynching, white ter- 1, and discrimination in housing and in courts. In these areas the efforts of the 'AACP to bring lawsuits designed to bring at the enforcement of equal rights for *ks began to show important progress. The major political parties did little to fur- rthe struggles of blacks in the 1920's. The blican Party was trying to build strong tical organizations in the South. As a re- t. the Republican administrations hesitated meet the demands of southern blacks for fed- protection of their voting rights or for a ^jr share of federally appointed jobs. Never- 'leas, Oscar de Priest of Chicago ran as a blican and in 1928 became the first black ed to Congress in 28 years. The Democratic Party held power in the and continued efforts to exclude black 18. In spite of this. Democrats in northern began to seek black support, and blacks ; began to join the Democratic Party. ks and the depression. For blacks the :iig of the depression was a catastrophe, y businesses and banks owned by blacks bankrupt. Black workers lived with the knowledge that they were "the first fired the last hired." During the worst years of 'depression, an estimated two thirds of the i in American industry lost their jobs. The New Deal provided black Americans relief and employment in the Works ss Administration, the Civilian Conser- Corps, and the National Youth Ad- ration. By-1936. one sixth of those on :fwere blacks. One black newspaper writer bed the meaning of one New Deal pro- to blacks: "The really important thing the WPA is that it is a guarantee of a liv- ie." Blacks also had a share of new I owning, and black farmers and sharecrop- received benefits from New Deal agricul- ' agencies. However, blacks suffered some i of discrimination in almost all New programs. A smaller percentage of blacks employed in the work programs, and the [and agricultural programs were par- ly unfair to blacks. theless, blacks did receive more aid the New Deal than they had under U abandoned the practice of segregation in federal offices. Hoover's administration. In addition, at the urging of Eleanor Roosevelt, the President's wife, blacks were appointed to important federal positions. Among them were Mary McLeod Bethune, Ralph Bunche, and Robert C. Weaver. These and other leaders made up an informal group of advisers often called the "black cabinet." Such New Deal actions revolutionized the voting habits of black Americans. By 1936, black voters were shifting to the Democratic Party. By the end of the decade, the Democrats had firmly secured the black vote. The depression and the new opportunities provided by the New Deal increased the determination of blacks to win their legal and constitutional rights. In many northern cities, black leaders organized "don't-buy-where-you- can't-work" campaigns. In the rural areas, tenant farmers, black and white, often joined together against wealthy landlords. The National Negro Congress united black and interracial organizations from all across the nation in the struggle for black rights. Despite these advances and the progress stimulated by New Deal programs, much remained to be done. For the vast majority' of blacks, the elimination of prejudice and full acceptance into the mainstream of American life remained an unfulfilled dream. Indian policy. Other racial and ethnic problems in the nation were becoming critical in the 1920's. The policy of "Americanizing" the Indians under the Dawes Act (page 496) had failed. Individual farm ownership was contrary to Indian traditions. Many tribes had never engaged in farming. Indians who did try to learn modern methods of farming often had to struggle with worn-out, nonfertile land. As for education, the government-sponsored boarding schools and day schools deprived Indian children of their tribal identity but gave them no identity that they could find meaningful. In 1924 the Indian population as a whole received United States citizenship, partly in recognition of the young Indian men who had fought in World War I. Citizenship did not lessen the harsh fact that Indian poverty was greater than that of any other group in the United States. The discovery of oil on some Indian lands brought unexpected wealth to a few Indians, but for most life was grim. Still, earlier predictions that the Indians were a vanishing race proved incorrect. The Indian popula- He initiated racial integration )fr*tw force*; he alto appointed one or more black advisers on race relations for almost *n bureau or commission tion increased from about 243,000 in 1863 to about 350,000 in 1924. Indians and the New Deal. In 1928 a report by the Institute for Government Research described the destructive conditions on Indian reservations. The report and other criticisms led Congress in 1934 to pass the Howard- Wheeler Act, or the Indian Reorganization Act. The new law halted the breaking up of reservations by granting lands to individual Indians. It tried to restore to tribal ownership parts of reservations that had not yet become individual homesteads. The act also emphasized local control. It permitted tribes to choose whether or not they wished to practice local self-government, (tallowed them to strengthen community life by reestablishing traditional beliefs, customs, and crafts. Under the act, Indians were allowed to engage in any business of their choice, to make contracts, and to sue or be sued in court. The Howard-Wheeler Act also tried to teach Indians to use their land more effectively. Soil- conservation practices and improved methods of raising and marketing crops and livestock were taught. The new educational programs included adults and children and made the school a center of community life. Many problems remained in spite of the change in policy. Some tribes that had been more or less successfully "Americanized" disliked the new policy. They believed it would keep them inferior in American society. Efforts to improve unused Indian lands met with little success. Thus although the new policy brought greater freedom and recognition to the Indians, its aim of raising Indian standards of living was not realized. Mexican Americans. As you may recall, many former citizens of Mexico became citizens of the United States at the close of the Mexican War in 1848. In the 1890's increasing numbers of Mexicans migrated into the United States looking for jobs. The need for labor during World War I and the desire of many Mexicans to escape the troubled economic and political conditions in Mexico increased the flow across the border. During the 1920's about half a million new Mexican immigrants arrived. Most of these immigrants were poor families from rural areas. They were forced to work for low wages as migrant laborers in agriculture, in mining, and in railroad construction throughout the Southwest and, increasingly, the Middle West. They entered the United States speaking a different language and practicing different customs. For the most part poor and ill-educated, they met with prejudice and discrimination in jobs, housing, and schools, Established labor groups resented them because they lowered wage scales by accepting, out of necessity, almost any rate of pay, White resentment also grew because these new immigrants could cross and recross the borderai economic conditions in Mexico improved or worsened. Despite these burdens, Mexican American! became active in the organized labor movement. They shared problems and developed i sense of cooperation through mutalistas, or self-aid societies. Particularly in New Mexico. Mexican Americans made their influence felt politically. The United States and Mexico jointly developed a program to deal with immigration from Mexico. The Expatriation Program, as it wz* called, was designed to persuade Mexican immigrants to return to their own country. From the Mexican point of view, the purpose of the program was to revitalize the Mexican economy by making use of the skills the Mexicans had learned while in the United States. Some 500,000 men and women did return to Mexico Only too often, however, they were disappointed with their decision. Conditions in their native land were bleak and they were read, whatever the obstacles, to try once again to improve their lives in the United States. The depression added to the burdens of the Mexican Americans. Jobs in agriculture and on railroads became scarce. Increasingly, the Mexican Americans moved from rural areas into the cities, where there was at least some hope, however slim, of finding work. At least in the cities, if jobs were not available. N'e" Deal relief programs were. See underscored items, text dp 7St - S4. Identify: Marcus Garvey, The New Negro, Oscar de Priest, National Negro Congress, Indian Reorganization Act, mutalistas. Expatriation Program For answer, to quettions, Me Answer Key, pp.A102-S). J 1, Summarizing Ideas: What factors helped cmw the race riots of 1919? 2. Interpreting Ideas: (a) What does the term "new Negro" mean? (b) How did the grovinf hlack pride affect business (c) How did it affert politics? A Report topic Have Interetted itudenti pretent report, on Memcan-Amerlcan political advancement in the soutfiwettern United States. [During the 1920's and 1930's, Americans had [faced rapidly changing conditions at home, economy had moved from a postwar pression to a boom to almost complete collapse in the Great Depression. Relations with foreign nations went ough equally complex changes during the ades of the 1920's and the 1930's. The end |of World War 1 in 1918 had released in people otions they had long held in check. Millions fpeople on every continent mourned for loved (killed in the war. Mixed with the sorrow, never, was wild joy that the war to end all rs was over. Millions of people offered ayers of thanksgiving and prayers for the Kliment of President Wilson's vision of a |world rebuilt on a foundation of lasting peace. Wilson realized, as millions of Americans l not, that it is easier to win a victory on a ittlefield than it is to build a lasting peace. Be warned Americans that great problems retained to be solved and challenged them to fake up the responsibility of world leadership. The United States, however, refused the challenge by rejecting the Versailles Treaty. Unhappily, Wilson's plea for world leadership went unheeded. As a result, the idealism [that imbued Americans at the end of the war pin faded. Americans were tired of wartime ■frictions and were eager to return to the ■preryday business of living. Also, as their Eu- pean Allies began to quarrel over the spoils pirar, many Americans became increasingly sillusioned. During the 1920's, the American people their representatives in Congress re- lucted immigration and raised tariffs. They greeted Wilson's policies, both domestic and eign. They refused to join the League of Eetions. In the following years, Americans ned their backs on Europe and on the chal- ge of world leadership. you read about the growing isolationism of postwar years, look for the details that bpport each of the following statements. jl America closes its doors to Europe's people I and goods. United States moves toward the Good Neighbor Policy. p Americans cooperate with other nations in efforts to prevent war. America closes its doors to Europe's people and goods See Teaching Suggestion! In TMRG, pp.TM 1 88*89. After World War I, the United States drew back from involvement in world affairs. The United States refused, for example, to join the League of Nations, in part, to avoid becoming entangled in Europe's troubles and quarrels. The United States also tried, with considerable success, to keep out the people and products of Europe and Asia. The immigration and tariff laws passed during this period were the most restrictive in United States history. Closing the doors. By almost completely halting immigration during the 1920's the United States reversed one of its oldest traditions. Earlier laws and international agreements had excluded the Chinese, the Japanese, and other Asians. Despite these exceptions, few questioned the historic role of the United States as- a place of opportunity for immigrants. Indeed, during the decade before World War 1, more Europeans settled in the United States than in any previous decade. Why did a nation of immigrants suddenly close its doors? One reason was an anti-Euro- pean feeling that arose. However, certain Americans had reasons of their own. Organized labor, for example, argued that new immigrants were willing to work for lower wages than American workers and thus pulled down the standard of living. Industrialists had formerly favored immigration as a source of cheap, unskilled labor, By 1920, with the railroads built and basic industries such as steel well developed, they no longer needed masses of unskilled workers. Finally, many established Americans felt that the more recent immigrants, mainly from eastern and southern European nations, did not easily become "Americanized." The immigration laws. Congress passed three laws in the 1920's that progressively restricted immigration from Europe. The Emergency Quota Act of 1921 introduced a quota system. This limited the number of Europeans and others who could be admitted to 3 percent of the total number of persons of their nationality ^05 ov kiufhout the Annotated Teacher** Edition, terms listed in the "identify" portion of a ■non Review are underscored the first time they appear. See the Teacher's Manual for Election for a listing of important vocabulary terms. ▲ A Report topic: Hive interested students present Orel reports on current Immlgrjtion quotes end laws. The students should discuss the specific incidents or situations behind the quotes and laws. Immigration to the United States 1690 -1939 By Country of Origin Italy (18.8%) Austria-Hungary (17.0%) Other (14.7%) Russia 3.6%) Germany (6.8%) Great Britain (6.7%) Scandinavia (5.8%) Canada (8.4%) Mexico (3.2%) Ireland (5.0%) Source Statistical ADur/ect of the Uni ted States residing in the United States in the year 1910. The act also set a total yearly limit of about 350,000 immigrants. In 1924 an even more restrictive law reduced the yearly quota from 3 to 2 percent. It also changed the base year from 1910 to 1890. This change discriminated against Italians, Austrians, Russians, and other eastern and southern Europeans who had immigrated to America mainly after 1890. Finally, the National Origins Act of 1929 shifted the base year of immigration to 1920. However, it counterbalanced this more liberal provision by reducing the yearly limit on im- a migrants to 150,000. The new immigration policies aroused a great deal of bitterness, especially among eastern and southern Europeans. The Japanese were also aroused because the immigration act of 1924 ended the Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907. Japan had faithfully observed the agreement and resented the policies which closed the doors to Japanese immigrants. The war of tariffs. While closing its doors to immigrants, the United States also raised tariff barriers to keep out foreign products. In fact. the ink was hardly dry on the peace treaties before the nations of the world were engaged io another war—a trade war fought with tariffs As you have read, the Fordney-McCumber Tariff of 1922 increased import duties on hundreds of items. I n 1930 Congress passed the Hawley-Smoot Tariff Act, providing for the highest tariff in American history. President Hoover felt that some of the rates were text high. He also pondered a petition signed by 1,000 leading ecocm- mists who argued that such high tariffs would raise prices, create hardships for American consumers, and seriously interfere with world trade. Nevertheless, believing that protective tariffs encouraged business prosperity. Hoover signed the bill. America's high-tariff policy proved a cruel blow to many countries in Latin America and in Europe. When America's high tariffs deprived these countries-of their best markets in the United States, their economic strength declined. Factories closed, people were thrown out of work, and the surplus of farm products mounted steadily. Some countries struck back by raising their own tariff barriers against American goods. Thus the high tariffs that Congress hoped would aid American industry' in the end deprived many American businesses and farmsof the foreign markets they badly needed. War debts and high tariffs. America's high- tariff policy created still another problem.How could European countries pay their war debts to the United States if they could not sell their gtxxhs in this country? The war had changed America's relation to Europe from debtor to creditor. Before the war American business leaders had borrowed money from Europeans to finance new industries. During the period before the United States entered the war in 1917, however, Europeans began to sell their American stocks and bonds to buy war goods. As the war progressed, the American government also loaned huge sums to the warring countries. As a result, by 1918 nearly all the European countries owed money to the United States. The total amounted to about $10 billion. The American government reduced the interest rates on the loans. It also arranged for the debtor nations to repay the money over a long period of time. Despite the generous terms, the bankrupt European countries emerged Class activity At the Undent* itudy chapter* 34 and 35. have them make note* in preparation lor a debate between pre-Wortd War II '•internationalists" and "Isolationists " Then divide the class into "internationalists" and -isolationists" and have them debate each other Women in the Labor Force • 1890-1980 Year Number of Women Employed Outside the Home Percentage of the Labor Force Composed of Women 1890 3.600.000 16.8% 1900 5.000.000 17.0% 1910 7.700.000 19.5% 1920 8.300.000 20.0% 1930 10.600.000 20.4% 1940 13,800.000 27.1% 1950 18,300.000 29.6% 1960 23.200,000 33.4% 1970 32.500.000 38.1% 1980 45.400,000 42.4% gasoline to conserve oil and rubber. It even controlled clothing styles to save wool, cotton, rayon, and other vital materials. To prevent transportation shortages and bottlenecks, the federal government also created the War Shipping Administration and the Office of Defense Transportation. These agencies supervised the railroads, express services, and shipping. The result was that supplies and troops moved efficiently over land and sea. Mobilizing human resources. The Office of War Information bolstered the morale of the armed forces and of civilians by publicizing the achievements of war production. It also gained support for Allied war aims by broadcasting them in dozens of languages to people all over the world. The War Manpower Commission iWMCl discouraged men and women from working in nonessential occupations. By 1945 it had channeled nearly 30 million wage earners into the war production effort, including 12 million black American workers and 50,000 Indian workers. By 1943 the labor force included 2 million women working in war plants, replacing men who had left to serve in the nation's armed services. The WMC also operated the Selective Service System. By the end of the war, the Selective Service had drafted nearly 10 million out of the more than 15 million Americans who served in the armed forces. Included were more than 350,000 Mexican Americans and 1 million black Americans, among them both volunteers and draftees. Despite black protests official military policy required blacks to sent in segregated units, as in previous wars. In 1944-45, however, some white and black troops in Europe were integrated to meet an emergency situation. Also included in the armed forces were about 25,000 Indian volunteers. Among tribes with warrior traditions, the rate of enlistment was high. In general, the Indian volunteersen- joyed the respect of their white and black fellow soldiers. Indian soldiers who returned to the reservations after the war took back with them new ideas to their families and their tribal communities. For the first time the American armed forces, which had previously used women only as nurses, accepted women in uniform to replace men in noncombatant jobs. More than 250,000 women entered the army (the WACi, the Coast Guard (the SPAR), the Navy (the WAVES), and the Marine Corps. As full- fledged military personnel, women worked as machinists, storekeepers, office workers, radio operators, and drivers of jeeps and trucks. The performance of women in the armed forces and in the nation's war plants did much to break down prejudices about what women could and could not do. Government price control. One of the ways in which the government most closely regulated the lives of civilians was through price controls. In World War I, the shortage of consumer goods and the increased purchasing power of industrial and agricultural workers had driven prices skyward. This brought on inflation and caused suffering, especially among the poor. The government was determined to prevent inflation in World War II. As a first step, the government raised income taxes. This drained off' dollars that would otherwise have been spent on goods in the stores. As a second step, the government encouraged Americans to buy war bonds, arguing that such purchases were Discussion topic- Despite deeply rooted beliefs in Individualism and free enterprise, Americans accepted government controls durin9 tbit period. Have students discuss the reasons for this. Ask: Are there any circumstances under which Americans might accept such controls today* mit"d over President Roosevelt** veto, the Smfth-Connally War Labor Disputes Act of 1943 |tire the President the power to take over a war plant threatened by a strike. he it'd *en ep. >uy ere [both a patriotic duty and a sound investment. However, these measures alone could not pre- 1 vent inflation. In 1942, following the example of European overnments, Congress created the Office of tice Administration (OPA). The OPA established ceilings, or top limits, on prices and set | sp a system of rationing. The OPA issued ra- Bon books containing coupons that purchasers Had to use in addition to money to buy gaso- Iline, fuel, shoes, coffee, sugar, fats and oils, eat. butter, and canned goods. The OPA also itahlished rent controls. Despite these efforts, the prices of Conner goods rose, especially food prices. By the cost of living had risen 30 percent ove 1941 prewar levels. Some Americans vi- ated the price control and rationing system jby paying exorbitant prices to obtain more •n their share of rationed products. Most nericans, however, accepted price controls l rationing as wartime necessities. ntrol of wages and profits. Shortly after attack on Pearl Harbor, the leaders of anized labor promised President Roosevelt #t American workers would not strike dur- [ the war. At the same time, they insisted ■t fhe government had to ensure that ers would be fairly treated. By the spring f 1942. however, the cost of living had risen, [workers were becoming restless. In July 1942 the National War Labor Board (NWLB) tried to work out a compromise. It granted a 15-percent wage increase to meet the rises in living costs. Several months later Congress and President Roosevelt authorized the NWLB to freeze the wages and salaries of all workers at the newly established levels. For a time there was relatively little trouble. However, as prices continued to rise, labor again became restless, and here and there strikes brokeout. In such instances the government usually stepped in and for the most part settled the disputes quickly. The government also tried to regulate pro- fits— mainly by means of taxation. Personal income taxes were greatly increased for people in the higher income brackets. The most drastic means of controlling profits was the excess profits tax, levied in 1940. This tax obliged corporations to pay to the government as much as 90 percent of all excess profits. Americans did not like government controls. Nevertheless, they accepted them with the understanding that they would be removed when the emergency was over. The Japanese Americans. The upheaval in everyday life resulting from these controls and from the whole vast war effort revealed the extraordinary willingness of the American people to make sacrifices for the national emergency. Despite discomforts and sacrifices. Iffy built tarpaper barracks were the new homes for Japanese Americans in 1942 i they were forced to leave their former homes and relocate in detention camps, i camp u>as set up in the desert near Maruanar, California. Although racial diverimmatitm did not divappear, reaction to Hitlei'v exlremilt, lacitt policiev did cium many Americans to reexamine their attitudes. the people maintained a remarkably high level of morale. Americans also suffered deep anxieties and fears. However, these fears did not lead to the widespread repressions of minority groups that occurred in World War I. The tragic exception to this overall tolerance was the forced relocation of some 100,000 Americans of Japanese birth or parentage. After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, many Americans were genuinely fearful of a Japanese attack on the United States. This fear was soon turned against the Nisei—na- tive-born Americans whose ancestors came from Japan. As a result, most Japanese Ameri- cans—the great majority of whom lived in California—were forced to leave their homes and were taken to detention camps in other states, where they were imprisoned until the end of the war. Most of the Nisei lost their homes and businesses. Yet there had never been any real proof that these Japanese Americans had been disloyal. Indeed, nearly all of the Nisei remained loyal, patriotic American citizens despite their harsh, unfair treatment. Many of those allowed to serve in the armed forces distinguished themselves for bravery. After the war Americans regretted their unjustified actions against the Nisei. In 1945 the Nisei were permitted to leave the detention camps and settle wherever they wished. In 1948 Congress passed an act to help the Nisei recover a part of their losses. Minorities in wartime. American minorities contributed not only to the fighting but to efforts on the home front as well. In 1941 President Roosevelt directed that a Fair Employment Practices Committee be set up to end discriminatory hiring policies in defense industries. As a result, the doors of the defense industries opened to minority workers. Less was accomplished, however, in promoting equal housing opportunities in the overcrowded cities. Discrimination on the part of white Americans led to outbursts of violence and even riots in several cities. In Detroit in 1943, for example, federal troops restored order after 25 blacks and 9 whites died in a riot. In 1942 the United States and Mexico signed a treaty. Under its terms thousands of Mexicans known as braceros entered the United States on a temporary basis as farm workers. Their efforts helped keep vital food production high during the war. Prejudice and discrimination against Mexican Americans in jobs, housing, and recreation facilities also aroused bitter resentment. This resentment erupted in a riot in Los Angeles between United States servicemen and Mexican Americans. Aware of their contributions to the war effort, blacks and other minorities became increasingly restless. As they listened to patriotic speeches about freedom for all, they became more determined to make these ideals meaningful for themselves. 5e" underscored items, text pp. BOS • 08 Identify: OWM, VVPB, WMC, Selective Servie* System, price controls, rationing, Nisei For aruwori to questions, see Answer Key, p.AIH, 1. Analyzing Ideas: (a) Why did the federal government establish controls and regulations over many aspects of American life during the war? (b) What were some of these controls? (c) How did they affect individuals? 2. Organizing Ideas: How did the following contribute to the war effort: (a) unions, (b) women. <c) minorities. 3. Studying Graphics: Examine the graph on page 806. (a) About how many women were in the labor force in 1920? in 1950? in 1980? lb) What percentage of the labor force did women represent in 1920? in 1950? in 1980? (c) What may have contributed to the changes? The Allies gradually fight their way to victory in Europe See Teaching Suggestions In TMRG. p.TM197. In the summer of 1942 President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill decided to strike at what Churchill called the "soft underbelly' of the Axis. Victory in North Africa. The opening blow, as you recall, fell late in October 1942. when the British broke through Rommel's lines at El Alamein and began to drive the Germans back into Libya. Meanwhile, on November 8, a force of 500 troop transports and 350 warships under General Eisenhower's command landed thousands of Allied troops in French Morocco and Algeria. The African offensive was the greatest The railroads, once the main carriers of the nation's passengers and freight, did not share in the transportation boom. Although they still carried more than half the nation's freight, the railroads met stiff competition from the trucking industry. Moreover, they lost most of their passenger business to private automobiles, buses, and planes. Some daily trains carrying workers to and from their city jobs were still crowded, but with few exceptions even the commuter railroads operated at a loss. Rising taxes and increasing operating costs added to the gloomy picture. Railroad managers argued that if commuter services were to continue in full force, federal, state, and local governments would have to subsidize train service. During the 1950's their pleas for help fell for the most part on deaf ears. By 1960 many railroads were in bankruptcy or nearing it. As a whole the American economy, however, had never been more prosperous. See underscored item*, taxi pp 868. 870 Identity: economy of abundance. Federal Aid Highway Act Fonnswiri to quefttoni, teo Answer Key, p.A119. I. Determining Cause and Effect: What were the causes of America's dramatic economic growth after World War II? I Summarizing Ideas: What new industries developed rapidly after World War II? 3. Analyzing Ideas: What was the connection between the transportation revolution and (a) the | airline industry, (b) the trucking industry, and <c) the railroads? mmmm Most Americans enjoy the advantages of a booming economy V< Teaching Suggestions in TMRG, pp.TM2l 1*12. The rapidly rising standard of living in the kte 1940's and the 1950's sprang from phenomenal advances in almost every field of sci- "ce and technology. There were, however, other contributing factors. For one thing, during the depression and the wrar—a period of more than 15 years—millions of Americans had not been able to buy the things they wanted and, in many cases, badly needed. Equally important, there was a postwar population explosion, called by some the baby boom. It created millions of new citizens who required food, clothing, housing, education, and entertainment. The population explosion. During the war and the prosperous postwar years, young people married earlier and had larger families. The resulting growth in population was spectacular. Where during the depression years of the 1930's the population increased by only 9 million, during the 1940's it rose by 19 million. In the 1950's it exploded with an increase of 28 million. In that single ten-year period, the increase was about equal to the total population of the country on the eve of the Civil War. The nation's growing prosperity also attracted immigrants. Between 1951 and 1960. more than 2.5 million men and women arrived to swell the nation's population. America's population was not only growing. It was also moving in a great human tide across the face of the land. Two major migrations of people—one into the central cities, the other out of them —were producing dramatic changes in American life. Changes in the central cities. The migration into the central cities consisted for the most part of impoverished men. women, and children from the rural areas. Many of these came from the South and from Appalachia, the area around the Appalachian Mountains in the eastern United States, Growing numbers also poured into the cities from Puerto Rico and Mexico and increasingly as the years passed from other Spanish-speaking countries. The hearts of the cities—the business and financial centers—were being completely rebuilt. Urban renewal programs were started during Truman's administration and continued under President Eisenhower. Under such programs, older sections of cities were tom down. Old. decaying structures were replaced by new housing and buildings. In city after city, blocks of gleaming new office buildings and apartment houses towered as visible symbols of the nation's wealth and vitality. At times, however, urban renewal programs destroyed good, low-cost housing. Such programs could disrupt established neighborhoods and force low-income families into poorer housing. At times the wealth and vital- Cun activity: Hjv" each student nk tomtone born In the 1940*s to recall crowded condition! at a remit of ■ feaby boom. (For example, by Ihe 1950*1, schools had to double up in clatirooms, etc.) Have the iharr thM^ rwnllrrBhni with *hr rl"" Puerto Ricans were often at the bottom of the economic ladder, but many had a fierce pride in their cultural heritage. This pride is evident here in their annual parade in New York City. vices for a number of tribes, including the Menominees of Wisconsin and the Klamathsof Oregon. The policy was a disaster for the Indians because states were unwilling or unable to provide needed services. The second goal of the new Indian policy was to assimilate the Indians into the majority culture. This called for relocating as many Indians as possible in cities. The Bureau of Indian Affairs attracted thousands of Indians to cities with promises of job training and job placement. In many cases these promises were not kept. Some Indians managed to overcome great odds and achieve success. Many others, facing discrimination and without the support of tribal life, lived in loneliness and poverty in the cities, which remained for them a strange environment. Some, embittered bv the experience, returned to the reservations. For most Indians, relocation, like termination, proved to be a failure. Immigration from Mexico. People from Mexico also faced hardships during the postwar years. As you have read (page 808), the brocero program encouraged the entry of Mexican farm workers during World War II. The policy of importing contract labor was continued after the war. From the Mexican point of view, it provided work for otherwise unemployed workers. It also provided relief through the money sent home by the braceros to impoverished Mexican families. However, opposition to the program was building upon bothsidesof the border. The Catholic Church opposed it on the ground that it broke up families. The Mexican government began to object because the Mexican economy was expanding and labor was needed in Mexico itself. The program also met growing opposition from organized labor in the United States. The newly formed farm labor unions pointed out that it was competitively unfair to American workers. Before the program was abandoned in 1962. more than 4.5 million Mexican workers had been imported as contract laborers into the United States. This nuriiber does not include the unknowm number of illegal migrants, or undocumented immigrants. Spanish-speaking immigrants. The bracers who came as farm laborers were required to return to Mexico after their contracts ended. During the 1950's, however, more than 360.000 Mexican immigrants entered the United States to become American citizens. They were joined by another 450,000 Spanish- speaking immigrants from countries in Central and South America and the West Indies. These newcomers came from all walks of life. A large percentage were highly educated professionals and white-collar workers. Puerto Ricans. By the 1950's Puerto Ricans made up one of the largest Spanish-speaking groups in the United States. Unlike other immigrants, who had to be naturalized to become American citizens, Puerto Ricans were American citizens at birth. As you recall. Puerto Rico became an unincorporated territory of the United States in 1898 and then, after 1952. a commonwealth. Since 1917, Puerto Ricans have been legally entitled to the rights and privileges of American citizenship. Even before the depression of the 1930's brought severe hardships to their island, many Puerto Ricans had migrated to New York City in search of jobs. During and after the depression, they came in ever-increasing numbers. Between 1945 and 1960, migration to the United States varied between 30.000 and 45.000 annually. Puerto Ricans who moved to New York City, Newark, Chicago, and other northern cities faced many problems. Most came from rural villages. They lacked the skills necessary to compete for jobs in a highly complex urban environment. Many had only a limited knowledge of the English language, which handicapped them both in the labor market and in the schools. Perhaps most serious, they were victims of prejudice and discrimination. Because of these handicaps, most of the newcomers were able to get only unskilled jobs that paid the lowest wages. Puerto Rigan families were crowded into such tenement districts as Spanish Harlem in New York City. In some ways the experience of Puerto Ri- cans in the United States resembled that of earlier immigrants. As you will see (page 9551, many gradually moved up the economic ladder and found places in small businesses, semi-skilled trades, the professions, and the arts. In the 1950's, however, progress of this kind remained beyond the grasp of most Puerto Ricans. A major victory for black Americans. Black Americans returning from World War II. like other minority veterans, often faced bitter disappointments. In spite of their war service, Ihev continued to be treated in many ways as second-class citizens. To be sure, by the 1940's Hacks had won substantial successes in every Held of activity —science, medicine, the professions, business, music and art, entertainment, and sports. At best, however, only a very small ority of American blacks had achieved such success. For most blacks, the doors of op- unity remained closed or at best only htly open. During the years after the war, the move- to end discrimination in government, iness, education, and sports speeded up. ident Truman urged Congress to adopt Nation strengthening civil rights laws and ir enforcement. When Congress failed to .Truman used his executive powers to order end to segregation in the armed forces and in the government. The Supreme Court rules. The most impor- it development, however, was the Supreme urt decision of 1954 during Eisenhower's ad- stration. In Brown v. Board of Education Topeka, the Court reversed the 58-year-old Hessy v. Ferguson ruling (see page 4681 that Median Family Income • 1940-1980 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1^1 While Families HP Non-White Families Sources Histo/rcai Statist* s of the United State* Statistical Abstract ot the United States "separate but equal" facilities were constitutional. The Court unanimously ruled that state or local laws requiring black citizens to send their children to separate schools violated the Fourteenth Amendment. Several months after the 1954 decision, the Supreme Court required local school authorities to work out plans for gradually ending segregation in public school systems. The Supreme Court also instructed federal district courts to require local school authorities to "make a prompt and reasonable start toward full compliance" and to move "with all deliberate speed in carrying out the law." Direct action. Encouraged by the Supreme Court ruling, civil rights supporters redoubled their efforts to break down discrimination. Dissatisfied with the slow response in a number of states to the Supreme Court's rulings, blacks turned to direct action. Early in December 1955 Rosa Parks, a 40- year-old seamstress in Montgomery, Alabama, took a courageous step. Her action led to a nationwide protest movement. On her way home from work. Rosa Parks boarded a bus and took tony loutherners believed that the Supreme Court had taken away the rights of Indlvtdua Km. and there was a great deal of resistance to the Supreme Court ruling. DECISIVE MOMENTS One Courageous No Started It All "It was just the times. I think people needed some event to start getting something accomplished. That's it" The event was the refusal of the speaker — a black woman named Rosa Parks — to give up her seat on a Montgomery, Alabama, bus to a white passenger. The date was December 1, 1955. And the something that eventually got accomplished was the elimination of racial segregation in public transportation. According to a Montgomery ordinance, blacks were prohibited Irom sitting in the front, or "white," section of public buses. The ordinance further required blacks — a row at a time — to give up their seats to whiles if the white section were filled. Parks later stated: "I don't care what your color or race is, we both paid the same fare so I shouldn't have had to move." Parks' refusal to yield her seat to the white man led to her arrest. An interviewer at the scene later reported. "When I asked her what had happened, she said she did not move . she had made up her mind a seat in the f ront section reserved for whites. The driver ordered her to move to the back. She refused and was arrested. The next day, led by a 26-year-old minister, Martin Luther King, Jr., 50,000 blacks joined in a boycott of Montgomery's bus system. It was a peaceful protest, and it worked. When the bus system began to drift toward bankruptcy, King and other black leaders were arrested. Finally, almost a year after Rosa Parks's initial action, the Supreme Court declared that the Alabama segregation law was unconstitutional. Inspired by the victory in Alabama, Martin Luther King called a conference of southern black leaders, Early in 1957 these leaders organized the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). The organization announced to the nation that it intended to attack discrimination everywhere in the country by nonviolent means. Congress finally acts. Efforts by both whites and blacks to avoid violence were only partially successful. Attempts at school integration as the Supreme Court had directed in 1954 led to violence in a number of communities. In 1957 President Eisenhower sent federal troops to Little Rock, Arkansas, to maintain order never to move again." A spontaneous protest against Parks' arrest quickly spread throughout the black community Several black leaders, including the Reverend Martin Luther Kng. Jr. organized a boycott of the city's bus lines. Dunng the year that followed, blacks rode in carpools and held weekly meetings on the philosophy of nonviolent resistance Finally in December 1956, as a result of the Supreme Court's intervention against segregation in public transportation, blacks and whites rode together on unsegle- gated buses for the first time in Montgomery's history. Parks' courage and the Montgomery bus boycott showed blacks everywhere that they could act effectively as a mass movement. Today at 72 years of age, Rosa Parks continues to work for civil rights. For her, the 1955 incident marked Ihe beginning of an ongoing struggle: "I did not decide that December 1 st was to be any different than any other day History made that decision for us * when several black students tried to enter the all-white high school. Responding to the growing unrest and violence, Congress in 1957 adopted a Civil Right Act designed to secure voting rights for black citizens. This was the first civil rights act since Reconstruction. The struggle by blacks and other minorities for freedom and justice continued into the 1960's and beyond. You will read about this struggle in Chapter 42. Sea underscored items, text PP- 87S • 78. Identify: termination, relocation, Rosa Parks, boycott, SCLC, integration For answers to questions, see Answer Key, p,AI20. 1. Analyzing Ideas: (a) Why did the Indian Reorganization Act fail? (b) What new Indian policy was set up in the 1950's? (c> How successful was the new policy? 2. Comparing Ideas: (a) Identify several gruups of Spanish-speaking Americans, (b) How are their backgrounds different from one another'1 (c) How has their treatment in the United States been similar? 3. Synthesizing Ideas: Why is each important to the black civil rights movement: la) Brown c Hoard of Education of Topeka, (bl Eisenhowers action in Little Rock. Arkansas, in 1957,(c)Civil Rights Act of 1957? A Local laws kept many public places strictly segregated, not lust buses. By the mid-1980s more than 25 million Americans — more than 10 percent of the population — were aged 65 or older. As the percentage of elderly persons in the population continued to rise, government sponsored assistance for the aged became an increasingly complex issue. badly run down that they needed to be entirely rebuilt. This would take years and require the investment of billions of dollars. Meanwhile, people living in the slums needed more and better services—health, education, sanitation, recreation, and police and fire protection. They also needed jobs and job- training programs. However, the cities did not have the finances to do the work that had to be done. The people most able to pay the taxes needed to support such programs were leaving. Those least able to pay and most in need were becoming more numerous. City alter city faced the prospect of bankruptcy. "Social dynamite." The urban crisis was in fact a national crisis. In 1961 James B. Conant of Harvard issued a report titled Slums and Suburbs that attracted nationwide attention. The report pointed out the alarming contrast between the poverty of life in the decaying cores of the cities and the growing wealth of the suburbs. Nevertheless, during the next two decades, conditions grew steadily worse. "We are allowing social dynamite to accumulate in our large cities," Conant warned. Sop under looted Items, text pp 943 46 Identify: Zero Population Growth, Sunbelt, MSA, Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965. white flight. Slums and Suburbs For answert to questions, see Answer Key, p.A129. 1. Organizing Ideas: How was each of these areas affected by population movements between 1960 and 1980: (a) Southwest, (b) Northeast, (c) rural areas, (d) suburbs? 2. 3. Analyzing Ideas: How did changes in the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 change the ethnic character of the nation's population? Synthesizing Ideas: What factors contributed to the urban crisis of the 1960's and 1970's? Black Americans demand equal rights and opportunities San Teaching Suggestions tn TMRG, P.TM227, The "social dynamite" that Conant had warned about exploded in city after city during the 1960's. Meanwhile, black Americans had were completely separated from each other. Before his death, however, Malcolm X gave up his rigid racist position, referring to it as "sickness and madness." In 1965 he was assassinated by black radicals he had antagonized. Among the other new leaders were Floyd McKissick and Stokely Carmichael, who had been active in militant civil rights organizations. Also included were the founders of the Black Panther Party—Huey P. Newton, Bobby Seale, and Eldridge Cleaver. The Black Panthers advocated immediate confrontation with "the white power structure" and the use of force, if necessary, to protect black Americans against aggressive "white racism." Black extremists demanded black power. In economics, black power seemed to mean the growth of independent black businesses. In education it meant local community control of largely black schools. In politics it meant the growth of political power either by the formation of a black political party or by control of politics in black neighborhoods through bloc voting. Socially it meant black self-reliance, self-respect, and racial pride. Moderate black leaders shared many of the objectives of the black power movement, but they rejected its tactics. Among these leaders were Roy Wilkins of the NAACP and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr" head of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). King, the most influential of the black leaders and a devoted advocate of nonviolence, denounced the appeal to black racism and the threatened use of force. Those who rejected integration, he believed, did a cruel disservice to black people. (1963) Signs of progress. By the mid-1960's the black power movement was making gains. Politically these gains were revealed in the election of black Americans to public office —for example, Edward W. Brooke of Massachusetts to the United States Senate; Carl B. Stokes and Richard Hatcher as mayors of Cleveland, Ohio, and Gary, Indiana, respectively; Julian Bond to the Georgia legislature. In addition, the Supreme Court also had its first black member, Justice Thurgood Marshall. In the spring of 1968, Congress adopted a new civil rights act. The new act extended federal protection to civil rights workers and also included a guarantee of open housing. The open-housing provision barred discrimination in the sale or rental of all housing with the exception of owner-occupied-home sales. The Kemer Commission. In the summer of 1967, President Johnson appointed a National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders headed by Governor Kemer of Illinois to investigate inner city riots and violence. The Kerner Commission's report in 1968 was the most thorough federal study of the race problem. The report acknowledged that gains had been made in civil rights laws and desegregation. However, it warned that little or nothing had been accomplished in those basic areas that mattered most to a majority of America's black people—housing, jobs, and economic security, educational opportunities, and living conditions in the inner cities. "Our nation," the Kemer Commission reported, "is moving toward two societies, one black, one white— separate and unequal." . . . I say to you today, my friends, that in spite of the difficulties and frustrations of the moment I still have a dream. It is a dream deeply rooted in the American dream. I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed: "We hold these truths to be self-evident; that all men are created equal." I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slaveowners will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood. ... I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character. I have a dream today.... The commission warned of continued disorder and the destruction of democratic values unless improvements were made at once in those basic areas. This could be done, it said, only by "commitment to national action—com- passionate, massive, and sustained." The death of Martin Luther King, Jr. The assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr" Nobel Peace Prize winner and most respected of black leaders, on April 4, 1968, fell with stunning force on all Americans, white and black alike. Dr. King was in Memphis, Tennessee, to lead a nonviolent demonstration when he was killed by an assassin's bullets. In the last speech he made before his death, Dr. King said, "It is no longer a question of violence or nonviolence. It is nonviolence or nonexistence." Dr. King's death was a grim reminder of the importance of the Kemer Commission's warnings. While the nation mourned the loss of Dr. King, riots broke out in Chicago and Washington. In 1983, Congress approved a federal holiday (the third Monday in January) to recognize Dr. King's accomplishments. Political advances. The massive effort called for by the Kerner report did not develop. Yet neither its worst predictions nor the revolution threatened by radical black nationalists had taken place either. In 1975 the Civil Rights Commission reported that many black citizens, as well as members of other minorities, were still prevented from voting by various unfair means. Even so, black citizens were making important political gains. By the end of the 1970's, 4,503 black Americans were serving in elected public offices. This number was only 10 percent of all such offices, but it was an improvement over earlier years. By the mid-1980's there were 17 black members of the House of Representatives. There were black mayors in such cities as Los Angeles, Atlanta, Chicago, Detroit, Gary, Newark, and Washington, D.C. Andrew Young, a civil rights leader, served during part of Carter's administration as the outspoken United States Ambassador to the United Nations. Carter also appointed the first black woman to a Cabinet post. This was Patricia Harris, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and, later, Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare. New black leaders were gaining greater political power. They were learning how to get out the black vote, an important factor in the election of President Carter in 1976. They were forming political alliances and making effective use of lobbying tactics. An uncertain outlook. The Equal Rights Commission brought lawsuits against corporations and labor unions to end unfair employment practices. In a number of schools and businesses, affirmative action programs were begun. This meant that blacks and members of other minorities were at times given preference when applying to schools or for jobs. They were given preference even when their qualifications were no better than those of other applicants. The idea behind such programs was to make up for past discrimination, which had left blacks and minorities at a disadvantage. Nevertheless, many Americans objected. Such programs, they said, did not represent the ideal of "equal justice for all." They were instead, critics claimed, reverse discrimination. The Supreme Court ruled on an affirmative action case in 1978. Allan Bakke, a white, had been turned down by a medical school when he tried to enroll, Bakke claimed that his qualifications were equal to or better than those of blacks who had been admitted under a quota system. (A quota system sets aside a fixed number of places for certain categories of people, in this case, blacks.) Bakke was, he said, a victim of reverse discrimination. The Court agreed with Bakke and ordered the school to admit him. The Reagan administration and blacks. In his first term President Reagan took several stands that were unpopular with many blacks. Reagan was on record as opposing affirmative action programs. He also favored giving tax breaks to segregated private schools, but the measure never passed. Reagan also fought unsuccessfully against an extension of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 that would help blacks register to vote. Many blacks felt Reagan's actions on the two bills showed he was not concerned with black needs. Blacks and the economy. Reagan's domestic policies also disturbed blacks. The budget cuts that Reagan called for (see Chapter 40) affected federal jobs programs, welfare payments, Medicaid, Medicare, and food stamps. Many blacks relied on the help that these programs provided. workers. "We were jailed, beaten, even killed," wrote the historian Dr. Julian Navo. From the early 1900's on, some efforts had been made to organize the migrant workers. These early efforts met only limited success. In the 1960's, however, Cesar Chavez made headway in organizing the workers in the California vineyards and lettuce fields. Sympathetic priests, civic groups, and idealistic students aided in his efforts. In 1965 he launched a strike that led to a nationwide boycott of produce not bearing the label of the United Farm Workers. In 1970, the strikers finally won. Although the gulf between Mexican Americans and other farm workers was still wide, it had begun to narrow'. Mexican Americans in cities. In time, large Mexican-American communities or barrios grew up in such cities as El Paso, Los Angeles, Denver, Seattle, Minneapolis, and Chicago. The residents of the barrios met with prejudice and discrimination in employment, in courts of law, in relations with the police, and in schools where English was often an unknown language to them. Despite obstacles, an increasing number of Mexican Americans went to high school and college, acquiring vocational and professional skills. Loyal to family and to their Mexican- American culture, the city dwellers contributed to the economic development of the country as w'ell as to the arts. During the Vietnam War. the death rate for Mexican-American servicemen was higher than that for any other group. This was due largely to the fact that many fought in high-risk branches of the service, such as the Marines. The Chicano movement. Inspired in part by I the struggles of blacks for their rights, Mexican Americans in the 1960"s took increasing pride in their Hispanic background. They, too, I struggled to win their civil rights. They also I fought to overcome the prejudice that many I "Anglos," as they called other Americans, held I against them. Referring to themselves as "Chicanos," I leaders of the movement used boycotts, sit-ins, I demonstrations, political organizations, and I the courts to secure their rights. In New Mex- I Ico, Reies Lopez Tijerina formed an organiza- Ition to regain land that, he claimed, Anglos I had taken illegally. In Denver, the boxer, news| paper editor, and poet Rodolfo "Corky" Gon- Mexican Americans have had success in winning political power, especially in southwestern slates. Henry Cisneros was elected mayor of San Antonio, the third largest city in Texas. zales won recognition for his work in the Democratic Party. He organized demonstrations and became one of the leaders of the Chicano movement. In Los Angeles Vilma Martinez, like a growing number of Mexican-American women, took an active part in defending the rights of her people. Many new' militant organizations sprang up. One of them. La Raza Unida, sought to register Mexican Americans and to see that they voted. Youth organizations also demanded Mexican-American studies and the use of Spanish in high schools and colleges. Mexican-American studies soon w'ere recognized in many schools and colleges. Able Mexican-American historians, social scientists, and humanists were professors at leading universities. El Grito del Norte and other newspapers and periodicals were further evidence of the vitality of the Chicano movement. The Puerto Ricans. Puerto Ricans made up the second lurgest Spanish-speaking group in the United States. As you recall, Puerto Rico has long had a special commonw'ealth relationship with the United States. The inhabitants of the island are legally American citizens. During the 1960's, there were 10 million Hispanic* m the United States. Of these, more than 600.000 were from Puerto Rico and 200.000 were of Cuban descent. Many Puerto Ricans have left their homeland in search of jobs in the United States. By 1975 more than 5 million Puerto Ricans, including rnainland-born descendants, were living in the United States. The Puerto Ricans were concentrated in New York. There, by the mid-1970's, they made up 10 percent of the city's population. Large numbers also lived in Newark, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Chicago, Boston, and other cities. In these urban areas they faced problems of unemployment, poor housing, prejudice, and discrimination. The lives of young Puerto Ricans were especially difficult. Making up 33 percent of New York's school population, they were handicapped because they did not speak English. The dropout rate was very high. Street gangs, friction with the police, and high unemployment added to their problems. Yet many realized that education was a road to a better life. Evidence of this was the fact that in 1975 more than 17,000 young Puerto Ricans were enrolled in colleges and universities. Despite difficulties and discrimination, many Puerto Ricans moved up the economic ladder. Some found places in small businesses, in semi-skilled trades, and in offices. By the late 1970's, about 10 percent of employed Puerto Rican males held professional or technical jobs. More and more were able to leave the crowded slums for better living conditions in the cities or in the suburbs. In the field of the arts, entertainment, and sports, Jose Fe- liciano, Rita Moreno, and Roberto Clemente became well known. Puerto Ricans realized that political methods could improve their position and as a result they set up political organizations. Other politicians soon became aware of their bloc-voting power. In 1970 Herman Badillo of New York City became the first Puerto Rican member of Congress. Many Puerto Ricans, on the other hand, rejected the "establishment." They emphasized forceful demands and revolutionary tactics to win greater opportunity. Frustration and pride led some to support Puerto Rican independence. Nevertheless, in a number of elections Puerto Ricans have rejected both statehood and independence, preferring instead to remain a commonwealth. The Cubans. In 1959, as you have read (page 916), Fidel Castro overthrew the government of the reactionary dictator, Fulgencio Batista. When it soon became clear that Castro wished to create a Communist state, refugees began to escape to the United States, Many crossed the 90-mile stretch of water in small fishing boats. From 1961 to 1970, more than 208.000 arrived. During the 1970's the number landing on these shores each year increased steadily. In 1977 alone more than 66,000 Cuban refugees entered the United States. Most of them settled in the Miami area. In an effort to relieve the strain on the city, county, and state, the federal government set up the Cuban Refugee Program. With an annual budget of $40 million, it provided welfare assistance, health services, and vocational training. The refugees, largely middle class, used their assets, skills, and initiative to set up businesses and other enterprises. Asa result of their efforts, they soon became an important part of the Miami area's economy. Efforts by the refugee program to promote settlement in other parts of the country were effective. By the mid-1970's half of the Cubans were living in New York. Chicago. Los Angeles, and other cities. In 1979 the Census Bureau estimated that the Cuban population in the United States had reached 700.000, Then, in the spring of 1980. a flood of refugees began to pour into Florida. The "Freedom Flotilla," an improvised fleet of privately owned boats, ferried them from Cuba to southern Florida. It was a dangerous, haphazard operation. Some of the boats, estimated to number more than 2,000, were capable of carrying only five or ten people. At first President Carter welcomed the refugees with "open heart and open arms," but he soon was forced to change his position. By the end of May, more than 60,000 refugees had entered and several thousand more were arriving each day. Increasing numbers of American citizens objected to the arrival of the Cubans. They claimed that the nation was in a recession and that unemployment was high. They feared that the newcomers would take already scarce jobs. Opposition to the uncontrolled flood of people approached the stage of violence. Finally the Carter administration announced that the "Freedom Flotilla" would be shut down. By that time, more Than 125,000 Cuhans had entered the United States. Legal gains for Hispanics. The civil right- legislation of the 1960's and 1970's already discussed helped the nation's Hispanic population. There were two other laws, however, that had special importance for Hispanics. One of these was the Voting Rights Act of 1975. It required governments to print materials in other languages as well as English in ureas with many non-English-speaking voters. The other law was the Bilingual Education Act. It ordered public schools to provide instruction to students in their native languages while they learned English. By the early 1980's, however, opposition to bilingual education was rising. Critics claimed it was not an effective teaching tool and that it slowed the rate at which students learned English. Immigration and Hispanics. Changes in legal immigration to the United States were discussed earlier in this chapter. By the 1970's and 1980's, the problem of illegal immigration had become a major concern. Estimates of the number entering the country each year ranged from 100,000 to 500,000. Possibly half of the illegal aliens crossed the border from Mexico. Many Americans believed that illegal aliens, by their willingness to work for lower wages, took jobs away from citizens. Many Americans feared the aliens would enter the welfare roles and raise taxes for all Americans. Still other Americans were concerned for the aliens themselves. They were unlikely to turn to the authorities for help. Thus illegal aliens were good targets for exploitation and abuse. President Reagan said. "The simple truth is that we've lost control of our own borders, and no nation can do that and survive." His administration led a fight for a bill to curb illegal immigration. One version would have granted amnesty for aliens who had been in the United States for a certain number of years. It would have also provided penalties for employers who hired illegal aliens. Many Hispanic leaders opposed the passage of such a bill. They worried that it might lead to increased job discrimination and other civil rights abuses against all Hispanics. Some people felt that in order to enforce such a bill, a national identification system would have to be set up, and they opposed such a step. Opponents of the bill joined forces and kept the measure from becoming law. The outlook. Despite impressive gains in recent years, Hispanics in the United States Each year, uncounted thousands of aliens pour Into the United States. These newcomers were among the more than 100.000 Cubans who sailed here from their homeland in /980. still face many problems. Median income for Hispanic families in the early I980's was $16,228 compared to the white median of $24,950. Hispanics must also still contend with prejudice and discrimination. Sen underscored Item*, text pp 952 - 54 Identify: Hispanos, migrant farm workers, Cesar Chavez, barrio, "Anglos," Chicanos, Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales, Vilma Martinez, Herman Ba- dillo, "Freedom Flotilla" For answers to questions, see Answer Key. pp.A 129*30. 1. Evaluating Ideas; (a) In general, how have Mexican Americans been treated by other Americans? (b) What actions have members of the Chicano movement taken? (c) How successful has the Chicano movement been? 2. Comparing Ideas: Compare the situation of Puerto Ricans with that of Mexican Americans in terms of (a) problems and (b) attempts to solve the problems. 3. Analyzing Ideas: (a) Why have many Cubans come to the United States since 1959? (b) How has the Cuban Refugee Program tried to help them adjust to their new life? The American People The people who settled America came from many lands. Indeed, all Americans were immigrants or the descendants of immigrants. The American Indians, the first Americans, for example, originally were hunting peoples who came to North America from Asia. Today the United States has a diverse population, composed of people with many national and racial backgrounds, religious beliefs, and regional loyalties. The following graphs and charts tell much about these Americans. One graph portrays which decades experienced the largest immigration to this country. Another graph shows which countries were the former homes of immigrants living in the United States in 1980. The following pages also provide information on how quickly the population of the country grew over the years and how specific regions, states, and cities have participated in this growth. In addition, this section of the Reference Section highlights certain trends that concern all Americans. There are graphs which show a rise in average life expectancy, a growth in family income, and an increase in educational enrollment. Graphs and charts, such as these shown here, are valuable tools for the study of the history of the United States. They support many of the themes stated in the textbook and provide a richer understanding of the American experience. 