Wadsworth Publishing Company Belmont, California A Division of Wadsworth, Inc, m. / R. Jackson Wilson ) P ^ C Smith College \Jt ^ James Gilbert University of Maryland Stephen Nissenbaum University of Massachusetts Karen Ordahl Kupperman University of Connecticut Donald Scott The New School for Social Research History Editor: Peggy Adams Production Editor: Leland Moss Interior and Cover Design: James Chadwick Art Editor: Marta Kongsle Art Assistant: Roberta Broyer Photo Research: Pembroke Herbert Print Buyer: Barbara Britton Compositor: Jonathan Peck Typographers Copy Editor: Anne Montague Editorial Assistant: Karen Moore Coivr Art: A Social History of the State of Missouri, by Thomas Hart Benton, Missouri State Capitol Building, Jefferson Qty, Missouri. Courtesy Missouri Department of Natural Resources, Missouri State Museum. © 1990 by Wadsworth, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transcribed, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher, Wadsworth Publishing Company, Belmont, California 94002, a division of Wads- worth, Inc. Chapter opening photos are from the following sources: Chapter 12, Library of Congress, Brady Collection; Chapter 13, Culver Pictures; Chapter 14, Culver Pictures; Chapter 15, Library of Congress; Chapter 16, Culver Pictures; Chapter 17, Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace Association; Chapter 18, Library of Congress; Chapter 19, Cul- ver Pictures; Chapter 20, Wide World Photos; Chapter 21, UPl/Bettmann Newsphotos; Chapter 22, Ralph Crane, Life Magazine, © 1958 Time Inc.; Chapter 23, © Burt Glinn/Magnum; Chapter 24, © Alex Webb/ Magnum; Chapter 25, Bill Vig- giano. Photographer. Printed in the United States of America 34 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10—94 93 92 91 90 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data The Pursuit of liberty. Includes bibliographical references. 1. United States—History. I. Wilson, Raymond Jackson. ISBN 0-534-11694-9 (hardcover) ISBN 0-534-11697-3 (pbk. : v. 1) ISBN 0-534-11699-X (pbk. : v. 2) 12 "His Terrible, Swift Sword" Episode: Abraham Lincoln, from Politics to Martyrdom 515 Civil War and Reconstruction 532 Building and Equipping Armies 532 Strategy—Theory and Practice 534 The Struggle Begins 536 War, Diplomacy, and Northern Morale 539 Leadership and Opposition in Wartime 540 The Struggle Climaxes 542 The Struggle Ends 545 The Toll of Total War 545 Mary Boykin Chesnut 547 The War and Slavery 548 Lincoln's Plan 550 Reconstruction: 1865-77 550 Presidential Reconstruction Under Johnson 550 Congressional Reconstruction 553 Radical Reconstruction 554 "Redeeming" the States 556 The End of Reconstruction 557 Suggestions for Further Reading 558 Chronology 559 13 The Politics of Restoration Episode: The Election of 1876 563 Government in an Age of Industrial Capitalism 579 The Slide from Ideology 580 The Grant Scandals 580 The Stalwarts 580 The Mugwumps 581 The Powerless Presidents 582 Hayes vs. His Own Party 582 1880: Garfield and Arthur 582 George Washington Plunkitt 583 1884: Grover Cleveland 585 1888: Benjamin Harrison 586 1892: Cleveland Again 587 The Rise of the Populist Party 588 The Grange 588 The Alliance Movement 589 Currency and Credit 590 Monopolies 591 Defeat of the Populists 592 1896: McKinley vs. Bryan 592 A Judicial Defense of Privilege 597 Railroad Cases 598 Social Cases 599 Chronology 600 Suggestions for Further Reading 603 vi 14 The Climax of the Industrial 15 A New West Revolution Episode: The Haymarket: Strike and Violence in Chicago 607 Factories, Workers, and a New Social Order 623 Technological Change 624 An Agricultural Revolution 624 Improving Rail Transport 625 Manufacturing 626 The Steel Industry 626 Other Industries 626 The Growth of "Big Business" 628 The Factory System 628 Changes in Organization 629 Competition and Consolidation 629 Andrew Carnegie 631 The Trust 632 The New Americans 632 Shifting Trends in Immigration 633 Reaction to the Newcomers 634 Becoming "American" 635 Urbanization 637 Technological Factors 637 The Industrial System 638 Conditions of Labor 639 Early Attempts to Organize Labor 640 Strikes and Strikebreakers 642 American Culture, 1875-1900 643 Literature 643 Art and Architecture 645 Chronology 646 Suggestions for Further Reading 648 Episode: Massacre at Wounded Knee 653 The Last Frontier 672 The Last West 672 The Mining Frontier 673 Transportation West 675 Train, Stage, and Pony 675 A Transcontinental Railroad 676 From Buffalo to Cattle 678 The Long Drive 679 The End of the Open Range 681 The Defeat of the Native Americans 682 Advantages of the Whites 682 Dealing with the Tribes 684 The Sand Creek Massacre 684 Negotiations with the Sioux 684 Chief Joseph 685 The Battle of the Little Bighorn 686 A Changing Policy 686 Farming on the Plains 688 The Homestead Act 688 Other Land Acts 688 Hardships and Solutions 689 Chronology 690 Suggestions for Further Reading 692 16 The Gospel of Wealth Episode: The Lizzie Borden Murders 697 Money, Class, and Women 717 The Gilded Age 718 The Monied Class 718 vii The Preoccupation with Wealth, Display, and Status 719 The Preoccupation with Manners 721 American Images: Status for Sale Utopian Vision of the Family 725 The Middle-Class Woman's Burden 726 The Other Half 729 Women's Work 729 Which Women Worked? 730 Women's Jobs 731 Chronology 732 Suggestions for Further Reading 735 17 The Politics of Reform Episode: Woodrow Wilson: Progressive Moderate 739 In Search of the Public Interest 754 Corporations vs. Unions 755 Corporations Organize 755 Unions Organize 756 Middle-Class Reformers 757 Churches and Colleges 757 Veblen and Dewey 758 The Good-Government Movement 758 Women and ProgTessivism 759 The Settlement House Movement 759 Suffrage 760 Frederick Winslow Taylor 761 ProgTessivism as a Movement 762 Theodore Roosevelt 763 The Path to the White House 764 Business Policy 764 Other Achievements 766 William Howard Taft 767 The Election of 1912 769 Wilson's Progressivism 770 Chronology 772 Suggestions for Further Reading 774 18 Imperial America Episode: The Conquests of the Philippines 779 Progressive Foreign Policy, from Empire to World War 802 The Myth of America's Destiny 802 The Reality Behind the Myth 805 A New Foreign Policy 806 The Singer Sewing Machine 807 The Spanish-American War 809 Results of the War 812 U.S. Foreign Policy, 1901-16 813 Roosevelt and the Panama Canal 813 Taft and "Dollar Diplomacy" 815 Wilson and Mission Diplomacy 816 World War I 818 The United States: From Neutrality to War 820 War and Peace 822 War at Home 824 John Reed 826 Chronology 828 Suggestions for Further Reading 830 19 Mass Culture and the "Jazz Age" Episode: Lindbergh's Flight 835 Society and Culture in the 1920s 850 Reaching a Mass Audience 851 The Communications Revolution 851 A Middle-Class "Public" 852 viii The Machine and the Maverick in a Technological Society 853 Electric Power and Assembly Lines 853 Effects of Mechanization 854 American Images: People and Machines Wheels and Wings: The Motor Age 855 Perfecting the Automobile 855 Henry Ford 856 Life in the Motor Age 857 Air Transportation 857 New Manners and Morals 858 A Revolution for Women 858 The Jazz Age 860 A Black Renaissance 861 W. E. B. Du Bois 862 A Search for Innocence 865 Illusions of Disillusionment 866 Chronology 868 Suggestions for Further Reading 870 New Federal Powers 903 The New Deal 903 The Election of 1932 903 Launching the New Deal 905 The Debate over Meaning 905 Relief and Stabilization 907 Reforms of the New Deal 909 Two-Thirds of a Nation 911 Women 911 The Marx Brothers 912 African Americans 914 Mexican Americans 917 Native Americans 919 End of the New Deal 920 Suggestions for Further Reading 921 Chronology 922 A Global Nation 20 Capitalism in Transition Episode: Defeat of the Bonus Marchers 875 Crash, Depression, and a "New Deal" 891 A Tide of Reaction 891 The Red Scare 892 Prohibition and Reaction 893 The Ku Klux Klan 894 The Politics of Conservativism 895 Warren G. Harding 895 Return to Normalcy 8% The Ohio Gang 897 Coolidge and Business 898 The Democratic Challenge of 1928 899 Boom and Bust 899 A Warped Economy 900 The Stock Market Crash 901 Hoover's Optimism 902 Episode: Hiroshima 927 World War and Cold War 947 The World War II Alliances 947 The War Begins 948 Japan 951 The United States Enters the War 952 The Wartime Economy 954 Japanese-American Internment 956 The War in Europe 958 Germany Capitulates 959 The War in the Pacific 962 Demobilization and Postwar Allied Cooperation 964 Cold War in Europe 967 The Korean War 970 Cold War at Home 974 Edward R. Murrow 975 Chronology 976 Suggestions for Further Reading 979 ix 22 The "American Century" Episode: Martin Luther King, Jr.: 1T\e Pursuit of Liberty 983 An Era of Promise 1001 The Peacetime Economy 1002 Truman's First Administration 1002 The Election of 1948 1004 Truman's Second Administration 1004 The Eisenhower Years 1006 The Shift to the Surburbs 1006 The Election of 1952 1008 American Images: Women: The War and After Eisenhower's First Administration 1009 ]ackie Robinson 1013 The Election of 1956 and the Dawn of the Youth Culture 1014 Eisenhower's Second Administration 1016 The Kennedy Years 1017 The Renewed Promise 1017 Kennedy and Civil Rights 1020 Kennedy's Foreign Policy 1022 Chronology 1024 Suggestions for Further Reading 1027 23 Liberalism in Decline Episode: Chicago, 1968 1031 The Limits of Politics 1051 Johnson as President 1052 Social Programs 1052 The Election of 1964 1053 The War in Vietnam 1054 The New Right 1057 Reaction to the Warren Court 1058 Intellectuals and Evangelists 1059 Segregationists 1059 Splintering of the Left 1060 Black Unrest 1060 Student Radicals 1061 The Counterculture 1064 Johnson's Presidency 1065 The War Escalates 1065 LBJ and Civil Rights 1066 Johnson Bows Out 1066 Chronology 1068 Helen Gurley Brown 1070 Suggestions for Further Reading 1071 24 The Politics of Credibility Episode: Three Mile Island: An Accident Waiting to Happen 1075 The Credibility Crisis 1092 American Society at a Crossroads 1092 Economic Problems 1093 Women 1093 Minorities 1094 Nixon and Southeast Asia 1096 Vietnamization 10% Fighting the War Protesters 1097 Detente 1098 The End of the War 1099 Norman Lear 1100 Nixon's Credibility at Home 1101 The Economy 1102 Domestic Spying 1102 Watergate 1103 Consumers Lose Faith 1108 Gerald Ford and the Failure of Leadership 1108 The Election of 1976 1110 Jimmy Carter and the Credibility Crisis 1111 Energy Policy 1112 The Economy and "Malaise" 1113 Foreign Affairs 1113 Chronology 1116 The Election of 1980 1118 Suggestions for Further Reading 11J9 25 The Way We Are Episode: The Case of "Baby M": Private Lives and Public Morals 1123 The Eighties and Beyond 1151 Materialism 1161 Vigilantism 1161 Evangelism 1162 The Language of Race and Gender 1163 Conservativism 1163 The Election of 1980 1165 Ronald Reagan 1165 Reaganomics 1168 Reagan and Social Issues 1171 Foreign Policy 1173 The Arms Buildup 1173 Terrorism 1174 Intervention 1174 The Iran-Contra Affair 1175 Summit with Gorbachev 1177 The Reagan Record 1178 The Election of 1988 1180 Suggestions for Further Reading 1181 Chronology 1182 New Lifestyles 1151 The New Poor 1152 Surging Subcultures 1153 Asian Americans 1153 Hispanics 1154 Miami 1156 The Eighties Economy 1157 The Global Economy 1158 Other Social Changes 1159 The Media Explosion 1159 Declaration of Independence A1 The Constitution of the United States of America A5 Index A21 The Haymarket tragedy: Another view. This representation of what happened in Chicago in 1886 is probably more accurate than the one on page 617. It shows workers fleeing, none firing at the police. And it shows the bornb killing both workers and the policemen who were beating them with nightsticks. (Library of Congress) Like most such incidents, the Hay market affair had been short. And considering what could have happened, very few people were hurt. But it occurred on the heels of trouble at the McCormick plant, in the midst of the strike for an eight-hour day, w ith 80,000 Chicago workingmen off the job. Thus the Haymarket bornb touched off a near-panic in the city and much of the rest of the nation. Thousands of respectable citizens convinced themselves that a dangerous conspiracy of anarchists, socialists, and communists was at work to overthrow the government and cany' out a bloody revolution. One of the leading business magazines of the day, Bradstreets', spoke for thousands of Americans w'hen it said of the Haymarket incident: This week's happenings at Chicago go to show that the threats of the anarchists against the existing order are not idle. In a time of disturbance, desperate men have a power for evil out of proportion to their numbers. They are desperate fanatics who are opposed to all laws. There is no room for anarchy in the political system of the United States. Also important was the fact that many people had been frightened and angered by a recent flood of immigration from Europe to America—and many of the "anarch- ists" were also foreigners. Not only in Chicago but all over the nation, newspaper editorialists and public speakers demanded the immediate arrest and conviction of the alien "radicals" w ho had conspired to murder honest policemen and subvert law and order. The result was a swift and efficient series of illegal raids by the Chicago police. They searched property without warrants. They imprisoned people without charging them and threatened potential witnesses. All in all, the authorities arrested and questioned about 200 "suspects"—probably none of whom had anything at all to do with the bornbing. In this heated atmosphere, fueled by journalists who whipped up unreasonable fears of an anarchist conspiracy', a jury met to determine w hether indictments could be brought against anyone for the violence. It decided that although the specific person who threw the bornb could not be identified, anyone w'ho urged violence was a "conspirator" and was as guilty of murder as the bornb thrower. On the basis of this decision, another jury met and indicted thirty-one persons on counts of murder. Of up this supercorporation. Like International Harvester, the giant company dominated its indus- try'. It produced almost all of some forms of steel and three-fifths of the total steel made in the United States. An even more stunning example of consolidation brought John D. Rockefeller into control of the oil industry. Rockefeller started out as a poor boy, like Carnegie. He too saved every cent (except for the 10 percent tithe he regularly gave to his Baptist church). Starting with one refinery in Cleveland, Rockefeller by 1872 had created the giant Standard Oil Company. THE TRUST Rockefeller also created a new device that made it even easier to consolidate an industry: the trust. A business trust is an arrangement in which several companies "sell" themselves to a group of trustees. The companies are paid for with shares in the new trust itself. Only paper changes hands, but the result is a single group of directors who control the operations of several companies. Through the Standard Oil trust, the Rockefeller interests acquired almost total control of the oil industry. The trust could phase out unnecessary plants. It could take full advantage of mass production and distribution techniques to provide most of the kerosene that lighted American lamps and the oil that lubricated American machines. Rockefeller himself summed up adequately the reasons for the trust. It has revolutionized the way of doing business all over the world. The time was ripe for it. It had to come, though all we saw at the moment was the need to save ourselves from wasteful conditions [of competition]. The day of combination is here to stay. Individualism has gone, never to return. One by one, the main American industries passed from competition to consolidation. It might occur through giant corporations created by mergers, like International Harvester or United States Steel. Or it might result from the Capital and its champion. One of the favorite subjects for nineteenth-century cartoonists was the trust. Here Capital brings its newest gladiator to the edge of the ring to introduce the victor. The vanquished at the rear include the "small dealer" and the traveling salesman. (Culver Pictures) formation of trusts in various industries, from cottonseed oil to sugar to whiskey. By 1900 a few large concerns controlled almost all the major facilities of production and distribution in the United States. The New Americans Industry has always needed people, and the new industrial order needed hordes. The growth in agriculture, railroads, and industry demanded millions of people—both as workers and as consumers. The American population kept pace with industrial growth. For every 100 people living in the United States in 1870, there were 126 in 1880, 158 in 1890, 190 in 1900, and 230 in 1910. In one generation, the population more than doubled, from about 40 million in 1870 to over 90 million fort)' years later. These were the millions who moved into the Great Plains and the Rockies, bringing about the final defeat of the Native Americans. These were the millions who made or bought McCormick's harvesters, who built the railroads that carried his reapers into every flat corner of the country where grain could be planted and harvested by machine. These millions, however, were not just more of the same kinds of Americans who had lived here in Jacksonian times. Many of them were "new" people—with different languages, different religions, and different ways of life. Andrew Jackson's "common man" was, most likely, berm in America; he was white, Protestant, and a farmer. His parents or grandparents might have been immigrants, but they would probably have come from England or Scotland. When they arrived here, they would have found the language, the ways of worshiping God, and the customs familiar and comfortable. But the "common man" in New York in 1900 was more likely to be a Jew from Poland or a Catholic from Italy. He lived in a great city and probably had a job in a factory or a business. His English might be poor. Fiis memories of the "old country" would be at least as important to him as his hopes for the new. He represented a social revolution that had accompanied the revolutions in technology, industry, and business—-the creation of an urban immigrant working class. There have been immigrants in America for thousands of years, since people began to cross over from Asia into Alaska. In the hundred years following the American Revolution, the actual proportion of immigrants to the total population did not change much. Two other things happened instead. First, the nature of the immigrant population changed. Second, the immigrants (along with other Americans) began to congregate in great urban centers. These two changes made industrial cities like Chicago the gathering places for a new kind of American: the poor immigrant from a country where English was not spoken and where an Anglo-Saxon Protestant was a rarity. In 1790, when the United States took its first census under the new Constitution, nine out of ten Americans (except for the black slaves in the South) had English or Scottish ancestors. This pattern changed somewhat with the immigration of the 1840s and 1850s—the "old" immigration— when large numbers of German, Scandinavian, and Irish immigrants began to arrive. Although their languages might be strange to American ears, most of the Germans and Scandinavians were at least Protestants. And although many native-born Americans resented the Catholicism of the Irish, these immigrants at least spoke English. In 1865 the United States had only about 200,000 inhabitants who had been born in southern or eastern Europe. They were easily absorbed in a total population of about 40 million. By 1914 this picture had changed dramatically. A "new" immigration—mainly from Italy, Russia, and Austria-Hungary—flooded into the United States. Poverty drove many of these people from their home countries. Some men left to avoid the military' draft, which discriminated against the poor. Jews wanted to escape the official anti-Semitism of Russia and Poland. Armenians fled from persecutions carried out by the Turkish government. The new immigrants were drawn to the United States by advertisements of cheap steamship transportation, by rumors of free land and golden opportunity, and by a massive propaganda campaign conducted by railroads anxious for workers and for customers to buy up their lands. 4.000,000- 3,500,000 - 2.000,000 - Nofthwest Europe ■ Great Britain, Ireland, Netherlands, Belgium. Luxembourg, Switzerland, France Scandinavia - Norway. Sweden, Denmark. Iceland Eastern Europe - Soviet Union, Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania. Finland, Rumania. Bulgaria, (European! Turkey Central Europe = Germany, Poland, Hungary, Austria Southern Europe " Italy, Spain, Portugal. Greece Asia * China, Japan Hie Americas - Canada. Newfoundland, Mexico. South America Immigration from southern and eastern Europe amounted to only a trickle in the 1860s and 1870s. But by the 1890s over half the immigrants to America were from southern and eastern Europe. Between 1901 and 1910—the peak decade for immigration in the history of the United States—the proportion of new immigrants rose to over 75 percent, as over 6 million Italians, Russian jews, Hungarians, and other immigrants from southern and eastern Europe poured into the country, REACTION TO THE NEWCOMERS The McCormick strike and the Haymarket affair occurred just before the new immigration into the United States reached its peak. But prejudice had already been aroused by the entry of Irish and Germans, and by the beginnings of the influx from eastern and southern Europe. Both the McCormick strike and the trial of the Haymarket Eight occurred in an atmosphere of fear and bigotry. The Pinkerton report on the "fighting Irish" molders and the newspaper comments on foreign "anarchists" make it clear that events in Chicago would probably have been different if they had not taken place at the time of this bewildering flood of immigrants. The new immigrants were not only different in culture, language, and religion, they behaved in ways different from those who had preceded them. They moved into a society that was no longer predominantly agricultural and rural, but urban. So they did not fan out onto farms as many of the old immigrants had done. Instead, they followed the lead of millions of other Americans and settled into cities. Two thirds of foreign- born residents in the United States lived in towns and cities by 1900. Bewildered and often victimized in America, new immigrants clustered together in their own city neighborhoods, or "ghettos." People from a particular province or even a particular village would move into buildings on the same block, re-creating much of the culture of their Old World homes. As the new immigration swelled, so did antiforeign sentiment. Ghetto dwellers earned a reputation among "native" Americans for being clannish, dirty, superstitious, and generally undesirable. They were considered strange, chattering in their old languages, and somehow suited only for city life. Actually, of course, they were no more "natural" city dwellers than were the English who had come to Virginia and Massachusetts in the seventeenth century. They were simply caught in a phase of the industrial revo- lution—the creation of an urban society. Immigrants from Asia—almost all from China and Japan—were among the most ghetto-bound of the newcomers, rigidly segregated in their "Chinatown" communities. And for generations, neither the Asian Americans nor native-born whites believed that they ever could or should become integrated into American life. Most of the Asian immigrants believed that Western civilization was a form of barbarism, something to be resisted in every possible way. Few American officials paid any attention to whether Asian- American children attended public schools. No one thought it necessary for them to learn English. They were the victims of harassment, cruel jokes, and vicious cartoons. The state of California had special taxes for "foreign miners." Murderous riots against the Chinese took place in every major Western city during the 1870s and 1880s. The Asians' subtle and sophisticated way of cooking attracted some favorable attention, but even their food came into the American diet and language as "chop suey," an unkind culinary joke. In California, especially, the Chinese immigrants were the objects of a double discrimination. Almost every American of European ancestry believed Asians were racially inferior. But white workers also resented competition in the labor market, especially during times of economic depression and high unemployment. In the 1870s the California Workingman's Party began to agitate for a law forbidding any person from China to hold a job. The effort succeeded. In 1879 a clause was added to the state constitution of California that forbade any employer to hire Chinese workers. But no state had a constitutional right to forbid immigration. That was up to the national government. In 1882 an act of Congress put a ten-year prohibition on Chinese workers entering the United States as immigrants. And so the new society that grew out of the industrial revolution was an intensely segregated society. As a result of the railroads and the rush of pioneers to the West, Native Americans were confined to their shrinking reservations. Blacks, Asians, and European immigrants in the towns and cities were just as confined to their ghettos. The very meaning of the word American, as it was normally used, reflected these racial and ethnic segregations. Being an American meant, to most people, not being "colored," not being Catholic or Jewish, tiof having Slavic or Greek or Polish ways and words. The two most intensely debated questions of the day among "native" Ameri- cans—that is, Protestant white people whose ancestry was British or northwest European— were: What could be done to slow down or stop the "foreigners" from coming? Who among them (if any) had a chance to become "Americans"? BECOMING "AMERICAN" In the era of the new immigration, the goal of many was still assimilation—to take on the traits of the new society so as to blend with it. But becoming an "American" was not an easy process for most European immigrants in the late nineteenth century. Real assimilation meant knowing the language. Many immigrant parents made enormous sacrifices to bring their families to a country where education was free and easily available. Mary Antin, a Jewish immigrant, remembered it this way: Education was free. It was the one thing that my father was able to promise us when he sent for r Open-air restaurant. This pair of Chinese Americans have established their restaurant in a lumber camp in the West. Chinese cuisine made its way into the European-American diet only slowly in the nineteenth century. Guidebooks routinely described Chinese restaurants as the haunts of the Chinese themselves, the European-American poor, "outlaws," and African Americans. It never occurred to the authors of the guidebooks that poor people might not be quite as bigoted as the American-born middle class (and that they might have more flexible tastes, too). (Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley) us; surer, safer than bread or shelter. On our second day in the country a tittle girl across the alley came and offered to conduct us to school. We five children between us had a few words of English by this time. We knew the word "school." We understood. This child, who had never seen us till yesterday, who was not much better dressed than we were, still was able to offer us the freedom of the schools of Boston! No application made; no questions asked; no examinations, rulings, exclusions; no fees. Learning the language was only one step toward assimilation. Many immigrants joined some kind of voluntary association that brought them contacts with native-born Americans. In cities, the most obvious associations were political parties. They could provide favors, food, and jobs. "Boss" Richard Croker of Tammany Hall in New York described the work of his machine as dealing with people W'ho do not speak our language and do not know our laws, yet are the raw material with which we have to build up the state. [The Tammany machine] looks after them for the sake of then- vote, grafts them upon the Republic, makes citizens of them, in short; and although you may not like our motives or our methods, what other agency is there by which so long a row could have been hoed so quickly or so well? Another powerful influence on the new immigrants was those who had preceded them. Some of the earlier arrivals learned English and helped recruit workers from Europe. They sometimes even paid the newcomers' transportation and helped them settle in the cities. One popular name for such men was padrone (an Italian word meaning "patron"). A padrone might be paid by an employer for supplying cheap labor, by a political machine for delivering immigrant votes, or by the immigrants themselves for favors. Often the padrones, who existed among almost every immigrant group, were ward leaders in political machines, serving as links between the newcomers and the city organizations. Urbanization In the ancient world, only two great cities—Rome and Alexandria—had populations of over half a million people. By the time of Christopher Columbus, Rome and Alexandria had long since declined. The only European cities to have reached a comparable size were London and Paris. At the time of the Haymarket affair, however, Chicago had already become a great city. In fact, by 1900 the United States had six cities with more than half a million inhabitants. The process of urbanization was not confined to the United States. All the industrializing nations of western Europe experienced it too. The factory system demanded high concentrations of workers, and the agricultural revolution made it possible for millions of people to leave their farms—whether in Germany or in Maine. The United States experienced three great migrations in the generation after the Civil War. One was from the East to the Great Plains and the Far West. Another was from Europe to America. The third was from the country to the city. Of the three, the movement from farm to city was the most extensive. In 1800 only about 3 Americans out of every 100 lived in cities larger than 8,000. By 1900 this proportion had grown 1,000 percent; almost a third of the nation lived in cities of over 8,000. In 1800 there had been only 6 cities larger than 8,000; by 1900 there were over 400. This increase was not gradual and smooth. Most of it came in the half-century' after the end of the Civil War. During this period, at least 15 million native Americans moved out of farming areas and into cities, and their number was swollen by an almost equal number of new immigrants who settled in cities instead of on farms. Statistics tell the story. Between 1870 and 1900 the total population of the United States increased by about 35 million people. During the same period the urban population increased by about 24 million. The cities had absorbed more than two-thirds of the total increase. TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS A city is not just a collection of people in a small area. Like industry, modem dties were made possible by technological change. In the centuries before the industrial revolution, the size of a city had been determined mainly by the available transportation. It could not be too big, because a person had to be able to walk or travel by wagon or carriage to a marketplace or job and back home again. After about 1880, however, cities began to experience a transportation revolution. The introduction of electricity made it possible to replace slow and awkward horse-drawn transport with fast, clean trolleys, elevated trains, and subways. These improvements meant that people could live many miles from their place of work and still be part of a vast city. Electricity also made it possible to light city streets. Cleveland, in 1879, became the first city to have electric street lighting. Similarly, the introduction of the telephone in the 1880s meant that homes, offices, and factories could be tied together in an almost instantaneous communications network. fc "forty-niners" and were celebrated in popular songs and stories, but the mythic version of this first American gold rush is a far cry from the reality. In most of the mining camps, somewhere between a fourth and half of the men were foreign-born. Experienced and skillful miners from Mexico came by the thousands, working in hills and valleys that had belonged to their nation just a few years before. Other skilled, Spanish- speaking miners came up the Pacific coast from Peru. News of the gold strike rippled around the Pacific Rim, and within three years there were 25,000 Chinese in California. (The new state government of California was quick to respond to these foreign "threats." In the first year of statehood, 1850, the California legislature passed a law requiring "foreign miners" to apply for special licenses and to pay a fee of twenty dollars a month for the privilege of looking for gold.) Some of the forty-niners did strike it rich, although the people who made the most money were probably not the miners and prospectors but those who set up businesses to sell them food, clothing, tools, or whiskey. Most of the men who rushed to California were disappointed. Many of them began to drift east, through the Sierra Nevada, looking for new bonanzas. In 1858, prospectors found gold near Pike's Peak in through the West to California. The North and the South, however, had not been able to agree on the western part of the route. The North wanted a line to run from Chicago to San Francisco. The South insisted on a route through Texas to southern California. The Civil War ended this competition. By seceding, the South lost its right to participate in the decision making. In 1862 Congress settled on a route between Council Bluffs, Iowa, and San Francisco. The same law provided for enormous financial support from the federal government. There would be two companies. The Central Pacific would build east from San Francisco. The Union Pacific (a patriotic name suited to wartime) would go west across Nebraska and Colorado. They were to meet somewhere in tne middle. Each railroad would be given a right-of-way 400 feet wide. In addition, the government would lend the railroads up'to $48,000 for each mile of track laid—less for flat country, more for mountain track. Most important, the railroads would be given 6,400 acres for every mile of track completed. In 1864 this land allowance was doubled. The Central Pacific started building toward the east, but the work went slowly for two reasons. First, the company did not have enough capital. Second, labor was scarce in California. The first problem was eased when the Lincoln administration allowed the Central Pacific to claim flat- country' miles as mountain miles, which entitled the company to the largest possible federal loans. The labor problem was "solved" by the brutal importation of thousands of Chinese laborers. Many of them were unwilling immigrants, and all of them were exploited as gang labor. They lived in extremely crude conditions, with poor food and almost no housing. And when the tracks were laid and their work was finished, they would be cast loose to try to earn their livings in the cities and towns of California, in a society whose European-American majority was at least as bigoted toward them as toward Native Americans or African Americans. But the Chinese workers endured, and their endurance was translated into rail mileage. In the first year of construction, 1864, the Central Pacific had completed only twenty miles of track. But by 1867 the pace was up to twenty miles per month, largely as a result of Chinese-American labor. At the other end of the proposed route the Union Pacific also built slowly, at first. But it picked up speed by bringing in thousands of Irish immigrants to lay rails. In 1868 alone the Union Pacific laid 425 miles of track, well over a mile a day. In May 1869, after only five years of construction, the two work gangs met at Promontory Point, Utah, just east of the Great Salt Lake. The last crosstie put down was coated with silver; the last spike was gold. A telegraph operator cabled east and west: "Hats off—prayer is being offered." Then there was a wait of almost fifteen minutes. Again the telegraph clicked. "We have got done praying. The spike is about to be pre- sented." Railroad officials took turns with the hammer; the first blow was a bad miss, but the work was done. Two locomotives eased forward until they touched. The nation celebrated almost as wildly as it had at the end of the Civil War. Chicago's parade was seven miles long. The nation was joined, east to west, across a "desert" that an earlier generation had believed would never be settled. During the next fifteen years three more routes were opened across the Rockies. Iowa, Missouri, Kansas, and Nebraska were crisscrossed by rails. In the process, the government gave the railroad companies almost 180 million acres of public land, and it lent them over $100 million. Because of complicated regulations that allowed railroads to delay choosing the land they wanted to keep along their rights-of-way, they were able to keep great stretches of land for years, waiting for its price to rise. At one point the railroads controlled—at least on paper—almost all of Iowa and Wisconsin. The Northern Pacific, whose route crossed the northern tier of states between Lake Superior and the Pacific, controlled a strip of land larger in area than many European nations. The same kind of situation developed in Arizona and New Mexico. By 1885 the railroads held land totaling almost a sixth of the entire country. East meets West. In the years after the Civil War, American railroad companies imported thousands of Chinese workers to help finish the rail network in the mountains and deserts of the West. Here, Chinese workers use hand labor to complete a graceful and impressive trestle on the Central Pacific Railroad in the Sierra Nevada of California. (Library of Congress) Many of the congressmen and senators who voted these huge grants to the railroads did so in the belief that most of the land in the "Great American Desert" was of little value. The motive behind the first transcontinental lines was not to build a transportation network for the Great Plains and the Rockies but to build a link to the Pacific Coast. It took a generation's experience to make clear that the intervening territory was valuable, that it would be settled and farmed. As things turned out, the railroads may have been a very efficient mechanism for disposing of the public lands, at least in some areas. The government's own land policy was confused and often corrupt, and the "public interest" may, on balance, have been served about as well by the railroad grants as by the government's direct land grant practices. But the public whose interest was at stake was, of course, solely a white public. From Buffalo to Cattle In any case, the first important effects of the railroads on the Great Plains had less to do with land ownership and cultivation than with animals. The railroads created a new industry on the plains: ranching. Building the railroads not only hastened the destruction of the buffalo herds, it made possible the systematic exploitation of another set of resources: grass and cows. Portland# ^OUTHiWWr^'C "Jf. Aitftf'aJl • VirgrtliYi Boat BlAOt Vpynvef Anas* Pueblo Wichita F,|rt l ^; 5?S_S PONv EKPftt u "miu. Lot AngaiM San Antonio c. 1860-50 %. ■^L; u < m> " i Railroadt .......Cattle trails Mining sites S>Y Cattle raising areas after 1 not been for "my damned old black face." An even larger number of cowboys, probably a third or more, were of Mexican ancestry. In fact, the Mexican counterparts of the American cowboys, the vaqueros (from the Spanish word vaca, cow), had mastered their trade long before Anglo- Americans reached Texas or the plains. If an American cowboy called his pony a pinto, it was because that Spanish word meant "painted." If he roped with a lariat, it was because the Spanish term for such a rope was la reata. If he preferred to say lasso, he was using the Spanish word for a snare, lazo. If he called another man hotnbre, If he said wimoose instead of leave, or savvy instead of kntnv, it was because the Spanish hotnbre, ihviios, and saber meant "man," "we're going," and "to know," respectively. THE END OF THE OPEN RANGE The long drive had a brief existence. Gradually, people north of Texas realized that as the railroads came closer, it made sense to breed and feed cattle nearby instead of driving them up from Texas. SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN THE 1920s Sigmund Freud on sex began to be discussed at the dinner table and in the polite magazines of the middle class. Words like bitch appeared in novels published by respectable publishers and read by respectable people. Petting and necking became part of the everyday vocabulary of magazine readers and even ministers. In the movies, sex became a major box-office attraction. Stars like Theda Bara and Clara Bow appeared on the screen in wispy clothing, locked in long, passionate embraces with their leading men. When Oara Bow was advertised as the "It" girl, hardly anyone needed to ask what "It" meant. Americans drank more, too. Despite Prohibition (see Chapter 20), liquor was easy to obtain. And since liquor was illegal, millions of Americans became technically criminals on an almost daily basis. Probably half the respectable, middle- class families in the nation had their regular bootlegger. Terms like "bathtub gin" and "speakeasy" became part of the national language. Especially in colleges, drinking became a regular pastime of the "flaming youth" of the decade. A BLACK RENAISSANCE The Jazz Age was a distinctly urban phenomenon. It was also an outcome of the greatest large-scale influence black music, dance, and style had ever had on white, middle-class Americans. And these two facts reflected two important changes in the African- American'experience. The first of these changes was one of the most massive and significant migrations in American history- In 1910, nine out of ten African Americans still lived in the South, almost all of them in rural areas where they worked for meager wages as sharecroppers or day laborers. But blacks were beginning to leave the farms for the cities in great numbers. In the 1920s, 1.5 million African Americans moved into urban areas, most of them in the North. The second great change in black experience was vocational. Those blacks who had managed to get an education during the decades after the end of Reconstruction had almost all been confined to careers as ministers or teachers in small towns, or managed to get work as clerks in a special environment like Washington, D.C. In 1910 there was exactly one black judge and two state legislators in the entire United States. But things were changing. Black colleges were turning out hundreds of graduates every' year, and a few blacks were able to graduate from old- line w'hite colleges and universities. (The first black football players to be singled out as "All- Americans," in 1916 and 1917, played for elite, private white colleges. Brown and Rutgers, and each was the first black ever to play varsity sports.) The migration to Northern cities made it possnle for ambitious young blacks to pursue careers—as lawyers, actors, singers, writers, edi- tors—that would have been impossible in the rural South. The place where these two changes came together to produce remarkable results was the part of Manhattan known by the old Dutch name of Harlem. The district, which ran north from 125th Street, had already become a black neighborhood by 1920. It was a neighborhood with real style, the place where every young black with ambition to be a doctor or a poet, a plavw'right or a lawyer took his or her dream, W. E. B. Du Bois had brought his magazine. The Crisis, to Harlem at the beginning of World War 1. After the war the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) moved its headquarters to Harlem (and at the same time replaced a predominantly'white board of officers with a group of blacks headed by poet and lawyer James Weldon Johnson). Du Bois and Johnson were typical of the kinds of people who were going to lead black movements in the 1920s in one important respect: They were not just political men interested in social justice. They were also intellectuals, writers, and poets with an intense interest in art and culture. Soon they were joined in Harlem by a remarkable generation of black intellectuals and artists, many of them immigrants from the West Indies. Together they produced what they themselves referred to with justifiable pride as the Negro Renaissance or the Harlem Renaissance. Sacco and Vanzelti. Here, in 1927, Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti enter the courtroom to make their last plea for justice. Some recent evidence seems to show that at least one of them may have been guilty of the crime he was charged with. But no amount of new evidence can set aside the fact that they were unfairly tried and unfairly convicted. (UPl/Bettmann Newsphotos) martyrs, modern counterparts of the victims of the Salem witch trials and the Haymarket affair. But to most Americans, they were just Italian radicals who had been properly punished. The bonus marchers of 1932 had to contend with the lingering effects of the red scare. They were accused of being communists and serving as tools in a foreign conspiracy. When Douglas MacArthur marched on their camp at Anacostia, he did so in the belief that he was protecting the country from a powerful revolutionary movement. The irony was, however, that the marchers themselves accepted much of the ideology of "Americanism" that underlay the red scare. Their response to the charge that they were communists was to insist on their own patriotism, and to point proudly to their record of military service. Most of the marchers were probably just as devoutly anticommunist, just as insistent on their own "100 percent Americanism" as their critics. The red scare also made it possible for those Americans who feared immigrants and their ethnic and religious differences to restrict immigration. In February 1921 (over the veto of President Wilson), Congress passed a law that limited immigration, especially from countries in southern and eastern Europe. According to the law, the number of immigrants from a country in any given year could not exceed 3 percent of the number of people of that nationality who were already in the United States in 1910. In 1924 the law was made even more restrictive. Quotas would now be based on resident population in 1890, immigration limited to 150,000 per year after 1927, and Asians totally excluded. The effect of the law's was to end, almost at once, the flow of immigration. PROHIBITION AND REACTION Like the red scare and the movement for immigration restriction, the prohibition of alcohol in the 1920s had its roots in the progressive period. In 1919 the states had passed the Eighteenth Amendment, which empowered Congress to prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages. The amendment marked the victory of a long campaign of "temperance." It provided another rallying point for conservative, small-town Americans. They divided society into the "drys" and the "wets" and opposed any politician who did not favor Prohibition. The Prohibition movement failed to stop Americans from drinking. In most cities, people continued to drink whiskey in speakeasies. The The "Scottsboro Boys." Authentic!, in Alabama allowed a photographer to take this carefully staged photograph of Attorney Samuel Leibowitz and his clients. The picture was designed to assure the public that justice was being done, that the defendants were indeed represented by a lawyer and had access to them. But it was also designed to assure racially fearful whites that the conference was watched over by troopers, who only partially cover their pistols w'ith their hands. (Brown Brothers) blacks from juries. The stage was being set for new efforts to use the Constitution and the courts to protect the basic rights of black citizens—a struggle that Would reach a climax after World War II, in the 1950s and 1960s. For those who would not wait, there was one final consolation to be wrung from the New Deal. It came in 1941, when it was becoming increasingly clear that depression and the New Deal were about to give way to war. A. Philip Randolph, the brilliant and militant leader of the black union movement, decided that the time had come for blacks to demand justice from their government. He proposed a grand, all-black march on Washington. The Roosevelt administration was anxious to prevent "disorder" in the capital. And some officials were afraid that "communists" would "infiltrate" the movement. Roosevelt decided to negotiate. He told black leaders that if they would call off the march, he would establish a Fair Employment Practices Commission, with at least some power to try to enforce equal treatment for black and white workers in the few industries where working conditions could be federally regulated. Randolph and his colleagues accepted the deal, and the commission was established in the summer of 1941, just a few months before the United States entered World War II. As one black newspaper put it, most African Americans thought they had little choice but to support Roosevelt and the Democrats, "until the real thing comes along." MEXICAN AMERICANS A large influx of Mexican laborers into California and the Southwest, where most of them became migrant farm workers, had taken place in the 1920s. But the Mexicanos on strike. The striking braceros on this truck were unarmed. But they were threatening to arm themselves unless the landowners they usually worked for put down their own weapons and stopped hiring pnvate armies of thugs to harrass striking workers. (Library of Congress) irresistible forces of the depression turned on them severely. Hundreds of thousands of white farm families of the Southwest's Dust Bowl were losing their land or their sharecropping arrangements and heading west to California. The result was a dramatic reversal of the tides of migration. At the beginning of the crisis, only a small minority of the migrant work force on California farms had been North Americans. By the end of the decade, the North Americans—the "Okies" and the "Arkies"—made up nine-tenths of that labor force, doing the toilsome and low-paying jobs that had once been left to Mexicano "braceros." The result was a huge outmigration of Mexicans and Mexican Americans. In the first five years of the depression, about half a million left. The U.S. census—woefully inaccurate when it came to minority groups—counted only half as many Mexican-born people in 1940 as it had in 1930. This drop was just about equal to the number of landless North Americans who had wandered into California looking for work. But the Mexicanos were not only discouraged by the economic crisis, they also were encouraged to go by governments like California's, which offered one- way tickets to Mexico, free of charge, to anyone willing to leave. And to offers like this, local police and bureaucrats often added harassment and ugly treatment. A government official in California said that "Mexicans are trash. ... We herd them like pigs." (His command of English was weak. He was obviously trying to say that he thought Mexicans were like pigs. But his sentence could also mean "We herd them as though vx were pigs.") Some of the Mexicanos did resist, did refuse the free tickets "home," and did try to do something about their difficult jobs and miserable earnings. In the 1930s, Mexicano workers began to organize, to resist exploitation at the hands of Norteamericano landowners—and exploitation, too, at the hands of fellow Mexicanos who organized work gangs and wrote contracts with the farmers. They organized a union, the Confederation de Uniones de Campesinos y Obreros Mexicanos (Confederation of Unions of Mexican Campesinos and Workers). There is no easy translation of cantpesino. It is sometimes translated as "peasants." But its meaning in Mexico and Central America covered a variety of forms of agricultural experience that included most of the rural poor, even those who owned small farms. The Confederacion supported a number of bitter and sometimes bloody strikes during harvest seasons in the 1930s. In the largest strike, which took place in 1933, 18,000 Mexicano pickers refused to harvest the cotton crop in the rich San Joaquin Valley of California. But two strikers were murdered, and the violence eventually broke the strike. Still, during the next seven years, the Confederacion promoted twenty-five major strikes. By the end of the decade most landowners had shown that they preferred to hire North American workers, if they would work for the same low wages. The North Americans proved to be more docile than those Mexicanos who had stayed in the United States. As for the federal government, it tried to assist migrant farm workers by setting up camps run by the Farm Security' Administration, camps that could provide decent temporary housing for laboring people. But the camps were established only in 1937, and the men who ran them, like the landowners, showed a definite preference for assisting North American migrant families. (John Steinbeck's famous novel about the sufferings of migrant workers in California, The Crapes of Wrath, was a moving and sympathetic book. But it did not have a single Mexican or Mexican-American character. His depiction of a Farm Security Administration camp is of an institution with no Mexicanos—or blacks, either.) Since agricultural workers were not covered by major New Deal programs like Social Security or the Wagner Act, and since only proven citizens were eligible for federal relief, the Mexicanos got little or no benefit from the New Deal. NATIVE AMERICANS For Native Americans, economic depression was nothing new. For half a century Native Americans on reservations had lived in increasingly miserable conditions. Their main resource was land. But land ownership was governed by the rules of the Dawes Severalty Act of 1887 (see pp. 687-88). Under the terms of this law, land that tribes had once owned in common became the property of individual families. But with each passing generation, a fixed amount of land had to be divided among several children. The only alternative was for new' generations to leave the reservations altogether, and try to cope with hardship and discrimination in towns and cities. So the inevitable long-term effect of the Dawes Act was to promote poverty and want. The situation was perhaps worst in Oklahoma, which had once been the "Indian Terri- tory." During the nineteenth century the federal government had crowded about thirty different tribes onto a skimpy expanse of land that was not very fertile in the first place. Increasing populations were unable to feed themselves adequately. Disease, especially tuberculosis, was epidemic. To Native Americans, the news that there was something called a "panic" on a street named "Wall" would have had a significance that was mainly ironic or bitter. And it appeared that help was not going to come to them any sooner than it w'as coming to the Mexican Americans. In 1929 the Hoover administration ruled that Native Americans living on reservations were not eligible for even the meager relief funds being provided by the federal government. Then, in 1933, Roosevelt appointed a new commissioner of Indian affairs, John Collier, a former social worker. Collier made a number of decisions that were of real benefit to Native Americans who lived on reservations. Some of the decisions were of genuine symbolic importance. He ordered the bureaucrats who administered federal programs to respect Native American customs, language, and dress. He told them to stop doing what they had been doing for half a century, trying to force Indians to dress Army had reached 1.4 million men by July 1941. But after total mobilization, this number moved up rapidly. By 1945 over 8 million men were in the Army. {The Women's Army Corps—WAC— reached about 100,000 at this time.) The Navy experienced a similar expansion, reaching 3.4 million, with the Marines constituting about 500,000 of this total. The Air Force (administra- tively part of the Army) also expanded rapidly. Military service touched all populations in America. By the end of the war about 1 million black Americans had participated in the various services, for example. The American armed forces in World War II mixed ethnic groups and social class, but in a curious way. Universal conscription threw together Northerners and Southerners, autoworkers and college professors. But if this necessitated a kind of melting pot culture in the barracks, it did not mean that democracy' or racial harmony prevailed. For example, black soldiers were segregated into units commanded by white officers. Often they were relegated to stevedore or construction work. Japanese Americans were placed in special ethnic units such as the Nisei 442 Infantry Regiment that fought in Italy. Thus, despite the commitment to defeat Nazism—the most virulent racism of the twentieth century—few Americans saw anything paradoxical in establishing and maintaining racial segregation throughout the military. This is even more curious because American war films often pictured foxholes as representative democracies, and such films as Bataan (1943) even implied that racial integration existed where it clearly did not. Once the United States had entered the war, Roosevelt decided on a strategy of attrition to defeat the Axis powers. He planned an enormous economic effort in which superior resources, supplies, productivity, organization, and scientific breakthroughs would overwhelm the enemy. This emphasis on weapons, he believed, would minimize American casualties. With this aim in mind, he authorized the secret building of the atomic bornb. His commitment made the factory assembly lines as important as the front lines of fighting men. THE WARTIME ECONOMY The war buildup also meant new federal economic controls. After Pearl Harbor, Congress granted sweeping powers to the executive branch. On January' 16,1942, Roosevelt created the War Production Board, which had the power to channel civilian production into armaments manufacture and to contract for the construction of new defense plants. With the massive reorientation of production, the draft of millions of men, and a rise in employment, the United States suddenly faced labor shortages. War orders wiped aw'ay the huge unemployment left from the depression. The War Manpower Commission was organized to recruit new workers for the booming defense sector. Tire largest pool of potential employees was women, and millions of them eagerly took over jobs in aircraft, shipbuilding, and munitions plants. They w'ent to vocational schools and learned trades and skills that transformed their lives. They were crucial in building the vast array of weapons that poured from the factories. They constructed B-29 bornbers like the Enola Gay that carried the first atomic bornb; they built the tanks and ships that shattered the Nazi armies and the Japanese navy. While the employment of women in factories was expected to be temporary, it had profound and lasting effects. Several million women attended vocational schools. As early as 1942, over 35 percent of the American work force w'as female. Bv the end of the wrar, surveys revealed, a majority of these working women hoped to keep their positions. But telltale signs during the war suggested that "Rosie the Riveter" would eventually be pushed aside. Differential wages for men and women, hostility in the workplace, antagonism from unions, and, most of all, failure of the Roosevelt administration to support the Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution (part of the 1944 Democratic national platform) suggested that gains made could be undone. The other large group of potential workers were African Americans. At first, they were generally excluded from defense employment opportunities. But A. Philip Randolph of the This simple, wooden sign, posted in the desert, marked the entrance to the Manzanar relocation center for Japanese families uprooted from their homes, primarily in the Los Angeles area. Other camps housed still more Japanese Americans, rounded up and deported from the coastal areas of the western United States. (Library of Congress) Labor disputes did not disappear, but in general, the War Labor Board did much to ease the pressure on wages, and it allowed unions to raise their membership extensively. Another new agency, the Office of Price Administration, tried to limit price rises by setting maximum prices for standard items, it also oversaw the rationing of scarce items such as coffee, canned foods (to save tin), shoes, and gasoline (to save rubber tires). Although many workers earned more money than before the war, there were few goods to spend it on; even a thriving black market could not supply them. Extensive government control over the economy was matched by increased federal attention to shaping public opinion and preventing possible subversion. In this climate, civil liberties suffered. Of course the military' censored news from the front. There was little serious opposition to the war, but even so, the administration overreacted as demands for security and secrecy increased. For example, it brought a group of inconsequential American fascists and right-wing opponents of the war to trial. Much more serious was the treatment of Japanese Americans. In early 1942, American commanders on the West Coast argued that Japanese residents must be removed. This fear of sabotage scarcely concealed a long-standing racial antipathy toward the Japanese in California. (There was no corresponding internment of Japanese Howard Y. Miyake, a Japanese American, receives the Silver Star from U.5. Army Colonel Lee D. Cady. Some Japanese Americans were allowed to participate in units in the European theater. (National Archives) residents of Hawaii, where race relations were better.) Thus, on February 19, 1942, President Roosevelt issued Executive Order #9066, which permitted removal of alien Japanese, Germans, Italians, and all persons of Japanese ancestry, whether citizens or not, from any "military area." These sensitive areas included California and parts of Oregon, Washington, and Arizona. In practice, exceptions were made for other groups so that only the Japanese were actually removed. This policy may have had military considerations as its justification, but it also continued a history of exclusion and racial segregation. In 1924 Congress had denied further immigration to the Japanese, abrogating a "gentlemen's agreement" of 1907-08 between the United States and Japan in which Japan promised to restrict immigration. Despite the burden of this history and various local laws that discriminated, the Japanese community had achieved considerable success in agriculture and small businesses. Their largest communities were centered largely around Los Angeles and Seattle, with much smaller contingents in San Francisco. By June 1942 over 100,000 had been forcibly removed, their property and jobs stripped away. Most were placed in ten crude, dusty Army camps and provided with tarpaper barracks, cots, common toilets, and shared bathing and laundry facilities. One internee recalled a camp set on a bleak plain behind Los Angeles: There was a lack of privacy when we first went to Manzanar. The barracks were not actually completed. There were terrible wind storms that swept through the Owens Valley which brought dust through the cracks in the door. 1 think there were two months running where we suffered from diarrhea. The food wras not properly prepared. Many of the internees gained their release before the end of the war, but few ever recovered their farms, businesses, or homes. In 1988 Congress passed a law apologizing to Japanese Americans and promised $20,000 in compensation for each internee. The War in Europe While the administration worked to organize production, it defined its strategy to win the war. In practical terms, the United States had disagreements with Kith of its major allies. Roosevelt opposed Britain's desire to hold on to its vast colonial empire. And he was reluctant to allow the Russians to establish control over the invasion routes across eastern European nations. The president tried to circumvent potential friction through face-to-face encounters with Churchill and Stalin. Several conferences shaped the course of the war and established general principles for a peace settlement. In 1941, even before the United States entered the war, Churchill and Roosevelt met and signed the Atlantic Charter, a document that outlined international rights and responsibilities and promised self-determination, free trade, and the abandonment of force after the war. They also agreed to focus on defeating Germany first. Even after Pearl Harbor, this meant that a substantial portion of war supplies went to Britain and the Soviet Union; the Asian war took second place. Churchill and Roosevelt made a second major decision at Casablanca, Morocco, in January 1943. There the two leaders agreed to demand unconditional surrender of the Axis powers in order to fix blame for the war on Hitler and Mussolini; no negotiated or partial peace with the fascist leaders would be tolerated. For the Russians, the immediate and paramount problem was the opening of a second front—by an Allied invasion of France—so as to divert the German armies and relieve the enormous pressure that Hitler had brought to bear on the Soviet Union. The Russians were reeling before the German onslaught, sustaining huge casualties and losses of territory. A longer-range Russian desire was to gain control of those areas through which the Germans had twice invaded during the twentieth century. Roosevelt and the U.S. Army commander, Dwight Eisenhower, agreed with the proposal for a second front, but Churchill twice convinced Roosevelt to postpone a landing, arguing that preparations remained incomplete, in August 1942 Churchill explained to Stalin why the United States and Britain had chosen to invade North Africa instead of France. Preparations for the attack advanced, and in November 1942, Allied forces landed in French North Africa. At first, French troops loyal to the Vichy government resisted, but Eisenhower negotiated a capitulation w'ith Admiral Jean Francois Darla n. American and British troops pushed into Tunisia to engage German forces led by General Erwin Rommel ("the Desert Fox"). By May 1943 the battle for North Africa had ended. Rommel was defeated and a large contingent of his army captured. But Russia still stood alone with no second front in sight. Once again, in the spring of 1943, the western Allies postponed the invasion of France. This time the United States and Britain decided to attack Sicily and knock Italy out of the war. Once again, the Russians were angered and suspicious that Britain and the United States wanted them to continue to bear the brunt of the European struggle. Nonetheless, the Allied command went ahead; troops landed in Sicily on July 9, 1943, and took thirty-eight days to conquer the island, although the bulk of the German army escaped into Italy. This victory led to the fall of the Italian fascist leader, Mussolini. A provisional government signed a peace treaty with the Allies on September 3, and Italy switched sides in the war. On the same day, British and American troops invaded Italy itself, and gradually they pushed a 1054 Comparison of White and Black Family Income (in constant 1975 dollars) White Families Black Families Ratio 1950 $7,702 $4,178 .54 1955 9,271 5,113 .55 1960 10,604 5,871 .55 1965 12,370 6,812 .55 1970 14,188 9,032 .64 1975 14,268 9,321 .65 1980 20,502 12,380 .60 Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1981 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office. 1981), p. 436- vote in primary elections in Wisconsin, Maryland, and Indiana. But Goldwater could not build a movement strong enough to block the Johnson landslide. THE WAR IN VIETNAM One relatively unimportant campaign issue was the war in Vietnam. During his year in office, Johnson had proceeded cautiously, without calling attention to the implications of his actions, but he moved the United States toward far greater involvement in the war. Early in 1964 he made several important decisions. He approved plans for covert harassment of North Vietnam, and he agreed to bornbing missions against the north in the event of provocation. He also appointed General William Westmoreland to head military operations. These moves rested on two assumptions: first, that North Vietnam was responsible for and could control the insurgent Viet Cong in the south; second, that American intervention in the form of air strikes and ground troops could be decisive. Johnson and his advisers did not believe that American actions would increase the fighting in the south or cause an uncontrollable infiltration of troops and arms from the north. The pretext for full-scale intervention came in late July 1964. On July 30 South Vietnamese PT (patrol torpedo) boats attacked bases in the Gulf of Tonkin inside North Vietnamese waters. Simultaneously, the Maddox, an American destroyer, steamed into the area to disrupt North Vietnamese communication facilities. On August 2, possibly seeing the two separate missions as a combined maneuver against them, North Vietnam sent out several PT boats to attack the destroyer. The Maddox fired, sinking one of the attackers, then radioed the news to Washington. Johnson ordered another ship into the bay. On August 3 both destroyers reported another attack—although somewhat later, the commander of the Maddox radioed that he was not sure. Nonetheless, the president ordered American planes to retaliate by bornbing inside North Vietnam. Johnson then sought congressional support and justification for his action. He quickly received it. Senator William Fulbright guided a resolution through his Foreign Relations Committee and then through the Senate in less than a week. Fulbright's action was perhaps related to his fear that Barry Goldwater might use the Vietnam issue in the forthcoming election. Neither he nor anyone else in the Senate had been told all the facts about the Gulf of Tonkin skirmish, and later critics would question whether or not an attack had actually occurred. 1055 The War on Poverty: Education. Employment, and Training Funds. 1960-80 Percentage of 1.1 1.8 4.4 4.9 5.3 federal budget Amount (in 1.0 2.1 8.6 15.9 30.8 billions of dollars) Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Statist tad Abstract of the United States. 1 Sill (Washington, D C.: Government Printing Office. 1981), p. 248. Like the Korean War and the cold war, the origins of the war in Vietnam lay partly in unresolved questions left over from World War II. American participation in the struggle was bv accumulation, some of it public and some of it secret. This made it a process and a cause that few Americans understood very well. The fighting in Vietnam began in 1945, at the end of Japanese occupation, and terminated in 1975, when North Vietnamese and Viet Cong soldiers marched into Saigon, the South Vietnamese capital, thus putting an end to the last American- supported government. This thirty-year struggle by communist-led forces sought to eliminate first French and then American influence in Vietnam. Essentially a civil war, it was complicated by French colonialism, by international agreements, by encouragement and aid from outside nations, and by a massive effort of the United States to thwart the communists. When the French reconquered most of their former colony of Vietnam after World War II, communist forces inspired by Ho Chi Minh began an uprising that eventually defeated the French in 1954 at the battle of Dien Bien Phu. From 1950, the United States supplied the French but refused direct intervention. During the Eisenhower administration, the president and his advisers sympathized with the French, gave them aid, and hoped to prevent the further spread of communist influence in Asia. But Eisenhower also understood the extreme risks of direct involvement in another Asian war after the unpopular conflict in Korea. Exhausted and defeated after Dien Bien Phu, the French agreed to a peace conference in Geneva, Switzerland, in July 1954. The Geneva Accords provided for French withdrawal and temporarily divided Vietnam into two administrative areas: the north, occupied by the communist Viet Minh, and the south, organized by pro-French Vietnamese. Reunification elections were mandated to decide the permanent fate of the nation. The United States sent observers to the Geneva conference but did not sign the accords. In fact, the Central Intelligence Agency worked secretly to undermine the agreements, to disrupt the economy of the north, and to install a pro-American ruler in the south. This last goal was accomplished when Ngo Dinh Diem became prime minister of the south. Diem asked for and received advice and aid from the United States. And he refused to participate in reunification. Partly to counter this, Diem's opponents, aided by the north, turned to insurgency. From this time onward, American financial and military support poured in as five American presidents, from Eisenhower to Ford, attempted to salvage American interests in the area. For the United States, however, intervention had no really distinct beginning. War was never officially declared, although the Gulf of Tonkin resolution 1056 £Bangkok PnomcMnhQ GULF OF St AM jfiSP** SOUTH CHINA SEA H"nai V _Ham>.......... MARCH igbfl VVimitatM ui bornbing halt Tr, zone authorized the president to protect American forces and interests in the area. American participation grew in small increments, sometimes openly and sometimes secretly. By 1965 there were 181,000 American troops in South Vietnam; by 1968 there were 536,000. Like the Korean War, the war in Vietnam was fought within serious constraints. The ultimate suppliers of war materiel—the United States, the U.S.S.R., and China—were not attacked, and supply lines into Vietnam remained open on both sides for most of the war. The victory the United States sought was the permanent establishment of a Western-oriented government in South Vietnam. But the means to achieve this were, from the beginning, controversial. The nature of warfare in Vietnam was determined by the jungle terrain and by the sympathy of many South Vietnamese for the rebels. In the absence of fronts or battle lines, the Viet Cong (South Vietnamese rebels) and North Vietnamese troops could choose the time and place of engagement. After a battle, they could slip into dense jungles or hide among supporters in the peasantry. Their weapons were sometimes crude— they used booby traps and captured arms—but they also possessed more sophisticated Russian and Chinese equipment. The United States, adapting to jungle warfare, relied most heavily on helicopters, which gave great flexibility to troop movements. After 1964, American tactics focused on preventing supplies from reaching rebels in the south. Intensive bornbing and defoliation of jungle foliage with herbicides disrupted supply routes, but eventually intensive bornbing of North Vietnam was undertaken to cut supplies off at the source. In his first year in office, Johnson prided himself on the consensus he had achieved in domestic and foreign affairs. In dealing with Vietnam he appeared to be a moderate. And in some respects he was. But he locked himself in by three assumptions that gradually convinced him to commit more men and more resources to the Indochina war. The first of these beliefs was the "domino theory," originally propounded by Eisenhower. This notion assumed that if South Vietnam fell to the communist-supported insurgents, other Southeast Asian nations would topple into the communist camp. The second assumption was that gradual escalation, covert action, and misinformation could hide the war from the American people and thus preserve consensus. (The war would be over before anyone realized its extent or cost.) Finally, Johnson wanted to save face. He believed that the United States could not afford to withdraw or back down without inviting a barrage of accusations that he had sold out to the communists. Having lived through one period of McCarthvism, he was determined to prevent another. 1057 A Vietnamese casualty. Both sides in the Vietnam War inllicted heavy casualties on innocent civilians. Photographs such as this one, featured in American newspapers and on nightly television newscasts, convinced many Americans that the fight could never be won without a savagery and brutality that they would not support. ( Philip Jones Griffiths/Magnum) Believing the optimistic appraisals of his military advisers and the "hawks" in his administration, he gradually committed American troops and prestige'to the jungle war. He cut himself off from the "doves" (war opponents) in Congress. Planning strategy and defending his decisions against mounting public criticism became his preoccupations. By pursuing this policy, he convinced many Americans that the Democratic party had fallen to the control of a narrow group of professional politicians who could not understand w hy any reasonable person might oppose the war. The Vietnam War w'as only one factor that undercut support for the liberal consensus on which Johnson depended. There were growing numbers of critics of the federal activism of the Kennedy and Johnson administrations. Opponents of integration and conservatives in general rejected the notion that government should intervene in the economic and social order to guarantee a fair distribution of opportunity and rewards. From the opposite point of view, students, the civil rights movement, the poor, and then the growing women's movement criticized the federal government for delaying social reforms. The New Right Large numbers of disaffected Americans joined the "new right." Born in the troubled 1950s from the marriage of traditional conservatism and a new, vociferous right wing, this movement captured the Republican party temporarily in |9f>4 