Copyright 1991 by D. C. Heath and Company. Also copyright 194S, 1941, 1951, 1954m No part of the material covered by this copyright may be reproduced in any form without written permission of the publisher. Printed in the United States of America. 5 A 7 r 1 he American Story is intended for die senior high school. Compared with other textbooks in its field it is less difficult and less voluminous and, we believe, more teachable. It avoids difficult words and long sentences. It leaves out the unnecessary details which weary and confuse so many pupils. It focuses attention on the really significant events and issues of American life. The American Story is more than a political history. It is the story of the American people — how they lived, what they thought, and how they struggled to realize the American dream of equal opportunity for all. The task of writing the Constitution and launching the national government is presented as the great achievement it was. Yet it is recognized that much still remained to be done to bring about a government by and for the people and that in consequence there have always been groups who vigorously demanded and obtained reforms. The American Story is concerned with American idealism and love of country. It records the public services of our outstanding statesmen and reformers — those whose names are household words and others whose patriotism should not be forgotten. These men and women are portrayed as the leading characters in an inspiring drama. The ten units cover American history from colonial times to the present. In harmony with the recommendations of the Report on American History in Schools and Colleges, nearly two thirds of the total space is given to the period from 1850 to the present, w while more than one fourth of the total space is given to the story of the United States in world affairs. The organization in the main follows the chronological pattern. However, at times the narrative is halted in order to consider separately some of its important strands. Thus, the topical organization appears in Chapter 2, Making a Living in Colonial Times; Chapter 3, Colonial Society; Chapter 4, Colonial Government; Chapter 17, The Period of Jacksonian Democracy; Chapter 25, The Rise of Big Business; Chapter 26, The Rise of the City; Chapter 27, The Rise of the Labor Movement; and Chapter 28, The End of the Frontier. In Unit VIII, The United States as a World Power, Unit X, The End of Isolationism, and Unit XI, The United States as a World Leader, the treatment is partly topical. 1 he illustration of The American Story has required many months of labor and research. More pictures have been included than in most high school histories. The pictures have been carefully selected for interest Foreword and educational value. Contemporary pictures have been used wherever possible. The exact source and date of most of the pictures are given. The maps, especially drawn for this book, were designed for maximum simplicity and usefulness. There are also a number of helpful diagrams. The teaching aids have been carefully planned. At the end of every chapter there are names to identify, words to explain or define, and questions to help develop full understanding of the text. There is also a list of subjects for oral or written reports. These are intended for the abler students and will enable them to supplement and enrich the text. At the end of every unit practicable group activities are suggested. Each unit also has a bibliography. The titles are those which high school teachers generally have found most usable for collateral reading. Titles suitable for the slower readers are designated. Textbooks and books too difficult for high school pupils were excluded. The Constitution, which appears in the Appendix, has been annotated in order that it may be more intelligible than young people usually find it. Additional teaching helps and suggestions, including lists of source materials and catalogs of visual aids, will he found in the teachers' manual. This is your book. It was planned and written to bring you greater satisfaction and enjoyment in the study of American history. We have worked hard to make it clear and interesting. We believe The American Story will help you to understand and take pride in the development of your country. We hope it will inspire you to cherish the American ideals of equal opportunity, liberty, and justice for all. Criticism and suggestions from teachers and students who read The American Story would be of interest and value to the authors. Ruth Wood Gavian Assistant Professor, Department of Education Brooklyn College William A. Hamm Associate Superintendent, New York City Schools Formerly Chairman, Social Studies Department Walton High School, New York City UNIT ONE. Our Colonial Heritage UNIT TWO. Forming a More Perfect Union UNIT THREE. The National Government Groves Stronger i UNIT FOUR. Nationalism and Sectionalism i Contents 29 ' 3°2 UNIT FIVE. Conflict between the North and South UNIT SIX. The Emergence of Modern America (1S65-1900) 337 UNIT SEVEN. The Progressive Movement 415 UNIT F.IGI IT. The United States as a World Power 45 5 UNIT NINE. Domestic Affairs (1920-1940) 5i7 39 DISASTER FOLLOWS THE "mad TWENTIES" 5 29 40 THE "new deal" Contents vii UNIT TEN. The End of Isolationism 559 UNIT E'.LEVEN. The United States as a World Leader 625 National Origins of White Settlers in English Colonies in 1775 1 Settled Portions of the English Colonies in 1700 and 1763 13 European Possessions in North America Before and After the French and Indian War 52 Principal Thrusts and Battles of the Revolutionary War 76 North America in 1783 84 Western Lands When Claimed by States 99 Western Lands after States Had Given Up Claims 99 Louisiana Purchase and Exploration 144 Territorial Problems Solved — 1819,1824 no Independence Movement in Latin America 173 Principal Routes Used by Western Settlers 178 The People Move West, 1790-1830 187 First Textile Mills in the United States 196 Sections of Our Country When Jackson Was President 209 Lands of the Five Civilized Tribes 214 Oregon Boundary Dispute and Settlement 246 Territorial Growth of the United States, 1783-1853 249 viii Maps The Aiexican War 253 The Missouri Compromise, 1820 279 Slave and Free Territory by the Compromise of 1850 289 The Kansas-Nebraska Act, 1854 292 States of the North and the South in 1863 304 Principal Thrusts in the War between North and South 314 The Readmission of the Confederate States 326 Railroad Lines and Grants 344 The United States Has Rich Mineral Resources 352 Settlement of the Far West, 1850-1890 382 Westward Advance of Center of Population, 1790-1900 388 Progress of the Woman Suffrage Movement 422 Prohibition on the Eve of the Eighteenth Amendment 429 Lands Irrigated under the Reclamation Act 437 National Parks and Forests of the United States 437 Expansion of the United States, 1867-1916 456 The Panama Canal Zone 480 The Flags of Sixteen Nations Fly over Caribbean America 486 American Operations on the Western Front 509 Territorial Changes in Europe, 1918-1923 519 The Presidential Election of 1920 522 The Presidential Election of 1928 532 The Presidential Election of 1932 537 Foreign Spheres of Influence in China, 1914 590 Japanese Advances in China 591 Territory Held by the Rome-Berlin Axis, October, 1942 604 The Axis Pincers Threaten World-wide Shipping 611 Theater of War in the Far East and the Pacific 619 Military and Economic Aid 671 The Federal Government in 1789 and Today 109 Extension of Suffrage since Washington's Day 207 Relative Strength of North and South in 1861 305 Per Cent of People Living in Cities 360 Shift of Workers from Agricultural to Nonagricultural Pursuits, 1820-1940 The City Manager Plan 421 Immigrants Entering the United States, 1830-1940 530 Extent of Soil Erosion in the United States 547 Cost of World War I to the United States and Four of the Allies 569 Free Exchange and Barter Trade 579 The Structure of the United Nations 626 The histone of the American nation begins with the settling of the thirteen original colonies. Many kinds of people came to these colonies. Some sought religious or political freedom: others were looking for a chance to earn a better living than they could earn in the old world. The new world was a land of opportunity, but only those with courageous hearts were willing to face its hardships. The settlers had to tame the wilderness and protect themselves from the Indians. They had to produce nearly everything they used. Men, women, and children worked hard. There was little time for play. The voters took a lively interest in their government. They expected the legislative to protect their rights and keep a watchfid eye on the governors sent from England by the king. The colonial legislatures quarreled continually with the governors and often refused to pay them. As the colonies grew stronger they saw no need to depend on England for any kind of help. They wanted to make their own laws without interference from Parliament. They finally took up arms to resist British control. The struggle for independence was long and hard, but victory was finally won. A new nation — the United States of America — was born. 6 The American Story confined in English prisons. However, not many debtors ever went there. The rapid peopling of the English colonies. Unlike the French colonies to the north and the Spanish colonies to the south, the English colonies along the Atlantic seaboard grew rapidly. Their growth was due partly to a high birth rate and partly to immigration. Why large families were usual. During the colonial period and for a long time afterward, American families were large. Families of eight, ten, or twelve children were rather common. Parents could support numerous children because land was cheap, and a family could build its own house from lumber cut on its own land, grow its own food, and make its own clothing and nearly everything else it required. Children helped in the hard work of the home and the farm, and the more numerous they were, the more likely the family was to get ahead. The custom of early marriage also favored large families. It is true that many children died in infancy, but even so, the average family had more children than does the average family today. Why immigrants came. Some people came from Europe to America seeking religious and political freedom. Among those coming to escape persecution for their religion were Pilgrims, Puritans, Quakers, Huguenots (French Protestants), Catholics, and Jews. Some individuals came as officials, ministers of the gospel, or missionaries to the Indians, and others came for love of adventure. Far larger numbers came in the hope of making a better living. The custom of giving the newcomer fifty or one hundred acres of land attracted the poor working people and peasants of Europe. Here they could become independent; there it was practically impossible to reach that goal. Obstacles to immigration. Immigration to America was held back by the cost and dangers of the journey. At best the trip from Europe to America required six to eight weeks; if storms drove the ship from its course, the voyage might last three months. There were no regular lines of ships, no regular dates of sailing, and no laws to regulate fares or protect the safety and health of the passengers. The traveler, after making a bargain with the sea captain for passage, had to wait in port, possibly for several weeks, until the ship was ready to sail and winds were favorable. Meanwhile he was using up his money and the store of food he had bought for the journey. The ships were small and completely lacking in comfort. Sanitary arrangements were crude. The sick and the well lived, slept, and ate in a crowded hold. The supply of fresh water, always very limited, Before 1700 nearly all the settlers in the English colonies came from England After 1700 many came from other countries. In this period the largest group of immigrants, next to the English, were the Scotch-lrish. They were among the best frontiersmen and Indian fighters in America and did more than any other group to push the frontier westward over the Appalachians. In addition to the Scotch-lrish there came to America a huge number of Germans, many Scotch, Welsh, Irish, Dutch, and French Huguenots (Protestants), some laws, and at least a few people from nearly every country in Europe. By the time of the Revolution these non-English settlers made up about one third of the total white population of the colonies. LEONARD CALVERT, brother of Lord Baltimore and first governor of Maryland. Maryland was founded in 1634. Both Catholics and Protestants were welcomed. In this painting, made by C. Y. Turner in 1902, Conveyor Calvert us buying land from the Indians. For several years the colonists had friendly relations with the Indians, but later the colony suffered severely from Indian wars. became dangerously low if the journey was prolonged by lack of wind or by stormy weather. Contagious diseases frequently broke out. It was not unusual for half or more of those on board to die from smallpox, measles, or dysentery. Young children, weak mothers, and the sick were almost sure to perish under the hardships of a long voyage. Another obstacle to immigration was religious intolerance. Most of the colonies tried to shut out Roman Catholics, Jews, and Quakers. Only in Pennsylvania and Rhode Island were newcomers of every religious faith made welcome. Indentured servants. Many fanners and plantation owners were so eager for laborers that they were ready to pay the cost of the voyage for immigrants who would work for them a period of years. In exchange for passage to America adults had to serve from three to seven years; children, until they came of age. The contract between master and servant was known as an indenture: this gives us the phrase "indentured servant." The tenns of the indenture were harsh, and the servant little better off than a slave. But when the time of servitude was up, he was free. Our Colonial Heritage WILLIAM PENN was the son of a wealthy' English admiral. This portrait by an unknown painter shows him at the age of twenty-two, dressed as a knight. Soon after, he joined the Quakers and became a missionaty and reformer. Six times he was thrown into prison for his beliefs. Later he founded a colony in America where Quakers and all others coidd enjoy religious and political freedom. The constitution he drew up for his colony' was so liberal that Thomas Jefferson called him "the greatest lawgiver the world has produced." (Courtesy of Historical Society of Pennsylvania. Photo by Philip B. Wallace) He usually received a suit of clothes from his master. Often he received a small grant of land and managed to become an independent fanner. More often he became a wage earner. Most indentured servants came here of their own free will, gladly binding themselves to service for a tenn of years in order to reach America. Entire families often came in this way, each one becoming an indentured servant. Other individuals, both adults and children, were carried here against their will and forced to become servants. The streets of London and other seaports in the British Isles were full of kidnapers. They made a business of hustling their victims into ships bound for America. Upon arrival here the captain delivered his unwilling passengers to whoever would pay him most. Debtors and criminals. The prisons of England also furnished immigrants to the New World. To avoid the expense of keeping offenders in prison, the authorities frequently sentenced them to be transported to America. Some were in prison because of their religious or The American Story political ideas, many because of debts, others because of very minor offenses, a few because of serious crimes. Those sent to America had to serve masters in the colonies for a term of years, usually seven, and were then given their liberty. Some fifty thousand of them were brought to the American colonies. Negro slaves. Probably one half of all immigrants to the English colonies in America were either indentured servants or Negro slaves. Although Negro slaves were first brought here in 1619, they were less numerous than white indentured servants until after 1700. The colonists from Maryland southward gradually came to depend upon slave labor, especially on the large farms or plantations, as they came to be called. Throughout the 1700's the importation of slaves increased rapidly. Negro slavery existed in all of the colonies, but three fourths of the slaves were in Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia. Cheap Negro labor drove white labor from the plantations. As indentured servants gained their freedom, and as new immigrants arrived, they avoided the plantation regions. They settled in the northern colonies, or else pushed beyond the plantation area in the South, to make homes on the frontier. The expansion of the frontier. The coastal plain of eastern North America offered colonists wonderful natural riches. Here were fine harbors, navigable rivers, fertile valleys, abundant wild game, untouched forests, and unexcelled fisheries. By the time the American Revolution began, two and three fourths million people occupied the land east of the Appalachian Mountains, where now some sixty million live. Most of the settlers still lived close to the great bays and navigable streams. In only a few places had settlers moved beyond the first highlands. Yet free land and plentiful wild game beckoned the adventurous westward. They were pushing the frontier back. The westward movement from the Atlantic coast, across the Alleghenies, the Mississippi Valley, the Great Plains, the Rockies, to the Pacific, is the central theme of American history — "the most American thing in all America." To identify: Lord Baltimore, Huguenots, London Company, James Oglethorpe, William Penn, Scotch-Irish. To explain or define: charter, indenture, indentured servant, mission station, plantation, proprietor, royal colony, trading post. THE MASSACRE AT JAMESTOWN, from a Dutch hook of1634. In 1622 Indians killed three hundred fifty' settlers in an attempt to drh'e out the white men. (Courtesy of New York Public Library) A DEBTORS' PRISON IN ENGLAND, sketched by Hogarth, the famous artist. James Oglethoipe founded the colony of Georgia as a refuge for debtors. (Courtesy of New York Public Library) The American Story WEAVING ROOM in Salters factory'. The designs for these machines were drawn from memory by Samuel Slater, an English immigrant. (Bettraann Archive) machinery did not stop manufacture at home and in small shops using hand methods. In 1820 two thirds of all the cloth produced in the United States was still made in the home. As late as the middle of the century a great deal of manufacturing was still carried on by hand methods. Why the factory system developed in the North. The factory system grew much faster in the North than in the other sections. Perhaps the most important reason was that Northerners had money to invest in factories — money they had made in commerce and banking. Other advantages of the North were abundant water power, a population with much mechanical and business ability, and a labor supply of farm girls and of immigrants from Europe. The first center of the factory system was New England, especially Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. From this section the system spread to eastern New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. Later it developed in Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. The growth of immigration. The early factory owners found their labor supply on near-by farms. The fanners' daughters were glad of a chance to earn money, and they were used to long hours and hard work. As more factories opened, the supply of American-born Nationalism and Sectionalism i95 SHOEMAKER'S SHOP ABOUT 1830. At this period all shoe manufacturing was carried on by hand in little shops like this one. (Courtesy of Essex Institute, Salem) women and children was not enough. Factory owners then began to encourage immigration from Europe. From 1790 to 1825 the number of immigrants was only about eight thousand a year. These easily found work. By 1830 the number of immigrants reached fifty thousand a year, and by 1840, one hundred thousand. Then famine in Ireland and a revolution in Germany sent a flood of newcomers to our shores. By 1850 three hundred thousand foreigners were coming each year. Most of them entered Northern ports and stayed in the North. They were usually uneducated and very poor. They had spent everything they had to get here, and they had to take any job they could find, regardless of poor wages and working conditions. New social problems due to industrialization. The factory system brought a number of new social problems. 1. The workman's loss of independence. As factories gradually took the place of small shops, the life of the workman was changed in many ways. The skills he had learned through years of experience were not needed in the factory; even a child could soon learn to run most machines. The workman could no longer look forward to being his own boss; he could not start a factory of his own, for machinery The American Story FIRST I IM il I MILLS IN I MF UNITED S I AXES The earliest textile mills in the United States were built in New England. The industry soon spread to near-by states. cost too much. He was dependent for a living on the man or the company owning the factory. The native-born American hated the thought of working for somebody else. He would prefer to go to the frontier and farm. Many did go west rather than work in a factory. Those who took factory jobs did not expect to stay in the factory long. But many factory workers were unable in a whole lifetime to save enough money to go west with their families and start a fann. 2. Long horns. The hours of work in factories and shops followed the custom of the fann, where everyone labored from sunrise to sunset. The usual workday in a New England mill began at five o'clock in the morning if light pennitted. A half hour was allowed for breakfast at eight and for lunch at noon. The day ended when it became too dark to see. Such hours taxed the strength of women and children to the limit. Nationalism and Sectionalism 3. Low wages. Skilled men sometimes got as much as $2.00 a day, but 85 cents to $1.00 was far more common. Women received from $1.50 to $3.00 a week. Children got from 50 cents to $2.00 a week. This wage scale did not change much until after the War between North and South. The single man, who could get a week's board, room, and washing for $2.50, might save money to buy a farm in the West. The man with a family of children found it very hard to make ends meet, even though his wife and some of the children were wage earners. 4. Child labor. Since a man could not support a family on his wages, his wife and children went to work too. Women and children had always worked, and the public did not realize that tending a machine all day in a factory was more tiring and unhealthful than working in the house and on the farm. In one Rhode Island mill in 1801 an observer tells us that he found a hundred girls from six to twelve years of age. They earned from 12 to 25 cents a day and had a "pale, dejected look." At that time most factory workers were children. Nothing much was done about the child- labor problem until late in the century. 5. Industrial accidents. The factory, or industrial, system, as it came to be called, brought new dangers to the worker. Machines then did not have "foolproof' safety devices; in fact they were built w without much thought of safety. Artificial lighting was hardly ever used in factories and when used was very poor. Accidents were frequent, particularly to children, who are naturally careless. Some employers gave money to their injured workers, but others did not. Under the common law (see page 49) the employer did not have to pay an injured worker if the worker or any of his fellows was in any way to blame for the accident. 6. Unhealthy living and working conditions. The factory system led to an increase in sickness. Sanitary arrangements were crude, and large numbers of workers in one building favored the spread of infections. Besides, the manufacturing process often created dust, steam, or fumes, causing a high rate of tuberculosis among factory workers. Other health hazards were due to the rapid growth of the factory towns. Few of them had water or sewer systems. Most factory workers crowded into cheap, unhealthy tenements. Poor housing, poor food, and long hours of work under unsatisfactory conditions resulted in a high sickness and death rate, and at this period the city was much less healthful than the country. IMMIGRANTS arriving in the United States from Europe. American factory' owners and mineowners were eager for additional workers; so the immigrants usually had no difficulty in finding jobs. (Drawn by A. Berghaus for Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper, November 23, 1878. Culver Service) CHILD WORKERS in a factory about 1840. At this period, and for many' years cfterward, most factories hired young children. Children worked the same long hours as adults and received very small wages. (From a contemporary woodcut. Bettmann Archive) Nationalism and Sectionalism 7. The labor movement develops. Until 1825 it was a crime in England for workers to organize and strike for higher wages. American judges followed the English practice and put many workers in jail for attempting to strike. There were a few workmen's societies in America, but they were powerless. After 1815 the labor movement finally got a start. Many trade unions were organized. In 1828 the trade unions of Philadelphia combined in a federation. Similar federations were soon formed in other cities. By 1834 a national federation of trade unions was established. Then, as now, labor unions struggled to improve wages, hours, and working conditions. In these matters they at first had little success. Strikes usually failed, for there were many immigrants who could fill the strikers' jobs. Besides, public opinion did nor approve of strikes and in most cases took the side of the employer. Since strikes rarely succeeded, the labor organizations of this period put most of their efforts into getting better laws. Workingmen win the right to vote. Most of the new Western states permitted all white men to vote. The older stares limited the vote to property owners. This caused such discontent among wage earners that in the 1820's and 1830's all the states except Rhode Island decided to let any white man vote, whether or not he owned property. From now on political parties had to pay more attention to the needs of the working class. The winning of the right of all men to vote was a big forward step for American labor. Labor organizations now worked to elect men friendly to labor. In 1828, for example, they joined with the farmers to elect Andrew Jackson President. They also asked for laws to improve the position of working men and women and to give them greater opportunity. They called for free public schools, equal rights for women, free homesteads for Western settlers, abolition of imprisonment for debt, abolition of slavery, laws establishing a ten-hour day, and other reforms. Labor wins some of its demands. The labor movement won some solid gains. The ten-hour day was established in several of the skilled trades. Cities and states adopted the ten-hour day for government workers, and in 1840 President Van Buren declared ten hours to be a legal workday on government construction jobs. In 1843 Massachusetts prohibited the employment of children under twelve for more than ten hours a day. The effort to obtain free public schools was successful. (See pages 225-226.) So was the effort to end compulsory militia service. The 2i 6 The American Story he declared the Bank unconstitutional and dangerous to liberty. He was not blind to the need for a central bank, for he asked Congress to establish a new bank owned and controlled by the government. However, Congress did not think well of the idea. In 1832 the officers of the Bank asked Congress to renew the charter. It was the year of the presidential election, and they thought the President would not veto a bank bill for fear of angering the Northeastern commercial states, whose votes he needed for re-election. They did not understand Jackson. A bill to recharter the Bank passed both houses of Congress. The President vetoed it in a ringing message, declaring that the Bank was meddling in politics. The election of1832. The presidential campaign was fought on the question of rechartering the Bank. Henry Clay, nominated by the National Republicans, supported the Bank. Jackson, renominated by the Democrats, thundered against the Bank and the "money power." Jackson won a sweeping victory. Jackson removes deposits from the Bank. The Bank had fought Jackson's reelection, and he took revenge. Although its charter would not run out until 1836, he ordered the gradual removal of government money. The Bank was crippled. Jackson's victory over it seemed to most people another proof that "Old Hickory" was on the side of the common man and against wealth and privilege. A period of speculation. The early and middle 1830's were years of unusual prosperity. Many people were moving west. Immigrants by the hundreds of thousands came here from Europe. The factory system grew rapidly. In the East railroad building went forward. Roads and canals were being built in all parts of the country. Sales of government land increased by leaps and bounds, and by 1836 a large surplus was in the treasury. Prices were going up. This led many people to buy land as a speculation (that is, in the hope of selling it soon at a higher price). Most of the speculators borrowed money to pay for their purchases. The state-chartered banks did nothing to discourage speculation and too much borrowing. Instead they encouraged both by issuing more and more paper money. Prices soared still higher. Becoming alarmed, Jackson tried to check the speculation in land and the issue of bank notes. He instructed the government land agents to take nothing but gold and silver in payment for public lands. Land sales fell off at once. The bright bubble of speculation was about to burst. The election of Van Buren, 1836. Jackson was in his seventieth A. JACKSON, SHIPMASTER. This cartoon shows Jackson with a crown on his head and a whip in his hand. IJis friend Van Buren, just behind him, says "Don't give up the ship. General, or I shall not succeed you. " (Courtesy of Library of Congress) HARD TIMES IN 1837. One cause of this panic, which lasted until 1843, was gambling in land. The panic caused great suffering to wage earners and to farmers in the South and West. The cartoonist shows idle workmen and miserable women and children. In the background people are trying to get their money from a closed bank (Courtesy of Library of Congress) The American Story Zj 6 Questions for Understanding the Text i. (a) How large a farm in the South was considered a plantation? (b) What was usually raised on plantations? (c) What was considered the best size for a cotton plantation? (cl) Why was the average slave more valuable on a plantation than anywhere else? z. Why did the royal governors veto every bill passed by the colonial assemblies which interfered with the importation of slaves? 3. Why did Congress wait until 1808 to forbid the importation of slaves? 4. (a) How did leading Southerners feel about slavery in the early years of the Republic? (b) Why were not more slaves set free during this period? (c) What was the colonization experiment? (d) Why did it fail? 5. (a) What invention caused the planters to lose interest in freeing the slaves? (b) Explain the need for such a machine. (c) How did it change the South? 6. (a) Name the five states of the lower or deep South, (b) How did these states differ from other Southern states in regard to (1) the principal crop, (2) the proportion of slaves in the population, (3) the prices paid for slaves? (c) What proportion of all the slaves in the United States lived in these five states? (d) Would you expect the people of the lower or the upper South to defend slavery more vigorously? Why? 7. How did Southern men of the planting class compare with Northern men of equal wealth, as to (1) training for military duty, (2) interest in government, (3) interest in business? 8. (a) How did slaves obtain spending money? (b) Why did slaveowners look carefully after the health of their Negroes? (c) Can you see any reason why some planters thought it paid them to have a central kitchen in which cooks prepared food for all the Negroes? 9. (a) How did planters defend the slave system? (b) Compare the condition of the average Northern wage earner and that of the average slave. 10. (a) By 1850 what proportion of Southern families owned slaves? (b) How did the average Southerner who had no slaves feel about the slave system? 11. (a) Where in the South did most of the small white farmers live? (b) Why did they not raise cotton? (c) Why did the small farmer dream of owning many slaves? 12. What was meant by the phrase, the South's "peculiar institution"? by the North grew faster than the South. Since colonial times commerce and manufacturing had been more important in the North than in the South. This was due partly to geographic conditions. Most of the Northeast was poorly suited to crop growing, and its people had to find other ways of malting a living. They learned to build and sail ships, to trade, and to manufacture. They made money and year by year expanded their enterprises. The North had another advantage — a supply of free skilled labor. More and more European immigrants were coming to the United States, and nearly all of them settled in the North. Some of them were highly skilled. Because they were free and not slaves, they cost their employers nothing but their wages. Many a small businessman who could not possibly have bought a slave could afford to hire a free laborer. While the North grew rapidly in population and wealth, the South lagged behind. One reason for this was the differences in the labor supply of the two sections. The South could not attract white laborers because of its cheap black labor. It lacked money to start industries because nearly all its wealth was in slaves. Southerners realized that their section was less prosperous than the North. For this many of them blamed the North. The following paragraph, written by an Alabama newspaperman in 1851, shows the way Southerners often felt about Northern wealth and Northern leadership: At present, the North fattens and grows rich upon the South. . . . Our slaves are clothed with Northern manufactured goods, have Northern hats and shoes, work with Northern hoes . . . are working for Northern more than Southern profit. The slaveholder dresses in Northern goods, rides in a Northern saddle . . . patronizes Northern newspapers, drinks Northern liquors, reads Northern books. . . . The American Story time the South was producing one fifth of the nation's pig iron. The South also had the largest tobacco factory in the world at Durham, North Carolina. In the 1890's hundreds of new textile and knitting mills were built. Most Southerners still lived by fanning, but the South was becoming an important manufacturing region. Industrial expansion in the North. Instead of ruin the War between North and South brought prosperity to the North. Manufacturing, transportation, and commerce expanded as never before. The use of machinery increased greatly. Almost overnight little businesses grew into big ones. Before the war ended, our modem industrial system had taken shape. Perhaps the greatest effects of the war were seen in the field of transportation. The movement of hundreds of thousands of troops and the supplies they needed forced rapid improvements in railroading. Small lines were joined to large ones. Connecting links, double tracks, and bridges were built. War needs led Congress in 1862 to vote federal aid for building a transcontinental railroad; however, construction had barely begun when the war ended. The closing of the Mississippi at the start of the war meant that the products of Western farms had to go east instead of south and had to move by railroad instead of by river boat. Chicago suddenly became the great Western shipping center. The supplying of a great army forced many industries to expand. To make cloth for uniforms, scores of new woolen mills were built. The manufacture of ready-to- wear clothing grew into a huge business during the war — a growth made possible by the sewing machine, invented in 1846. Army orders for millions of shoes caused the shoe business to leave the one-man shop for the factory. Great packing houses were built to fill army orders for meat, with the result that after the war thousands of local slaughterhouses had to close. In spite of fewer men on the farms, farm production increased, for the farmers turned to the use of the reaper and the mowing machine. The farm machinery industry grew enormously but could not keep up with the demand. The need for iron and steel to make machinery, cannon, rails, locomotives, and steamships led to the opening of scores of iron and steel mills. The steel manufacturing district around Pittsburgh got its start during the war. War also helped the mining industry. The railroads and the war industries demanded large quantities of coal, iron, and copper. Oil was needed for lubrication and for lighting. The first oil well had been The Emergence of Modern America (1865-1900) 343 A RAILROAD STATION AND TRAIN in the 1860's. The scene is Stratford Connecticut. Note the big smokestack on the wood-burning locomoth'e. (From the painting by Edward L. Henry, 1867. Courtesy of Metropolitan Museum of Art) sunk in 1859 at Titusville, Pennsylvania. Before the war's end western Pennsylvania was dotted with hundreds of derricks, and oil refining was becoming an important business. Expansion continues after the war. For several years after die war, industry continued its rapid growth. Thousands of businessmen who had made fortunes from anny contracts invested their wealth in new factories. Hundreds of thousands of immigrants poured into the country each year, supplying plenty of workers, who also became customers for manufactured products. The West was filling up, creating a demand for fann machinery, manufactures of all kinds, and more railroads. The five years after Appomattox saw more rails laid, more lumber sawed, more houses built, more coal, iron, silver, and copper mined, more flour milled, and more cotton cloth woven than any previous five years in the nation's history. European critics thought that the return of a million Union soldiers to civilian life in 1865 would cause hard times. They were mistaken. The Union soldiers had little trouble finding jobs. Many went into the factories, oil fields, and mines, or into railroading. Others claimed a free homestead in the West and settled down to fann. The triumph of industrialism. When it came to power in 1861, the 358 The American Story To explain or define: absentee ownership, arc light, capital, consolidation of business, corporation, dynamo, franchise, holding company, monopoly, rebate, stock dividend, trust. Subjects for Talks or Written Reports I. The Bessemer process for making steel and the great changes it brought about in modem living. 2. The early years of the electric industry. 3. The principal inventions of Thomas Edison. 4. The life of Cornelius Vanderbilt, John D. Rockefeller, Andrew Carnegie, or Cyrus McCormick. 5. Advantages and disadvantages of giving inventors complete control of their inventions for a long period of years. 6. How a corporation is formed and carried on. Questions for Understanding the Text 1. What remarkable changes took place in the United States in the period 1850 to 1890? 2. (a) Where did the money come from which made possible the rapid growth of industry after the War between North and South? (b) Where did the laborers come from? 3. How did the large population of the United States and the absence of tariff barriers between the states help the growth of our industries? 4. Name several inventions which assisted the growth of nationwide businesses. 5. Name an invention which brought great changes in the food industry. Name some of these changes. 6. What invention made possible the wide use of electricity? 7. (a) What did Vanderbilt do to improve railroading in the Northeast? (b) What was his attitude toward the public? Toward government officials? 8. Name ways in which our government has encouraged private business. 9. (a) What is a franchise? (b) Why is it valuable? (c) What kinds of companies need franchises? 10. (a) What is meant by consolidation of business? (b) When did it begin? (c) What are the reasons for consolidation of business? 11. State the chief differences between a partnership and a corporation. 12. Tell the story of the oil trust. 13. How did secret rebates given to Rockefeller force his competitors to sell out to him? 14. Tell the story of how Andrew Carnegie became one of the leaders in the steel industry. 15. (a) How did Carnegie in 1900 frighten his competitors into buying him out? (b) What large company was then formed? (c) What was remarkable about it? 16. What is meant by absentee ownership? Is it better or worse for a community than local ownership of business? 17. (a) Name the good effects resulting from the consolidation of business, (b) Name the evil effects which sometimes follow. 18. (a) What groups protested the growth of the trusts? (b) Why did the Sherman Antitrust Act fail to prevent the growth of great combinations? ■ the cities got their people, 'flic rapid growth of manufacturing and trade led to a rapid growth of cities. In i860 only one American in six lived in a place having 10,000 or more people, but by 1900 one in three did so. The cities drew many of their people from the farms. It became the custom for most of the fanners' sons and daughters to go to the city to earn their living. If a fanner had poor land, all his boys and girls were likely to leave home for the city. In this period thousands of fanns in the Northeast were given up. Soon nothing remained of them but cellar holes surrounded by clumps of lilac and syringa, tumble-down buildings, scrubby orchards, and pastures growing up into forest. In hilly parts of New England whole villages were gradually abandoned. The cities also attracted millions of immigrants from Europe. Between i860 and 1900 over fourteen million foreigners came to the United States, most of them settling in factory and mining towns in the Northeast. Until about 1880 the great bulk of the immigrants came from northwestern Europe, mainly from the British Isles and Germany. These immigrants were much like the people already living here and quickly fitted into our ways. After 1880 we began to receive many immigrants from eastern and southern Europe, especially from Italy, Hungary, and Russia. These people took much longer to learn our language and our customs. By 1890 three fourths of the immigrants entering the United States were from eastern and southern Europe. Soon our big seaport cities had whole sections known by such names as "Little Italy," "Little Hungary," or "Little Bohemia," where the newcomers settled to be near their own countrymen. IMPROVEMENTS HELP CITIES GROW The modem city was made possible by new methods of communication, transportation, sanitation, lighting, and fire protection. Improvements in communication. New methods of communication helped businessmen to reach more customers. As businesses grew bigger, the cities grew bigger also. The American Story CHINESE WORKERS in a California cigar factory'. In the 1860's and 1870's thousands of Chinese immigrants were brought to this country by corporations seeking cheap labor. In some occupations on the Pacific coast white workers were entirely replaced by Chinese. The labor unions demanded that the Chinese be kept out of the United States. (Courtesy of Bancroft Library) industry. By 1900 twelve states limited the number of hours per day or per week that women might be employed. Four states prohibited the employment of women at night. Twenty states prohibited the employment of young children at night, although some of the laws now seem very timid. For instance, one state went no further than forbidding the employment at night of girls under twelve years of age. The real evil of child labor had scarcely been touched, for in 1900 one in every five children between the ages of ten and fifteen was a wage earner. Labor demands curbs on immigration. By 1880 nearly a third of a million immigrants came here every year. Within a few years the figure rose to nearly a million. The United States, it was thought, had room for all who wished to come. Steamship companies sent agents all over Europe to persuade people to come to America. Western railroad companies, with land to sell, did the same thing. Large corporations made contracts with laborers who wished to come to America. The corporation paid the laborer's fare, and the laborer promised to work for the corporation for a certain period of time. Unskilled Chinese laborers by the tens of thousands were brought in under contract to build railroads in the West. The Emergence of Modern America (1865-1900) 379 Labor leaders saw that their efforts to raise wages and improve working conditions would not get far so long as the country was flooded with poor immigrants eager to take any job. The labor unions demanded that the Chinese be shut out, and in 1882 Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act.* Next labor unions called on Congress to stop the practice of bringing in laborers under contract. Congress did so in 1885. Still the flood of immigrants increased. Labor then asked that immigrants unable to read and write be shut out. Many employers were against any such restriction. Some liberals opposed it because they wanted America to continue to be a refuge for the ill- treated. Labor did not have its way until 1917, when Congress passed a law requiring immigrants to be able to read or write in some language. Labor conditions in 1900. At the turn of the century wages and hours were little better than in 1865. According to the census of 1900 two thirds of the male workers received less than f 12.50 a week. Only the most highly skilled workers earned as much as $ 18.00 a week. Of course prices were much lower than they are now. Beef sold for 17 cents a pound, pork for 14 cents, eggs for 21 cents a dozen. A good pair of shoes cost $2.00, and a good suit cost $20.00. Low as these prices seem, most American workers found that their wages would barely support even a small family. Since the War between North and South the wealth of the nation had increased wonderfully. Yet it was concentrated in a small number of hands. By 1900, 1 per cent of the people owned more than the other 99 per cent put together. However, a large part of the wealth owned by the fortunate 1 per cent was invested in factories, machinery, mines, railroads, steamboats, and other business property. This investment made mass production possible. It would gradually bring about shorter hours of labor and enable the people to enjoy more comforts. To identify: John P. Altgeld, Anti-Injunction Act, Samuel Gompers, Knights of Labor, Terence V. Powderly. To explain or define: arbitration, black list, contempt of court, co-operative business, craft union, injunction, strikebreaker, sweatshop, sympathetic strike. * This Act was repealed in 1943. Now a small number of Chinese may come here every year. The American Story 5 3° Tenvears end Millions of Immigrants 3 In 1921 Congress limited the number of immigrants to be admitted annually from any one country. The Immigration Act of1924 earned this policy further by reducing the total number of immigrants to be admitted to 164,667. In 1927 this number was set at 150,000. After 1930 the Immigration Sen'ice let in very few immigrants. ods of change, were thought to be dangerous radicals. Progressives and pacifists were looked on with suspicion and sometimes had difficulty in securing a public hall for their meetings. Most of the states passed laws intended to force people to be loyal to the American political and economic system. In some states teachers were to take an oath to uphold American institutions. A new Ku Klux Klan sprang up to fight so-called "un-American" ideas. It was directed mainly against Catholics, Jews, foreigners, and Negroes. Adopting the disguise and the methods of the Klan of Reconstruction days (see pages 331 - 332), it spread terror over a large part of America. Where the Klan was strong, newspapers and politicians feared to lift their voices against it, and business and professional men had to join or lose their customers and clients. At its peak in 1925 the Klan had over five million members. In 1928 it helped defeat the Democratic candidate for President, Alfred E. Smith, mainly because he was a Catholic. The Klan expressed a kind of national feeling ill- suited to a land of liberty. The "one hundred per cent Americans" who led it cared nothing for our great traditions of freedom and jus- Domestic Affairs (1920-1940) 531 tice for all. Fortunately, the Klan lost much of its influence by the end of the twenties. A period of lawlessness. In 1919 the Eighteenth, or Prohibition, Amendment was added to the Constitution. In spite of the fact that the Amendment was approved by forty-six of the forty-eight states, and probably at least two thirds of the people wanted it to succeed, prohibition was a failure. Those who wanted liquor were determined to have it, even at a very high price. The profits from selling liquor illegally were so great that sellers were willing to pay large bribes to the officers responsible for enforcing the law. Almost every city of any size had "speakeasies" and numerous bootleggers. Some of the liquor was brought in by smugglers, or rumrunners; some of it was made illegally within our borders. Much of this lawless business was in the hands of powerful and well-organized gangs of criminals. Often one gang stole liquor from another gang, this practice being known as "hijacking." Gangsters sometimes used the money they made in the liquor business to branch out into other kinds of crime, particularly kidnaping and racketeering. A "racket" usually consisted of forcing businessmen to pay the gang for so-called "protection." In the dry-cleaning business, for example, it was necessary to buy "protection" to keep the gangsters from secretly placing acids in the cleaning fluids. Gradually most of the friends of prohibition became discouraged. They began to think that perhaps it would be best to return the control of the liquor business to the states and to try, by education of the young, to solve the drink problem. By 1932 the Democratic party dared to take a firm stand in favor of repeal, and a year later repeal was voted. Business is given a free rein. For twelve years, 1921 to 19 3 3, the government was in the hands of conservative, or "Old Guard," Republicans. Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover, who occupied the White House in turn, believed that "the business of the United States is business." They wished to free private enterprise from government control and also to assist it in every possible way. They neither enforced the antitrust laws nor did anything else to limit the growth of big business. Congress was equally friendly to big business. It voted large sums of money, or subsidies, to aviation companies and shipowners. It helped nationwide advertising by keeping the postage rate for magazines below the cost of the service. In 1922 it raised the tariff to the 586 The American Story two purposes: (1) to end the naval armaments race, and (2) to find a way to keep peace in the Far East. (See pages 561-562.) The Conference also produced the Four-Power Treaty and the Nine-Power Treaty. The alliance between Great Britain and Japan was replaced by the Four- Power Treaty. This bound Japan, Britain, France, and the United States to respect one another's possessions in the Pacific and to consult together if these possessions were threatened by any other power. In the Nine-Power Treaty the same four powers and five others (Belgium, Holland, Portugal, Italy, and China) agreed not to interfere with China's independence and to maintain the Open Door in China. The signers did not agree to defend China's independence by force; they merely agreed not to attack it. China's request that the powers give up extraterritoriality and other special privileges within her borders was not granted. Exclusion of Japanese immigrants creates new ill will. The Washington Conference resulted in somewhat better feeling between the United States and Japan. The naval race was stopped. The United States agreed that Japan should be the strongest naval power in the Far East. (See page 562.) Japan promised to uphold the Open Door. Some two years later, when Tokyo was destroyed by an earthquake, Americans quickly raised a large relief fund. For a little while there was real friendliness between the two nations. However, new friction was soon to develop over the immigration question. Following the Russo-Japanese War, thousands of Japanese settled in California. The Californians demanded that Japanese immigrants be excluded. (Chinese laborers had been excluded since 1882.) Not wishing to hurt the pride of a sensitive nation, President Theodore Roosevelt did not want Congress to pass an act to prevent Japanese immigrants from entering the United States. Instead, he got the Japanese government in 1908 to make a "gentlemen's agreement" not to give passports to laborers wishing to come to the mainland of the United States. Japan observed the agreement faithfully. Yet when the Immigration Act of 1924 was passed, Congress, against the advice of President Coolidge and Secretary of State Hughes, insisted on excluding all members of the Mongolian race, Japanese as well as Chinese. The proud Japanese people regarded this as an insult. They thought Congress should have given Japan an immigration quota, as was done for other nations. Japan's quota would have been only a hundred immigrants a year. By shutting them out completely, "C aroused the lasting resentment of the Japanese people. The End of Isolationism Growth of Chinese nationalism. While American-Japanese relations were growing cooler, American sympathy for China continued to increase. The republican movement in China, which began about the turn of the century, pleased Americans. They were pleased, too, by the growth of national spirit in China. Hundreds of Chinese students after 1900 went abroad each year to study. Thousands more went to missionary colleges in China, where they were taught by European and American instructors. These students came to realize that if China was to take its place in the world, it must adopt Western science and industrial methods, and must develop a strong and democratic government. They wanted to make China strong and free. This aim was also held by many Chinese businessmen in the port cities, who had been influenced by Western ideas. They joined with the educated youth of China to found the National People's party. (The Chinese name is Kuomintang fgwo1 min tang].) Its aims were nationalism, democracy, and livelihood (a living for the people). Its leader, Dr. Sun Yat-sen, hoped to free his people from the injustices they suffered from their own rulers and at the hands of foreign nations. The first revolution took place in 1911. It drove out the Manchus (the family which had ruled for three hundred years) and set up the republic of China. But the people were not yet ready for self-government, and the feeling of national unity was still very weak. For the next fifteen years the country was in the grip of Chinese war lords, who set up their own governments in the provinces and defied the central government. Foreign powers supplied anns to the war lords in return for special privileges. After World War I the National People's party appealed to die United States, Great Britain, Japan, and other powers for help, but got none. Finally, they turned to Soviet Russia, which had given up the special rights and privileges obtained by imperialist Russia. With the help of advisers from Moscow, Sun Yat-sen reorganized the People's party and began to build an anny. Many Russians migrated to China and carried on Communist propaganda. After Sun Yat-sen's death in 1925, the leader of the anny, Chiang Kai-shek (Che ang1 KT shek1), became the head of the People's party. He led China's second revolution, 1926- 28, and founded the Nationalist Government of China. The Manchurian crisis, 1931. Manchuria was a valuable Chinese province north of China proper. The great bulk of the population was Chinese, but most of the business and industry of the province be- 