EXPLORINGCRICANHISTORYGLOBE BOOK COMPANYJOHN R. O'CONNORB.A., St. Francis College; M.A., University of Pittsburgh. Mr. O'Connor taught socialstudies for many years before becoming a principal in the New York City school system. Heis widely known for his lectures and articles on reading skills in the social studies. Inaddition to this book, Mr. O'Connor has coauthored other Globe textbooks: ExploringWorld History, Exploring the Urban World, Exploring American Citizenship, and Unlocking SocialStudies Skills. He has edited Globe's Exploring a Changing World and Exploring theNon-Western World.Acknowledgements of quoted matter begin on page 697. Acknowledgements ofillustrations begin on page 698.Photo Editor: Joan ScafarelloGraphs on page 404 and Diagrams on pages 75, 380, and 428 by Mark Stein StudiosThe reading on page 308 is reprinted with permission of Charles Scribner's Sons, an imprintof Macmillan Publishing Company, from John Marsh, Pioneer, by George D. Lyman.Copyright 1930 Charles Scribner Sons; Copyright renewed C 1958 Dorothy Van SicklerLyman.Maps: General Cartography, Inc.Patricia A. Rodriguez, M.A.Cover pictures? Left, Astronaut Bruce McCandless II in space (NASA photo), right,Hernando de Soto at Tampa Bay, Florida, in 1539 (The Granger Collection); bottom,Lewis and Clark, with Sequoyah and York at Three Forks, Montana (illustration courtesyMontana Historical Society).ISBN: 1-55675-531-7Copyright © 1991 by Globe Book Company, Inc., 190 Sylvan Avenue, Englewood Cliffs, NJ 07632. All rightsreserved. No part of this book may be kept in an information storage or retrieval system, transmitted or reproduced inany form or by any means without the prior written permission of the publisher. Published simultaneously in Canada byGlobe/Modern Curriculum Press.Printed in the United States of America1234567890GLOBE BOOK COMPANYA Division of Simon & SchusterEnglewood Cliffs, New JerseyiiCONTENTSUNITTHE EARLY PEOPLE OF THE AMERICAS2Points of View Two Attitudes Toward the Land4Chapter 1The First People of the Americas6Chapter 2 Native Americans of the North and the Pacific Coast Region12America's People Hawaiians14Chapter 3 Native Americans of the Mid-Continent18Linking Geography and History The Geography of Mesa Verde National Park20Chapter 4 Native Americans of the Eastern Woodlands24Chapter 5 Native Americans of Latin America30Unit Review36UNIT 2EUROPEANS EXPLORE THE AMERICAS38Points of View A New World Appears40Chapter 1The Earliest Explorations42Chapter 2 Columbus Sails West48Linking Geography and History The Atlantic Basin50Chapter 3Explorers Sail the World54Chapter 4Spain Conquers an Empire60Chapter 5Spanish Explorers Move North66Chapter 6 Spanish Settlers Move North72America's People Spaniards74Chapter 7 The French Explore North America78Chapter 8 England Founds a Colony84Unit Review90xUNIT 3COLONIES IN THE AMERICAS PROSPER AND GROW92Points of View Toleration-For and Against94Chapter 1Europeans Settle in New England96Chapter 2 Champions of Religious Freedom102Chapter 3 Europeans Settle in the Middle Colonies108America's People Dutch and Swedes110Chapter 4 Europeans Settle in the Southern Colonies114Linking Geography and History The Fall Line in Colonial America116Unit Review120UNIT 4LIFE IN COLONIAL AMERICA122Points of View The American Colonies and Their Future124Chapter 1Farming in the Colonies126Chapter 2 Colonial Trade and Shipping132America's People Africans134Chapter 3 Religion and Education in the Colonies138Chapter 4Government in the Colonies144Chapter 5 Colonial Life in New France150Chapter 6Life in New Spain156Chapter 7 Life on the Frontier162Linking Geography and History The Appalachian Mountains164Unit Review168UNIT 5AMERICA WINS IDEPENDENCE170Points of View Taxation Without Representation172Chapter 1The French and British Fight174Chapter 2Britain Tightens Its Grip180Chapter 3The Colonies Resist Taxation Without Representation186Chapter 4 "Give Me Liberty or Give Me Death'192Chapter 5 Independence Is Declared198The Declaration of Independence204Chapter 6 The New Nation Wins Its Independence208Linking Geography and History The Geography of the Revolutionary War210Chapter 7 The Revolutionary War Changes American Life214America's People European Army Officers216Unit Review220xiUNIT 6ANEW GOVERNMENT, A GROWING NATION222Points of View Deciding on a New Form of Government224Chapter IThe New Nation Stumbles226Chapter 2Making the Constitution232Chapter 3 A Federal Government Is Formed238The Constitution of the United States.244Chapter 4 Settling Western Lands to the Mississippi274Linking Geography and History Logic on the Land276Chapter 5 Adding the Louisiana Territory280America's People The French282Chapter 6 America vs. Britain: The War of 1812286Chapter 7 A New Nationalism Takes Shape292Chapter 8 The Influence of the West298Unit Review303UNIT 7AMERICANS MOVE WESTWARD306Points of View Settlers and Native Americans308Chapter 1Pioneer Trails to the West310Chapter 2 The Mormons Settle Utah's Salt Lake Basin316Chapter 3The Spanish Settle California322Chapter 4 The War Between the United States and Mexico328Chapter 5 California Becomes a State334America's People The Chinese336Chapter 6 Settlers Move into the Great Plains340Linking Geography and History Settling the Great Plains342Chapter 7 The Decline of Native Americans on the Great Plains.346Unit Review352UNIT 8SLAVERY TEARS THE NATION APART354Points of View Slavery Is Debated356Chapter 1 Slavery in the Colonies and the Young Nation358Linking Geography and History The Cotton Kingdom360Chapter 2 Southern Planters, Farmers, and African American Slaves364Chapter 3 African American Slaves Resist Slavery370Chapter 4Factories Grow in the Northeast376xii

America's People The Irish378Chapter 5 Slavery Causes Bitter Feelings382Chapter 6 The North and South Grow Farther Apart388Unit Review394UNIT 9THE CIVIL WAR AND RECONSTRUCTON396Points of View Secession398Chapter 1The Civil War Begins400Chapter 2 The Early Years of the Civil War406Linking Geography and History Strategic Targets of the Civil War408Chapter 3 The North Wins the Civil War412America's People Germans414Chapter 4 Reconstruction418Chapter 5 From Slavery to Segregation424Unit Review430UNIT 10THE UNITED STATES BECOMES AN INDUSTRIALNATION432Points of View City Life in Industrial America434Chapter I The Growth of Industry to 1860436Chapter 2 An Industrial Nation442Linking Geography and History The Geography of Iron and Steel444Chapter 3 The Rise of Big Business448Chapter 4 Immigration Brings New Ways of Life to America454America's People Italians456Chapter 5 The Growth of Cities460Unit Review466UNIT 11REFORM MOVEMENTS468Points of View How to Deal with America's Problems470Chapter 1Unions Help Workers472Chapter 2 Farmers Face Hard Times478Linking History and Geography The Growth of Chicago480Chapter 3 Women Fight for Equal Rights484Chapter 4 Americans Improve Their Lives490Chapter 5 The Progressive Movement496America's People The Japanese498Unit Review502xiiiUNIT 12THE UNITED STATES AS A WORLD LEADER504Points of View American Expansion-For and Against506Chapter 1The Spanish-American War508Chapter 2 Relations with Latin America514America's People Puerto Ricans516Chapter 3 Opening the Pacific520Linking Geography and History The United States and the Pacific Ocean522Chapter 4 World War I526Chapter 5 America Goes to War532Unit Review538UNIT 13PEACE, DEPRESSION, AND ANOTHER WAR540Points of View Government and the Economy542Chapter 1America in the 1920s544Chapter 2 The Great Depression and the New Deal550Linking Geography and History The Dust Bowl552Chapter 3 World War II Begins556Chapter 4 The United States in World War II562Chapter 5 The World Returns to Peace568America's People Mexicans570Unit Review574UNIT 14THE UNITED STATES BECOMES A SUPERPOWER576Points of View The Cold War of Words578Chapter 1America in the Postwar World580Chapter 2The Cold War Begins586Chapter 3 United States Involvement in Asian Conflicts592America's People Koreans and the Vietnamese594Chapter 4 The United States and the Middle East598Linking Geography and History Oil in the Middle East600Chapter 5 America Works for Peace604Unit Review610xivUNIT 15AMERICANS STRENGTHEN THEIR NATION612Points of View Looking to Tomorrow614Chapter 1Equal Rights for African Americans616Chapter 2Opportunities for Women622America's People Cubans624Chapter 3 Opportunities for all Americans628Chapter 4A Changing America634Chapter 5 The United States: A Nation of Cities640Linking Geography and History The Los Angeles-Long Beach Metropolitan Area642Chapter 6 New Leaders for the Nation646Chapter 7Dealing with Other Nations652Chapter 8Science and Technology Transform America658Chapter 9Protecting the Environment664Unit Review670ATLAS672PRESIDENTS OF THE UNITED STATES CHART676GLOSSARY677INDEX690new taxes. The Puritans decided that they couldtans to Massachusetts Bay. By 1634, there werenever establish "heaven on earth" in England.

over 10,000 settlers. Nine years later, when the14. By 1630, the Puritans felt that Americamigration ended, the population of New En-was the place to set up their new community.gland included over 16,000 colonists.The Pilgrims already had proven that Europe-16. All along the Massachusetts coast, Puri-ans could live on the rocky soil of New England.tans established small towns such as Salem,Puritan leaders, like John Winthrop and JohnCharlestown, Boston, Concord and Sudbury,Cotton, wanted to set up a holy Christianamong others. Here people used the ideas ofcolony that lived by the teachings of Christ.God's law in every part of daily life. At theWinthrop called the settlement that the Puritanscenter of the towns stood Puritan meetingdreamed of "a city upon a hill."houses. These buildings were usually dark andunheated and furnished with hard benches. Atfirst these meeting houses served mainly asThe Massachusetts Bay Golony What steps didplaces of worship. In time, though, they alsothe Puritans take to build the Massachusettsbecame the gathering place for town meetingsBay Colony?where people talked about local problems.15. In 1630, the Great Migration from17. Puritans did not always agree aboutEngland to New England began. A migrationeverything, but in matters of religion they rarelyis a movement of people from one place todisagreed. Although fair-minded in other ways,another. Fifteen ships carried over 1,000 Puri-Puritan leaders did not welcome questionsabout their faith. People who questioned thereligion often had to leave the colony. TheV Rules for behavior were very strict in the coloniesof New England. People who broke the law couldvoyage to America had not changed Puritanbe put in the pillories as these people have or in abeliefs. As one leader put it, "We have onlydunking stool.changed our climate, not our minds." Why doyou think a group that left England to escapereligious persecution would not tolerate, orallow, dissenters?Outlook18. In the early 1600s, the Pilgrims andPuritans had started a new life in Massachusetts.Both groups had come to America in search ofreligious freedom. Other English settlers fol-lowed during the Great Migration of the 1630sand 1640s. Yet the Puritans and the Pilgrimsdid not welcome other religions in their colo-nies. Likewise, they did not believe that NativeAmericans had rights. What problems do youthink Puritan and Pilgrim attitudes mightcause? At first, only a select few could partici-pate in government, but other settlers de-manded a say in government. The leaders gavein. It was a first step toward democracy. Muchof what the Pilgrims and Puritans started inMassachusetts became the base for later devel-opments in government and individual rights.99-THE SWEDES AND THE DUTCHlogs were chosen to be about the same size.This made it easier to fill the cracks betweenThe first European child born in the Newthem with mud, clay or moss. The logs wereWorld may not have been an English girl but anotched at each end so that they would fitSwedish boy. When the Swedish Vikingstogether as tightly as possible. The log cabinsettled Vinland, they wrote about the birth of abecame very popular for many settlers. Today,child, Snorri, in the winter of A.D. 1003-1004.when people think of pioneer America, the logWhile historians may argue about this fact,cabin comes to mind.they do agree that the Swedes were earlyimmigrants to the thirteen colonies.Like the Swedes, the Dutch were amongthe earliest European settlers of the NewIn 1638, a group of 50 people left Sweden.World. Their homeland was The Netherlands,Sweden is located in northern Europe on aa small nation sandwiched between Germanypeninsula shared with Norway. They sailed outand Belgium and bordering the North Sea.of the Baltic and North seas to the AtlanticThe Dutch were a great sea trading people.Ocean and arrived in Delaware four monthsBy 1650 their ships supplied about half of thelater. They hoped to start a trading companyshipping trade in the world. In 1624, the Dutchand convert the "heathens" of America tosent the first settlers to Manhattan Island. TheChristianity.settlers, who were from the Netherlands,Sometime between 1634 and 1654, thestarted the colony of New Netherland in 1621.early Swedish settlers built the first log cabinsThey settled Fort Orange (Albany, New York)in America. Though the log cabins were notin 1624, and colonized New Amsterdam ineasy to build, they could be made with only a1625. Most of the early Dutch colonists werefew tools. They were also very strong. Thefur traders. Later settlements with small andlarge farms spread up the Hudson River andover Long Island.V Swedish settlers built the first log cabins in theThe Dutch established the first police forceNew World. The practical construction of the login America in 1658 with a total of eight men.cabin served as a model for the homes of manyfuture settlers.Easter eggs, Santa Claus, bowling, andwaffles are some of the traditions that theDutch brought to American life. Many of thestone houses and buildings built by the Dutchare still in use today.Now answer the following questions.1. Why has the log cabin introduced by theSwedes become a popular symbol inAmerica? What are some things inAmerican life that use the symbol of thelog cabin?2. How would you evaluate the contributionsof the Swedes or the Dutch to the UnitedStates? What impact do you think theircontributions made on the country?

THE CHINESEWhen the Gold Rush ended, many Chinesestayed on in California. They opened their ownThe Gold Rush brought gold seekers fromshops, restaurants, and other businesses tomany other countries to California, includingmeet the growing state's needs. OtherChina. The gold rich California that wasChinese worked in factories and on farms.advertised in the large cities of China seemedlike a dream. Many Chinese came toOne of the greatest achievements of theCalifornia to find their riches and return homeChinese in America was the work they didwealthy. Over 20,000 Chinese came toin building the transcontinental (trans-California in the first three years of the Goldkon-tuh-NEN-tuhl) railroad in the 1860s.Transcontinental means across a continent.Rush. While some became miners, otherstook whatever work they could find, mostly inThe Chinese worked on the Central Pacific,service work. Many washed clothes andthe western part of the transcontinentalcooked food in the mining camps.railroad, that crossed the Rocky Mountainregion. It took 10,000 workers to build theThe customs and culture of the ChineseCentral Pacific, and 9,000 of them werevere vastly different from those of theChinese. Many Chinese died performingAmericans. To protect themselves fromdangerous tasks that other workers wouldprejudiced Americans and preserve theirnot do.culture, most Chinese lived in separatecommunities called "Chinatowns, both in theIn the 30 years after the Gold Rush, overnining camps and in towns and cities.250,000 Chinese came to California. Whilemost stayed on in the land they helped buildinto a major state, the Chinese population/ The Chinese in the United States becamespread to other states. In 1882, however, asknown for the backbreaking work they didthe Chinese became stronger economically,helping to build the first transcontinental railroad.anti-Chinese feeling grew in the United States.Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Actthat prohibited Chinese from immigrating intothe United States. It was not until after WorldWar II, when China was an ally of the UnitedStates, that this law was repealed.Now answer the following questions.1. How long have the Chinese beenimmigrating to the United States?2. What contributions have the Chinesemade to life in the United States?the invention of the power loom changed theonly one or two tasks. Factory owners couldway cloth was made. Before, factory-made yarnhire less skilled workers at lower wages andhad to be woven on hand looms. These newproduce goods more cheaply than a skilledmachines made it possible to make cloth muchcraftmaker could. As a result, many craftworkersfaster and more cheaply.faced hard times when they had to competewith large factories.People in HistoryNorthern Industries How did the North come4. Samuel Slater The first person to buildthe new machines in America was Samuelto depend on textiles and other industries?Slater. The British government had passed laws7. New industries developed rapidly in theto keep the machines in England. They couldNorth between about 1800 and 1860. Differentnot be exported, and no plans or drawings oftypes of industries arose in different parts of thethem could leave the country. It was evenNorth. Textile and shoe factories were foundforbidden for textile workers to leave the coun-mainly in New England. Buffalo, New York,try. Textile is another word for cloth. Slaterand Chicago, Illinois, became flour milling cen-disguised himself as a farm boy and left Englandters. Cincinnati, Ohio, was known for meat-in 1798. The factory owners who hired Slaterpacking. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, was a steelopened the first spinning mill in the Unitedand glass center. Although most NorthernersStates in Pawtucket, Rhode Island. Slater alsoduring this time still worked on farms, thetaught other people how to set up textile facto-number of industrial workers grew rapidly. Byries. How did Slater's work increase the demand1860, about one out of five workers in thefor cotton in the South?North had a job in manufacturing.Early New England Factories Why weretheSpotlight on Sourcesfirst factories built in New England?8. Northerners took jobs in factories for5. New England had many advantages as adifferent reasons. Many workers in cotton millsregion where textile mills and other industrieswere young people from nearby farms and smalltowns. Some of them had worked their wholecould succeed. New England had swiftly flow-ing rivers that could provide water power forlives on a farm and were ready for a change. Inthe machinery. Some New Englanders weresome parts of the Northeast, there was littlewealthy enough to buy machinery and hireland available for young men and women whoworkers. Often the owners joined together towanted to set up their own farms. A largebuild large mill towns with housing for work-number of immigrants also became factoryers. In addition, New England had plenty ofworkers. Why would immigrants be likely toworkers. Most of these were children or youngtake jobs in factories? In the following passage,women from farm families.a woman recalls how life changed for youngwomen who left small towns for the mill.6. Textiles were not the only products madein New England factories. By the early 1800s,It was an all-day ride, but that was nothingshoes, guns, clocks, and other items were beingto be dreaded. It gave them a chance tomade there. Some of the new factories de-behold [see] other towns and places, andpended on machinery, but others did not. Be-see more of the world than most of theirfore the rise of shoe factories, one skilled workergeneration had ever been able to see. Theywould make a pair of shoes from start to finish.went in their plain, country-made clothes,But a factory-made shoe was put together byand, after working several months, wouldmany different workers, with each worker doingcome home for a visit, or perhaps to be377

out of their farms. Homeless and hungry, theyTHE IRISHeasily became sick. By the time the potatoToday more people of Irish descent live in thecrops returned to normal in 1850, 750,000United States than in all of Ireland. In colonialpeople had died of starvation or disease. Fortimes, small numbers of Irish craftspeople andthousands of Irish, leaving the country wasfarmers sailed to America. More Irish came intheir only hope for survival.the 1820s and 1830s, attracted by well-payingAlthough they had been farmers in the oldjobs building canals. The great migration ofcountry, most Irish immigrants became citythe Irish to America, however, did not begindwellers here. Few had the money to buy landuntil the 1840s. This migration was caused byor farm equipment. The newcomers quicklythe failure of a single crop-the potato.found jobs in Northern cities, especiallyBy 1840, the potato was the main source ofBoston and New York. Irish men became dockfood for almost half of Ireland's nine millionworkers or factory workers. Irish women oftenpeople. These were tenant farmers whoworked as servants. Those Irish who wentrented small plots of land and cottages fromwest became laborers. Many helped to buildwealthy landlords. Growing potatoes wasthe early railroads.practical. The crop required little land, labor, orequipment. In the summers of 1845 and 1846,All too often, the irish met hardships. Sincedisaster struck. A blight, or disease, causedthey had to live near their jobs, they crowdedthe potato crops to rot in the ground. A terribleinto city slums. Epidemics of disease killedfamine (FAM-uhn) spread throughout Ireland.thousands. Rather than helping the Irish,A famine is a severe shortage of food.many native-born Americans reacted in fear.Families unable to pay their rent were turned"No Irish Need Apply" appeared on many"help wanted" ads. On the stage, the Irishwere made fun of as people who liked to bragV Irish people are boarding the coach to leave forand fight.America. This drawing was done in the 1860s.The Civil War did much to do away withWhat mood do you think the artist was trying tocommunicate through this drawing?this anti-Irish feeling. During the war, the Irishfurnished at least six generals and overUSAUES150,000 men to the Union Army. After thewar, the Irish began to assume leadershiproles throughout the country. Some showed agift for politics and won elections in manycities. Others gained leadership positions inthe Roman Catholic church and in tradeunions. Their success inspired others to cometo the United States. Irish immigrationcontinued strong well into the 1900s.Now answer the following questions.1. Why did large numbers of Irish come tothe United States in the 1840s?2. Why did the Irish gain acceptance afterthe Civil War?GERMANSjust to escape civil strife; they had a hungerfor democracy. Among them was Carl Schurz.In the Union army, many regiments wereSchurz became one of Lincoln's mostmade up of German immigrants. Both beforeimportant supporters and was eventuallyand after the Civil War, vast numbers ofnamed a general for the Union side.people came to America from Germany. TheThe new Americans from Germany broughtfirst group came in colonial times. In 1683, aideas and practices soon taken up by thegroup of 34 immigrants establishedwhole country. German music and styles ofGermantown in Pennsylvania to escapecelebrating Christmas caught on with allreligious persecution. By 1776, some 225,000Americans. Kindergarten, a German word forGermans had sailed to America."garden of children," and gymnasiums wereIn the nineteenth century, economic andideas adopted nationwide. Vocational trainingpolitical trouble in Germany brought a steadywas another German educational idea.flow of immigrants. By 1832, well over 10,000Germans a year were coming to the UnitedNow answer the following questions:States. Teachers, professors, farmers,1. How would American education bedoctors, lawyers, and craft workers arrived tobuild a new life-and new communities. St.different today without ideas contributedby German-Americans?Louis, Milwaukee, and Chicago all owed theirgrowth to German-Americans. After an2. What adjustments would an immigrantoutbreak of revolution in Germany in 1848, thefrom Germany have to make after arrivingtides of immigration increased. They came notin the United States in the 1850s?V German immigrants brought their customs and ways of life to many parts of the United States inthe 1800s. These Germans settled a section of Texas about the time of the Civil War.414

tory in Highland Park, Michigan. Machinesand workers were arranged in a line. The carsINVENTIONS IN THE GROWTH OFINDUSTRYwere put together while being moved alongYearInventorInventionfrom one worker to the next. Each workeradded a few parts as the car passed. By 1914,1857Elisha OtisElevatorthe time needed to finish a Ford "Model T"1868ChristopherTypewriterhad been cut from twelve and a half hours toSholes93 minutes. Ford's Highland Park factory1876AlexanderTelephonebecame an example of mass production, theGraham Bellprocess of making goods quickly and cheaply.1877Thomas EdisonPhonograph1895GuglielmoRadioSpotlight on SourcesMarconi190310. When cars first appeared on AmericanWright BrothersFirst successfulairplaneroads, factories put out handbooks to help newowners care for their cars. This passage is fromthe 1905 Oldsmobile Owner's Manual:A What developments made it easier for inventorsand manufacturers to create and produce newDon't take anybody's word for it that yourproducts in the late 1800s?tanks have plenty of gasoline and waterand your oil cup plenty of oil. They may beguessing.industries with a large pool of workers who didDon't do anything to your motor withoutnot ask for high wages. Another reason forgood reason or without knowing whatindustry's rapid growth was the rich supplyyou are doing.of natural resources in the United States.Don't make "improvements" without12. American business people also werewriting the factory. We know all abouthelped by their government. There were nothose improvements and can advise you.federal taxes on profits or on personal income.-from The American Heritage History of theState taxes were very low. Both federal and stateAutomobile in America, Stephen W. Searsgovernment followed a laissez faire (LESS-sayWhat advice might still be needed for car own-FAIR) policy toward business. "Laissez faire" isers today?a French term meaning, "Let them do as theyplease." This meant that the government didnot put controls on how business owners ranA Strong Economy Why did the United Statestheir companies.become the world's leading industrial nation?Outlook11. By 1900, the United States led the worldin industry. There were many reasons for the21. Railroads, new inventions, immigrantnation's success. First, the railroads joined fac-workers, and a friendly government all helpedtory owners with a huge market across thethe United States become a world leader incountry. Second, a flood of inventions increasedindustry. But there was also something aboutthe amount of goods factories could make.Americans themselves that played a part. Amer-Third, American factory owners saw the valueicans were willing to take chances with theirof machines more quickly than European fac-money because they saw their country as a landtory owners did. Fourth, large numbers ofof opportunity. If a person failed, there waspeople from Europe began to arrive in thealways something else to try. Are Americans1840s. These immigrants provided Americantoday still willing to take chances?445-tImmigrants Bring NewWays of Life to AmericaOBJECTIVE: How did millions ofimmigrants help build the United States?1. "I have a very great wish to go to Amer-ica. I want to leave my native country becausewe are six children and we have very little land.I am a healthy boy of 24 years old. I do notfear any work." The young man from Polandwho wrote this letter was ready to take hischances in a new land. He and others like him,from thousands of villages around the globe,helped make America the great mixture of peo-ples it is today. Between 1820 and 1860, nearlyfive million immigrants came to the UnitedStates. During the next 50 years, another 23million arrived.Immigration Grows What new groups ofpeople carne to America seeking a better life?2. In the last years of the 1800s, a largegroup of people came to the United States fromsouthern and eastern Europe. Until the 1890s,most of the immigrants had come from north-Immigrants from Europe in the late 1800s wentern and western Europe. They mainly includedfirst to Ellis Island, a receiving center in the Newthe English, Germans, Irish, and Scandinavians.York harbor.During the mid-1880s, however, large numbersof Eastern and Southern European Jews, Poles,could no longer support themselves on theand Italians, as well as Czechs, Slovaks, Hun-worn-out farms of their countries. They sawgarians, and Greeks began to arrive. Theselittle hope for the future in their native villages.Europeans saw the United States as the greatMoving to America seemed to be the onlyhope for their future.answer. Millions packed their few belongings3. Like earlier European immigrants, mostand set sail for the new land of opportunityof the newcomers were peasants. These peopleacross the ocean.454In Chapter 4 you will apply these critical thinking skills to the historical process:Comparing and Contrasting:Generalizing: Making a statement thatRecognizing similarities and differences.links several facts.

4. To the Jewish people of Eastern Europe,often seven days a week. Their income wasAmerica offered freedom. In Russia and Poland,usually five or six dollars a week. While thesewhere most of them came from, Jews wereEuropean immigrants were grateful to haveforced to live in certain parts of the country. Injobs, they knew that they were being treatedthe cities, they had to live in segregated com-unfairly. The workers, many of them women,munities called ghettoes (GET-ohz). They weresoon organized labor unions. Labor unions arenot permitted to own land. Beginning in thegroups of workers who band together to im-1880s, a number of bloody massacres againstprove working conditions.Jewish communities, called pogroms (POH-grumz), took place. It was no wonder thatthousands of Jews looked to America as a landPeople in Historywhere they could escape this persecution.8. Rose Schneiderman One of the gar-ment workers' heroes was Rose SchneidermanArriving in America Where did immigrants(SHNY-dur-man), a spellbinding speaker withlive and how did they earn a living?bright red hair. She stood only 4 feet 6 inches(15 meters) tall. Born in Russian Poland,5. Most of the immigrants from Eastern andSchneiderman came to America in 1891 asaSouthern Europe settled in the industrial citieschild of nine. After working in a departmentof the East and Midwest. They most oftenstore, she found a job sewing cap linings. Insettled in New York City, Boston, Chicago, and1903, when she was 21, Schneiderman helpedCleveland. They did not travel to the Greatto form the Cap Makers Union.Plains and become farmers because, by 1890,9. Rose Schneiderman spent her life helpingthe price of farmland was rising. In the cities,the people she called her "sister workers." Shethey crowded into immigrant ghettos or neigh-went on to become a union leader. She walkedborhoods made up of people from one group orpicket lines and collected money and food forcountry. Many lived in slum tenements (TEN-strikers. Picket lines are made up of workers onuh-ments), or buildings divided into tiny apart-strike who march, often with signs, outside aments. Why do you think most immigrants atbusiness as a form of protest. Schneiderman alsofirst chose to live with other people from thefought against child labor and taught immigrantsame country?workers their legal rights. Immigrants like Rose6. Needing work badly, the immigrants didSchneiderman were able to stand up for theirthe nation's dirtiest and most dangerous jobs.rights in America.Italians replaced the Irish as the main source of10. On the West Coast, immigrants contin-labor in the building industry. Poles, Czechs,ued to arrive from Asia. The Chinese still didand Hungarians worked long hours at low paymuch of the most dangerous work in the minesin coal mines, meat slaughterhouses, and steeland on the railroads. In the 1880s, Japanesemills. In New York City, many East Europeanfarmers began to replace Chinese workers inJews found work in clothing factories. ManyHawaii's pineapple and sugar cane fields. Manymore brought factory work back to their tene-Japanese saved enough money to travel to Cal-ment homes. In 1907, a magazine reported, "Inifornia and become successful farmers there.unaired rooms, mothers and fathers sew by dayand by night.And the children are called inImmigrants Face Hostility How did native-bornfrom play todrudge [work hard] besidetheir elders.Why do you think manyAmericans respond to the newcomers?immigrant children had to work like adults?11. Some native-born Americans greeted the7. In New York City's clothing factories,new immigrants with anger or distrust. Duringimmigrant workers worked 13 hours a day,the 1840s and 1850s, many Americans had455THE ITALIANSwere likely to be met by the padrone(puh-DROH-nay), or labor boss. The padroneItalian immigrants arrived in America withcould speak enough English to make dealsmany memories of their homeland. Theywith business people. He was paid to bringthought of their beautiful peninsula surroundedworkers to the job site, feed them, and giveby the blue Mediterranean. They rememberedthem their pay. The padrone gave the workersits pleasant climate, olive trees, rocky hilltops,as little as possible. Padrones sent workand grapes ripening in the sun. But othercrews of young Italians to dig ditches, unloadmemories were less happy. In the 1880s andships, and mix concrete. Italian women also1890s, falling prices for crops and clothhad to take whatever jobs they could find.destroyed southern Italy's economy. ThereMany joined the East European Jews in thewere famines and peasant revolts. Starving inclothing factories.their tiny stone huts, southern Italy's peasantsImmigrants from Italy formed their ownbegan to sing a new song: "Today, landlordItalian-speaking neighborhoods in New York,you will plow your own field. Because we areBoston, Philadelphia, and many other cities. Atleaving for America.'first, living conditions in the nation's "LittleDuring the late 1800s, most of theItalies" were hard. As many as 12 people livedimmigrants from Italy were young men. Within three-room apartments in dark and airlessmoney earned in America they hoped to returntenement buildings. Life in the tenements wasto Italy, marry, and start a family. Or, theyunhealthy. Diseases spread quickly in theplanned to bring their families to America ascrowded spaces, and many immigrants fellsoon as they could. Dragging batteredsick and died. Even so, the Italians workedsuitcases, they arrived in New York Harborhard to improve their lives. Pushcart peddlerswithout money and often without friends. Theyopened grocery stores and restaurants.Families found better apartments, with flushtoilets, bathtubs, and windows that let in they This Italian family has just arrived in New York insun. "Pasta fagioli," a mixture of pasta and1910. Why might they have decided to come tobeans, was less often eaten.the United States? What experiences lie aheadWhen their parents began to earn betterfor them?pay, the children were able to spend less timeworking and more time in public school. Someof these children grew up to be leaders inbusiness, politics, and many other fields.Others became famous for what they did inthe arts and in sports.Now answer the following questions.1. In what ways were the experiences ofItalian immigrants like those of Irishimmigrants? In what ways were they

different?2. What did the padrone do to help thenewcomers? How might he be in aposition to trick the immigrants?3. Why was education important to thenewcomers?worried about German and Irish immigrants.lic school. They learned to speak English in classNeither of these groups, some people said,and met children from other neighborhoods.could ever be "real" Americans. The GermansSometimes however, this caused trouble atwere not trusted because they formed their ownhome. One 16-year-old boy whose parents hadGerman-speaking communities. Other Ameri-come from Poland wrote:cans blamed the Irish for the bad state of the cityI don't like to bring my American friendsslums. The Irish also were disliked because theyaround. They were born here and so werewere the first large Catholic group to arrive in atheir parents. My mother speaks "English"mostly Protestant country. In some eastern cit-to them, and they make fun of her.Myies, Irish and German immigrants were attackedfather won't allow us to play ball on theby mobs.lot. He says it's a waste of time. He was12. There was an even greater uprisingraised in Poland.My parentsmakeagainst immigrants during the 1880s andmany sacrifices [give up a lot] to keep up1890s. This time the "new" immigrants fromtheir traditions [customs], but they don'tEastern and Southern Europe, and from Asia,mean anything much in my life.That'swere the targets. In 1891, 11 Italian prisonersjust why I don't like to stay home. I don'twere dragged from a New Orleans jail andwant to hurt my parents and I can't followkilled. Six years later, near Hazleton, Pennsyl-their advice.vania, 21 unarmed Polish and Hungarian strik--from Looking for America, Stanley I. Kutlerers were shot to death by sheriffs' deputies.Chinese immigrants were attacked by mobs andWhat is this boy's attitude to his parents' Polishdriven out of mining towns throughout thetraditions? What would you do if you were inhis situation?West.13. There were many reasons for the grow-Outlooking langer toward the immigrants. First, immi-grants worked for low wages. They were often15. In the years following the Civil War, thebrought in to replace workers on strike. Thislargest number of immigrants ever came to theangered workers who were trying to organizeUnited States. They came with the same highunions and get better pay. Second, the lan-hopes for freedom and opportunity as had theguages and habits of the newcomers seemedcolonists before them. After 1890, many im-strange to most Americans and made them feelmigrants came from Eastern and Southernuncomfortable. Third, during the 1880s andEurope. The newcomers provided the labor1890s, many Americans were deeply troubled.needed for the nation's growing industries.Big-city slums were spreading and crime seemedThey were sometimes treated unfairly by native-out of control. The boom-and-bust economyborn Americans. But they worked hard, begangave jobs and then took them away. Strikingto succeed, and soon became an important partworkers were fighting the police. The countryof the American work force. In time, many ofseemed to be falling apart and no one couldthe cultural traditions they brought with themfigure out why. Many Americans looked for awere enjoyed and adopted by all Americans. Forscapegoat (SKAYP-goht), or someone tomost immigrants, the struggle for a better lifeblame. Why were the newcomers from othertook place in the nation's growing cities, wherenations an easy target for that blame?opportunities were greater. The new Americanshad to struggle hard for equal opportunities andSpotlight on Sourcesbetter working and living conditions. In spite ofthis, most Europeans and Asian immigrants14. Children of immigrant parents began towere glad that they had come to America. Whyfeel more like Americans after they started pub-do you think this was so?457

as well. Growing cities needed electric poweruated from college there. In the 1880s, Addamslines and streetcars. Private companies com-traveled to England and learned about settle-peted for the right to provide these services.ment houses there. Settlement houses offeredCity officials often chose the company that paidadvice, training, and recreation to people inthe biggest bribe. A bribe is payment given topoor neighborhoods. In 1889 Addams and hersomeone in order to cause him or her to act infriend Ellen Gates Starr opened their own set-a certain way. The officials belonged to politicaltlement house for immigrants in the Chicagogroups called "machines." Each political ma-slums. It was called Hull House. The twochine had a "boss," who rewarded loyal sup-women started with a kindergarten program forporters with government jobs. One reason thatthe small children in the neighborhood. Beforemachine politicians won city elections was thatlong, they had added a day nursery to providethey worked to get the support of the immi-child care for working mothers. Hull Housegrants. Politicians provided free coal, road-also had clubs for older women, classes in musicbuilding jobs, and other favors to immigrants inand art, a gym, and an employment service.exchange for votes. The immigrants were grate-When people in other cities heard about Hullful to the bosses. No one else seemed to careHouse, they began their own settlement houseabout their problems.programs. Where are programs like those ofHull House found today?People in History12. Throughout her life, Jane Addamsworked to aid the poor and bring about world11. Jane Addams One American who didpeace. She did this by speaking out against childcare about the people in the slums was Janelabor. She also helped immigrant workers formAddams. Addams grew up in Illinois and grad-unions. Addams also was president of theMAP SKILL BUILDER: Learn from the map about the largest cities in the United States in the 1900s.1. What cities had over one million people? 2. What cities had 300,000 to one million people?130'WCANADAWASH.NORTHMAINEMONTANADAKOTAMINN.OREGONMinneápolisWISC.IDAHOSt. PaulYN.H.Rochaister MASS. BostonSOUTH40'NBuffalsoN.Y.ProvidenceWYOMINGDAKOTAMilwaukeeDetroitJersey City(New York40'NIOWALCleyelandoChicagoPENN.-NewarkNEVADANEBRASKAOHIOPhiladelphiaIndianapolisPiffsburghBaltimoreSan FranciscoUTAHILL.IND.CincinnatiWabhington, D.C.COLORADOKansas CityMO.KYW.VA.VA.KANSASSt. LouisLouisvilleCALIFORNIAN.C.70%PACIFICTENN.OCEANARIZONAOKLAHOMAATLANTICNEW MEXICOARK.S.C.OCEAN30°NMISS.ALA.GA.30%120'WTEXASLA.The Largest U.S.New OrleansFLA.Cities in 1900More than 1 million inhabitantsGulf of Mexico300,000 - 1 million inhabitants150,000 - 300,000 inhabitantsNCities labeled in red type wereMEXICOamong the 24 largest cities of 1850WCUBAE0600 milesS90'W0800 kilometers80WLoints OIviewDuring the late 1800s, America was rapidly growing and changing. Millionsof immigrants from European nations were arriving in America each year.American cities were growing so fast they had great trouble meeting people'sneeds for housing and jobs. The nation's farmers were protesting the lowprices they often received for their crops. Giant corporations were in controlof many industries and fixed the prices of many products and services.American workers were forming labor unions to fight for higher pay andbetter working conditions. Women and African Americans were still strug-gling for equality in American society.All this unrest and rapid change caused many problems in Americansociety. Americans were not sure how to deal with these problems. ManyWILLIAM GRAHAM SUMNER'SVIEWA [person] who has studiedany social question for [long]enough to be [confused] by its difficultieswill [probably] propose some form oflegislation [law] about it.[I believe]the last thing to do is to legislate [pass alaw]It is not possible to experiment with asociety and just drop the experimentwhenever we choose. The experiment en-ters into the life of the society and nevercan be got out again.Thereforethedoctrine [belief] of noninterfer-ence [not taking any action] is thehighest wisdom.Essays of William Graham Sumner, Albert G.Keller and Maurice R. Davie, eds.A Jane Addams was one of the many individualswho took responsibility for helping the poor. Sheopened her settlement house in Chicago in 1889to heln poor meonle and their children

How To Deal with America's ProblemsAmericans were confident that by hard work and careful planning, peoplecould solve society's problems. Other Americans strongly believed that tryingto improve society would only make things worse.William Graham Sumner was a professor at Yale University. As you willread in the first section below, Sumner believed that society's problems weretoo difficult for people to be able to solve. He was especially against new lawsto try to improve society.President Theodore Roosevelt, on the other hand, had a strong belief thatmany things that were wrong in American society could be reformed. In thesecond selection below, he explains that he is certain that people can worktogether to change their lives.A PRESIDENT'S VIEWWe recognizethe evils [prob-lems] of today. The remedies[cures] arepartly to be obtained[achieved] by laws, and in greater part tobe obtained by individualeffort.These remedies include a religious andmoral teaching which shall increase thespirit of human brotherhood; an educa-tional system which shall train men [peo-A President Theodore Roosevelt believedple] for every form of useful service.agovernment should play a part in reformingdivision of the profits of industry as shallsociety. Here he is attacking the trusts with histend to encourage intelligent and thrifty"big stick."tool-users [workers] to become tool-owners [business owners]; and a govern-Using Primary Sourcesment so strong, just, wise, and democratic1. Why did Sumner believe it wasthatit may do its full share indangerous to try to make great changespromoting these ends [achievingin American society?these things].2. What did Roosevelt believe were thebest cures for the problems of AmericanThe Outlook, Theodore Roosevelt.society?3. Which person's ideas about reformingsociety do you agree with? Explain thereasons for your answer.471THE JAPANESEOne of the interests of the Progressives wasthe unfair treatment of immigrants. In manyways, the history of the Japanese in theUnited States is a study of prejudice andintolerance. In the 1880s, California farmerslooked to Japan as a new source of cheaplabor. In response, thousands of Japaneseflocked to the United States. In 1880, only 150Japanese lived in California. By 1910, thenumber had climbed to 90,000. United Stateslaw said these immigrants, called Issei, couldnever become citizens. However, their childrenwho were born in the United States, or Nisei,were citizens.Japanese immigrants quickly began to buyor rent farmland of their own. Entire familiesworked long, tough hours in the desert sun.Other Japanese immigrants branched out intothe fishing and canning industries. TheJapanese grew successful as they becameproducers as well as suppliers and distributorsof many different goods.Despite the bitter experience of their internmentAs Japanese prospered, white Californiansduring World War II, Japanese Americans todayfelt economically threatened and oftenare proud of their loyalty to the United States.attacked them. In 1906, San Franciscorequired Japanese students to attendsegregated schools. Then, in 1907 under theJapanese Americans worked for Congress toso-called "Gentlemen's Agreement," Japanreview this injustice. Finally, in the late 1980s,agreed not to give passports to workersCongress apologized to Japanese Americansheaded for California. Still not satisfied, thefor the government's treatment. CongressCalifornia legislature in 1913 made it illegal forapproved cash payments for the survivingnon-citizens to own land. In 1924, Congressvictims and for Japanese Americanended all immigration from Japan.communities.Much of the anger that Americans felt aboutNow answer the following questions.Japan's surprise attack on Pearl Harbor in1941 was directed at Japanese Americans.1. Why did Americans limit immigration inOver 110,000 Japanese Americans, two-thirdsthe late 1800s and early 1900s? Do youof them American citizens, were forced to gothink immigration should have limits?to detention camps after the attack. These2. Why do you think it was important tocamps consisted of poorly-built barracks withno indoor plumbing or central heating. Most ofJapanese Americans to have Congressthe internees had to give up or sell theirrecognize the injustice of their wartimepossessions at a loss. Beginning in the 1970s,internment? Do you think their requestswere reasonable?498Northeast and Midwest of the mainland United

Puerto Rican AmericansStates. Puerto Ricans make up about 12After the Spanish-American War, the Unitedpercent of Hispanic Americans.States took control of Spain's former colony,Most Puerto Ricans came to the mainlandPuerto Rico. In 1952 Puerto Rico became aUnited States to escape the poverty of theircommonwealth of the United States. As aisland. Some became migrant workers whocommonwealth, all the people living in Puertodid seasonal work on tobacco and otherRico are free to move to and from thefarms. Others went to work in factories, hotels,American mainland. They do not pay federaland the garment industry in large cities.taxes, but the people of Puerto Rico cannotvote in federal elections.Many Puerto Ricans arrived with few jobskills and little education. They facedPuerto Ricans trace their roots to the nativediscrimination in jobs and housing. In 1974,Taino Indians of the Caribbean islands. AfterPuerto Ricans led the effort to broaden theColumbus's arrival, Puerto Rico was underVoting Rights Act of 1965 so that Spanish-Spanish rule for 400 years. Africans werespeaking Americans and other "languagebrought as slaves to Puerto Rico and otherminorities" did not have to know English to beCaribbean islands. As a result, influences ofable to vote. Today, many Puerto RicanSpanish culture joined with African and TainoAmericans become business people, teachers,Indian cultures to make up the distinct PuertoRican character. Today, while many Puertodoctors lawyers, and political leaders.Ricans still speak Spanish as their nativetongue, many younger Puerto Ricans speak1. How are Puerto Ricans a people of mixedEnglish as their primary language.cultures and languages?Since World War Il more than 2 million, or2. What common struggles do Puerto Ricansalmost one half of all Puerto Ricans, live in theshare with other minorities?After World War II, as many as 1500 Puerto Ricans a month came to New York City, a favoritelocation for a new home.the first time, women had the right to vote inWorld War I, many African Americans movednational elections. New products made wom-from rural areas in the South to cities in theen's lives easier. Factories turned out low-North. They found work in the factories. How-priced, ready-made clothes so women did notever, race riots broke out as whites objected tohave to spend their time sewing. The spread ofthe hiring of black workers. The Ku Klux Klan,electricity brought refrigerators, vacuum clean-which had terrorized blacks in the South duringers, and electric irons. These appliances madeReconstruction, gained new strength. It spreadhousework much easier. Women enjoyed newfrom the South to the largely Protestant whitefreedom. They "bobbed," or cut short, theirMidwest and West. The new Klan preachedhair and wore shorter skirts. Why would suchhatred of blacks, Catholics, Jews, and immi-behavior have been considered shocking beforegrants. Klan members attacked and terrorizedthe war?individuals in an effort to drive them out theirhomes and jobs.Behind the Prosperity What groups did not15. Feelings against foreign-born Americansshare in the prosperity of the 1920s?also erupted in the 1920s. Millions of factoryworkers were immigrants who had come to the12. Not everyone in the 1920s shared in theUnited States since the 1900s. When the work-pleasure and prosperity of the times. These yearsers went on strike for better pay, many native-had their share of serious problems. Manyborn Americans feared a communist revolution.factory workers and miners earned so littleIn 1919 and 1920, the United States was sweptmoney that they could barely provide theirup in the Red Scare. Attorney General A.families with the basics of life. Farmers pro-Mitchell Palmer had thousands of people ar-duced more food than they could sell. As arested and jailed on the grounds that they wereresult, prices for farm products remained low,"reds." Reds were radicals who wanted to over-leaving many farmers deeply in debt. Why didthrow the government.farm prices fall with increased production?16. The Red Scare soon faded, but demandsFarm workers such as Mexican Americans in thefor limits on immigration increased. During theSouthwest earned low wages and so could not1920s, Congress passed immigration laws thatafford the new consumer goods.included a quota (KWO-tuh) system. Under13. The 1920s were also a time of lawless-this system, only a certain number of peopleness and crime. The Eighteenth Amendment,would be allowed to enter the United Statesbetter known as the Prohibition Amendment,from each country. The quota system greatlywas adopted in 1919. It prohibited, or out-limited the number of immigrants coming fromlawed, the manufacture and sale of liquor in theEastern Europe, China, and Japan. Was theUnited States. Millions of Americans broke theUnited States right in limiting immigration?law, however. People known as bootleggerssupplied liquor to fill the demand. GangstersOutlookorganized the illegal liquor trade and fought17. In 1928, Herbert Hoover, an able, en-one another for control of cities. They bribedergetic, self-made millionaire, won the office ofthe police and public officials to allow them toPresident. As he took office, Hoover spokeoperate. To bribe is to pay for an illegal favor. Aconfidently. "Ours is a land rich in resourcessense of contempt for the law spread in theblessed with comfort and opportunity," henation. In the end, Prohibition, which had beendeclared. "I have no fear for the future of ourseen as a "noble experiment" failed, and thecountry." Like many Americans, Hoover ex-amendment was repealed in 1933.pected the prosperity of the 1920s to continue.14. The 1920s also saw renewed racist feel-Was Hoover correct in predicting a rosy futureing against African Americans. During and afterfor the United States?547

"living at the point of a gun-a gun loaded withexplosive bullets, economic as well as military.THE PRESIDENTS CORNERIn March 1941, the President signed the Lend-Lease Act. This law let the President sell or lendAmericansassociatewar materials to the Allies. Soon convoys ofFranklin D. Roosevelt,who was President fromAmerican ships were ferrying planes, tanks, and1933 to 1945, with threeguns to Britain.outstanding achieve-ments. The first is hisWar Is Declared Why was the United Statescourage in coping withforced to declare war in 1941?the crippling effects ofpolio. When he was 393. As Japan continued its advance in South-years old, he waseast Asia, relations with the United States wors-stricken with this dread disease. For the restened. The United States stopped selling oil andof his life, he was unable to walk withoutother goods to Japan while diplomats on bothbraces on his legs. His second greatsides tried to ease the growing tension. Yet,achievement was launching the New Deal,which was a series of laws that aimed to lifteven as the talks dragged on, leaders in Japanmade the decision to attack the United States.the United States out of the greatest de-pression it had ever known. Finally,As you read at the beginning of this chapter,Roosevelt was also a strong leader of thethat attack came on December 7, 1941.Allied struggle against the Axis in the World4. On the day after Pearl Harbor, a solemn,War II. He was the only President to haveangry President asked Congress to declare warbeen elected to that office four times. Not allon Japan. December 7, he said, was "a dateAmericans approved of Roosevelt's poli-which will live in infamy [dishonesty] ]". Con-cies, but few deny that he was a greatgress quickly passed a declaration of war. Japanpolitical leader.followed up its bombing of Pearl Harbor withattacks on the Philippines, Guam, and otherAmerican possessions in the Pacific. As Japaneseracial prejudice, Americans of minority groupsforces stormed across the Pacific, the outlookenlisted in the armed forces in large numbers.for the United States looked desperate.Although African Americans were forced intosegregated, or all-black, units, they proved theirAmericans Mobilize for War How didcourage under fire. Spanish-speaking Americansand Native Americans also wore their uniformsAmericans help the war effort?proudly, fighting heroically for their country.5. With their country now in the war, Amer-7. World War II brought tragedy to Japa-icans rallied to the cause. They lent the govern-nese Americans. After the bombing of Pearlment money by buying millions of dollarsHarbor, some Americans claimed that Japaneseworth of war bonds. The government put theAmericans on the West Coast were a danger toeconomy on a war footing. Factories changedthe nation. They feared they might spy for thefrom making cars and refrigerators to producingJapanese government. No evidence was evertanks and airplanes. Men were drafted or en-given to support this claim, but the governmentlisted in the armed services. Women, too, joinedacted on this fear. It forced Japanese Americansthe military. Many women took jobs in ficesto sell their property and move to "relocation"and factories or managed farms, replacing mencamps inland. There they lived in shabby bar-who had gone to war.racks surrounded by barbed wire. Despite this6. Americans of all backgrounds united be-harsh treatment, thousands of Japanese Ameri-hind the war effort. Despite discrimination andcans in the armed forces cerved loyally563The Drive to Victory How did the Allies winbined land and water operation, in history. Thethe war in Europe and in the Pacific?Allied forces met with deadly German resis-tance, but six weeks later, they broke through8. Between 1942 and 1944, the AlliesGerman coastal defenses and headed for Paris.launched attacks in North Africa, Europe, andThey captured the French capital in Augustthe Pacific. After regaining control of North1944. By September, Eisenhower's forces hadAfrica, they pushed across the Mediterraneanreached the western border of Germany.into Sicily and Italy. The Italian dictator Mus-10. The Soviet army, meanwhile, was mak-solini was overthrown, but the Allies had toing a strong push from the east and took Berlin,battle German forces that controlled much ofHitler's stronghold, in April 1945. When HitlerItaly. In the meantime, German armies hadrealized that defeat was certain, he committedbogged down in their attack on the Sovietsuicide in his shelter deep below the streets ofUnion. The Soviets suffered terribly under Ger-Berlin. Why do you think he took this action?man sieges, but in the end they forced theOn May 7, 1945, a week after Hitler's death,Germans into retreat.Germany's military leaders agreed to an uncon-9. On June 6, 1944, Allied forces underditional surrender. The next day, the WesternGeneral Dwight D. Eisenhower crossed theworld celebrated V-E Day, Victory in EuropeEnglish Channel to start a drive that would takeDay. After more than five years and eightthem to the heart of Germany. On D-Day, as itmonths, the war in Europe was over.came to be called, 9,000 vessels carried thou-11. In the Pacific, the Allies gained groundsands of troops, who stormed ashore along theslowly. The United States adopted an island-beaches of Normandy, France. This was thehopping plan. That is, they set out to retakelargest amphibious (am-FIB-ee-uhs), or com-some islands held by the Japanese and bypassMAP SKILL BUILDER: Learn from the map about the division of Europe in World War II. 1. Who werethe Axis Powers? 2. Who were the allies of the Axis Powers?30%20'W10.Wor10 E20 E40 E50 E60 EdowICELANDATLANTICOCEANFINLANDSOVIET UNIONNORWAYSWEDENESTONIAWorld War IISONLATVIAIRELANDBRITAINDENMARKLITHUANIAin EuropeAxis PowersBerlin.GERMANYPOLANDAxis alliesNormandy InvasionaStalingradMaximum extent of Axis controlBattle ofCZECH.Allied Powersthe BulgeAUSTRIAHUNGARYNeutral for all orFRANCEROMANIAmost of the warYUGOSLAVIABLACK-EEA0600 milesSPAINITALYBULGARIA01,000 kilometersTURKEYGREECESicilyMOROCCOALGERIATUNISIAFRANEANSEALIBYAEl AlameinEGYPT

California, Nevada, Utah, New Mexico,MEXICAN AMERICANSArizona, Texas, and parts of Wyoming andAs peace came to the United States,Colorado were once Mexican territories. TheAmericans became aware as never beforepeople who were living there at the timehow many minority groups were part of thebecame Americans.nation. Among them were the many MexicanMany Mexican Americans becameAmerican who had come to work in the UnitedAmerican citizens by immigration. The firstStates during the war. Numbering about 12.6large wave of Mexican immigration began inmillion, Mexican Americans now make up the1910, after a revolution in Mexico that causedsecond largest minority group in the country.much violence and hardship in the country.Between 1900 and 1930, more than 600,000Mexican Americans live throughout theUnited States, but about 70 percent are foundMexicans settled in the United States. Whenin California and Texas. Los Angeles, which isthe Great Depression hit, however, the wavehome to about 700,000 Mexican Americans,of immigration stopped. In fact, manyboasts the largest Mexican AmericanAmericans of Mexican origin were forced topopulation of any American city. Most Mexicanreturn to Mexico so that they would notAmericans trace their ancestry back to thecompete for jobs with other Americans.Maya, Aztec, and other Native Americans.The shortage of workers in the UnitedStates in World War Il spurred a new wave ofMexican Americans became part of theimmigration from Mexico. During the warUnited States in two ways. The ancestors ofyears, thousands of Mexican Americanssome present-day Mexican Americans lived inentered the armed forces. Mexico hasparts of Mexico that were taken over by theremained a poor country, so its peopleUnited States after the war with Mexico.continue to stream into the United States insearch of a better life.V These El Paso, Texas, graduating students areLike other minority groups, Mexicanamong the growing number of MexicanAmericans have faced many problems.Americans who realize how important educationWithout a knowledge of English, manyis in improving the lives of their people.Mexican Americans have found it difficult toget a good education. As a result, most ofthem hold low-paying jobs that require littleeducation. Many work as migrant farmers or infactories. Still, the number of MexicanAmericans who enter the mainstream ofAmerican society is growing. More and moreMexican Americans hold high positions ingovernment. Business people and entertainersof Mexican origin have enjoyed success. Atthe same time, they continue to be proud ofthe heritage that their ancestors brought withthem from the land south of the border.Now answer the following questions.1. In what two ways did Mexican Americansjoin the population of the United States?2. Describe the handicaps and achievementsof Mexican Americans as a group.KOREANS AND VIETNAMESEcould enter the United States in greaternumbers. Korean doctors and nurses came toKoreans and Vietnamese have come to thework in American hospitals. Jobs wereUnited States to escape poverty and politicalavailable for Korean scientists and technologyand economic upsets in their homelands. Theworkers. Many Korean immigrants startedfirst immigrants from Korea came to thebusinesses in the United States, such as smallUnited States after 1903 by way of Hawaii. Allfamily-run grocery stores, restaurants, andmen, they came to Hawaii to work on sugarservice businesses. Most of the nearly 1plantations. The few thousand male Koreansmillion Korean Americans live and work in thein the United States lived here without theirmajor American cities such as New York, Losfamilies. The reason was that Japan, whichAngeles, and Chicago.then ruled Korea, would not let familyDuring the last days of the Vietnam War,members leave. In this way, Japan made suremany South Vietnamese feared a communistthat money flowed back into their nativetakeover of their country. Fleeing to the Unitedcountry. As a result, the small KoreanStates, this first wave of Vietnamesecommunities were largely "bachelor societies"of young male workers. Anti-Asian prejudiceimmigrants was made up of mostlyand laws made life for the newcomers evenprofessionals and former government officials.Later, after the communists took control ofmore difficult.Vietnam, a second wave of immigrantsThings began to change in the 1950s.

arrived. Many had barely escaped VietnamKorean women started to enter the Unitedwith their lives. Often they had to make theStates as "war brides" of American soldiersdifficult and dangerous trip across miles ofwho were returning from the Korean War.open sea in small boats. For this reason,Also, immigration laws were slowly relaxed.these refugees were called "boat people."Beginning in 1965, Koreans and other AsiansMost of the people in this group were poorand uneducated. For these VietnameseV Korean Americans have become known for theAmericans, adjusting to life in America hasfine food markets they have set up in manybeen a hard struggle. To help Vietnamesecities.refugees and immigrants, governmentprograms were created in job training andEnglish. Like the Koreans, the Vietnamesehave started their own small, family-runbusinesses. Using their fishing skills from theirhome country, Vietnamese Americans havealso started fishing businesses in coastalareas. As with other Asian Americans, theKoreans and Vietnamese are working to builda better life in America.Now answer the following questions.1. What was unusual about the first wave ofKorean immigration?2. How have the Korean and Vietnam Warsaffected immigration to America fromthese countries?ALLOpportunitiesfor All AmericansOBJECTIVE: How have HispanicAmericans and Native Americans workedfor equal rights?1. In the fall of 1968, many students andteachers at San Francisco State College weredemonstrating. Hispanic Americans, NativeAmericans, Asian Americans, African Ameri-cans, and a good number of Anglo-Americanscarried banners and signs. The signs read "WeDemand Ethnic Studies!" Ethnic studies areschool and college courses that teach aboutminority groups and cultures. They wanted tolearn about the people of their own groups.After weeks of demonstrating, the protestorsgot their wish. San Francisco State Collegebecame the first American college to start anethnic studies department. The demonstrationsin San Francisco were just one example of thegrowing importance of minorities.Hispanic Achievements What progress haveHispanic Americans made in gaining equalityAEvery year, people from all over the worldin American society?become United States citizens. What reasons2. The 1960s and 1970s were a time of greatmight these people have for seeking a newlife here?change for Hispanic Americans. One man, Cé-sar Chávez (SAY-sahr CHAH-vez), a Mexican-American farm worker, had a lot to do with thelaborers, most of whom were Mexican Ameri-change. In 1962, Chávez started the Nationalcans. The strike grew throughout the state. InFarm Workers Association (NFWA). In1967, Chávez called for a national boycott of1965, Chávez called for a strike against thegrapes. People throughout the country did notgrape growers in Delano, California. Hebuy grapes. This was the first successful nationalwanted better working conditions for the farmboycott in the history of the United States.In Chapter 3 you will apply these critical thinking skills to the historical process:628Comparing and Contrasting:Making Judgments: Stating a personalRecognizing similarities and differences.opinion based on historical facts.3. The five-year strike finally ended in victoryAmerican who served in a President's cabinet.for the union, which was now known as theHe taught at Texas Tech and the MedicalUnited Farm Workers Organizing CommitteeCollege of Virginia. In 1975, Cavazos became(UFWOC). The union was recognized byDean of the School of Medicine at Tufts Uni-growers. Hispanic Americans saw how power-versity. Cavazos's outstanding career asaful they could be when they worked together.teacher and scholar caused President Reagan toWhy might the farm workers' success inspirechoose him as secretary of education. As secre-other groups working for civil rights?tary of education, he headed the drive to im-4. Other people became leaders in Hispanicprove public education. Cavazos continued incommunities. In New Mexico, Reies Lópezthis important office under President Bush.Tijerina (tee-heh-REE-nah) created the AlianzaFederal de los Pueblos Libres (Federal AllianceNative Americans How did Native Americansof Free Peoples). Tijerina felt that HispanicAmericans should have all the land taken fromfight for equal rights?them by Anglo-Americans more than a century8. The same spirit that stirred African Amer-earlier returned. José Angel Gutiérrez (goo-icans and Hispanic Americans to fight for theirTYEH-rez) of Texas formed a new politicalrights rose up among Native Americans.party called La Raza Unida. La raza means "therace" and includes all Spanish-speaking peopleSpotlight on Sourcesin the Western Hemisphere. The party sup-ported everything from community classes to9. In 1961, 500 Native Americans from 67draft counseling during the Vietnam War.tribes started the Native American movement at5. Hispanic Americans have worked hard toa meeting called the American Indian Chicagogain full voting rights. In the 1970s, HispanicConference. Native Americans made the fol-citizens also organized the Southwest Voterlowing "Declaration of Indian Purpose."Registration Education Project to encourageWe believe in therights of all people toHispanics in that region to vote in all elections.retain [keep] spiritual and cultural valuesPuerto Ricans, too, organized registrationthe free exercise [use] of these values isdrives to encourage voters to go to the polls onnecessary to the normal development ofelection day. Puerto Rican voters became aany people. Indians exercised [used] thispowerful group of voters in elections in Newinherent [basic] right to live their ownYork and other Northeastern cities.lives for thousands of years before the6. As the number of Hispanic voters grew,white man came and took their lands.Hispanic Americans gained more politicalbut they mean to hold the scraps andpower. In this way, they helped elect membersparcels [of the land they have left] asof state legislatures, governors, city mayors, andearnestly [seriously] as any small nationmembers of Congress. By the mid 1980s, moreand ethnic group was ever determined tothan 3,000 Hispanic Americans were serving ashold onto their identity and survival.government officials. How could these govern--from The Way: An Anthology of Americanment officials help Hispanic American causes?Literature, edited by Shirley Hill Wattand Stan SteinerPeople in HistoryWhat basic right were Native Americans deter-mined to take back?7. Lauro Cavazos Hispanic Americans10. Later in the 1960s, more militant Nativealso served as high officials in the federal gov-Americans formed their own organizations.ernment. Lauro Cavazos (kah-VAH-zohs), aMany of the groups were based on the BlackMexican American, was the first HispanicPower model that you read about in Chapter 1629

CUBANSFlorida, mainly in Miami. They soon began totake a leading part in the life of that city.More than 200,000 Cubans came to theCuban Americans now have become theUnited States in the 1960s after communistlargest group in southern Florida.dictator Fidel Castro seized control of Cuba.Thousands of Cubans escaped by boat andCubans have succeeded because of hardplane. Many of these newcomers werework and their traditions. Most Cubans had tosuccessful business people, teachers, doctors,give up everything to come to the Unitedand lawyers. They refused to allow Castro toStates. But they were determined to do well.take away their freedom. Instead, they leftFor example, when Carlos Arboleyatheir homes and property to seek new lives in(ahr-BOH-lay-ah) arrived in the United States,America.he had only $40. Now he is vice chairman ofSome Cubans were allowed to leavean important Florida bank. Another reason forlegally. In 1965, Castro let Cubans whotheir success is the Cuban tradition of helpingwanted to join their relatives in the Unitedone another. Newcomers often received helpfrom successful Cubans who were businessStates leave. Planes hired by the UnitedStates brought 4,000 Cubans to freedom. Thispeople or professionals. The newcomers inwas called the Freedom Airlift. In 1980,turn would help poorer Cubans who cameCastro allowed 125,000 Cubans to leave.later. Also, many Cuban women work outsideThese Mariel boat people were not asthe home to make the family better offwelcome as earlier Cubans because somefinancially. Since three generations often livehad criminal records. However, most havetogether in Cuban households, traditions,become productive members of society.values, and language can be maintained.Some Cubans settled in New Jersey, NewCuban Americans have built a new life inYork, and California, but most settled inthe United States. Cubans have become apowerful political force and have held positionsV Cuban Americans have used their talents toin local, state, and federal government. Manymake important contributions in the fields ofhave achieved prominent positions infashion, business, and the arts.American business. Other Cuban Americanshave become well-known educators,scientists, and artists. Pop singers like GloriaEstafan and painters like Demi have combinedCuban and American culture successfully.Today, Cuban Americans occupy an importantplace in American life.Now answer the following questions.1. Why did Cubans come to the UnitedStates in the 1960s?2. How have Cuban Americans used theirpolitical power in Florida?3. Why do you think Cuban Americans havebeen able to play so important a part inAmerican life?

MA ChangingAmericaOBJECTIVE: What groups of people arechanging America today?1. Every year, the Westinghouse ScienceTalent Search provides a national competitionfor high school students. Forty students becomefinalists. Out of those forty, ten students wincollege scholarships. In recent years, over half ofthe 60 scholarship winners have been the chil-dren of immigrants. Hong Huynh, 16 years oldwhen he became a finalist in 1988, fled Vietnamwith his parents in 1980. They escaped on acrowded boat. Of his parents Huynh said,"They gave up their home, furniture, every-thing, so I could be here. I don't want todisappoint them." Sheeyun Park, a physics fi-nalist, also expressed appreciation for his par-ents, who left Korea for New York in 1974. "IfI needed books for courses, they gave me themoney," he said. "If I wanted sneakers, theysaid, "Keep the old pair.'` These two finalistsshow just one kind of contribution immigrantsmake to the United States.A Many winners of the Westinghouse ScienceImmigration Today What changes are takingContest have gone on to distinguished careers inresearch, teaching, and industry.place in the population of the United States?2. Throughout America's history, waves ofwith Mexico are the chief sources of immigra-immigrants have changed this nation. Until thetion. China, the Dominican Republic, andsecond half of this century, most immigrantsCuba follow close behind. The flow of peoplearrived from Europe. In the 1980s more thanfrom those countries continues to change Amer-half of all immigrants were Asians. Many othersica gradually. For example, African Americanswere from the Western Hemisphere Now, theare currently the largest minority group, makingPhilippines, Korea, Vietnam, and India alongup 12 per cent of the total population. Hispan-In Chapter 4 you will apply these critical thinking skills to the historical process:634Comparing and Contrasting:Identifying Fact versus Opinion:Recognizing similarities and differences.Specifying whether information can beproven or whether it expresses feelings orbeliefs.ics are the second largest racial minority. TheySoviet Union did not open emigration channelsmake up 7 per cent of the population. By theuntil the late 1980s, when Mikhail Gorbachevend of this century, however, Hispanics arebrought change to emigration policy. In 1989,expected to become the largest ethnic minoritythe Soviet Union offered to ease its emigrationin the United States.laws even further. If the United States would liftbarriers against Soviet exports, the SovietPeople in HistoryUnion would let more people leave. PresidentBush pressed the Soviets for more changes. He3. Maya Lin An American woman withoffered "most favored nation" status in ex-Chinese parents, Maya Lin designed the Viet-change for allowing even more people, espe-nam Veterans Memorial while in her earlycially Jews, to emigrate. The result has been atwenties. The memorial, which stands in Wash-greater number of Soviet immigrants than everington, D.C., consists of polished, black granitebefore. Why would people from the Sovietwalls. On those walls are inscribed the names ofUnion want to come to the United States?the 58,000 Americans who died in the war. The6. The most recent change in American im-design began as a contest entry-No. 1,026.migration policy is the Immigration ReformAfter it was chosen the winner, it created muchand Control Act of 1986. It allows illegalpolitical and artistic controversy. However,immigrants who lived in the United States sincemost people thought the memorial succeeded.January 1, 1982, to apply for amnesty, orThey saw it as a tribute to the dead and to thepardon. Migrant workers here illegally can alsoveterans who came home to a lukewarm wel-apply if they lived in America for at least 90 dayscome.between May 1, 1985, and May 1, 1986.4. The daughter of immigrants, Lin is proudDuring 1987 and 1988 two million illegalof her heritage. She calls her artistic visionimmigrants applied. If approved, each was"distinctly Asian" in its simplicity. Though borngiven legal permission to remain in the Unitedin the United States, she did not feel she fittedStates and to apply for citizenship after 6¹/²into American society until college. Since de-years. However, there were problems. In Newsigning the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, MayaYork City, only about 35 percent of all illegalLin has worked as an architect, a stage designer,immigrants signed up. To apply for amnestyand a sculptor. Her most recent project was thecost money - $185 for the application fee, $90Civil Rights Memorial in Montgomery, Ala-for a medical exam-and required an AIDS test.bama. Maya Lin had not studied the civil rightsPeople with the AIDS virus are not allowed tomovement before taking on this project. Sheimmigrate to the United States.was too young during the 1960s to have par-7. A second problem was that some peopleticipated in the movement. However, Maya Lincould not prove they had lived here longused her feelings and intelligence to come upenough. Their employers feared punishmentwith a design. She carved the names and eventssince it is illegal to hire illegal immigrants.of the civil rights era on stone with waterEmployers must check that their employees areflowing over them. "If you don't remembercitizens. Employers of illegal aliens can be finedhistory accurately," she said, "how can youand jailed. Therefore, many employers refusedlearn?" Her experience proves that you do notto help employees qualify, although the Immi-necessarily have to take part in an event, or agration and Naturalization Services promised togroup's struggle, to understand and appreci-keep records secret. Now, with the deadline forate it.amnesty passed, illegal immigrants still struggle5. In the 1980s, the United States pressedin this country. Some carn as little as two dollarsthe Soviet Union to case its emigration lawsan hour because of employers who take advan-and allow more people to leave Russia. Thetage of their illegal status.635

Mr. Jeffords [a member of Congress]:students. What is your opinion of bilingualThere are significant [major] differenceseducation?between rural areas and urban areas as far13. In response to this issue and to otheras education of the handicapped children,problems concerning language, many statesare there not?have made English their official language. How~Mr. Weintraub [Assistant Executive Di-ever, Federal law requires election ballots to berector, The Council for Exceptional Chil-printed in other languages in certain districts. Ifdren]: I don't think that there is anya large number of people in a district do notquestion of that. I think that there is also aspeak English well, ballots must be in theirquestion of leadership. The question ofprimary language or first language. Do youwhether a handicapped child gets an edu-think English should be the official language ofcation is really left to the vulnerability, orthe country? Why or why not?the whim of some local decision makers.14. Still another trend concerns the questionSo, you can go into communities in Ver-of the declining percentage of people who votemont, I can show you some little ruralin elections. Despite the fact that a greatercommunity in Vermont that probably hadnumber of people than ever before are qualifiedthe most incredible special education pro-to vote, a smaller percentage actually vote. Thegram I have ever seen. If you go 15 miles23rd Amendment, ratified in 1961, gave citi-down the road, to a similar community,zens in Washington, D.C., the right to vote inand there is absolutely nothing. The dis-presidential elections. A decade later, the 26thtinction is that there is a local schoolAmendment lowered the voting age to 18 forboth state and national elections. Before 1971,superintendent in one community whobelieves in doing this, and there is anotheronly ten states had allowed people under 21 tovote in the state elections. Yet in the 1970s andcommunity with a superintendent whodoes not believe in doing it at all. So I1980s, only about 55 per cent of all qualifiedthink that it is the kind of arbitrary [sub-voters took part in presidential elections. Theject to individual and random decision]United States has the worst voting record of allWestern democracies.decision making that we wish toeliminate.- Congressional Record, 1975OutlookAccording to the witness, why was a law on15. For decades, the United States waseducating the handicapped needed?known as a "melting pot" where immigrants of12. Another trend in education is the grow-different cultures were absorbed into Americaning use of bilingual education, wherein stu-culture. Today, some people prefer to comparedents are taught in their native language inthe United States to a salad bowl, where ethnicschools. They learn basic subjects in the nativegroups preserve their own cultures while stilllanguage and English while studying English asfitting into the general culture. Besides thea second language. People who support bilin-varied national backgrounds in the Unitedgual education claim that students can learnStates, racial minorities, older Americans, andsubjects in their native language while theythe handicapped add to the challenge of assim-master English. Opponents say that a bilingualilating, or integrating large groups of Americanseducation allows children to avoid learninginto one society. Many Americans now agreeEnglish. With immigrants from so many differ-that assimilation should mean not only requir-ent countries now coming to American schools,ing a minority to adjust to the majority. Itsome schools have difficulty providing teachersshould also mean the majority accepting, under-who are fluent in all the languages of theirstanding, and learning from the minority.637

