The Story of Gouvcmeur Morris Professor of History Columbia University Austin • Orlando • San Diego • Chicago • Dallas • Toronto JOHN A. GARRATY is a distinguished historian and writer and the (iouvernettr Morris Professor of History at Columbia University. His books include the widely adopted college textbook The American Nation, biographies of Henry Cabot Lodge and Woodrow Wilson. The Great Depression, and the popular 1,001 Things Everyone Should Know About American History. He has held Guggenheim. Ford, and Social Science Research Council Fellowships. Professor Garraty is a former president of the Society of American Historians, editor of the Dictionary of American Biography, and coedi- lor of the Encyclopedia of American Biography. PHILLIP BACON is Professor Fmeritus of Geography and Anthropology at the University of Houston, He served on the faculties of Columbia University and the University of Washington and is former Dean of the Graduate School of Peabody College for Teachers at Vanderbilt University. Cover: © B. Gelberg. 1989. Sharpshooters. Maps: R.R Donnelley Company Cartographic Services Copyright © 1991 by Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, w ithout permission in writing from the publisher. Requests fur permission to make copies of any part of the work should be mailed to: Permissions Department. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Inc.. 8th Floor. Orlando. FL 32887. This work is derived in part from AMFRICAN HISTORY, copyright © 198ft. 1982 hy Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Inc. All rights reserved. Acknowledgments, kee back matter. Printed in the United States of America 0123456 041 987654321 Contents Howto Use The Stcry of America xviii Using the lextbook's Features xviii Studying Primary Sources xxiii Developing Historical Imagination xxiii Writing About History xxiv To the Student xxvi Unit One Beginnings to 1770 Chapter 1 Three Discoveries of America 2 1. The First Americans 2 2. Europe Awakens 14 3. The Age of Discovery 20 4. Spain's Golden Age 27 Reading a Time Line 21 Reading Maps , 32 The Columbian Exchange 36 America's lndian Heritage 10 Chapter 1 Review 38 Chapter 2 English Colonies in America 40 1. Why Colonists Came to America 40 2. The Settlement of Virginia 47 3. The Settlement of Massachusetts 53 4. "A City Upon a Hill" 57 5. European Challenges to England 62 6. Later Colonial Settlements 66 A Colony Built Upon Smoke 52 Using l atitude and Longitude 46 Chapter 2 Review 70 v Unit Two 1770-1798 Chapter 3 Life in Colonial America 1. An American Civilization 72 2. Slavery and the Economy 85 3. Americans Share New Ideas 95 4. East-West Disputes 101 STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: Reading Graphs 78 Creating a Graphic Representation 103 PORTFOLIO: America's West African Heritage 81 Chapter 3 Review 106 Chapter 4 Governing the American Colonies 108 1. 'Hie English Colonial System 108 2. English Colonial Policies 111 3. France Challenges England v 116 4. Taxation Without Representation 124 Washington 's Escape 120 Recognizing Cause and Effect 132 The American Revolution 132 Chapter 4 Review 134 Unit One Review 136 Chapter 5 The Revolutionary War 138 1. The Revolution Begins 138 2. Shots Heard Round the World 143 3. "Liberty or Death" 150 4. Independence Is Declared 156 5. Americans Hold Together 164 6. The War Is Won 169 Praise to Washington 154 Heroes of the Revolution 174 Tracing Movements on a Map 146 LINKINGHISTORY 8t GEOGRAPHY: Crossing the A tlantic 176 Chapter 5 Review 178 vi Contents Chapter 6 Creating the United States 180 1. Self Government 180 2. Setting New Boundaries 185 3. Peacetime Troubles 191 4. "We, the People" 196 5. "A More Perfect Union" 220 Franklin's Advice STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: 221 Using SQ3R -A Helpfrl Study Plan INTERPRETING HISTORY: 230 The United States Constitution 219 Chapter 6 Review 232 Chapter 7 Governing the United States 234 1. A Government Is Formed 234 2. Financing the Nation 240 3. 'ITic Nation Is Tested 244 4. The Two- Party System 254 The Whiskey RebeUum 252 Separating Fact from Ofnnum 258 Chapter 7 Review 262 Unit Two Review 264 Unit Three 1790-1840 Chapter 8 The Age of Jefferson 266 1. The Fall of the Federalists 266 2. Jefferson as President 272 3. Tlte I-ouisiana Territory 280 4. 'Ihe Threat of War 286 FEATURE: The Capital City 270 STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: Interpreting a Physical Map 274 Chapter 8 Review 292 1. War in the Northwest 295 2. The War at Sea 300 3. The War on 1-and 305 4. Peace and New Boundaries 313 5. A Latin America Policy 323 A Wolf Against Sheep 304 7hr Star-Spangled Itannrr 311 Synthesizing Information 296 America's Hispanic Heritage 319 Chapter 9 Review 326 Contents vii Using Photographs as Primary Sources 399 Chapter 11 Review 402 Unit Four Chapter 10 Building America, 1790-1840 1. A Diversified Economy 2. The Industrial Revolution 3. Rise of the Cities 4. Improvements in Travel A Protective Tariff Interpreting a Special Purpose Map Homes for A mencans Chapter 10 Review Unit Three Review Chapter 12 Manifest Destiny 1. The Texas Question 2. Westward Movement 3. War with Mexico 4. The Golden West 5. Free and Slave Territories A Desert in Bloom 1816-1860 Chapter 11 The Age of Jackson 364 1. The F,ra of Good Feelings 364 2. Sectional Conflicts 370 3. Jackson as President 382 4. Jackson and the Economy 388 5. Jackson's Indian Policy 393 FEATURES: America Grows Westward 376 The Trail cfTran 394 Learning from Art 415 LINKING HISTORY 8t GEOGRAPHY: The Nation Moves West 444 Chapter 12 Review 446 Chapter 13 Slavery and Abolition 1. Cotton and Slavery 2. "Cotton Is King" 3. Abolitionism Sold Down the River Comparing Statistics 457 Chapter 13 Review 474 viii Contents Chapter 14 Reform and Romanticism 1. Women and Reform 477 2. Reforms in Education 484 3. Religion and Reform 490 4. The Romantic Age 495 5. Improving Society 498 STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: Utidrrstandtng Sequence 481 Chapter 14 Review 506 Unit Four Review 508 Unit Five Chapter 16 The Civil War 542 1. The War Begins 543 2. Raising the Armies 549 3. War and the Economy 560 4. The War in the East 568 5. The War in the West 577 6. The Final Battles 581 FEATURES: Johnny Rcb and Billy Tank 552 Soldiering in the Civil War 555 Btndinq Up the Wounds of War 574 STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: Reading a Statistical Chart 558 Geography and War Chapter 16 Review 1850-1877 Chapter 15 Causes of the Civil War 510 1. The North and Slavery 512 2. The Struggle for Kansas 515 3. New Political Parties 523 4. A Controversial Court 525 5. Lincoln and Douglas 528 6. The Threat of Secession 532 FEATURES: A Caning in Congress 521 The Amistad Mutiny 526 STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: Comparing Maps 517 Chapter 15 Review 540 1. Radicals and Moderates 591 2. The Civil War Amendments 597 3. Freedom Alter Slavery 601 4. Troops Leave the South 610 5. The Long Night Begins 613 Interpreting a Graph of Business Cycles 605 Reconstruction 596 Chapter 17 Review 618 Unit Five Review 620 Contents ix Chapter 17 Reconstruction Unit Six 1850-1900 Chapter 18 The Last Frontier 622 1. The Banlc for the Plains 623 2. Indian Wars 630 3. Mining the West 639 4. The End of the Open Range 643 The Buffalo Vanishes 635 The Richest Hill in the World 640 Reading a Climate Map 649 Gold! Gold! Gold! 654 The American Frontier 633 Chapter 18 Review 656 Chapter 19 The R isc of Industrial America 658 1. The Power of the Rails 659 2. The Communications Revolution 665 3. Regulation of Big Business 670 4. Workers and Work 678 5. The Growth of Cities 683 Root, Hag, or DU 672 Reading a TabU 688 Chapter 19 Review 694 Chapter 20 National Politics and Culture, 1867-1896 696 1. Politics After the War 697 2. The Age of Realism 706 3. Populism 712 4. Unemployment and Lhircst 723 5. Gold Versus Silver 726 FEATURE: The Front-Porch Campaign 729 STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: Interpreting Election Results 716 Chapter 20 Review 732 Unit Six Review 734 x Contents Unit Seven 1865-1914 Chapter 21 America in World Affairs, 1865-1912 736 1. Extending America's Influence 736 2. Policing the Western Hemisphere 744 3. The Spanish Amcncan War 747 4. America Expands Further 761 5. Roosevelt and 1 Its ( anal 770 FEATURES: Yellow Journalism 753 The One-Centavo Stamp 771 STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: Interpreting Editorial Cartoons 775 PORTFOLIO:' America's Pacific Heritage 757 Chapter 21 Review 778 Chapter 22 Reformers and the Progressive Movement 780 1. The Progressive F>a 781 2. Reformers 785 3. Government Versus Big Business 796 4. A Progressive Victory 800 5. Limits of Ptogrcssivism 805 Composing Paragraphs 806 Identifying (leographtc Regions 810 Chapter 22 Review 812 Unit Eight Chapter 23 The Great World War 816 1. 'The Spark Is Lit 817 2. War on I and and Sea 822 3. America Enters the War 828 4. The War at Home and Abroad 831 5. The Search for Peace 845 FEATURE: Torpedo Warfare 827 STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: Analyzing Roundary Changes 847 Chapter 23 Review 850 Contents xi Chapter 24 The Twenties 852 1. The Tragedy of Waodrnw Wilson 852 2. American Reaction to the War 859 3. The Roaring Twenties 870 4. An Automobile Civilization 880 5. America Heads for a Crash 884 The l our Eagle 873 Comparing Points of View 855 Chapter 24 Review 892 Chapter 25 The Great Depression and the New Deal 1. The Costs of Depression 895 2. Roosevelt Comes to Power 903 3. The New Deal 913 4. Effects of the New Deal 920 The Dust Rowl 910 The First Lady 924 Composing an Essay 914 Dust front the Greenhouse 930 Chapter 25 Review 932 Unit Eight Review 934 Unit Nine 1940-1963 Chapter 26 World War II 936 1. American Neutrality 937 2. The European War 942 3. The Pacific War 950 4. The Allies Regain Europe 959 5. The Allies Win in the Pacific FEATURE: 966 New Weapons of War STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: 954 E valuating Decisions 972 Chapter 26 Review 976 Chapter 27 America in the Cold War 1. The United Nations 978 2. Truman in the Cold War 983 3. Truman Survives His Critics 993 4. The Eisenhower Legacy 1000 5. A Youthful Cold Warrior 1014 The Stars and Stripes 1008 A nalyzing Historical Interpretations 987 xii Contents The CM War 992 Political Geograplry: Uncle Sam's Islands 1022 Chapter 27 Review 1024 Unit Nine Review 1026 Unit Ten 1964 to the Present Chapter 28 The Great Society 1028 1. The Johnson Presidency 1029 2. A Prosperous America 1032 3. A Society of Many Members 1042 4. Movements for Equal Rights 1051 FEATURE: Baseball Leaves Brooklyn 1048 STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: Using the Census 1047 Chapter 28 Review 1058 Chapter 29 America Is Put to the Test 1060 1. War in Vietnam 1061 2. A Year of Tragedy 1068 3. Nixon as President 1072 4. The Watergate Affair 1081 FEATURE: The Vietnam Veterans Menumal 1079 STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: Drawing Conclusions 1066 Chapter 29 Review 1086 Chanter 30 Modem Times 1088 1. Two Centuries of Democracy 1089 2. The Melting Pot Bubbles Over 1092 3. Three American Tragedies 1103 4. The Democrats Take a Turn 1107 5. The Republicans Triumphant 1110 Expressing a Point of View 1115 Fatal Error: Oil on Water 1122 Chapter 30 Review 1124 Unit Ten Review 1126 Contents xiii Point of View William Penn's biographer tells of Penn's respect for American Indians. 41 From what Penn had read or heard or seen of Indians, he had formed a highly favorable opinion of them. They were quiet folk, much like typical Quakers, serious, reserved, and taciturn, qualities Perm admired. . . . '■ Harry Emerson Wildes This table shows how the colonies arc afirngrouped. Although there were no formal ties between the colonies in each group, geographical and cultural factors dresv them together. What were the two most comment reasons for founding colonies? America. Charles II was agreeable. He owed a large sum of money to Penn's father, who had died in 1670. To cancel this debt, in 1681 he gave William the region between New York and Maryland, suggesting that it be called Pennsylvania in honor of Penn's father. William Penn was strongly religious and held to high ideals. He also had a solid understanding of the value of money and how to make it. Pennsylvania was to be "a holy experiment'' in Christian living and self-government. Penn personally came to Pennsylvania to oversee the laying-out of Philadelphia, his city of "brotherly love." Like Roger Williams, he insisted that the Delaware lndtans be paid for their land and treated fairly by the settlers. Penn was shrewd in business. To attract settlers he wrote glowing accounts of Pennsylvania's soil and climate and circulated them throughout Europe. These, along with his promises of a voice in the government and religious liberty, lured settlers from many lands. Among these were large numbers of Germans, who were popularly known as the Pennsylvania Dutch. "Dutch" was the way English settlers pronounced the word Deutsch, which means German. Pennsylvania prospered from the start. Farmers produced large crops of wheal and other foodstuffs. To obtain a port to export their surplus. Penn in 1682 obtained a grant of land on Delaware Hay, This region, known as Delaware, became a separate colony in 1704. Georgia The last of the English colonies in America, Georgia, was not settled until 1733. It was founded by a group of well-to-do. charitable Kn- FOUNDING OF THE THIRTEEN COLONIES Colony Founded Reason for Founding New England Colonies Massachusetts 1620 Religious freedom New Hampshire 1622 Profit from trade and fishing; religious freedom Connecticut 1636 Religious and political freedom; expand trade Rhode Island 1636 Religious freedom Middle Colonies New York (New Netherland) 1624 Expand trade (Dutch) Delaware (New Sweden) 1638 Expand trade (Swedish) New Jersey 1664 investment by founders; religious and political freedom Pennsylvania 1682 Investment by founders; religious and political freedom Southern Colonies Virginia 1607 Expand trade and agriculture Maryland 1632 Investment by founders; religious and political freedom North Carolina 1663 Profit from trade and agriculture; religious freedom South Carolina 1663 Profit from trade and agriculture; religious freedom Georgia 1732 Investment; haven for debtors; buffer against Spanish cans. Washington came out of retirement to command the army. Suddenly Adams, who had been elected president by such a narrow margin, became a national hero. The Alien and Sedition Acts War with France would certainly have been popular in 1798. President Adams, however, wished to avoid it. He was right to do so. France had the most powerful army in the world. Its commander. Napoleon Bonaparte, was a military genius. The French navy completely outclassed the American navy. Although three powerful new warships called frigates were being built, the largest American warships ready for action were tiny coast guard patrol boats with crews of only six men. French privateers waited outside American harbors and picked off merchant ships almost at will. Nevertheless, many Federalist leaders, including Hamilton, hoped for war. War would give them an excuse to destroy what they called their "internal enemies." Jefferson's Democratic-Republicans had long been supporters of France and some of the radical ideas of ihc French Revolution. Would they not side w ith France if war broke out' It was time to crack down on "Democra/.v and all other kinds of rats,' " these Federalists claimed. Taking advantage of the war scare and the public anger over the XV/ Affair, the Federalists pushed several laws through Congress in the summer of 1798. These laws are known as the Alien and Sedition Acts because they were aimed at foreigners in the United Stales and at people who were supposedly trying to undermine the government in order to help F rance. One of these laws increased from 5 to 14 years the length of time foreigners had to live in the United States before they could become citizens. Another gave the president the power to jail or order out of the country foreigners w ho he thought were "dangerous to the peace and safety of the United Slates." Still more severe was the Sedition Act. which outlawed conspiracies against the government and attempts to start riots or uprisings The act made it a crime for anyone to "write, print, utter, or publish" even merely "scandalous" statements critical of the government, of either house of Congress, or of the president. So much for the First Amendment! The Sedition Act was an attempt to frighten the Democratic- Republicans into silence. In practice it made criticism of the Federalists a crime but not criticism of the Democratic-Republicans. It was against the law to "defame" the president but not the vice president. Such an attack on freedom of speech and of the press was a threat to everything the American Revolution had sought to protect. In 1798 the American experiment in republican government was little Return to the Preview & Review on more than 20 veto's old. Was it about to end in a new tyranny? |% j| ■ page 254. The I'wo-Party System 261 ■ uO)P"||(>3 j*OuoiD "m Vice President Jefferson reacted swiftly to the obvious political bias of the Sedition Act against his party. Above all. he believed that Congress did not have the power under the Constitution to pass any of the Alien and Sedition Acts. They were unconstitutional, in his opinion. That is. they violated the intent of the framers of the Constitution. He wrote out a series of statements called resolutions which explained his reasoning. A friend of his introduced these resolutions at a session of the legislature of the new stale of Kentucky, where the Jeffersonians had a large majority. The legislature voted to approve them in November 1798. At the time the public did not know that Jefferson had written the resolutions. They were called the Kentucky Resolutions. About a month later a similar set of resolutions was passed by the Virginia legislature. These were written by James Madison. The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions did not claim that the rights of free speech and free press had no limits. The issue was whether the federal government had the power to limit them. Jefferson and Madison argued that because of the First Amendment, it could not. Only the slate legislatures could restrict these rights. When Congress goes beyond its legal powers, what can be done? Jefferson had a simple answer. The Constitution, he wrote, was a contract. It was an agreement made by separate states. It gave certain powers to the federal government created by the states. What if Congress broke the contract by passing a law that the Constitution did not give it the power to pass? Jefferson argued that any stale could nullify, or cancel, the law. The law- would no longer exist within that state. Fach state, said Jefferson, "had an equal right to judge for itself' whether or not a law of Congress was constitutional. A Federalist editor strikes phrases from America's great documents in this 1790 political cartoon. 'Peter Porcupine' says, "1 hate this country and will sew this seeds of discord in it." Liberty weeps at the tomb of Benjamin Franklin. At right the devil himself whispers, "Let us destroy this idol liberty," while the British lion purrs, "Go on, dear Peter, my friend, and I will reward you." How do you think those who favored the Sedition Act felt about this cartoon? Bowdoin College Museum of Art / antes Madison was author of the Virginia Resolutions. Gilbert Stuart painted Madison in the early I It00s. The Fall of the Federalists 267 If put into practice, this doctrine of nullification would have meant the end of the United States as one nation. If any state could refuse to obey a law of Congress, the national government would soon collapse. Even the friendly Kentucky legislature found the idea of nullification too radical. It changed that resolution. Instead it urged Congress to repeal, or revoke, the unconstitutional law. The Virginia Resolutions took the same position. The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions had no practical effects. The other states did not respond favorably to them. Congress did not repeal the Alien and Sedition Acts. The resolutions are important, however, because they pul forth an argument about states' rights that reappears many times in the story of America, most notably over the issue of slavery. The Heroism of John Adams This etupysvinq shows Gearytetown. the Potomac Riper, and dimly in the distance the h'ederal City planned by Pierre Charles L'Enjant. Washington, D.C. was but a tiny villsute when this view was made in I SOI. The Federalists, of course, did not think that the Alien and Sedition Acts were unconstitutional. President John Adams hud special reason for believing them both legal and desirable. The coarse personal attacks of Democratic-Republican editors like James Callender made him very angry. Me was understandably delighted to see such people punished. Library of Congress Adams also wanted to he reelected president in 1800. He knew that his strong stand against France at the time of the XYZ Affair had made him very popular. The people saw him as the defender of the nation's honor and security during a national crisis. The danger of war with France was a political advantage for him. If war actually broke out, he would almost certainly be reelected. John Adams, however, was too honest and too patriotic to pul personal gain ahead of duty. He learned that the French foreign minister, Talleyrand, was eager to repair the damage caused by the XYZ Affair. Adams decided to try again to solve the nation's difficulties with France by negotiation. l.ate in 1799 he sent three new commissioners to Paris. This made Hamilton and his Federalist supporters furious. They wanted the conflict between America and France to continue. But they could not prevent Adams from acting. The American commissioners were greeted ''with a friendly dig- nity." After months of discussion the diplomats signed a treaty known as the Convention of 1800. Peace was restored between the two nations. France agreed to release the United States from its obligations under the treaty of alliance of 1778. Little else was gained, for the French would not agree to pay for the damages their warships and privateers had done to American vessels and their cargoes. On October 4, 1800, Napoleon Bonaparte, who was now dictator, or absolute ruler, of France, gave an enormous party for the American commissioners. It took place at his brother's estate outside Pans There were 180 guests, including all the high officials of the French government. A magnificent meal was eaten. Champagne toasts were drunk to ''perpetual peace," to "freedom of the seas." and to President John Adams, letter there were fireworks and a concert. The Election of 1800 President Adams had stopped the threat of war with France. He was quite rightly proud of what he had done. Many years later he said that the treaty was his greatest achievement—"the most splendid diamond in my crown" was the way he put it. Peace ended the crisis that hud led to passage of the Alien and Sedition Acts. Equally important, it ended the threat to democracy these laws posed. It also lessened the fear of many Americans that the Jeffersonians preferred France to their own country. This helped Jefferson in his campaign for the presidency in 1800. The Democratic-Republican party again nominated Jefferson for president and Aaron Burr for vice president. The Federalists ran Adams for president and Charles C. Pinckney of XYZ fame for vice- president. In the campaign the Jeffersonians were united, the Federalists badly divided. Hamilton disliked Adams so much that he Thomas Jefferson, top, and Aaron Burr, below, were the Democratic-Re- publican candidates for president and vice president in IttOO. Jefferson was painted by Rrmlrrandt Peale about the year of the election and Burr was painted by John Vanderlyn in 1HQ9. Who were their Federalist opponents? The Fall of the Federalists 269 White House Historical Society New-York Hi*torica! Society Point of View He also spoke with deep feeling about American democratic ideals. The United States, he said, was "the world's best hope." It had "the strongest government on earth" because the people felt that they were part of the government. They were therefore eager to protect and defend it. Jefferson's speech promised a moderate and reasonable program. The Alien and Sedition Acts were cither repealed or allowed to expire. By 1802 all were gone. JefTerson got Congress to repeal the Whiskey Tax too. And he canceled the federalists' program for expanding the army and navy. On the other hand, he continued Hamilton's policy of paying off the national debt and made no effort to do away with the Bank of the United States. The author of the Declaration of Independence had no taste for pomp and ceremony in the White House. He sometimes wore a frayed coat and carpel slippers to greet the representatives of foreign nations who presented themselves in powdered wigs, bemedalcd coats, and silver-buckled shoes. Plain citizens and foreign diplomats were each seen in their turn, for JefTerson told them all. "Nobody shall be above you, nor you above anybody." Jefferson and the Judiciary The only serious trouble JefTerson encountered in his first term involved the courts. He believed that judges must be independent. But he feared what he called their ' habit of going out of the question before them, to throw an anchor ahead, and grapple further hold for future advances of power." JefTerson, like many presidents, had to contend with a Supreme Court whose members had been appointed by his political opponents. The chief justice, John Marshall, whom JefTerson particularly disliked. was appointed by John Adams. Adams also appointed numerous other judges unfriendly to the Jeffersonians. Several of these appointees were know n as "midnight justices" because Adams had stayed up until midnight on his last day as president feverishly signing the commissions appointing them. In the confusion of Adams' last hours the commissions of a number of justices of the peace for the new District of Columbia were not distributed. When JefTerson found them, he refused to let them be released to the appointees. This led William Marbury, one of Adams' appointees, to ask the Supreme Court to order the secretary of slate, James Madison, to issue the commissions. The case of Marbury v. Madison (1803) provided a great test for the court and ■ Chief Justice Marshall. Marshall ruled against Marbury. The law allowing Marbury to sue, he announced, was not authorized by the Constitution. Thus, JefTerson had his way. But this case established the power of the Supreme Court to declare an act of Congress unconstitutional. which was much more important. M At a dinner honoring American winners of the Nobel Prize, the president made this toast, some 160 years after Jefferson's time in office. tcThis is the most extraordinary collection of talent . . . that has been gathered together at the White House—with the possible exception of when Thomas JefTerson dined alone. >5 John F. Kennedy, 1962 National Portrait Gallary John Marshall was painted by Henry Inman in 1781. Why is Marshall's name so often linked to Constitutional law? Jefferson as President 273 America's Hispanic Heritage The Prado. Madrid; Courtesy Art Resource Tin "Maids of Honor" shows Princess Margarita surrounded by her friends and iaarf. Velazquez himself stands to the left, Isold inn a brush. The mirror at the had reflects the smiling king and sjucen. More than 300 years pass before our eyes when we see these two paintings of the same Sale Spanish princess. The first is by Diego Rodrique? de Silva yVelatquee. In 1656 he painted LasMeninas ("Maids of Honor") in the court of Philip IV of Spain, the second portrait of Princess Margarita was painted in our time by Fernando Bolero of Colombia. His painting, like the others on these pages, shows our Hispanic heritage. Bolero is modern and at the same time pays homage to the American Indians whose art and architecture flourished long before the painted sails of Columbus' ships hoved into view. "Princess Margarita after Velazquez" was painted by Fernando Bolero of Colombia in 1978. His figures with large heads recall the sculptures made by early Indian artisans. America's Hispanic Heritage 319 Courtesy Christie's. N.Y. o From Colombia coma this Qmismbdym flildcd pendant fashioned in 500- 1000 A.D. The medallions cover the likeness of a woman whose face we see hut whose torso is demurely covered. Tha Brooklyn Museum New Orleans seems an appropriate home for "Archangel with a Gun," painted on cotton in the 17th century by a Peruvian disciple in tlte circle of an artist known as the Master of Calamareha. Ndm Orltant Munattm of Art Mumo do Arto do Ponce From Juan tU la Cosa, a Spaniard, we have this world map published in 1500. It shows for the first rime the islands and coasts of the Americas. A Spanish-trained Indian artist snade this Peruvian miniature of "Ataltualpa, Last King of the Incas." The first great native-born Puerto Ri- can painter was Jose Campeche. His "Dama a Caballo" ("Lady on Horse- back") shows how strong the Spanish influence was in 1785. America's Hispanic Heritage The Thomas Gilcrease Institute Courtesy Miguel Martinez Amelia Pelaez del C.asal is a Cuban painter who studied for a time in Europe. There she was influenced by the Cubist style of Pablo Picasso of Spain and Georges Brogue of Erance. To these influences she brought the vivid colors of her Caribbean homeland, as seen in Fishes " on the left, painted in 1943. 0 One of Mexico's greatest artists was Diego Rivera, best known for bis murals. "Women Washing C.lothes in a River among Zopilotes" was painted in 1928. Miguel Martinez, a contemporary Hispanic American who lives in Taos, New Mexico, is the artist of this contemporary painting entitled "Taos Mesa." Collection of France* da Santo*. Couneey Sotheby's Preview & Review Immigration from Europe Many women walked out of faciories to protest wage reductions in 1834 and 183ft. They were replaced by men and women rcccnlly come from Europe. These immigrants were very poor and willing toO take any jobs they could find. The number of people coming to America was increasing yearly. Only about 250.000 immigrants had entered the United States between the end of the Revolutionary War and 1820. During the next 20 years more than 700,000 crossed the Atlantic. ■ The majority of these immigrants came from England. Ireland, and Germany. Most came as families. Nearly all came to the United States because they were poor and hoped to earn a better living in what Europeans considered "the land of opportunity." No one rolled out the red carpet for these newcomers. Some Americans opposed unlimited immigration. These nativists believed that 1(H) much immigration would destroy American institutions. They wanted to keep the country for "native Americans." They conveniently forgot that the only real native Americans were the Indians! The 1835 Annual Report for the Bible Society of Essex County. New Jersey contained this challenge to its members: tt At a lime when a vast foreign population is rushing in on us like a flood—when infidelity |unfaithfulness] on the one hand, in its protean (various] forms, and Romanism |Ca- tholicisml on the other, with its determined and deadly hostility to God's truth and our free institutions—are assailing those truths, and endeavoring day and night to undermine those interests which are dear to our hearts, shall we be idle'.*?? The nativists were members of various Protestant churches. They were particularly hostile to Irish Catholics, who were entering the country in large numbers. Disease had destroyed most of the potato crop in Ireland, and thousands of Irish, facing starvation, turned to America. In 1834 a nativist mob burned a Catholic convent near Boston. Similar shameful incidents occurred in other parts of the country. Andrew M. Greeley, a popular contemporary writer, scarcely conceals his anger at the typical nativist view of the Irish Catholics who came to America: U It is no secret that the Irish were not especially welcomed when they entered the United States. One can understand this reaction. Most earlier immigrants were, if not wealthy, at least reasonably skilled workers or artisans. They were the most ambitious and vigorous of the Europeans seeking Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 3. Understanding Issues, Events. & Ideas. Describe the growth of American cities, using the following words: immigrant, nativist. urban frontier, urban center, tenement. 1. Where did most immigrants come from between 1820 and 1840? 2. Why did nativists fear too much immigration? 3. In what sense were western cities an urban frontier? 4. What caused slums to develop in cities? Thinking Critically. 1. Imagine that you are an immigrant in Boston in 1830. Use your historical imagination to describe the kind of job you would look for and the skills that would be necessary for that job. 2. The year is 1835. You have decided you want to move to the urban frontier. What service would you most like to provide farmers? Why? The Rise of Cities The Granger Collection Blood flaws in the streets of the City of Brotherly Love in this 1844 enttravirut of an anti-Catholic riot in Philadelphia. Wlty was the mob so tlrrcalened by new arrivals to America? to make new lives for themselves in a richer country. But the famine Irish (people who left Ireland because disease destroyed the potato cropl were poor, uneducated, and confused. They tied not to a better life hut from almost certain death. They were dirty, undernourished, disease-ridden, and incapable of anything but the most unskilled labor. That they arrived in great numbers and filled up whole sections of cities almost overnight did not go unnoticed by native Americans [Those already living there], . . . If the Irish were to be accepted into American society they must be sober, industrious, and ambitious, like the Protestant immigrants who had come before them. There, of course, was the heart of the problem. Not only were they poor, sick, dirty, and uneducated. They were also Catholic. The Irish Catholics, with their unmarried clergy, had an equally strange tendency not to send their children to public schools, where every effort would be made to turn them into good Americans—this meant, of course, good Protestant Americans. From the nativist point of view, it was no wonder that churches were burned and that Catholics were occasionally murdered in riots.1" 'from I hul Must Distressful Nation. The Turning of the American Irish by Amlin M. (irecley H<"toncat Statistics tif turn United States Meanwhile people continued to leave their homes in Ireland, miserable and downtrodden. Many sang this farewell to their homeland: it Farewell to thee. Erin mavoureen [Ireland dear]. Thy valleys I'll tread never more; This heart that now bleeds for thy sorrow's Will waste on a far distant shore. Thy green sods lie cold on parents, A cross marks the place of their rest. The wind that moans softly above them Will waft [blow] their poor child to the West.1?? 'From The Irish in Amrrini by James E. Johnson City Life in America Most of the immigrants who came to America between 1820 and 1840 settled in the cities of the Northeast. These were still communities where a person could easily walk from one end to the other in half an hour—places where church steeples stood out on the skyline and the masts and spars of ships at the wharves lowered over the roofs of the houses, shops, and warehouses. There were no skyscrapers These charts show the total number of immigrants coming to the United States between 1820 and I860 and their places of origin. What art some trends in immigration during those years illustrated by the charts? The Rise of Cities 345 beyond the Mississippi. The federal government had cut costs of the relocation wherever possible. Sometimes the Indians were supplied with spoiled meat and other bad food. Even so. the move still cost much more than had been expected. Nevertheless. Jackson went ahead with the Indian removal policy. More than 45.000 southern Indians were resettled. The Seminoles refused to sign a treaty of removal. Led by their great chiefs Phillip and Osceola, the Seminoles fought. Joseph Hernandez. Florida's first congressional delegate and the first Hispanic in Congress, raised an army of volunteers. Within a few short months, Hernandez had captured all the Seminole leaders. By 1842 the Seminole resistance, called the Second Seminole War. was over. By the 1840s scarcely an Indian remained in the southern states. The tribes that were removed had suffered heavy losses. For the moment the survivors were free to go their own way, but not for long. The Log Cabin Campaign of 1840 O Martin Van Buren had been secretary of state during Jackson's first term and vice president during his second. Van Buren came from New York. He was a small, red-haired man, one of the shrewdest politicians of his day. He was so clever at political dealing that he was frequently called "the Little Magician" or "the Red Fox." In 1836, with Jackson's approval, the new Democratic party nominated Van Buren for president. When the opposition, now calling itself the Whig party, put up three different presidential candi- 0 dates. Van Buren won the election easily. He got 170 electoral votes, while his closest opponent. General William Henry Harrison, received only 73. As president. Van Buren was hurt by the economic depression that followed the Panic of 1837. Many stale banks closed. Others had shaky finances. The federal government had no safe place to store lax payments and other income. At Van Buren's urging. Congress established an Independent Treasury System. Thereafter, all money due the government was to be paid in gold or silver. This money was simply stored in government vaults until needed. In 1840 Van Buren sought reelection. This time the Whigs united behind General Harrison. They correctly guessed that this old Indian fighter would have an appeal to voters similar to that of Andrew Jackson. Their strategy was the Log Cabin Campaign. In 1828 the Democrats had ignored most issues and concentrated on describing (he virtues of that friend of the common man and savior of his country. Andrew' Jaekson. Now the Whigs sang the praises of ©"Old Tippecanoe." the conqueror of Tecumseh. Harrison was a simple man of the people, the Whigs claimed. He lived in a log cabin and always had a warm welcome for strangers. He drank that won- on saddles trimmed in silver and rode with beautiful wives wearing jeweled combs in their hair. They also feared outsiders and forbade trade with Americans. Hispanics had a strict class system which they wished to keep intact. Highest were Spaniards born in Spain. Next came Creoles, Spanish born in America. These groups held all the power of New Spain. Mestizos, people of Spanish and Indian ancestry came next, with the Indians last. They were treated as children by the missionaries and abused by the foremen of mines and ranches where they worked. Revolution in New Spain Like the American colonists, the settlers of New Spain came to deeply resent the heavy hand of their government in Mexico City. When revolutions began to topple governments in Europe late in the 1700s and early in the 1800s, the Spanish and Portuguese colonies in Americaalso revolted. In 1821 New Spain successfully won its independence from Spain. New Spain hccame the independent Republic of Mexico. But sadly in the flush of these victories, the original purpose of the revolution—to free those who were oppressed by the class system—was forgotten. Most Spaniards returned to Spain, leaving the leadership of the Republic to Creoles, The struggle to organize the government look three years. Finally Mexico's republic was organized and a constitution proclaimed in 1824. It strictly outlawed slavery, a change that would come to have important consequences when American settlers began to stream into northern Mexico. Life in Northern Mexico By 1830 perhaps as many as 50,000 Mexicans, mostly mestizos, lived in the northern part of the new territory. Already living on these lands were more than 250,000 Indians. Some, such as the Hopi and Zuni. married newcomers and merged their ways of life. Others, the ITc and Apache especially, moved or did battle for their ancestral territories writh the new arrivals. Life in northern Mexico was not much different than life elsewhere in Mexico. Rich landowners still controlled vast ranchos and large herds of sheep or cattle, as well as silver or copper mines. Most people worked for the landowners. The missions also owned huge tracts of land and large herds. Here, Indians did most of the work. There were not many large towns in northern Mexico. Ranches were far apart and most settlements had only a few buildings. People counted on each other. Men headed the households. T hey handled The Texas Question (he (railing and worked outside the home. Women did not usually go out in public except to go to market or to church. But inside the home the mother was in charge. She made most of the decisions, and her children helped and obeyed her. A Mexican boy or girl was expected to be respeto and hien educado—to be respectful of others and to do well the work others depended on. Before he was very old. a boy joined his father in the fields or mines, or rode beside him as he gave orders to his workers. A girl helped her mother go to market, bake, weave, and take care of the younger children. If the family was wealthy, servants might do many of these jobs. Quite often many members of the same family—grand- parents. aunts and uncles—lived close together. A large family meant more hands to help do the work. People learned to work with others and to do what was best for the family. They also learned that when one member of the family did something wrong, all members were disgraced. Americans in Texas Into this setting came settlers from America. Moses Austin of Missouri. after losing his money overnight in a financial panic, struck out for Texas. He respected and admired the Mexicans and felt his future lay with them. He was granted a colony in 1820 in what is now Texas, but he died of pneumonia the year following. On his deathbed Moses Austin asked his son Stephen to carry out his dream of colonizing Texas. Some Mexican leaders opposed American settlement. Others thought settlers should be attracted to Texas, where they could eventually become Mexican citizens. Trade would increase, particularly over what came to be known as the Santa l-'e frail. The second group won the argument and Stephen Austin was given a renewal of his father's grant. He thus became an empresario—the Mexican term used to describe business people who brought in settlers. Each em- presario received 23.000 acres (9.315 hectares) of land for every 300 families brought into Texas. Austin and his hand-picked settlers, the "Old Three Hundred," as they came to be known, joined about 6.000 Tejanos—Mexican ranchers—living near San Antonio and other small Texas towns. They were loyal Sons of Mexico who were taken with the notion of colonizing Texas. Austin and Juan Sequin, the Tejano leader, became friends at once. The families who followed Austin each received a grant of land. Most grew cotton on it. They prospered. By 1830 about 20,000 Americans had come to Texas, bringing 2.<XX) slaves with them. Stephen Austin became a citizen of Mexico and urged that Catholicism be the religion of the colony. For several years he was the governor of Texas, which by then was a Mexican province. But Teas Slat* Capitol (Photo: Texas Stock) Texans set this paint ina of Stephen F. Austin at their capitol in Austin. Hr is shown in his cabin in 1824. W'by is Austin considered a hero in Texas? What makes a person a hero? Austin, whose heart was in A ncrica, had difficulty inspiring loyalty to Mexico when most of his settlers had come from America. The friendship with the Tejanos aside, most Americans came to lecl that Texas was their country and that they were the real Texans. Few troubled to learn Spanish. When the Mexican government abolished slavery, the Texans found legal ways to keep their slaves. ® The trickle of colonists from the United States and the third- generation Tejanos in Texas gave people a feeling of independence and nationalism. Why should they report to a foreign capital as far away as Mexico City? Hadn't they earned the land by farming and ranching as others had in the westward-moving United States? Texas Wins Its Independence Government leaders in Mexico City naturally disliked the Texans' attitude. They tried to stop further immigration to Texas. When The Texas Question 409 did sincerely desire peace. Our army had not then penetrated far into Mexico, and I did hope, that with the two millions [dollars] then proposed, we might get peace, and avoid the slaughter, the shame, the crime, of an aggressive, unprovoked war. But now you have overrun half of Mex- ico—you have exasperated and irritated her people— . . . and boldly ask her to give up New Mexico and California; and as a bribe to her patriotism, seizing on her property, you offer three million [dollars] to pay the soldiers she has called out to repel your invasion, on condition she will give up to you at least one-third of her whole territory. . . . What is the territory, Mr. President, which you propose to wrest from Mexico? It is consecrated to the heart of the Mexican by many a well-fought battle with his old Castilian master [against the Spanish in the Mexican Revolution]. His Bunker Hills, and Saratogas, and Yorktowns, are there! The Mexican can say, "There I bled for liberty! and shall I surrender that consecrated home of my affections to the Anglo-Saxon [descendants of the Knglish] invaders? What do they want with it? They have Texas already. They have possessed themselves of the territory between the Nueces and the Rio Grande. What else do they want? . . . What would be the response? . . . The Senator from Michigan says he must have this. Why, my worthy Christian brother, on what principle of justice? "I want room!" Sir. look at this pretense [unsupported claim] of want of room. With twenty millions of people, you have about one thousand millions of acres of land, inviting settlement by every conceivable argument, bringing them down to a quarter of a dollar an acre, and allowing every man to squat where he pleases. But the Senator from Michigan says we will be two hundred millions in a few years, and we want room. If I were a Mexican I would tell you, "Have you not room in your own country to bury your dead men? If you come into mine, we will greet you with bloody hands, and welcome you to hospitable graves. . . .'?? Adding more territory where slavery might be established was another concern in the North. Polk therefore swallowed his anger and submitted the treaty to the Senate, which ratified it after heated debate. Point of View Was the Mexican War fought to protect the border of the U.S.? Or was it waged to gain California and New Mexico? These famous lines have outlasted the controversy. ttl heartily accept the motto,—'That government is best which governs least,'. . . Witness the present Mexican wars, the work of comparatively a few' individuals using the standing government as their tool; for, in the outset, the people would not have consented to this measure.?? From Civil Disobedience, Henry' David Thorcau, 1848 A Blending of Cultures After the treaty had been signed, more and more Americans moved into the Southwest. They brought their own language, laws, and ways 'From Appends to the Congressional Globe. 29 Congress, 2nd Session War with Mexico of behaving. Differences in the cultures of the Americans and the Mexicans—75,000 or more in the new U.S. lands—created problems at first. For families with ties to Americans, adjusting was usually fairly easy. Other Mexicans did not do as well. Many lost their property. To get the prime land held by Mexicans. Americans challenged land titles that had been granted by Spanish or Mexican authorities and held for years. This started long and costly court battles. Whatever the decision, hard feelings resulted. Under the treaty Mexicans were granted all the rights of American citizenship. Yet their culture, which blended Spanish. Mexican, and Indian ways of life, often was viewed as inferior. Traditions of family loyalty, personal honor, and devout Catholicism were not respected by the newcomers. Poor Mexican Americans suffered most. Many of these newcomers were forced to take low-paying jobs on American ranches, railroads, or in American mines. Mexican American bandits, many of them trying to recover their stolen property or livestock, raided American settlements. In time, though, the two groups helped change each other's way of life. They borrowed ideas from each other. The Americans learned from the Mexicans how to mine the rich hills of the Southwest. Because they had no mining laws of their own. Americans also used Mexican laws to form their own. They also learned sheep ranching. The tough churros of the Mexicans were well-adapted to thrive in dry lands of the Southwest. These sheep had already changed the lives of some of the Indian tribes in the area. Navajo women learned to weave their wool into beautiful, warm blankets colored with Navajo dyes and woven into traditional patterns. Seeing that they could trade their blankets for horses and other things they needed, the Navajo decided to settle down and raise sheep. Now the Americans began to raise sheep loo. As you will read later. American cowhands ■ also learned their craft from Mexican vaqueros. The Americans brought tools, seeds, and livestock with them. They had the latest inventions and business techniques. They established a legal system that preserved the rights of the accused. Mexicans adopted the best of these and many other things. Slowly a new way of life was formed in the Southwest, a system of values and behavior shared by most of the people there. You can see this special way of life today thoughout the Southwest. You see it in the music of Trini Lopez, Santiago and Flaco Jimenez, and Laura Canales and in the art of Diego Rivera. Josd Clementd Orozco, Amado Pena, Joan Miro, Carmen Lomas Garza, and Julio Gonzalez. You can also see the blending of cultures in the clothes the people wear, in their laws. Return to the Preview & Review on and in lhc words they usc- " is a way lifc wilh dccP roo,s in ,hree page 418. cultures—Indian. Mexican, and American. |*Q| Thomas Gtkrease Institute, Tulsa California and the Rancheros Tk great prize that the United Stales won in the Mexican War was © the province of California, in the 1840s most of the region beyond the Rocky Mountains was untouched by any other than its native Indians. But. as wc have seen, (he Spanish had been living in California and New Mexico since the late 1700s. By the 1830s there were 2l mission settlements in a kind of broken string from San Diego to Sonoma, north of San Francisco. The landholdings of the missions were enormous. Around the missions founded by the Spanish were clustered large Indian villages, for Father Juntpero Sena and other priests had eon-© verted thousands of Indians to Christianity. These Indians were practically slaves. They did all the work that supported the missions. They tended large herds of cattle and grew corn, grapes, and other crops They also made cloth, leather goods, wine, soap, and many other manufactured products. The missions w ere so prosperous that other Mexicans demanded that the government open mission lands to settlers. In the early 1830s it did so. Thereafter any Mexican citizen with cattle could obtain a huge rancho free. These landholders were called rancheros. Within ifeu years 700 ranchos were established in California, most of them The pride of the Spanish rancheros is evident in this color lithograph titled "Hacendado y Su Mayordomo," "The Landowner and His Foreman " The Mexican artist is Julio Michaud. Judpinfl from these riders, were most rancheros wealthy people? How can you tellf Preview & Review Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 4. Understanding issues. Events. & Ideas. Contrast the settlement of Utah with that of California, using the following words: Mormons. Nauvoo, Salt Lake City. Mormon Trail, Law of Riparian Rights, Law of Prior Appropriation, prospector. Gold Rush, Forty-Niner, clipper ship, stake a claim, mining camp. Negro Hill, ghost towns, 1. Compare life in a California mission with life on a rancho. 2. How were Mormons able to move so many people westward? 3. Define two laws of water rights. 4. What were some of the means of travel used by the Forty- Niners? Thinking Critically. You are a prospector who has struck gold in California. Write a letter persuading a relative to join you. The Golden West 425 1 -------.------------------' 0 50 100 Km Albert Fqunl Aiea Projection LEARNING FROM MAPS. The missions were located no more than one day's travel apart. Why arc most near the coast? about 50.000 acres (20,000 hectares) in area. Each ranchero had an enormous amount of land. ■ Life on one of these great ranches was rich but simple. People ate enormous quantities of meat at every meal. Horses were so plentiful that travelers merely lassoed a new one when their own mounts became tired. Most of the hard work of caring for the herds and raising crops was still done by the Indians, who were even worse off than when they had lived outside the missions. Yet in spile of their wealth, the ranchers had few comforts and conveniences. Their homes were unheated and poorly furnished. Window glass was scarce. Most homes had dirt floors. People lived so far apart that they had few visitors. There were no newspapers. The days stretched out one after another. The Mormons of Utah The signing of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo increased interest in westward expansion. During the Mexican War one of the most remarkable migrations of American history had taken place into what is now Utah. This was the settlement that spread out next to the Sutters Fort State Historical Monument keepers, and merchants who sold the miners everything from pickaxes and tents to fancy clothes and fine horses at extremely high prices. These types made far more money than the miners. Fighting in the mining camps—with fists, knives, and guns—was common. People from all over the United Stales, from Mexico and South America, from Europe, and from as far away as China and Australia flocked to the gold regions. With so many people crowding into the camps, disputes of all kinds occurred. Mexican Californians were ■ badly treated and often prevented from prospecting. The Chinese and free African Americans were also mistreated, although none of the gold seekers were more hard working. The local Indians were driven off by brute force, although as always they were the original settlers of ihe land. Nevertheless, some from these various groups found gold, and a few became rich. Tw o African American miners, digging in a most unpromising spot, hit a deposit so rich that the site was named Negro Hill. These two men found gold worth $80,000 in four months. By 1852 there were 2,000 African Americans in California, half of them working in the mining area. Despite the problems of camp life the majority of the prospectors and storekeepers in the mining country w ere decent people eager to build schools and churches and live at peace with one another. The difficulty was that most of the camps sprang up too quickly to establish orderly governments. Prospectors abandoned them when the gold tan out and rushed off to other strikes in other regions. The old | camps became ghost towns, inhabited only by a stray cat or two or a few hermits or vagabonds. |*CJ| At the head of the Auburn Ravine in IR52, American anil Chinese miners posed for this rare picture. Hmv miflbt the sluice that divides the miners be a symbol of a deeper division ? Perhaps 1,000 of the prospectors in California were African Americans. How were they treated by the majority of the miners? Return to the Preview & Review on page 425. The Golden West 435 California State Library Political Breakups The controversy over slavery in the western territories once again became a major political issue. It brought about major shifts in the nation's political parties. The Kansas-Nebraska Act had been a Democratic party measure. Its passage caused that party to lose thousands of supporters in the North. The Whig parly, however, was shattered completely. Southern "Cotton" Whigs and Northern "Conscience" Whigs could not remain in the same organization. Most of the southerners supported the Kansas-Nebraska Act. The northern Whigs went in two directions. The huge increase of immigration in the 1841k and 1850s hurt the Whig party greatly. For various reasons about 90 percent of the new Irish citizens became Democrats. The tendency of German immigrants to vote Democratic was almost as strong. Most of these immigrants were Catholic, while most Whigs belonged to one or another of the Protestant churches. So the Whigs disagreed in both politics and religion with the new Democrats. As a result many Whigs became nativisLs. They favored stncl controls on the admission of foreigners into the country. They pined a new political organization, the Native American party. Many former Democrats also joined this new party. Members of the Native American party were often called Know-Nothings because when asked about the organization, they replied. "I know nothing." Perhaps without realizing it. the nalivists were trying to make the slavery issue go away by ignoring it. They were also bucking a tide that could not be stemmed without mining the country. A steady (low of immigrants was essential if the United States was to expand. The very people win* joined the Native American party benefited from the work the new immigrants did. liy spending their wages, the immigrants stimulated the w hole national economy. Fortunately most American-horn citizens realized this. The Know-Nothings won some important local elections in the 1850s, but they never replaced either of the two major political parties. The other new organization that northern Whigs and Democrats joined was the Republican party. It sprang up in many northern states immediately after passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act. The exact birthplace of the party is still in dispute. The Republican platform was simple: Keep slavery out of the I western territories. Dislike of slavery was not the only reason the I party took this stand. Indeed, many Republicans shared the common racial prejudice of most northerners. But they feared that small farmers in the lerritorics could not compete with southerners who could bring their slaves there. The ranks of voters swelled with newcomers from Ireland, nearly Preview & Review Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 3. Understanding Issues, Events, & Ideas. Explain how two new political parties formed in the 1850s, using the following words: nativist, Native American party, Know-Nothings, Republican party. 1. How did the Democratic party suffer from passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act? Why was the Whig party shattered? 2. In what ways was the political situation unsettled in 1856? 3. What were Buchanan's qualifications for the presidency? Why did the Democrats nominate him? 0 Thinking Critically. Imagine that you arrived in America from Ireland in 1850. Write a letter to your family in Ireland, explaining why you would not join the Native American party or the Republican party. New Political Parties National Portrait Gallery National Portrait Gallery all of whom joined the Democratic party. They were poor and unskilled. These Irish interpreted Republican talk about free soil and free men as threatening their jobs. While not in favor of slavery, the Irish found Democratic politics more to their liking. The Election of 1856 The political situation in 1856 was most unsettled. Neither President Pierce nor Senator Douglas could get the Democratic nomination for the presidency. Their support of the Kansas-Ncbraska Act convinced party leaders that these men could not win in the northern states. Instead the Democrats chose James Buchanan of Pennsylvania. 9 Buchanan seemed well qualified for the presidency. He had been a congressman and also a senator. He was an experienced diplomat, having been minister to both Russia and Great Britain, lie had been President Polk's secretary of state. But the chief reason the Democrats picked him was that his service as minister to Britain had kept him out of the country during the bitter fight over the Kansas- Nebraska Act. The Republicans nominated John C. Frdmont, "the Pathfinder." Unlike Buchanan, who was 64, Frdmonl was a relatively young man in his early forties and something of a national hero. As his nickname indicates, he was an explorer. He had also played an important role in taking California during the Mexican War. A strong, silent type, Fremont had almost no political experience. With voters so divided, that too was a political advantage. Former president Millard Fillmore was also a candidate in 1856. He received the nomination of the Native American party and also was the candidate of the rapidly declining Whig party. The Republicans did not even attempt to campaign in the South. Fillmore got many northern votes that might otherwise have gone to Fremont, but he did not even come close to winning a single free state. So the contest was between Buchanan and Fremont in the North and between Buchanan and Fillmore in the South. Buchanan's strength in both sections gave him a great advantage among undecided voters and people who pul sectional peace ahead of any particular issue. Buchanan proved to be much more popular than Fillmore in the South. He lost only Maryland. Fremont was the stronger of the two in the North. But Buchanan won narrow victories in Illinois, Indiana, New Jersey, and his home state, Pennsylvania. These gave Buchanan a majority of the electoral vote, 174 to Fremont's 117. Fillmore gained only 8. Again the danger of the Union breaking up over slavery seemed to have been avoided. Buchanan's conservatism and his long political experience encouraged people to believe that he would proceed cautiously and with good judgment. |T3| Why did James Buchanan seem well ifualified to be president of the United Stata? Why was John C. Frhnont somethin# of a national hero when he ran for president? Return to the Preview & Review on page 523. Thomas Cole's "Home in the Wood*'' was painted in about 1845. Family farms sprang up everywhere, especially after the Homestead Act oj' 1862 made land available to anyone who would settle it. After studying this painting closely, tvhat can you say about daily lift on the frontier? order to protect producers from foreign competition. They rejected the idea of nativist support. They promised not to restrict immigration into the country. Before the convention Senator William H. Seward of New York seemed the person most likely to get the Republican presidential nomination. However, to win the election, the Republicans would have to carry Pennsylvania. Indiana, and Illinois—the northern states that Buchanan had carried in 1856. Seward was thought to be too antislavery to persuade doubtful voters in those states. After much political "horse-trading" the delegates nominated Abraham Lincoln. Many proslavery radicals had threatened that the southern stales would secede from the Union and set up an independent country of their own if a Republican was elected president. This possibility was particularly alarming to many people in the Upper South, the so- called border states of Maryland. Virginia. Kentucky, and Missouri, Should civil war break out. it would surely be fought on their seal. These people formed still a fourth party, the Constitutional Unionist party, in I860. The Constitutional Unionist's platform was simple: They stood for "the Constitution and the Union." In other words, they tried to ignore the controversial issues that were dividing the country. If the party had lived long enough to develop a symbol Words bv ii K0. II. II4) KK H,Esq' , i-V . MUSIC b, A CONTRABAND. ,r > '■ \ j.jj ;< o v/ii uruAiVj.' Tin Grog* Cobeciion Notice that the composer of this "Hymn of the Freedman " is identified only as "A Contraband." It was probably a tune used to recruit soldiers. At right is Major Martin II. Delany, who was promoted right on the battlefield for bravery. How many African Americans fought for the Union? How many Hispanic Americans? Sves in the struggle. Several thousand Hispanic Americans loughl on both sides. Union admiral David Farragut was the best known. The Draft Riots The benefits of the Emancipation Proclamation were slow in coming, k disadvantages appeared at once. Probably it made southerners 0 ■ore determined than ever to maintain their independence. Many ■Nr northerners resented it because they feared that slaves liberated Mikt the Proclamation would flock into the North to compete with to for jobs. As a result the Democratic party made large gains in the 1862 Congressional elections. The War in the East Michigan Department of State Archives 11)0 m HAWED!? For Ibr <3d flirk. Infuniry. Enlist bffoTD April Ut, neouro tho Govern moot Bounty of $300 00. Govenmiont Bounty, $300; State Bounty. $100; Town Bounty. $100 A>d" t. m SICKKLH at J-ta. "r Limit Cal. 234 Bwh Cunmm*. "Rally Round the Flail, Roys!" says this 1864 Michigan recruiting poster. And "Keep Out of the Draft!" which passed the month the poster went to press. A few months after the Proclamation went into effect. Congress $ passed a conscription law. Like the Confederate draft, this measure allowed men who were drafted to hire substitutes. They could even avoid military service by paying the government $3(M). Poor men could not possibly raise $300, w hich was as much as a laborer could earn in a year. Many made a connection between the draft law and emancipation. They resented having to risk their lives in order to free slaves who could then compete with them for work. Draft riots broke out in many parts of the country in the spring and summer of 1863. The worst occurred in New York City, where Irish-born workers ran wild for four days in July. The rioters burned buildings, looted shops, and terrorized innocent local African Americans. Over a hundred African Americans in New York were murdered. These riots should have been a warning. The war might free the slaves, but it was not likely to produce racial harmony, either in the North or South. Fredericksburg Meanwhile the Emancipation Proclamation had little effect on the battlefields. When McClellan failed to attack the Confederates as they retreated after the Battle of Antietam. Lincoln again removed him from command of the Army of the Potomac, choosing General Ambrose E. Burnside to succeed him. Unlike McClellan. Burnside was a bold, even reckless officer. He decided to push directly toward Unlike other wars all the casualties of the Civil War were Americans. Of total Union forces, more than 40 percent were casualties, and nearly 23 percent died. About 33 percent of the Confederate forces were casualties, and almost 24 percent died. Why did such high casualty rates actually favor the North ? mofuumtug wjpmdataAauj) aajnofi Railroads in the West In 1W0 Congress passed the Pacific Railway Act. This law granted a charier lo the Union Pacific Railroad Company to build a line westward from Nebraska. Another company, the Central Pacific Railway O of California, was authorized lo build a connecting line eastward from the Pacific. The government granted each company the right of way—the thin strip of land on w hich the tracks were actually laid. In addition it gave them large amounts of land for every mite of track built. This Lind could be sold and the money used for construction. Or it could be held in reserve and sold later w hen the land became more valuable. The government also lent the companies large amounts of money at lew interest. Private fortunes were to be had here. The Central Pacific employed thousands of Chinese immigrants to lay its tracks. Most of the Union Pacific workers came from Ireland. All were underpaid. Construction got under way in 1865. 0 Building the railroad was tremendously difficult. The Central Pacific had to cross the snow-capped Sierra Nevada range. Omaha, Nebraska, where the Union Pacific began, had not yet been connected to eastern railroads. Thousands of tons of rails, crossties, and While Chinese railroad workers watch, the Cmtral Pacific train enters a snow shed in the Sierra Nevada. Snow sheds kept tracks clear and qave sonic protection to the wooden cars in the event of an avalanche. Why is it so appropriate that the workers pictured are Chinese Americans? The Battle for the Plains 627 The real 'bonanza kings" were John W Mack ay, James G. Fair. James C. Flood, and William S. O'Brien. All were of Irish ancestry. All had been born poor. All had come to California during the Gold Rush. In 1868-69 these four men formed a partnership. I hey used the profits of one strike to buy up other mines. Eventually they look precious metals worth over $150 million from the rich Nevada lode. Mining Camp Life Whenever a strike was made, mining camps seemed to sprout out of the surrounding hillsides like flowers after a desert rain. The camps were ramshackle towns of tents and noisy saloons. The most famous was Virginia City, Nevada. It was given its name by Henry Com- stock's partner. "Old Virginia." While on a spree. "Old Virginia" inpped and fell, smashing his bottle of whiskey. Rising to his knees he shouted dninkenly, "I baptize this town Virginia Town." Virginia City was a typical boom town, so crowded that a horse O and wagon could take half an hour to cross the main street. The life of miners, shopkeepers, and others in these mining towns was sometimes as difficult as life on the open range. In these towns it was difficult to keep the peace. Smooth-talking gamblers, gunslingers, and cither outlaws sidled alongside claim jumpers, shifty types who specialized in seizing ore deposits that had been staked out by others. Some camps were taken over by these outlaws, who ruled the terror- filled citizens at gunpoint. Such communities provided rich material tor American writers. Mark Twain in Roughing li and Bret Marie in "The Luck of Roaring Camp" told of life in California mining camps. Charles Farrar Browne wrote this somewhat fictionalized account of i Nevada silver-mining tow n: " Shooting isn't as popular in Nevada as it once was. A few years since [ago| they used to have a dead man for breakfast every morning. A reformed desperado [bandit] told me that he supposed he had killed enough to stock a grave-yard. 'A feding of remorse,' he said, 'sometimes comes over me! But l m an altered man now. I hain't killed a man for over two weeks! What'll you poison yourself with?' he added, dealing u resonant | noisy] blow to the bar. '5? Compare Browne's description to the following remembrances of some Virginia City residents. Which seems to be closer to the image of the "Old West" you have? W The men who worked in the mines . . . were |al happy-go- lucky set of fellows, fond of good living, and not particularly interested in religious affairs. ... . As regarded deportment [behavior], everyone was a law unto himself. . . . Most of the men employed in the Artmtu Ward: Hi\ Travels by Charles l armr Browne Point of View A cattleman gave this testimony on pasturing his livestock on the open range. "I have two miles of running water. That accounts for my ranch being where it is. The next water from me in one direction is 23 miles; now no man can have a ranch between these two places. I have control of the grass, the same as though I owned it." Testimony Before Public Laws Commision, c. 1880s ranchers. Cattle ranchers believed that sheep cropped the grass right down to the roots so that cattle could no longer find it. Many range wars broke out between cattle ranchers and sheep ranchers for control of the grasslands. Farmers also competed with ranchers for land. Longhorns trampled their crops. The farmers feared the free-roaming herds would O infect their cattle with a dread disease called "Texas fever." Then came two terrible winters. In 1885-86 and in 1886-87 blizzards howled across the plains. Theodore Roosevelt, then a "gentle- man rancher" in Dakota Territory, wrote: Ct Furious gales blow down from the north, driving before them the clouds of blinding snow-dust, wrapping the mantle of death around every unsheltered being. . . 0 When the spring came in 1887, ranchers discovered that the storms had ail but wiped out their herds. The boom times were over. Cattle ranchers could no longer count on the free grass of the plains. They had to fence in their herds and feed them hay and fodder in the winter. Cattle ranchers became cattle feeders, their work, like mining, less risky but also less adventurous. This change was important, especially to farmers on the Great Plains. Demand for corn, grains, and hay soared, as did the prices paid for them. Now economics urged Americans to find ways to farm the hard, dry soil of the plains. Farming on the Great Plains The soil of the Great Plains was fertile, but farming there proved to be very difficult. Still, settlers came by the thousands to claim their 160 acres under the Homestead Act or to buy land from the railroads. Some were the sons and daughters of farmers in states like Illinois and Iowa and Arkansas. Others were emigrants from Norway, Sweden, and a dozen other lands. O. E. Kolvaag wrote of several Norwegian families and the land they settled. Imagine the plains they saw as he describes them: Bright, clear sky over a plain so wide that the rim of the heavens cut down on it around the horizon. . . . Bright, clear sky, to-day, to-morrow, and for all time to come. . . . And sun! And still more sun! It sets the heavens afire every morning: it grew with the day to a quivering golden light—then softened into all the shades of red and purple as evening fell. . . . Pure colour everywhere. A gust of wind, sweeping across the plain, threw into life waves of yellow and blue and green. Now and (hen a dead black wave would race across the scene ... a cloud's gliding shadow . . . now and then. . . . Girls, hand-sewers, earn nothing for the first month, then as unskilled workers they get $1 to $1.50 a week, $3 a week, and (as skilled workers) $6 a week. . . . The 'sweat-shop- day is ten hours; but many take work home to get in overtime: and occasionally the shops themselves arc kept open for extra work, from which the hardest and ablest workers sometimes make 514 to $16 a week. . . . The average weekly living expenses of a man and wife, with two children . . . are as follows: Rent (three or four small rooms). $2: food, fuel, and light. $4; clothing, $2: and beer and spirits, $1. . . . A city ordinance enacts that rooms provided for workmen shall contain space equal to five hundred cubic feet of air for each person employed; but in the average 'sweat-shop' only about a tenth of that quantity is found. In one such place there were fifteen men and women in one room, which contained also a pile of mattresses on which some of the men sleep at night. The closets [toilcts| are disgraceful. In an adjoining room were piles of clothing, made and unmade, on the same table with the food of the family. Two dirty children were playing about the fl"*or, . . Unionization In part because large corporations had so much power over their labor force, more workers began to join unions after the Civil War. This was especially true of skilled workers. In 1869 the Knights of Labor was founded in Philadelphia by Uriah Stephens, a tailor. At first it was a secret organization, with an elaborate ritual. Soon tt expanded and began to work openly to organize workers into a "great brotherhood." By 1879 the Knights claimed to have 9.000 members In that year Terence V. Powderly. a Pennsylvania machinist and onetime mayor of Scranton, Pennsylvania, became its head. Under Powderly the Knights admitted women. African Americans, immigrants, and unskilled workers. This was a radical step. Most unions would not accept these workers. But Isaac Myers, the leading African American labor leader of the time, told the group: ''American citizenship for the black man is a complete failure if he is proscribed |barred | from the workshops of the country." After his speech a majority of the delegates voted to admit all workers to the union. The Knights advocated the eight-hour workday and stnet regulation of trusts. They hoped to avoid strikes, the refusal of laborers to work until their demands are met. Cooperation between 'From "Among the Poor of Chicago" by Joseph Kirkland in The Poor in the Great Cities Preview & Review The New Immigration About three quarters of the workers in the Carnegie steel mills had been born in Europe. I .ike most immigrants, including Carnegie him- £ self, they had come to America to find work. To millions of poor people in other parts of the world, industrial expansion had made the United Slates seem like the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow. Mark Twain used a similar metaphor when he called this era the Gilded Age. The surface was dazzling, but only base metal lay below. It was as though the country were an enormous magnet drawing® people into it from every direction. Between 1860 and 1400 about 14 million immigrants arrived. Most settled in large cities. In 1880, 87 percent of the residents of Chicago were either immigrants or the children of immigrants. The situation was similar in New York. San Francisco. Milwaukee, Cleveland, Boston, and most other cities. Before the 1880s most immigrants had come from western and northern Europe, especially from England. Ireland, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries. We have already noted that established Americans frequently resented the newcomers of this "Old Immigra- tion." However, people from western Europe had certain advantages that helped them to adjust in their new homeland. British and Irish immigrants spoke English. Many German immigrants were well educated and skilled in one or another useful trade. Scandinavians were experienced fanners and often came with enough money to buy land id the West. Except for the Irish, most of these immigrants were Protestants, as were most Americans. In the 1880s the trend of immigration changed. T housands of Italians. Poles, Hungarians, Greeks, and Russians flocked in. People believed in the golden dream of opportunity. America was the "golden door." One Jewish girl living in Russia. 13 years old at the time, waited for her lather already in America to send for the family. When the letter arrived, she wrote: U So at last I was going to America! Really, really going, at last! The boundaries burst. The arch of heaven soared. A million suns shone out for every star. The winds rushed in from outer space, roaring in my ears, 'America! America!''" The trip to America was still a trial. But all were buoyed by hopes of a better life. Anzia Yezierska. a sixleen-ycar-old Jewish girl from Poland, remembered: U We traveled in steerage |lhe section of the ship where those who paid the cheapest fares were crowded under the Tibi tV Mint Land by Mary Anlin Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 5. Understanding Issues. Events. & Ideas. Use the following words to describe how American cities changed between 1860 and 1900 Gilded Age. Statue of Liberty, ethnic neighborhood. New Immigration, literacy test, Chinese Exclusion Act, settlement house, Hull House, cable car, electric trolley, Brooklyn Bridge. 1. How did the immigrants coming to the United States after the 1880s differ from those who had come earlier? 2. How were Chinese immigrants treated? Mexican immigrants? 3. What problems were faced by cities during their rapid growth? What were some solutions? Thinking Critically. In 1890 you arrive in New York City from Poland. Write a letter to your cousin back home, describing your new life in the United States. The Growth of Cities 683 i!889" 11907) • w Orleans Gulf of Mexico 1 Springfield oBqston k^yRlovidence Tflfew Haven f'ftew York Kewark filadelphia more ■ngton. D.C. run It LHH "■ cfr% • Mote than 1,000,000 people • 300,000 to 1,000,000 people • 100.000 to 299.999 people ■ New states (after 18881 Albert Equal-Area Protection 750 500 Km LEARNING FROM MAPS. The second half of the 19th century saw the growth of many of America's largest cities. Still, even by 1900few of the largest cities art west of the Mississippi River. Why do you think this is true? decks]—dirty bundles—foul odors—seasick people—but 1 saw and heard nothing of the stinking dirtiness and ugliness around me. I seemed to float in showers of sunshine. Sight after sight of the new world were in my imagination. From everyone's lips flowed the golden legend of the golden country: 'In America you can say what you feel—you can join your friends in open streets without fear.' 'In America there is a home for everyone. The land is your land. . . .' 'Everyone is like everybody else in America.' 'All people can do what they want with their lives in America.' 'Plenty for all. Learning flows free like milk and honey.''99 After 1886 the immigrants' first sight of America was often the Statue of Liberty. At the base of the statue were the words written by the poet Emma Lazarus: it Give me your tired, your poor. Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free. 'From Hungry Hearts by An/ia Yczicrska The colossal Statue of Liberty raises the torch of freedom in New York Harbor. It wasfirst known as "Liberty Enlightening the World." Here we see the dedication of the magnificent gift from Frame. The sculptor, F. A. Bartholdi, wished to pay tribute to the alliance of France with the American colonies during the Revolution. What does the statue symbolize today? Muwum of the City of Now York The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these the homeless, tempest-tossed, to me: I lift my lamp beside the golden door. . . ,W But although America was a vast improvement in most cases, it had a hard time living up to the dream of most immigrants. Their first experiences were not what they had expected. Anzia Yczierska wrote: U Between the buildings that rose up like mountains, we struggled with our bundles. Up Broadway, under the bridge, and through the crowded streets of the ghetto [a segregated neigh- borhood), we followed our friend, Gedalyeh Mindel. I looked about the narrow streets of squeezed-in stores and houses, ragged clothes, dirty bedding hanging out of the windows, ashcans and garbage cans piled up on the sidewalks. A sadness pressed down on my heart—the first doubt of America.195 'from HungTM Hearts by Anzia Yezierska The Growth of Cities 685 Point of View For many immigrants it was sail the crowded ships to America or starve. The author of The Fitz- geralds and the Kennedys explains the Irish exodus 44 As anybody who knows die history of Ireland knows, the potato failed. .. . The failure of four successive crops sentenced one out of every six peasants to death by starvation and forced more than a quarter of the Irish population to emigrate. . . . Before the Great Famine, as it came to be called, the Irish had regarded the idea of leaving their country as the most appalling of fates. But now, terrified and desperate in the wake of starvation and fever, they made their way out of Ireland by the tens of thousands. , .. burrowing their way onto the great "coffin ships," so named because of the great numbers who died on board. . Doris Kearns Goodwin, 1987 Most immigrants were indeed poor. They had little or no education and no special skills. They knew no English. Their habits and cultures were very different from those of native-born Americans. The majority were Roman or Greek Orthodox Catholics or Jews. Many of these immigrants came from areas where money was seldom used. People there exchanged food for cloth, a cow for a wagon, and so on. It was difficult for such people to adjust to life in a large industrial city. Most took the lowest-paid jobs. Whole families toiled to earn enough to survive. As Yezierska recalled: 44 1 felt a strangling in my throat as 1 neared the sweatshop prison; all my nerves screwed together into iron hardness to endure the day's torture. For an instant I hesitated as I faced the grated window of the old dilapidated building—dirt and decay cried out from every crumbling brick. In the maw of the shop, raging around me the roar and the clatter, the clatter and the roar, the merciless grind of the pounding machines. Half maddened |crazy|. half deadened. I struggled to think, to feel, to remember—what I am—who am 1—why was l here? I struggled in vain—bewildered and lost in a whirlpool of noise. 'America—America—where was America?' it cried in my heart.'?* 9 The immigrants from each country or district tended to cluster together in the same city neighborhood. In 1890 a New York reporter wrote that a map of the city showing where different nationalities lived would have "more stripes than the skin of a zebra, and more colors than any rainbow." These ethnic neighborhoods were like cities within cities. They offered people newly arrived in the strange new world of America a chance to hold on to a few fragments of the world they had left. There the immigrants could find familiar foods, people who spoke their language, churches and clubs based on old- country models. 0 Many native-born Americans resented this New Immigration. They insisted that the newcomers were harder to assimilate, or "Americanize" than earlier generations Workers were disturbed by the new immigrants' willingness to work long hours for low wages. American Protestants believed the mass immigration would weaken their political and social clout. A new nativist organization, the American Protective Association, blamed the hard times of the 1890s on immigration. Nativists charged that the new immigrants were physically and mentally inferior. They were dangerous radicals, the nativ- ists said, who wanted to destroy American democratic institutions. 'From Hunary It earls by An/i.i Yezierska "Tbt Battery, New York" was painted about 1855 by Samuel B. Wauflh. This detail shows a shipful of immigrants arriving in New York. Immigrants were protested at Castle Garden, at the left in the baekpround. Whs did some Amerkans resent the new immigration? One pool express'd these fears in this excerpt. U Wide open and unguarded stand our gates. And through them presses a wild motley throng— Men from the Volga and the Tartar steppes [Russia], Featureless figures from the Hwang Ho [China], Malayan, Scythian [Greek], Teuton IGcrman], Celt [Irish], and Slav, Hying the Old World's poverty and scorn; These bringing with them unknown gods and rites. Those, tiger passions, here to stretch their claws. In street and alley what strange tongues are loud. . . .'55 In the 1890s the Immigration Restriction League called for a law preventing anyone who could not read and write some language from entering the country. The League knew that such a literacy test would keep out many immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. In ■ that part of the world many regions did not have public school systems. Congress passed a literacy test bill in 1897, but President Grover Cleveland vetoed it. He insisted that America should continue to be i place of refuge for the world's poor and persecuted. Many 'from "Unguarded Gales" by Thomas Hailey Aldrich in The Works of Thomas Hailes ] I Mdntk, farms, sol II The Growth of Cities □ Northwestern Europe (mostly Ireland, Germany, and England) □ Central and Eastern Europe (mostly Poland, Russia, and Hungary) □ Southern Europe (mostly Italy and Greece) D Asia (mostly China) ______ ________ _________________ □ Other 2% S%t | r 6% 1B6V1880 "* m- _18% 2% 1881 1900 51% | 25% 114% | - -s% 3% 1901 1920 13% 44% J 29% | [11% C 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 Millions of immigrants 16 Source: Historical Statistics of the United States Immigrants to America between IS6I and 1920 had different points of origin from those that came earlier. Where were most of the earlier immigrants from ? When were most of the "new immigrants" from? Also note that the origins of immigrants between 1861 and 1920 shifted. Wbat shift took place? employers opposed any check on immigraiion for less humane reasons. They knew lhal unlimited immigration would assure them a steady force of low-paid but hard-working laborers. Congress did exclude one type of immigrant during this period— Ihe Chinese. By 1880 there were about 75,000 Chinese immigrants in ■ California. They were extremely hard-working people. Most were Buddhists, a religion little understood in America. Because of language and cultural differences, the Chinese tended even more than most immigrants to stick together. They seemed unwilling to try American ways. Older residents feared and resented them. When a depression swept the country. California workers worried that Chinese workers would steal their jobs at lower wages. In 1882 Congress responded to the demands of Californians by passing the Chinese Exclusion Act. It prohibited Chinese workers from entering the United Stales for a period of ten years. Later the ban was extended. It was not lifted until 1965. By 1900 about 80.000 Mexicans had emigrated to the United Slates. Increasingly they provided the labor force that developed the southwestern part of the nation. Unlike most other immigrants, these newcomers seldom settled in large cities. Many had to move continually from place to place. They encountered many social, economic, and political handicaps. Yet Mexican American communities survived and even thrived, strengthened by their cultural traditions and community life. Some Mexican Americans found jobs as laborers building the Southern Pacific and Santa Fe Railroads. When the lines were completed, they became section hands—men w'hosc job it was to maintain the railroad right-of-way and repair damaged tracks and ties. Many families had to live in railroad boxcars. Other Mexican I immigrants worked as cowhands on cattle ranches. Still others became farm laborers. Like so many immigrants, most were poorly pud and oftentimes badly treated. The Growth of Cities 689 New Immigration 1682 Chinese Exclusion Act i i r 1886 1889 Htiymarkct Hull House Square bornbing founded 1892 Homestead Strike ★ 1890 American Sherman Antitrust Act Federation of Labor 1887 Interstate Commerce Act 1900 2. Between 1870 and 1900, what was the rate of increase of the male workers as compared to the female workers? 3. Which 10-year interval saw the greatest increase in the total number of workers? 4. In 1900, the table shows a new age group: IB- 19. What changes may have resulted in this new age group for workers? 2. The author thinks that "the virtues of American life is the best Americaniser." What do you think the author means by this statement? 3. What might the use of grammar and spelling tell you about the author of the article? 4. Think about recent immigrants to the United States. Do you think that "Americanization" is necessary? Why or why not? Using Primary Sources In the late 1800s people began arriving in America from eastern Europe. The following excerpt is from an essay that was submitted in a competition organized by the Committee for Immigrants in America. The essay appeared in a journal called Immigrants in America Review. As you read the excerpt from "What America Means to a Russian Jewess," think about an immigrant's point of view of "Americanization." America means for an Immigrant a fairy promised land that came out true, a land that gives all they need for their work, a land which gives them human rights, a land that gives morality through her churches and education through her free schools and Hhraries. The longer I live in America the more I think of the question of Americanising the immigrants. At first I thought that there is not such a question as that, for the children of immigrants naturally arc Americans and good Americans. America is a land made up of foreigners and the virtues of American life is the best Americaniser. The first generation of American immigrants can't he Americanized much for they were raised in different ways the mode of living is different. And yet how much it is rhen they love America and are such patriots. I. According to the excerpt, what has America given the new immigrants? Linking History & Geography Immigration has been an important aspect of the development of the United States. To understand immigration, reread "The New Immigration" on pages 683-89 and on an outline map of the world, color the countries from which most of these new immigrants came. Then review "Immigration from Europe" on page 343. Mark the countries from which these earlier immigrants came in a different color. Enriching Your Study of History 1. Individual Project. Complete one of the following projects. Use historical imagination to place yourself in a telegraph office in Homestead, Pennsylvania, in 1892. Prepare a telegraph message that reports on the clash of strikers and Pinkertons. Include the views of both sides in the Homestead strike. Or using historical imagination, place yourself in the year 1890. A few months ago, on your twenty-first birthday, you moved from your parents' farm to find work in the city. Write a letter to the folks at home telling them about city life. 2. Cooperative Project. Your class will prepare a multimedia presentation on the railroad network that was built after the Civil War. Various groups will use pictures, stories, and songs to show the development and effects of railroads. Chapter 19 Review 695 Point of View Doris Kearns Goodwin has written this description of Matthew Keany—the North End boss in Boston. John Fitzgerald goes to Keany for help after his father's death. " Fitzgerald found the bluff and genial Keany in his usual position, behind his desk in the back room of the red brick grocery store. . . . Into this low- ccilingcd room which served as his headquarters, diousands of men and women had entered over the years in search of assistance. By Keany'* word, a man's son could be liberated from prison, a widow provided with food, an aspiring peddler issued a permit and a destitute father given a coffin to bury his infant child. . . . | There] Fitzgerald reported all summer long in order to help the boss dispense the hundred and one favors regularly awarded in tile course of a day, favors which spread the boss's influence, like a huge spider, over the entire district. . , .55 From The Fitzgeralds and the Kennedyr, 1987 York, New Jersey, and Connecticut were a eluslcr of stales where Democrats could sometimes win. Ohio. Indiana, and Illinois made another group where elections were usually very close. In nearly every presidential election after the Civil War. the party that won the majority of the electoral votes of the "close" northern slates won the presidency. For this reason both parties usually chose presidential and vice presidential candidates from these close states. These candidates were called native sons. Their names on the ballot could increase the chances of carry ing the candidates' home states and perhaps winning the election. ■ Every president from Rutherford B. Hayes, elected in 1876. to William Howard Taft, elected in 1908. came from either Ohio. Indiana. or New York. Of the 27 men who were nominated for president or vice president by the Democrats and Republicans between 1876 O and 1908, 19 came from these three states. Not a single southerner was nominated by the major parties for either office during the period. This shows how the Civil War continued to affect politics. Ordinary people paid a great deal of attention to politics. A much larger proportion of eligible voters actually voted than has been true in recent times. Did they do so because the campaigns were so intense and colorful? Or were the campaigns intense and colorful because the people were so interested in politics? Unfortunately, these are questions almost impossible for historians to answer! The Poor and Political Machines One reason why elections were close in northern industrial states like New York and Ohio w as that large numbers of recent immigrants lived in them. These immigrants, as we have noted, tended to settle in the cities. They were "outsiders." poor and w ithout much influence. Most people with wealth and social position looked down upon them. And in the northern states the wealthy and socially prominent were nearly all Republicans. This explains why most immigrants in the cities joined the Democratic party. Their position w as somewhat like that of blacks in ihe southern stales. Each group supported the minority party of its part of the country. Northern immigrants voted Democratic, southern blacks Republican. Northern blacks, on the other hand, while definitely not part of the majority, supported the Republican parly. They were mindful that it was the Republican party that had abolished slavery. In most northern cities local politicians took advantage of the immigrants' preference for the Democratic party to build up political machines. These organizations nominated candidates for local office and turned out large numbers of loyal voters on election day. One such machine was Tammany Hall, which was run by New York City Democrats. Cuhrw Pictures The leaders of the machines, called bosses, provided many ben- ■ dit\ to poor city dwellers. Well-to-do residents and most political reformers disliked the machines. The bosses used shady and even clearly illegal methods to win votes. Hut they certainly helped new people, especially immigrants, to make the adjustment to city life. They helped immigrants find jobs. When neighborhood w orkers w ere ill or out of work, the bosses would supply their families with food and small sums of money. The machines ran community picnics on holidays. They helped local youngsters who got in trouble with the law. hi return for their help the bosses expected the people to vote for the machine's candidates. By controlling elections, the bosses could reward their friends or line their own pockets. For example, companies that wanted to operate streetcar lines or sell gas or elec- tncity for lighting homes or businesses needed city permits called franchises. Bosses often demanded bribes before they would have these franchises issued by the local officials they controlled. They also made deals with contractors who put up public buildings or did other work for the city. The bosses agreed to pay needlessly high prices for the work in return for large kickbacks, the illegal return to them of part of the payment made to contractors. Politics for profit seemed to be the method of operation. This made politics and politicians the target of many reformers. Lincoln "New York's .Veil' Solar System'* was drawn by Joseph Keppler in ISOS. Here Richard Croker, the head of the Tammany machine, is the sun. A round him revolve lesser corrupt politicians. Why are these futures definitely tiot heavenly bodies? Politics After the War 699 The Granger Coriecnon Thomas Xast first drew a Tammany tiger in 1871. When this cartoon appeared in Harper's magazine, the city basses threatened to cancel all orders of Harper Brothers' textbooks. "The Tammany Tiger" upset Bass Tweed, who controlled Tammany Hall and who had said, "as long as I count the votes, what arc yougoing to do about it?" Nast asked the same question in the cartoon's subtitle, "What Are You Going to Do About It?" On what Roman practice is this cartoon based? Steffens, the leading reformer of political corruption, wrote: " There is hardly a government office from United States Senator down to alderman in any part of the country to which some business leader has not been elected. Yet politics remains corrupt and government pretty bad. Business leaders have failed in politics as they have in good citizenship. Why? Because politics is business. . . . The commercial spirit is the spirit of profit, not patriotism; of credit, not honor; of individual gain, not national prosperity; of trade, not principle. . . . We cheat our government and we let our leaders rob it. We let them persuade and bribe our power away from us. True, they pass strict laws for us, but we let them pass bad laws too, giving away public property in exchange. Our good, and often impossible, laws we allow to he used for oppression and blackmail. And what can we say? We break our own laws and rob our own government—the woman at the tax office, the lyncher with his rope, and the captain of industry with his bribe and his rebate. The spirit of graft and of lawlessness is the American spirit. We Americans have failed. We may be selfish and influenced by gain. . . . [But] there is pride in the character of American citizenship. This pride may be a power in the land. So this record of shame and yet of self-respect, disgraceful confession, yet a declaration of honor, is dedicated. in all good faith, to the accused—to all the citizens of all the cities in the United Slates.'55 The machines did both good and harm in their day. Not all of them were associated with the Democratic party. The powerful Philadelphia machine, for example, was a Republican organization. So were many of the machines in middle-sized cities. But most of the hig-city machines were run by the Democrats. They were very useful to the national Democratic party in presidential elections in close states like New York. Sitting on the Fence Extremely important social and economic problems were being discussed and settled after the Civil War. There were problems caused by industrial expansion and technological change. Other problems resulted from the growth of cities. Still other problems related to racial questions and to immigration. Logically, the parties should have fought their campaigns on these issues. They rarely did so. Each was afraid that a strong stand on any controversial question would cost votes. It seemed politically safer to make vague statements that everyone could accept, even if no one entirely agreed with them. This was called silting on the fence. Still, the issues remained, and politicians had to deal with them mone way or another. For example, the need to regulate railroads and other big businesses resulted in the Interstate Commerce Act ami the Sherman Antitrust Act. The Indian lands of the West were seized and divided up. During these years Congress and the presidents struggled with high protective tariffs on imported manufactured goods. They tried to solve what was known as "the money question." d they attempted to reform the way government employees were hired and fired. The Tariff Issue When the United Slates first began to develop manufacturing about the time of the War of 1812. a strong case could be made for tariffs which heavily taxed foreign manufactured goods. American "infant industries" needed protection in order to compete with larger, more efficient producers in Europe. After the Civil War the need for protection was much less clear. America was rapidly becoming the greatest manufacturing nation in the world. Its factories were efficient. The costs of doing business were lower than in many foreign countries. Manufacturers did not, however, want to give up the extra profits that the protective tariffs I made possible. 'From Ibc The Shame of the Cities by Lincoln Sleffens Politics After the War Other farmers, especially Hispanics, African Americans, and new immigrants, had nowhere to tum. As in other occupations, they faced prejudice and discrimination. They were not welcomed in many ufthe local granges and they had even less political clout than established white farmers. Yet though life was shockingly hard for these people, in many places their communities thrived. In the West and Southwest Mexican American communities grew, strengthened by cultural traditions. As you read, one of the most important of those traditions was the spirit of community—everyone pitching in to help. Sec if you can get a feeling for life in the Southwest through the following excerpt, written by Jovita Gonzalez about her life in Texas: It In August, down towards the Rio Grande, the rays of the sun beat vertically upon the sandy stretches of land, from which all tender vegetation has been scorched, and the white, naked land glares back at the sun: the only palpitating [moving] things discoverable between the two poles of heal are beat devils. The rattlesnakes are as deeply holed up and as quiet as in midwinter. In the thickets of brush the roadrunners, rusty lizards, mockingbirds, and all other living things pant. Whirlwinds dance across the stretches of prairie interspersed between the thickets of thorn. At six o'clock it is hotter than at midday. Seven o'clock, and then the sun, a ball of orange-pink, descends below the horizon at one stride. The change is magical. A soft cooling breeze, the pulmolor [breathing apparatus] of the Border lands, springs up from the south. Down in the tanada |brook between mountains], which runs by the ranch, doves coo. Out beyond, cattle are grazing and calves are frisking. In the cottonwood tree growing beside the dirt "tank" near the ranch house the redhird sings. Children shout and play. From the corrals come the voices of vaqueros | cowboys] singing and jesting. Blended with the bleatings of goals and sheep arc the whistles and hisses of the pastor (shepherd). The locusts complete the chorus of evening noises. Darkness subdues them; then, as the moon rises, an uncounted mob of mongrel curs lmixed- brecd dogs] set up a howling and barking at it that coyotes out beyond mock. It was on a night like this that the ranch folk gathered at the Big House to shell com. AH came: Tio Julianito, the pastor, with his brood of sunburned half-starved children ever eager for food; Alejo the fiddler. Juanito the idiot, called the Innocent, because the Lord was keeping his mind in heaven; Pedro the hunter, who had seen the world and spoke English; the vaqueros; and, on rare occasions, Tio Esteban, the mail carrier Even the women came, for on such occasions supper was served. A big canvas was spread outside, in front of the kitchen. In the center of this canvas, cars of com were piled in pyramids for the shellers, who sal about in a circle and with their bare hands shelled the grains off the cobs. It was then, under the moonlit sky, that we heard stories of witches, buried treasures, and ghosts. . . . Then the pastor told of how he had seen spirits in the shape of halls of (ire floating through the air. They were souls doing penance for their past sins. As a relief to our fright. Don |a title of respect] Francisco suggested the Tio Julianito do one of his original dances to the tune of Alejo's fiddle. A place was cleared on the canvas, and that started the evening's merriment. . . The Silver Issue Lower freight and storage charges did not help farmers as much as the Grangers had hoped. Costs were not reduced much. So farmers tried instead to raise the prices of their produce. The best wav to push up prices seemed to be by causing inflation. Fanners looked for a way to put more money in circulation so their prices would rise. One way was by coining silver money. Throughout the period before the Civil War both gold and silver had been minted into coins and used to back bank notes. But in 1873 Congress had voted to slop coining silver. That seemed a terrible mistake to those who favored inflation. Many new silver mines had been discovered. If miners could bring their silver to the United States mint for coining, more money would be created. With more money in circulation, prices would rise. Yet silver was a relatively scarce metal. The amount that could be mined would place a limit on the amount of new money that could be put into circulation. This would prevent "runaway" inflation, which might result if there was no limit on how much paper money could be printed. Farmers and silver miners joined to make a powerful political force. People began to refer to the law that had discontinued the coining of silver as the Crime of 1873. They demanded that the government once again coin all the silver brought to the mint. The result of their pressure was a political compromise. In 1878 Congress passed a bill sponsored by Representative Richard Bland of Missouri and Senator William B. Allison of Iowa. Bland was a Democrat who believed sincerely in coining both gold and silver 'Prom Among My Prtyptr by Jo vita Gonzalez wdb dnybiuu, dnu me; punce uisuditutru nib dimy. The Depression of 1893 Shortly after the presidential election, which Grover Cleveland won, the country entered into the worst period of hard times in its history. Business activity slowed down. Unemployment increased. By the end of 1893 more than a hundred railroads had gone bankrupt. People hoarded money, withdrawing their savings in gold from the banks. As usual the depression hurt African Americans. Hispanics. and recent immigrants worst of all. Many held the lowest-paying jobs and were therefore the lirst to be laid off. Others barely scraping out a living as farmers now could not sell their produce. One historian wrote of "the absolute destitute condition of the colored people of the South." It was us bad if not worse elsewhere. The long period of deflation that began in the 1870s was an important cause oflhis depression. Farmers and wage earners blamed the depression on "tight money." They fell the Sherman Silver Purchase Act had not gone far enough. They demanded that the government coin even more money. President Cleveland believed the business decline was caused Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 4. Understanding Issues, Events, & Ideas. Using the following words, describe the key instances of labor unrest during the Depression of 1893: gold standard, Coxey's Army, Pullman Strike. 1. Why did President Cleveland want the nation to return to the gold standard? 2. How would Coxey's plan have put people to work and caused prices to rise? 3. Why did many people turn against President Cleveland after the Pullman Strike? Why was the president hurt by Governor Altgeld's criticism? Thinking Critically. Which amendment in the Bill of Rights might Jacob Coxey have used to protest his arrest in March 1894? Why? by the uncertainty people hail about the safety of their money. The government should stop coining silver, he insisted, and go back to the single gold standard. This meant that only gold would be used to bock the currency. In October 1893 he persuaded Congress to repeal the Sherman Silver Purchase Act. This action angered those w ho favored coining silver as well as eolii It split the Democratic party. And it did not end the depression. During 1894-1895. economic conditions got worse rather than heller. Other people blamed the depression on the government's failure to regulate business. Unsafe working conditions, child labor, low wages, and unfair pricing policies had gone on for most of the century. Government on all levels had ignored these and other effects of industrialization, lr.ven more, they seemed to support business leaders in their pursuit of profit. These people claimed the depression of 1893 was another result of the lack of government regulation of American business. Coxey's Army p r • As the depression dragged on. large numbers of unemployed men took to wandering about the countryside. These people were called tramps. Some thought them dangerous troublemakers, perhaps even revolutionaries who wanted to overthrow the government. In truth, they only wanted work. Small groups of unemployed workers began making protest marches to seek government relief. This increased fear of the ''tramp 0 successful w he? Jacob C'oxey seems a timid, mild son in this 1894 photoflraph. But appearances can be deceiving. You know him as the leader of Coxey's Army. How Unemployment and Unrest 723 The Granger Collection Preview & Review Restrictions on Immigration By the end of 1914 the Progressive Movement had accomplished many political, social, and economic reforms. But the progressives had prejudices and blind spots that limited their achievements. Most were not very sympathetic to immigrants during a time of heavy immigration. Some years at the height of the progressive period, more than I million newcomers settled in the United States. In 1907 Americans demanded that the government stem the tide of Japanese immigration. In 1907 the United States and Japan reached what is known as the Gentlemen's Agreement. Japan promised not to allow unskilled workers to come to the United States. Progressives who were alarmed about corruption in politics blamed the recent immigrants. These people cast a large proportion 0 of the votes that kept corrupt bosses in power. Social workers and many others who were trying to help the poor thought that too many immigrants were crowding into the slums. They argued that the famous American melting pot could not absorb so many people so quickly. They were afraid that the character of American life would be undermined unless immigration was somehow limited. frrn Uncle Sam terms disturbed by the horde of new arrivals—"Anarchists for Chicago'' and "Socialists for New Tork.u Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 5. Understanding Issues, Events. & Ideas. Explain the limits of progressivism, using these words: Gentlemen's Agreement, melting pot, Niagara Movement. National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Great War. 1. Why were progressives not sympathetic to immigrants? What was the attitude of most progressives toward blacks? Why? 2. How did Booker T. Washington continue to work for black people? How did William E. B. Du Bois work for blacks? 3. What event slowed the pace of progressive reform? Thinking Critically. Suppose you are a speaker at the Niagara Falls meeting of 1905. What demands would you make? How would you expect the government to meet those demands? Limits of Progressivism 805 Culver Pictures Victoriano Huerta became military dictator of Mexico in 1913. President Wilson said he headed a "government of butchers." Do you suppose such a display of medals were worn in the memory of fallen comrades or to intimidate those who opposed Huerta's heavy-handed rule? Revolution in Mexico Even before the war in Europe began, Wilson had to deal with an important foreign problem. This was the Mexican Revolution. This upheaval, which began in 1910, was against the dictator Porfirio Diaz who had ruled Mexico for many years and allowed foreign companies 0 to exploit his country's resources. It was of concern to Wilson because United States investments in Mexico were threatened by the troubles. Also, many Mexican refugees from the fighting were crossing the border into Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California against U.S. wishes. Before Wilson became president, the revolution had been led by Francisco Madero, a progressive-type reformer who had forced Diaz to resign and leave Mexico. Madero became president but early in 1913 was murdered by General Victoriano Huerta. Huerta set up a military dictatorship with all powers of government held by the generals. Wilson called this "a government of butchers." He refused to recognize Huerta as the legitimate leader of the Mexicans. Many Mexicans agreed with Wilson. A new revolt broke out, led by Venustiano Carranza. Wilson was urged on by United Stales companies whose Mexican properties were in danger. He asked Huerta to order free elections and promise not to be a candidate himself. If he agreed, the United States would try to persuade the Carranza forces to stop fighting. Wilson meant well. But even supporters of Carranza resented Wilson's interference. Mexico's problems were none of his business, insisted both sides. If we agreed to United States interference, said an official of the Huerta government, "all the future elections for president [of Mexico] would be submitted to the veto of any president of the United States." Then, in April 1914, some American sailors on shore leave in Tampico, Mexico, were arrested. They were soon released, but by this time Wilson was so angry at Huerta that he used the incident to try to overthrow him. He sent a naval force to occupy the city of Veracruz. Wilson did not intend to start a war. He expected his "show of force" would cause the downfall of Huerta. But 19 United States sailors and 126 Mexicans were killed before Veracruz was captured. Again, Carranza joined with his enemy Huerta in speaking out against the interference of the United States in Mexican affairs. Fortunately, the ambassadors of the ABC Powers—Argentina. Brazil, and Chile—offered to mediate the dispute—that is, to act as neutral go-betweens to find a peaceful settlement. Wilson eagerly accepted their offer. The crisis ended. By summer Carranza had forced Huerta from power. The United States then withdrew' its naval force from Veracruz. Yet Wilson's troubles in Mexico were far from over. No sooner Museum of New Mexico Octaviano Lnrrnzota was one of the thousands ofMexican Americans who came north for wartime jobs. Larra- sola became the first Hispanic American qovemor of Nov Mexico and later represented New Mexico in the U.S. Senate. to escape the disorder resulting from the Mexican Revolution. Even more came after the Great World War began. Most settled in the Southwest. Mexican American leaders worked hard to involve the new immigrants in American life. When New Mexico and Arizona became states in 1912, many Mexican Americans voted in their first United States election. In 1916 Octaviano Larrazolo was elected governor of New Mexico, the first Hispanic American governor. In 1928 he became the first Hispanic American in the United States Senate. Besides working in the cotton fields of Texas and Arizona and on farms in Colorado and California, the Mexican Americans became railroad laborers, construction workers, and miners. Some settled in the northern cities, attracted by jobs in war plants. The jobs were mostly low paid and unskilled. Nevertheless, these workers could earn much more than they could by farming. By the end of the war there were communities of Mcxican-born families in St. Louis. Chicago. Detroit, and several other northern cities. Many Mexican Americans served in the armed forces. Propaganda and the Great War From the beginning most Americans enthusiastically supported America's involvement in the war. But Wilson realized that other Americans opposed that involvement. So the government attempted to gain the cooperation of all Americans in the war effort. A week after war was declared. Wilson created the Committee on Public Information, headed by George Creel. The CPI used propaganda to influence people's opinions about the war. For example, it circulated millions of leaflets praising America's official war aims and criticizing the German government. These releases portrayed the Germans as bloodthirsty Huns, willing to do anything to conquer the world. They even hinted that there were German spies in every office, factory, labor union, and university. And perhaps more importantly, they implied that any disagreement with the American war effort was unpatriotic. Using propaganda also sold war bonds to raise money to pay for the war. convinced young men to join the armed forces, and even helped convert some doubters. Churches and religious groups, colleges, women's organizations, and civic groups joined in the government's efforts to "sell the war to the American people.** The Treatment of Protesters The government's propaganda campaign failed to convince everyone of the rightness of United States actions. Despite the urgings of union leaders like Samuel Gompers. some workers were unwilling to go along with the government's labor policies. Radicals in the labor imerturu wiui wdi piuuuuiuu. movement had founded a new organization, the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), in 1905. According to the 1WW, "the working class and the employing class have nothing in common." Workers should organize, "take possession of the earth and the machinery of production, and abolish the wage system." One of the founders of the IWW was William D. Haywood. "Big Bill" Haywood had gone to work as a miner in Colorado at the age of 15. In 18% he joined the Western Federation of Miners. A few years later he became a socialist. In 1904 he led a violent strike of miners in Cripple Creek, Colorado. The next year he was accused of planning the assassination of the governor of Idaho. He was successfully defended by the famous attorney Clarence Darrow. When the Great War broke out. Haywood was secretary-treasurer of the IWW, whose members were known as Wobblies, probably because of the way some mispronounced its initials. Workers should stick together, Haywood said in 1915. They could U stop every wheel in the United States . . . and sweep off your capitalists and state legislatures and politicians into the sea.>5 In 1917 the IWW staged strikes in the lumber and copper-mining industries. The reaction of the government was swift. Federal agents raided IWW headquarters looking for evidence that the Wobblies were trying to slow war production. Over a hundred members, including Haywood, were arrested. The Wobblies were revolutionaries. Their arrest when they deliberately interfered with the war effort was perfectly proper. But the O limes made people fearful and uncertain. This led the government to violate the civil rights of many radicals who did nothing but speak or write unpopular words. In 1917 Congress passed the Espionage Act. This law made it a crime to aid enemy nations or to interfere with the recruiting of soldiers. It also allowed the Postmaster General to censor mail. The next year a much stronger law, the Sedition Act, was passed. This law even cracked dow n on expressions of opinion. Q Heavy lines and prison sentences of up to 20 years could be imposed on persons who spoke or wrote anything critical of the government, the army or navy, or even the uniforms worn by soldiers and sailors. One national political party—the Socialist party of America— also opposed the war. the only political party to do so. Surprisingly, the Socialists' stance helped them at the polls. Many non-Socialists voted for Socialist candidates as a way to express their disagreement with America's involvement in the war. The government moved quickly to end this antiwar movement. In New York seven Socialists were expelled from the state legislature simply because they opposed the war. Victor Berger, a Socialist representative from Wisconsin, was denied his scat in the House. Bur Bill Haywood was a radical fimn- dcr of the IWW. He headed a violent strike of miners in Cripple Creek, Colorado. When war came, bis members, known as Wobblies, were raided and sometimes arrested. Why did the government think it was proper to do so? The War at Home and Abroad Culver Pictures Cutver Picture* Oliver Wendell Holmes was known as the Great Dissenter Jbr his carefully reasoned minority opinions as a justice of the Supreme Court. What did lie say about the riqht of free speech? Even more notable was the arrest of Eugene V. Debs, leader of the Socialist party. Debs was jailed following a speech opposing the draft. At his trial in I9|8 Debs spoke forcefully against the government's suppression of opinions it disagreed with. But Wilson and other government officials made it clear they would not tolerate opposition on the war issue. o An unreasoning hatred of anything German swept the country. Persons with German names were likely to be insulted by strangers. Schools stopped teaching the German language. Libraries took books by long-dead German authors off the shelves. German-born immigrants who had not become United States citizens were forced to register so that they could be watched closely. The nation seemed to be in constant fear that radicals and spies would cause the country to lose the war. This was especially true after November 1917. when the Communist Revolution occurred in Russia. Americans were suspicious of the communists, and feared they would try to spread their revolution. The Russian communist government quickly made peace with Germany. That enabled the Germans to transfer troops from the Eastern Front to France just when large numbers of American soldiers were going into battle and convinced Americans that the communists were against them. A sensible limit on freedom of speech in wartime was finally set by the Supreme Court in Schenck v. United States (1919), a case that questioned the constitutionality of the Espionage Act. The decision, written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., one of the greatest of American legal thinkers, upheld the law. The right of free speech is not an unlimited right, Holmes declared. No one has the right, for example, of "falsely shouting 'lire!' in a theater and causing a panic." If there is "a clear and present danger" that something said or written might hurt the war effort, the government may take action. The Supreme Court did not hand down this decision until after the war was over. Before it did so. local, state, and national officials frequently punished persons whose words had no effect on the war effort at all. Weapons of the Great War After nearly four years of war, many new weapons had been developed. The fighting in Europe became more and more mechanized. The British and French were the first to use tanks—armored, truck- like vehicles that ran on treads rather than wheels. The first tanks were slow, clumsy, and unreliable. They were used to protect advancing troops rather than to attack enemy forces directly. Another new weapon was poison gas. The Germans used gas first, but the Allies soon copied them. Gas was a horrible weapon, choking and blinding its victims. It was not very effective, however. If the wind shifted, it might blow back on those who released it. For all the brave chargers and white- eyed stallions who carried their men into battle, for all who shielded their riders or hurst their lungs in a last heroic charge, let us not he too impressed by the British tank that rolls through this devastated French village. The Great War was the last in which cavalry units on horseback were used but the first to use poison gas— a horrible weapon that choked and blinded its victims. The French soldiers at left art in a gas alert with their masks and tanks of oxygen. Do you think chemical warfare should be banned from the planet? The War at Home and Abroad 839 Point of View Not atl immigrants were as frightened of America as most Americans were of them. In 0 America, an Italian journalist wrote these lines. ((.Americans followed the leaders they chose, not those given to them by God or imposed by screaming and violent crowds. The leaders they' freely chose, most of them anyway, who looked to me like Roman senators or Renaissance princes, were born on small farms, the sons of humble people. This free and easy flow of a whole nation toward the future seemed the enviable secret of America, a country where it was still possible to hope. But was that all there was, was it real nr a creation of my imagination Luigi Bar/,ini, 1977 "holiday" on the construction of battleships. They also agreed to maintain a fixed ratio, or balance, on all major warships, The United Slates and Great Britain were to have no more than 525,(XX) tons of such vessels. Japan's limit was 315,000 tons, France and Italy's 175,000 each. In another agreement all nine nations promised to uphold the principle of the Open Door in China. This was the policy which assured all nations equal trade rights with an independent China. President Harding insisted that the Washington Conference treaties did not commit the United States "to any kind of alliance, entanglement, or involvement." This was true enough. The treaties were backed only by the good will of the nations that signed them. This satisfied most Americans. They wanted peace without the responsibility for maintaining it. They could accept the treaties and still believe that they could remain isolated in the old way from foreign "entanglements." The Postwar Reaction Isolation was an aspect of a larger postwar reaction in the United Stales. The Great War had been a Great Mistake, most people now thought. Millions of lives had been lost. Billions of dollars had been wasted. And for what purpose? The world had certainly no! been made safe for democracy, as Wilson had promised. ■ In 1919 most Americans seemed more worried about making the United Stales safe for themselves. Many seriously believed that a communist revolution might break out in the United States at any moment. They were mindful that a tiny group of communists had taken over all of Russia in 1917. Now there were perhaps seventy thousand communists (called Reds) in the United Stales. Communists wanted workers to raise the red flag of revolution, take up arms, and destroy the capitalist system. At the same lime anarchists, who wanted all governments violently abolished, stirred up workers. But most workers were simply trying to keep their jobs Going from war to peace had been difficult for American industry. Without contracts for war supplies, many plants shut down temporarily or slowed down their operations. Hundreds of thousands of wage earners were thrown out of work. Soldiers returning to civilian life found it almost impossible to get jobs. Many of the workers found their jobs had been filled by African Americans w ho had moved from the South during the war to work in factories. This added fuel to racial tensions that erupted in situations like the 1919 Chicago Race Riot. As a result a wave of strikes spread over the land. Al one time or another during 1919, 4 million workers were on strike. Seattle was paralyzed. In Boston even the police walked off their jobs. Strikes by police were unheard of at that lime. With the strecls of Boston Despite these efforts, little progress was made in ending discrimination in America. America's postwar mood was also reflected in new immigration laws. In 1921 Congress reacted to the isolationism of the times by taking steps to control the entry of foreigners into the United Slates. This made some sense at the time. The frontier had disappeared. In a machine age the nation no longer needed to import large numbers of unskilled laborers. The Emergency Quota Act limited the number of immigrants by nationality, reducing the number of newcomers from eastern and southern Europe. A still sliffer quota law. the National 0 Origins Act, was passed in 1924. Beginning in 1929, a total of only I50.IKH) immigrants a year could enter the United Slates. In practice the number of actual immigrants fell below IOO.IKK) every year from 1931 to I94(i. The Sacco-Vanzctti Case Such xenophobia—the fear of foreigners—led to the Sacco-Vanzctti case. In April 1920 two men in Massachusetts killed a paymaster and i guard dunng a daring daylight robbery of a shoe factory. Shortly thereafter, Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzctti were charged with the crime, and in 1921 they were convicted of murder. Sacco and Vanzctti were anarchists who believed that government was unnecessary and should be violently overthrown. They were also Italian immigrants. Their trial was a travesty of justice. There was little real evidence against them. Much of what was presented at the trial had keen manufactured by the prosecution. In addition, the judge seemed I prejudiced against the two, especially in his comments outside the Murtroom. Prominent people all over the world praised the dignity Sacco and Vanzctti showed throughout the trial. The noted lawyer Felix Frankfurter helped found the American Civil Liberties Union to fight fur the two men. Other defenders of justice, including the novelist I Min Dos Passes and the poet Edna St. Vincent Millay, joined ■ worldwide protests that for years kept Sacco and Vanzelti alive I through efforts to obtain a new trial. Vanzctti's dignified words arc [ mil remembered: I ((You see me before you. not trembling. 1 never commit a crime in my life. . . I am so convinced to be right that if you could execute me two times, and if I could be reborn two other times. I would live again and do what I have done already.?? In August 1927 Sacco and Vanzctti were electrocuted. Historians I row suspect that at least Sacco was guilty, but the truth and shame I if the incident remain: at the time Sacco and Vanzelti paid with their I lots for being radicals and foreigners as much as for any crime. Whitney Museum of American Art Were that two humble Italian im- migrants— V icola Sacco and Barto- lomeo Vanzctti—guilty of' a bold daylight robbery and killing a paymaster1 Or were they simply guilty of being foreigners at a time when xenophobia—fear if foreigners— swept over America in the 1920sf Those who believed them innocent hung Ren Shabn's lithograph, "The Passion of Sacco and Vanzctti " right in the living room for all to see. American Reaction to the War 865 Thomas Han Benton depicts the dark side of prohibition in "The Bootleg gets," painted in 1927, Planes, trains, and fast cars bring the customers to buy liquor in a scene sadly reminiscent of city streets today when people come to buy drugs. Reynolds House. Museum of American Art. Winston Salem. N.C. Prohibition During the Progressive Era there had been strong popular support for prohibiting the manufacture, transportation, and saJe of alcoholic beverages. This temperance movement, like the one in the 1840s. was led by American religious groups who saw liquor as the devil's tool. By 1914 prohibition was in force in more than a quarter of the states, known as the dry states. Most of the dry states were in the South and rural areas, where many of the people were members of fundamentalist Protestant religious groups. The outburst of moral and religious concern caused by the war gave energy to a national prohibition movement. Some saw it as an attack on the German custom of drinking beer; others as an attack on the drinking habits of European Catholics. What tipped the scale? was a very effective campaign to protect young servicemen from the sale of alcohol on or near army bases. This fit closely with the prohibitionist charge that drinking was a cause of poverty and social disorder. As a result, in 1919 the Eighteenth Amendment was ratified, making the entire nation dry. This amendment was enforced by the Volstead Act. People who favored prohibition pointed to the sharp decline in arrests for drunkenness and to the lower number of deaths from alcoholism in the 1920s. Fewer workers spent their hard-earned dollars on drink. However, prohibition was impossible to enforce, even with the lough Volstead Act. Private individuals bought liquor smuggled by bootleggers or drank gin from teacups in "speakeasys"— secret bars or clubs. Crime statistics soared in the 1920s. Most of the liquor was sold Index (1923=100) 'The Consumer Price Index is a measure of the change in average prices paid by consumers for specified goods and services. Source: Historical Statistics of the United States The Consumer Price Index, or CPI, is a statistic that tells rconontists how much a typical American can afford. M 'hat happened to the CPI durinct the Great Depression? Win? The weakesl and poorest suffered most. Many married women ■lost their jobs because employers thought they did not need to work. Unemployment was far higher among African Americans, Hispanics, •4and other groups than among whites. In the southwestern slates thousands of Mexican-born farm laborers and their children born in the United Stales were gathered up by federal authorities and shipped back to Mexico when they were unable to find work. Officials excused this cruel policy by arguing that there was not enough relief money to care for them. Many Mexican-born workers who had not lost their jobs were also shipped back. In this case the excuse was that they were holding down jobs that United States citizens needed. The term "depression" describes the mood of the people as well as the state of the economy. Until the middle of the 1930s there was no system of unemployment insurance and no national welfare assistance program to help the unemployed and their families. People in desperate need had no sure place they could turn to. One sufferer recalled: tC My first real memories come about '31. It was simply a gut issue then: eating or not eating, living or not living. My father was a coal miner, outside a small town in Illinois. When the mine temporarily closed down in the early Thirties, my dad had to hunt for work elsewhere. He went around the state, he'd paint barns, anything. . . .'55 Great efforts were made to assist the jobless. State and city governments and private charities raised money to feed the poor and provide them with a little cash for their other needs. Special "chanty drives," many led by churches and religious groups, were conducted 'From Hard Times: An Oral History of the Great Depression by Studs Terkd intellectual and cultural capital of the nation. And it remained so throughout the depression. Ambitious young blacks from other states moved there, believing Harlem was the best place to develop their talents. However, the Great Depression look much of the glitter from this revival of confidence. It struck African Americans with cruel force, as it did Hispanic Americans. As always in hard times, these workers were "the last hired and the first fired." By 1932 more than 30 percent of all black and Hispanic workers were unemployed. Still, most African Americans voted the Republican ticket in 1932. In Chicago, for example. Hoover got 76 percent of the black vote. In Cincinnati he got 71 percent. But in 1936 most blacks in Chicago and Cincinnati voted for Roosevelt, Black Support of the New Deal Today it is hard to understand why African Americans and Hispanic Americans found Roosevelt and the New Deal so attractive. Many of the most important New Deal programs did little or nothing to help them. Most of the NRA industrial codes permitted employers to pay lower wages to black and Hispanic workers than to whites. ■ New Deal farm policy badly hurt black tenant farmers and sharecroppers in the South. The AAA payments went to land owners. They were paid for taking tobacco land out of production. The tenants and sharecroppers who had farmed these acres lost their jobs and often their homes as well. It did nothing to help Hispanic farmers in the Southwest. Unemployed blacks and Hispanic* in all parts of the country rarely got a full share of federal relief money or jobs. The social security program did not discriminate directly against African Americans or Hispanics. However, it left out farm laborers and household workers. The millions of blacks and Hispanics who did work of this kind received no share of the new pension and unemployment benefits. Yet African Americans and Hispanic Americans liked the New Deal. Many became enthusiastic admirers of Franklin Roosevelt. Thousands of black and Hispanic parents in the 1930s named babies after the president. The reasons for such strong feelings arc best understood by keeping in mind how white society treated these groups at that lime. This is another example of the need to use historical imagination. For example, the Civilian Conservation Corps camps in the South were segregated If black youths had not been sent to separate camps when they joined the CCC, the program could not have functioned in the southern states. More important, the program almost certainly would not have been created by Congress. Blacks realized this. Most blacks therefore accepted the segregation of the camps as a lesser evil than being without work. Most African Americans and Hispanic Americans thought the main point was that they were included in New Deal programs and that some effort to treat them fairly was being made by important officials. Because so many of the unemployed and poor were black or Hispanic. WI'A and the federal relief programs were particularly important to them. President Roosevelt ordered state relief officials not to "discriminate . . . because of race or religion or politics" in distributing government aid. This order was not always obeyed, but Harry Hopkins and other key WPA officials tried hard to enforce it. With the approval of Roosevelt. Harold L. lekes. the secretary of the interior, appointed an African American, Clark Foreman, to his staff. Ickcs instructed Foreman to seek out qualified blacks and try to get them jobs in government bureaus. Foreman also served as a kind of watchdog, checking on cases of racial discrimination in various New Deal programs. Among other distinguished African Americans whose government service began in New Deal agencies were Robert Weaver, who became the first head of the department of housing and urban development in the I9f"0s, and William Mastic, later a federal judge. These appointees made up what became known as Roosevelt's Black C abinet. One of the most prominent members of the Black Cabinet was Mary McLeod Bcthunc. She was the 15th child of former slaves. Some of her brothers and sisters had been sold away from her parents before the Civil War. Mary McLeod was fiercely independent. After completing her education in South Carolina, she taught at several schools for blacks in the South. In 1898 she married Albcrtus Bethune, also a teacher. She founded a school of her own in Florida during the Progressive Era. In 1936 Mary McLeod Bcthunc was put in charge of the Office of Minority Affairs in the National Youth Administration. As with male black officials like Clark Foreman, her role was broader than her title indicated. She always had access to President Roosevelt. During the New Deal period, she later recalled, she conferred with him privately about six or seven times a year. In a way their relationship points up the strengths and weaknesses of Roosevelt's way of dealing with his black supporters. His intentions were good, but he was unwilling to take the political risk. Once Mary Bcthunc asked him to act quickly on some important matter. He refused. "Mrs. Bcthunc. if we must do that now, we'll hurt our progress," he said. "We must do this thing stride by stride." Mary McLeod Bcthunc worked strongly for equal rights for African Americans and other groups. She served as president of the National Association of Colored Women. She was a vice president of the two most important organizations in the United States that worked for racial equality—the NAACP and the Urban League. Yet she was not offended by Roosevelt's attitude. Indeed, she admired him enormously. Her reaction tells us a great deal about racial attitudes and the problems faced by minorities at that time. It is not surprising that Mary McLeod Bcthunc it quietly dignified in her portrait by Betty Groves Reyneau. What did Roosevelt think of Mary Bcthunc? National Portrait Gallery Effects of the New Deal 923 Movies pictured the wives and sweethearts of servicemen working at these jobs while their loved ones fought against the Germans and the Japanese. It was all so new and exciting for many. One woman, who was only 18 at the time, recalled her experience as a machinist in an airplane engine plant: <( I was very unsophisticated at the time, but 1 was very zealous, probably overzealous. I remember some of the older guys who had been there for years used to say, 'Hey kid. don't be in such a hurry!' But I'd get into the thing and geared up for it and I'd just keep plugging away, measuring and grinding, measuring and grinding, and they'd say. Hey kid. take it easy.' . . ,'W The wartime labor shortage cemented the gains that organized labor had made under the New Deal. A National War Labor Board was established in 1442 to regulate wages and prevent labor disputes. Farmers experienced boom times. The demand for food to feed American and Allied troops was enormous. Farm income more than doubled during the war. Farmers who had suffered during the 1920s and 1930s were soon able to pay off their mortgages, improve their property, and put aside savings too. During the war Congress adopted the withholding system of payroll deductions for collecting income taxes. Employers withheld a percentage of their workers' pay and sent the money directly to the treasury. The withholding system made paying taxes a little less painful. It also supplied the government with a steady flow of funds and made evading taxes almost impossible. High taxes on personal incomes (up to 94 percent) and on the profits of corporations helped persuade Americans that no one was benefiting too much from the war while soldiers were risking their lives overseas. To boost the morale of those in uniform. Congress passed the Serviceman's Readjustment Act of 1944. This G.l. Bill of Rights made low-cost loans available to veterans who wished to buy houses or start new businesses. It also provided money for expenses 0 such as tuition and books for those who wished to resume their education after the war. Suspicion of Japanese Americans World War II had great popular support. Almost no one questioned the decision to fight the Axis powers. Assured of the solid backing of the people, the Roosevelt administration adopted a relaxed attitude toward freedom of speech in wartime. There was little persecution of German Americans as had occurred during the Great World War. The one blot on the Roosevelt record of civil liberties was the Train American* Remember the Home Front: An Oral History by Roy Hoopcs The Pacific War Along with most Japanese Americans, these three generations of the Mochida family, tagged for evacuation from their home in Hayward, California, would be interned until the war ended—even though many were US. citizens. Read tome of the accounts by these victims on tins page and the next. ■ treatment of Japanese Americans. About 112.000 lived on the West Coast. They were forced to move to internment camps in barren sections of the country. The government was afraid that some were disloyal and would try to interfere with the war effort and help Japan. Others were placed in the camps for their own protection. The white population of the American West had always been suspicious of the Chinese and Japanese who settled there. Partly this was the typical dislike of immigrants with different customs. Partly it was a matter of racial prejudice. The suspicion was greatly increased by the sneak Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Many people were convinced that unless everyone of Japanese origin was cleared out of the Pacific Coast region, the Japanese would soon be bornbing San Francisco. There was absolutely no evidence that the Japanese Americans were less loyal than other Americans. Most of them had been born in the United States. Immigration from Japan had been ended by the so-called Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907. Nevertheless, all were forced to sell their homes and property and leave for the camps. One woman, a college student in Seattle. Washington, at the time of her internment, described a relocation camp: a Camp Minidoka was located in the south-central part of Idaho, north of the Snake River. It was a semidesert region. When we arrived 1 could see nothing but flat prairies, clumps of greasewood shrubs, and jack rabbits. And. of Point of View course, hundreds and hundreds of barracks, to house 10,000 of us. Our home was one room in a large army-type barracks, measuring about 20 by 25 feet 16 by 7.5 melers|. The only furnishings were an iron pot-belly stove and cots. Our first day in camp wc were given a rousing welcome by a dust storm. We felt as if wc were standing in a gigantic sand-mixing machine as the gale lifted the loose earth up into the sky. hiding everything. Sand filled our mouths and nostrils and stung our faces and hands like a thousand darting needles. . . . Idaho summer sizzled on the average of 100 degrees [43 degrees Celsius]. For the first few weeks I lay on my cot from morning to night, not daring to do more than go to the mess hall three times a day. . . . Winter in Minidoka was as intense an experience as summer had been. . . .'55 Another victim of the internment remembered his confusion over what was happening to him and his family. ti 1 remember the pain of being labeled a dirty Jap' and a 'dangerous enemy.' For me. a l.os Angeles teenager of 17. it was a time when my entire value system was thrown out of kilter. If we, good Christians and loyal American citizens, could he stripped of our civil rights, it seemed that all of the values and ideals I held most dear would need to be reexamined. . . After the war many Americans regretted their treatment of Japanese Americas. In 194K Congress passed an act to help those interned to recover part of the losses. Court decisions in the l9H0s further awarded retribution to the families sent to the camps. African Americans and Hispanic Americans in Wartime African Americans also had a difficult time during the war. About IB million enlisted or were drafted. Illack servicemen were expected to risk their lives for the country. Still they were kept in segregated units and frequently treated with disrespect by both officers and enlisted men. Yet by comparison with their treatment during earlier wars, there was some improvement. More black officers were commissioned. A number of blacks became pilots in the air force. As during the Great World War. the labor shortage benefited Roosevelt's biographer writes of the decision to intern Japanese Americans. ct During January the climate of opinion in California turned harshly toward fear, suspicion, intolerance. Clamor arose for mass evacuation and other drastic action. The causes of the change have long been studied and defy easy explanation. Partly it was the endless Japanese advance in the Pacific, combined with a spate of false alarms . . . of attacks on the coast, stories of secret broadcasting equipment, flashing signals, strange lights and the like. . . . But the main ingredient that tired and fueled the demand for "cleaning out die Japanese" was starkly obvious. The old racism— economic, social, and pathological-—toward the Japanese on the West Coast simmered a few weeks after Pearl Harbor and then burst into flamcs.55 James MacGregor Bums, 1970 'from Nhei Daughter by Monica Stone 'From "I'oint of View: A Sorry Part of Our History" by Daniel Kuzuhara. from The 'igu Tribune. August 26. 1981 The Pacific War Asa Philip Randolph was a writer and editor of the Messenger. He had planned a march on Washington when racial discrimination did not end in wartime service. Roosevelt persuaded him not to protest because it would disrupt the war effort. After reading further and using historical imagination, which man do you think had the stronger argument? Return to the Preview & Review on page 950. black workers. Thousands got a chance to learn new skills and therefore cam higher wages. Yet racial discrimination did not end. Tor this reason, early in 1941 a black leader, A. Philip Randolph, decided to organize a march on Washington to protest the way blacks were being treated. President Roosevelt feared that such a march would split public opinion at a time when national unity was essential. To persuade Randolph to cancel the march, he issued an executive order prohibiting racial discrimination in defense plants. This rule was enforced by a Pair [Employment Practices Committee. Randolph then called off the march. O This did not mean that African Americans were satislied with their treatment after 1941. Many whites resented the concessions Roosevelt had made. There was a good deal of racial trouble in the armed services and in industrial plants throughout the war years. In 1941 it erupted in riots involving attacks on blacks in New York City and Detroit. More and more African Americans were demanding their rights as members of a democratic society. It was clear that when the war ended, demands by blacks for fair treatment were sure to increase. The situation for Hispanic Americans was similar. Almost 4IXMHX) of them served in the armed forces during the war. A higher percentage saw combat duty overseas than any other ethnic minority. They also received more military medals. Yet like black soldiers and sailors, Hispanic Americans suffered discrimination. On the other hand, for many it was their first chance to experience life outside their neighborhoods. When they returned home, Hispanic Americans were determined to fight for a better life. The war brought many new opportunities for Hispanic Americans on the home front despite a vicious riot against them in l.os Angeles in 1943. Hispanic American women gained jobs in many industries, especially in the West and Southwest. In July 1942 the United Stales and Mexico signed a treaty that allowed braccros, Mexican farm workers, to enter temporarily and work in the United States. Their efforts helped keep up vital food production during the war. A Move Toward Religious Toleration The war had an important effect on religion in America. American society moved toward religious pluralism, or the acceptance of different religions. People from all denominations found themselves supporting the war. The open hatred for Jews led by Adolf Hitler and his Nazi followers shocked all Americans. People of various faiths sang Cod Bless America as they united in the struggle to win against their common enemy. By the end of the war the various religions had grown more tolerant of each other. | \j| Authority to private companies. He wanted to cut back or eliminate many other long-established functions of the federal government. In his acceptance speech at the Republican National Convention. Goldwater frightened many of his listeners when he said: W Extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice. And . . . moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue.55 Most voters found Goldwater's ideas loo extreme. Johnson defeated him easily. The Democrats increased their majorities in Congress as well. Johnson then proposed what he called the Great Society program. With typical energy he sent Congress 63 messages calling for legislation in a single year. He stated his vision of the Great Society: tt The Great Society is a place where every child can find knowledge to enrich his mind and to enlarge his talents. It is a place where leisure is a welcome chance to build and reflect, not a feared cause of boredom and restlessness. It is a place where the city of man serves not only the needs of the body and the demands of commerce but the desire for beauty and the hunger for community. It is a place where man can renew contact with nature. It is a place w hich honors creation for its own sake and for what it adds to the understanding of the race. It is a place where men are more concerned with the quality of their goals than the quantity of their goods. Hut most of all. the Great Society is not a safe harbor, a resting place, a final objective, a finished work. It is a Challenge constantly renewed, beckoning us toward a destiny where the meaning of our lives matches the marvelous products of our labor. '55 Fsira History of US Political Parties by Arthur M. Schlesinger Congress approved nearly everything Johnson asked for. It created Medicare, providing health insurance for people over 65. It supplied huge grants to improve elementary and secondary education, The Immigration Act tif 1965 abolished the system of favoring immigrants from the nations of northern and western Europe. Future admission to the United States was to be based on the skills and abilities of the newcomers, regardless of nationality. There was also a Housing Act to help pay the rent of poor people and a Highway Safety Act. Another civil rights measure, the Voting Rights Act, was passed. This law- appointed new federal officials called registrars in districts where local while officials were refusing loallow African Americans to register to vote. These federal officials made sure there were no problems or irregularities in voter registration in those districts. Within a year and a half a million southerners acre added to the voter lists. 13) Senator Barry Goldwater became the chief spokesman fitr the conservative winet of the Republican party. In the early 1960s his firm stand against communism earned him national prominence. His width read 1962 book The Conscience of a Conservative: VVTiy Nor Victory? was a statement of his views on A merienn fiorrijtn policy and the use of force atjninst communism. How did Goldwater's ideas differ from Johnson's? Return to the Preview & Review on page 1029. The Johnson Presidency 1031 Preview & Review Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 2. Understanding Issues. Events, & Ideas. Use the following words to describe immigration and social changes in American society from the 1960s to the 1990s: National Farm Workers Association, United Farm Workers Organizing Committee, barrios. Black Power, Equal Rights Amendment. 1. For what reasons did immigrants come from Korea, the Philippines, and Vietnam after 1965? 2. How were the Puerto Rican immigrants similar to the European immigrants before the Great World War? 3. Why were restrictions for immigration set aside for Cubans? 4. Why do many modern blacks prefer to be known as African Americans? 5. How did the status of women improve in the 1970s and 1980s? 6. What were some of the problems faced by Indians on reservations in the 1980s? Thinking Critically. Imagine that you are a member of the United Farm Workers during the great huelga against the California grape growers. Write a newspaper editorial explaining why you are striking, what you hope to achieve by the strike, and why you support Cesar Chavez as your leader. Cambodian refugees leave Phnom Pehn in their 1975 exodus after the city fell to the Kltmer Rouge. Some if these refugees eventually reached the United States, setting out on boats that were not seaworthy. Report on the "boat people" who reached America. Immigration and Social Change The flow and makeup of the American people celebrating the nation's ■ bicentennial had changed after the passage of the Immigration Act of 1965. Europeans no longer accounted for the majority of new immigrants. In their place were immigrants from Latin America (Mexico, the Caribbean, and Central and South America! and Asia. Under the old regulations, the entire continent of Asia supplied only 20,000 immigrants to America in 40 years. In 1973 over 124,000 Asians entered the country. The Korean War and the stem policies of the South Korean government led thousands of Koreans to migrate to the United States. Most settled in California and Hawaii, but considerable numbers came to New York City and other eastern cities. Still larger numbers of Filipinos became Americans. When the islands became independent after World War II. the immigration slowed to a trickle. Under the 1965 act it soared again. As with the South Koreans, many Filipinos came for political reasons. Many were skilled workers and professional people. After the Vietnam War large numbers of South Vietnamese who had been friendly to the Americans came to the United States to escape persecution by the victorious communists. The United States government helped these refugees settle in the country. The growth of the Asian American population has been dramatic. Although Asian Americans currently make up only about 3 percent of the population, it is estimated that their numbers will increase to BorreltSipa Press nearly 10 million by the year 2000. This means there will be nearly ten times as many Asian Americans as in 1970. Wiry are so many people attracted to the United States? One observer said: tt New immigrants are trying all over again to integrate themselves into the system. They have the same hunger. On any given day. there arc about three million throughout the world who are applying to come to the United States and share the American Dream. . . . The Vietnamese boat people |who lied Vietnam after the communist takeover in I975| express it as well as anyone. They don't know if they're gonna land, if the boat's gonna sink. They don't know what's gonna happen to 'em, hut they've a hunch they might make it to the U.S. as the 'freedom place.' There is the plain hard fact of hunger. In order to cat. a person w ill endure tremendous hardship. . . .'?> Mexican Americans Increase Their Numbers Hispanic Americans arc now one of the fastest growing segments of the United States population. During the 1980s the Hispanic population of the United States grew by 30 percent. In comparison the overall population of the United States increased by only 6 percent. Today Hispanic Americans account for about 8 percent of the American population. Census experts estimate that by the year 2025 Hispanic Americans may constitute as much as 20 percent of the nation's total population. By far the largest group among the new immigrants came from Mexico. Before World War 11 the ebb and flow of Mexican immigra- ■ lion had depended almost entirely on economic conditions. During the Great Depression, when jobs were scarce, far more Mexicans left the United States than came in. When the United Slates entered World War II. however, the demand for labor in the Southwest soared. The United States and Mexico signed an agreement allowing Mexicans to work temporarily in this country. These workers were called braceros, a name that comes from the Spanish word for "arm.'* Die braceros came north to harvest crops and returned to Mexico when the season ended. Between 1942 and 1964 almost 5 million Mexicans came to the United States under the bracero program. Each year many stayed rather than return to Mexico. 4 As with immigrants all through history, many of the Mexicans who settled permanently in the United States found it to be a true land of opportunity. Many obtained farms of their own. Others found ★ good jobs. Some became successful professionals. Their example caused thousands of other Mexicans to want to come to the United Slates. After the 1965 immigration law put a limit on the number of The flap of bis country proudly drawn in school, this Chinese American hoy celebrates democracy with bis parents. How is this family representative of the new immigration of the last two decades? 'tram American Dreams: Lost and hound by Studs Icrkcl The Melting Pot Bubbles Over 1093 The plentitude of food on your family's kitchen table comes in part from these Mexican-born harvesters called bra- ccros. When this photo was taken, many Mexicans bad to cross the border illegally to find work until a public amnesty program was approved by Congress. Below is Cesar Chavez, whose fasts for the National farm Workers drew worldwide attention. Huclga means "strike." newcomers from the Western Hemisphere, many Mexicans entered ■ the United States illegally. They came north because there was no M work for them in Mexico. Throughout the postwar years Mexican-born workers harvested most of the crops grown in California and the rest of the Southwest. Gradually a leader. C6sar Chavez, emerged among these migrant workers who followed the harvest. Chavez had grown up in the migrant camps of California. Hoping to call attention to conditions in the camps, he founded a labor union, the National Farm Workers Association. This group joined with an organization of Filipino farm laborers to form the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee. He remembered his first days of organizing the workers: t< The idea was to set up a meeting and then get each attending person to call his own house meeting |in the organizer's home], inviting new people—a sort of chain letter effect. After a house meeting I would lie awake going over the whole thing, playing the tape back, trying to see why people laughed at one point, or why they were for one thing and against another. I was also learning to read and write, those late evenings. I had left school after the 7th grade after attending 67 different schools, and my reading wasn't the best. . . . I found that if you work hard enough you can usually shake people into working too, those who arc concerned. You work harder and they work harder still, up to a point and then they pass you. Then, of course, they are on their own. . . .'59 The committee worked hard to improve wages and the poor ^conditions of migrant camps. Most workers received less half the 'From ''The Organizer's laic" by Luis Valdez in Ramparts. July 1966 Michael Rougier Lite Picture Service* minimum wage, which at the time was $1 dollar an hour. The camps were usually no more than rough cabins, often without indoor plumbing and no garbage pick up. To attract attention to these problems, Chavez called for a great huelga, or strike, against the California grape growers. The strikers won a great deal of public sympathy. Chavez's personal dedication was almost as important as the low wages paid the pickers in winning public support. Eventually the grape growers recognized the union and settled the strike. Chavez inspired migrant workers with a sense of their own ■ worth. "We . . . stood tall outside the vineyards where we had stooped for years," the grape pickers stated proudly. Some who called themselves Chicanos spoke of La Causa (the cause) which was to make all members of La Raza (the race) conscious of their common history and culture. Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales captured that spirit in the last verses of the poem "I am Joa- quin." Following are the verses in Spanish and in English. Yo Soy Joaquin . . . Y en todos los terrenos fdrtiles los llanos atidos. los pueblos montaneros alidades ahumadas empezamos a AVANZAR. La Raza! Mejieano! Espunol! latino! Hispano! Chicano! o lo que me Name yo, yo parezco lo mismo, yo siento lo mismo yo lloro y canto lo mismo Yo soy el bulk) de mi gente y yo renuncio ser absorbida. Yo soy Joaquin Las dcsigualdades son grandcs pero mi espiritu es firme mi Id impenetrable mi sangre pura. Soy principe Azleca y Cristo cristiano 'From "I am Joaquin " by Corky Gonzales I am Joaquin And in ail the fertile farmlands, the barren plains, the mountain villages, smoke-smeared cities we start to MOVE. La Raza! Mejieano! Espanoll Latino! Hispano! Chicano! or whatever I call myself, I look the same I feel the same I cry and sing the same I am the masses of my people and I refuse to be absorbed. I am Joaquin The odds are great but my spirit is strong, my faith unbreakable my blood is pure. I am Aztec Prince and Christian Christ The Melting Pot Bubbles Over 1095 Two marchers in New York's Puerto Rican Day Parade. Rascball is the national pasttime on the island. The girt sntiling shyly is holding the Puerto Rican /lag. Do you think Puerto Rico might become the 51st state? What arguments are made for and against statehood? Other Hispanic Newcomers Another major group of Hispanic newcomers was from Puerto Rico. Since Puerto Rico was part of the United States, these people were already American citizens. The immigration laws did not apply to (hem. Hundreds of Ihousands of Puerto Ricans had come north in search of work and better pay. Most settled in New York City, which soon had a larger Puerto Rican population than San Juan, the capital of Puerto Rico. In many ways the Puerto Ricans were like the European immigrants of the years before the Great World War. Most were very poor. Most came from rural backgrounds and were not accustomed to city life. Few could speak English Few had the skills needed to get well-paid jobs. Many were crowded into neglected pockets of the city called barrios. Yet many Puerto Ricans were able to improve their lives. Herman Badillo came to New York from Puerto Rico in 1941, when he was 12. He worked as a dishwasher and as a pin boy in a bowling alley. He went to college and earned a law degree. In 1965 he was elected borough president of the Bronx, the part of New York City with the largest Puerto Rican population. In 1970 he was elected to Congress. Since I960 increasing numbers of people have immigrated to the United Stales from other areas of Latin America. More than 750,000 people have immigrated to the United States from Cuba since I960. Many opposed the new government of Fidel Castro in 1959 and emigrated to the United States. After Castro announced that he was a communist and made an alliance with the Soviet Union, these Cubans were admitted to the United States under laws that allowed refugees from communist countries to come in without regard for 1096 sj<k|3jrot*U oioud "jne-i uoser /.MSI -9tP ON OZ <* suottey uo/tm/ndoy neujjn^ oajnos any limits set by the immigration laws. About half settled in southern Florida in and around Miami. For the next 20 years Castro made it next to impossible for Cubans to leave their country. In 1980. however, he changed his mind. In a few weeks' time more than 100,000 Cubans entered the United States. As with the Vietnamese in 1975. restrictions on immigration were temporarily set aside. Today Cuban Americans account for over 5 percent of all Hispanic Americans. Even more Hispanic people have immigrated from Central and South America over the last three decades. Since I960 over I million legal immigrants have come to the United States from Central and South America. Today over II percent of all Hispanic Americans trace their origins to Central or South America. As can be seen from the graph on this page. Hispanic Americans have not shared equally in America's wealth. They have tagged behind the non-Hispanie population in terms of educational attainment and income. Yet great variations exist within the Hispanic American population. Cuban Americans have reached levels close to non-Hispanic Americans in average years of schooling, average family income, and the percentage of families living above the poverty level. Puerto Rican Americans, on the other hand, have a poverty rate that is nearly four times that of non-Hispanics. The label H uptime Ameriean encompasses people from many different backgrounds. 'This Sfraph shows certain characteristics of the largest Stroups of Hispanic Americans. Compare the data on the sfraph. Then state a comparison of the four Hispanic American groups. How do these jfroups compare to non-Hispanic Americans? The Melting Pot Bubbles Over 1097 Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States; United Staters Immigration and Source: World Almanac, Naturalization Service; World Almanac, t9S9 As the graphs on this page indicate, the United States has a rich and varied racial and cultural heritage. This rich heritage is due in large part to immigration. Prior to World War II the majority of immigrants to the United States came from Europe. The Immigration Act of 1965, however, made it easier for non-Europeans to enter the United States. As a result, people from Central and South America, the Caribbean, and Asia now make up the majority of new immigrants. Statistical Profiles 1137 