Teacher's Annotated Edition Part I * with Teacher's Introduction and Unit 1 Carol Berkin Baruch College The City University of New York Alan Brinkley Columbia University Clayborne Carson Stanford University Robert W. Cherny San Francisco State University Robert A. Divine University of Texas a! Austin Eric Foner Columbia University Jeffrey B. Morris Brooklyn Law School The Reverend Arthur Wheeler, C.S.C. University of Portland Leonard Wood Eastern Illinois University, Emeritus ScottForesman A Division of HarpcrOJIins/W'/ij/jm Editorial Offices: Glenview. Illinois Regional Offices: Sunny..'lie. California • Atlanta. Georgia • Glenview. Illinois • Oakland. New Jersey • Cam . Texas Carol Berkin, professor of history at Baruch College, The City University ol New York, specializes in American colonial history and women's history She has written several books, including Jonathan Sewell Odysseyolan American Loyalist (1974) which won the Bancrolt Award. Alan Brinkley, professor of history at Columbia University, specializes in 20th- century U S history He is the author of Voices ol Protest: Huey Long, Fattier Cough- lin, and the Great Depression (1982) Clay borne Carson, professor of history at Stanford University, specializes in African American history He is the author of the award-winning In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening ol the 1960s (1981) and is the editor ofthe papers of the Rev Dr Marlin LulherKIng, Jr, Robert Cherny, professor of history at San Francisco State University, specializes in 19th-century and early 20th-century U S. history His books include A Righteous Cause The Life ol William Jennings Bryan (1985), Robert A. Divine, George W Littlefield Professor in American History at the University of Texas at Austin, specializes m American diplomatic history. Among his books is Eisenhower and the Cold War (1981) Eric Foner, DeWilt Clinton Professor of History at Columbia University, specializes in the Civil War and Reconstruction. His books include the award-winning Reconstruction: America s Unfinished Revolution (1988), Jeffrey B. Morris, professor of law at Ihe Brooklyn Law School, specializes in constitutional history. He is the co-editor ol works that include Great Presidential Decisions and Encyclopedia ol American History The Reverend Arthur Wheeler, C.S.C., prolessor of history at the University of Portland, specializes In modem European history, in particular, World War II. Leonard Wood, professor ementus at Eastern Illinois University, specializes in 19th-century and 20th-century U S. history He has also taught at secondary schools and has extensive experience developing high-school instructional materials. Contributing Authors/Source Readings Heidi Roupp, history teacher at Aspen High Si ;hooL Aspen, Colorado, is Regional Director of the Colorado Council for the Social Studies David Pasquini, history teacher at Glen brook South High School, Glenview. Illinois, leads the history portion of an intensive Academy program of history, english, and foreign language. Academic Consultants Hispanic History Felix Almaraz, Jr. University of Texas at San Antonio American Colonial History Jean Friedman University of Georgia 20th-Century U.S. History James Penick University of Alabama at Birmingham 20th-Century and African American History Christopher Reed Roosevelt University Achieving English Proficiency Shahrzad Mahootian Northwestern University Copyright G 1992 Scott Foresman. A Division ol Hamer Collins Publishers, Gtenviow Illinois All Rights Reserved Primed in the United States of America This publication is protected by Copyright and permission should be obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage tn a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical photocopying, recording, or otherwise. For Information regarding permission, write to Scott Foresman. 1900East Lake Avenue Glenview, Illinois 60025, Acknowledgments lor quoted matter and II lustrations are included in the acknowledgments section on pages 1076-1078. The acknowledgments section rs an extension otthecopyrighl page Critical Thinking John Bareli Montcl ai r State Col lege Reading Comprehension Robert Pavlik Lorraine Gerhart Cardinal Slrilch College Teacher Consultants William Bartelt William Henry Harnson High School Evansville, Indiana Myrth Buckley La Quinta High School Westminster, California Dr. Thomas Caughron Upland High School Upland. California Armando Cunanon Mt. Miguel High School Spring Valley, California Loyal Darr Denver Public Schools Denver. Colorado Carol Ann Davis Lowell High School Lowell. Massachusetts Dominick De Cecco Bethlehem High School Del Mar. New York Frederick Dorsett Northeast High School St Petersburg, Florida John A. Jones, Jr. Walter L Cohen Senior High School New Orleans, Louisiana James R. Mullen Del Mar High School San Jose, California Marilyn Washington Jordan High School Los Angeles, California Teacher's Annotated Edition Part I Contents How to Use the Teacher's Annotated Edition n What Is History? / xxi Using Critical Thinking Strategies / xxv Geography: Background for American History / xxx Howto Use American Voices / xl Prologue: Key Themes in American History /1 Our society reflects racial, ethnic, and religious diversity 2 Our economic system is organized around free enterpnse and the protection of private property. / 3 The American political system is built upon constitutional and representative government /4 Conflict and cooperation have been essential elements in the development of the United States. / 5 Americans have made choices based on geography as they interacted with the environment. / 6 Americans express social and political concerns within a religious and ethical framework. / 7 The American belief in a unique national destiny influences its relations with other nations. / 8 Encouraging technological and scientific innovation has helped American society / 9 Unit 1 Planning Pages / 9A it 1 The New Nation no Chapter 1 Planning Pages / 11A Chapter 1 The Meeting of Three Cultures Pre-Columbian Era-1624 /12 section 1 Diverse Native American cultures peopled trie continent. /14 Voices from the Past: Aztec School Days /16 section 2 Africa and Europe had rich civilizations. / 20 section 3 An exchange of cultures shaped the Americas. / 24 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Making Comparisons / 25 Geography in American History: Columbian Exchange / 28 section 4 England and France challenged Spain. / 30 Highlights of American Life: Estebanico and the Lost Cities / 32 section 5 English settlers established Jamestown. / 36 source readings 1A Christopher Columbus Describes the New World / 40 IB The Aztecs Mourn the Destruction ofTenochtitlan / 42 1C English Artists Portray Native Americans / 45 chapter review /46 Chapter 2 Planning Pages / 47A Chapter 2 The Enlightenment and the Revolutionary Era 1600-1788 mi section 1 Europeans founded the 13 American colonies. / 50 Voices from the Past: The Mayflower Compact / 51 Enlightenment ideas came to the colonies. / 55 Highlights of American Life: Benjamin Franklin's Enlightened Spirit 58 The colonies moved toward war. / 59 The Americans won the War for Independence. / 65 The nation devised a new government. / 69 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Identifying Alternatives / 72 The Declaration of Independence / 74 2A Anne Hutchinson Is Banished / 78 2B Olaudah Equiano Endures the Middle Passage / 80 2C "As Poor Richard Says . . ." / 82 20 Loara Standish Stitches a Sampler / 84 2E Jonathan Edwards Reflects on the Great Awakening / 86 2F Jane McCrea Is Murdered by Burgoyne's Indian Allies / 88 2G "If Men Were Angels, No Government Would be Necessary" / 90 f Chapter 3 Planning Pages / 93A Chapter 3 Examining the Constitution 1787-1824 / 94 section i The framers created a federal system. / 96 Voices from the Past: Revising the Preamble / 97 section 2 The framers balanced the roles of government. /100 section a The Constitution permits change. /104 section 4 The Federalists yielded to the Republicans ./111 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Identifying Central Issues / 114 section 5 War shaped a new Amencan nationalism. /116 Highlights of American Life: Jefferson's MonticellO / 117 3A The Constitutional Convention Debates the Slave Trade /124 3B John Marshall Lays the Foundation of Federalism /126 3C Abigail Adams Urges Her Husband to "Remember the Ladies" /121 Chapter 4 Planning Pages / 161A Chapter 4 Expansion, Reform, and Constitutional Conflicts 1824-1860 /162 section 1 Andrew Jackson gave his name to a new era. /164 section 2 An Age of Reform swept the nation. /171 section a Manifest Destiny became a national battle cry. /175 Highlights of American Life: Blue Jeans / 178 4A Tecumseh Fights the Sale of tndan Lands /194 4B Lucy Stone and Henry Blackwell Protest Marriage Laws /196 4C Santa Anna Besieges the Alamo /198 40 Lalu Nathoy Arrives in California / 200 4E A Slave Recalls Her Mother's Courage / 202 The United States acquired western lands from Mexico. /180 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Analyzing Cause and Effect / 182 Sectional differences led to war. /184 Voices from the Past: Ain't I a Woman? /187 Chapter 5 Planning Page* / 205A Chapter 5 Civil War and Reconstruction 1860-1877 / zoe Secession led to war. 220 Tire war brought a Northern victory. / 227 Voices From the Past! The Gettysburg Address / 228 Plans for restoring the Union created conflict. / 233 Highlights of American Life: Schools for the Emancipated 236 Reconstruction ended and white supremacy was restored. / 240 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Identifying Assumptions / 243 Radical Reconstruction tested national ideals. / 245 Touring the Past: Gettysburg National Military Park. / 248 5A Mary Chestnut Watches the Attack on Fort Sumter / 250 58 "Sarah My Love for >bu Is Deathless" / 252 5C Augustus Saint Gaudens Honors an African American Regiment / 254 50 Frank Haskell Observes the Artillery at Gettysburg / 256 5E Elizabeth Keckley Mourns the Death of Lincoln 258 Background for the Progressive Era, as required by the California Framework: Chapters Planning Pages / 261A Chapter 6 America's Economic Transformation 1860-1900 / 262 The railroads altered the character of the West. / 264 Highlights of American Life: Barbed Wire / 268 The close of the frontier threatened the Indians. ' 270 Industrial growth affected the American way of life. ' 275 Voices From the Past: the Sun Is Demoted / 277 America experienced massive economic growth 279 Building Critical Thinking strategies: Formulating Appropnate Questions 282 Immigrants challenged American society. 283 6A Joseph McCoy Describes a Stampede / 286 6B The Buffalo Go - 288 6C "Don't Come Back Till Vbu Sell Them All" / 290 60 Japanese "Picture-Brides" Adjust to America / 292 ■ Chapter 7 Planning Pages I 29SA Chapter 7 Politics and Daily Life in the Gilded Age 1870-1900 section i Gilded Age politicians avoided controversy. / 298 section 2 City life transformed American culture. / 304 Voices From the Past: Honest Graft / 308 section 3 Workers struggled to adapt to trie industrial age. / 309 section 4 Discontented farmers revolted. / 313 Highlights of American Life: Ordering by Mall / 314 section s Ttieme Essay: School reformers broadened the three R's. / 318 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Recognizing Values / 319 7A Thomas Nast Attacks Boss Tweed / 322 7B August Spies Addresses the Court 324 7C Elizabeth Cady Stanton Urges Higher Education for Women / 326 American literature The Red Badge of Courage by Stephen Crane / 330 unit survey /332 AMERICAN CHARACTERISTICS: Liberty / 340 writing strategies Paraphrase and Discuss / 341 / 296 Part II Contents Unit 2 Planning Pages / 341A Unit 2 America at Peace and at War / 342 Chapter 8 Planning Pages / 343A Chapter 8 The Progressive Era 1900—1917 / 344 The American people clamored tor reform. / 346 Progressive ideas transformed politics. / 351 Highlights of American Life: Frank Lloyd Wright and the Prairie Style / 353 Progressive reforms reached the national level 355 The West gained political power / 358 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Identifying Central Issues / 360 Geography in American History: Yosemite National Park / 364 Woodrow Wilson won sweeping reforms. / 366 Voices from the Past: A Work of Restoration 367 Touring the Past: Ellis Island / 370 8A Booker! Washington and W E B Du Bois Disagree / 372 8B Ida Wells Calls tor Action Against Lynching / 375 Chapter9Planning Pages / 379A Chapter 9 America's Rise to World Power 1890-1914 / 3so US. expansion laid the foundation for world power. 382 War with Spain opened the path to empire. 386 Building Critical Thinking Strategics: Making Comparisons 388 The nation debated the status of its new territories. / 391 Voices from the Past: Midnight Thoughts of American Imperialism 392 The United States became a Pacific power. 394 Highlights of American Life: Chinatowns / 398 Americans expanded their influence In Latin America. 399 9A Commodore Perry Visits Japan / 404 98 Queen Liliuokalani Objects to American Annexation and Manners 406 9C "I Have Two Countries: Cuba and the Night" / 408 90 "Villa Is Coming!*/ 410 Chapter 10 The Great War 1914-1919 mu Peace movements failed to stop world war. / 416 The United States went to war in 1917. / 422 Highlights of American Life: World War I Posters / 423 Voices from the Past: A War Prophecy / 426 U S economic power won the war '430 World leaders debated the peace. / 434 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Formulating Appropriate Questions 437 Theme Essay: Americans drew back from world leadership. / 439 10A Arshile Gorky Is Haunted by Armenia's Sufferings 442 10B George M Cohan Contributes to the War Effort 443 IOC Shirley Millard Serves Behind the Lines / 445 American literature Afy Antonia by Willa Cather 450 AMERICAN CHARACTERISTICS Reform / 456 writing strategies: Define and Explain / 457 Unit 3 Planning Pages / 457A it 3 Prosperity and Depression / 458 Chapter 11 ages/459A Chapter 11 Society and Politics in the 1920s 1919-1929 /460 section i Intolerance and conflict marked postwar society / 462 Highlights of American Life: In Their Own Voice / 464 Building Critical Thinking strategies: Distinguishing False from Accurate Images / 466 Social change threatened traditionalists. / 470 Voices from the Past: Testifying at the Scopes Trial / 473 Republicans dominated 1920s politics. / 474 Women and farmers pushed for change. / 480 11A George F. Babbitt Descnbes the Ideal American / 484 11B "Depressions Are Farm Led and Farm Fed" / 486 Ut i'd/.MC Chapter 12 Planning Pages / 489A Chapter 12 Technology and Culture in the 1920s 1919-1929/490 section 1 Technology transformed American society. 492 section 2 A new consumer society arose., 497 Building Critical Thinking strategies: Determining Relevant Information ' 498 section 3 V6ung women took the lead in the 1920s. 504 section 4 Art and music shaped the Jazz Age. / 507 Voices from the Past: A Leaky Inheritance / 507 Highlights of American Life: The Paintings of Georgia O'Keeffe / 508 Touring the Past: Mann's Chinese Theatre / 514 12A The Age of Advertising Arrives / 516 12B The Babe Slams Number Sixty / 517 12C "Homesick Blues Is a Terrible Thing to Have" / 520 chapter review /522 Chapter 13 Planning Pages / 523A Chapter 13 The Great Depression 1929-1932 / 524 section 2 The Depression brought economic hardship. / 526 The Depression challenged people's culture and values. 533 A diverse society dealt with the Depression, i 536 Highlights of American Life: Going to the Movies . 537 Voices from the Past: A Piercing Chill / 540 Herbert Hoover lost his battle with the economy. / 542 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Distinguishing Fact from Opinion / 545 13A Muriel Rukeyser Expresses the Despair of the Unemployed / 548 13B Dorothea Lange Documents the Depression / 550 CHAPTER review /552 Part III Chapter 14 Planning Page* / 553A Chapter 14 The New Deal 1933-1940 / 554 Franklin D Roosevelt launched the New Deal. / 556 Geography in American History: Boulder Canyon Protect 558 Voices from the Past: This I Remember 563 New federal programs helped many Americans. / 565 Organized labor grew more powerful during the 1930s. / 570 Theme Essay: The New Deal changed the role of the government. 573 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Identifying Assumptions 574 Highlights of American Life: The Blues / 575 14A Diego Rivera Paints Murals in the United States / 580 14B "Which Side Are Ybu On?" i 582 14C The Depression Lingers on in Spanish Hartem / 584 American literature: The Grapes ol Wrath by John Steinbeck / 588 unit survey /590 American characteristics Equality / 594 writing strategies Analyze and Interpret 595 Part III Contents Unit 4 Planning Pages / S9SA Unit 4 War and Cold War s* 15 Planning Pages / 597A Chapter 15 The World at War 1939-1941 / 598 World depression led to the rise of dictators. 600 Britain and France answered aggression with appeasement. / 606 Germany attacked with new methods of warfare. / 613 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Drawing Conclusions 614 America aided Britain and the Soviet Union. / 617 Highlights of American Life: Broadcasting the Blitz / 620 Voices from the Past: America Rrst! / 622 15A "This Is London . . .' 624 15B An Isolationist Speaks Out / 626 Chapter 16 Chapter 16 Planning Pages / 629A The Allied Victory 1941-1945 / 630 Japan began its march toward empire. / 632 The Allies concentrated on defeating Germany and Italy. / 636 Voices from the Past: Showing What We Could Do / 641 The United States led the offensive against Japan. / 644 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Testing Conclusions 650 The war changed Amenca's rale in the world. 652 Highlights of American Life: Go for Broke! 654 Touring the Past: Oak Ridge. Tennessee / 658 16A Elie Wieset Survives Buchenwald / 660 16B Eugene Sledge Fights on Okinawa 662 16C Harry Truman Defends Dropping the Atomic Bomb / 664 16D Sybil Lewis Does Defense Work 666 16E Daniel Inouye Remembers Pearl Harbor / 668 Chapter 17 Planning Pages / 671A 17A Kuangchi Chang Flees Communism / 698 17B Truman Fires General MacArthur / 700 Chapter 17 Truman and the Cold War 1945-1952 / 672 The Cold War began. / 674 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Expressing Problems / 676 The United States vowed to contain communism, / 678 Highlights of American Life: The Berlin Airlift 682 Geography in American History: Cold War / 684 The Cold War spread to Asia. 686 Voices from the Past: A Soldier's Farewell 690 The Cold War affected life at home. / 691 xiii Chapter 18 Planning Pages / 703A Chapter 18 Eisenhower and Postwar Prosperity 1953-1960 / 704 The American economy boomed. / 706 Highlights of American Life: The American Musical / 706 Eisenhower served as president. / 711 The Cold War tested Eisenhower. / 714 Voices from the Past: The Cost Of the Cold War / 715 Americans questioned their values. / 720 Theme Essay: Sputnik shook the confidence of the American people 725 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Recognizing Bias / 726 18A Senator Margaret Chase Smith Condemns McCarthyism 728 18B Elvis Presley Reaches the Top of the Charts 730 The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love by Oscar Hijuelos / 734 A Raisin in the Sun by Lorraine Hansberry / 736 And the Earth Did Not Devour him by Tomas Rivera / 738 unit survey /741 AMERICAN CHARACTERISTICS Optimism / 746 writing strategies: Paraphrase, Summarize, and Discuss / 747 Unit 5 Planning Pages I 747A Unit 5 Troubled Times / 748 Chapter 19 Planning Pages / 749A Chapter 20 Planning Pages / 785A Chapter 19 The Struggle for Civil Rights 1954-1968/750 The struggle began with nonviolent protests. / 752 Students strengthened the civil rights movement / 758 African Americans staged mass protests. / 762 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Analyzing Cause and Effect / 765 Voices from the Past: I Have a Dream / 766 Many racial barriers remained in the South. / 767 Militant black consciousness developed. / 772 Highlights of American Life: Community Murals 776 19A Rosa Parks Refuses to Move / 778 19B "We Shall Overcome" / 780 19C Malcolm X Talks to Vbung African Americans / 782 Chapter 20 The Turbulent Sixties 196 0-196 8 / 786 section i Liberal optimism swept the nation. 788 section 2 The Great Society emerged. 794 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Checking Consistency / 795 section 3 Liberalism influenced international affairs. / 797 section 4 Discontent characterized the late 1960s. / 801 Highlights of American Life: Modern Art in America / 806 Voices from the Past: My Own Kind of American / 811 20A 'What Keeps the Women Home7" / 812 20B Mary Crow Dog Describes the Occupation of Wounded Knee / 814 20C "God is Beside tf>u on the Picket Line" i 816 chapter review/818 Chapter 21 Planning Pages / 819A Chapter 21 The Vietnam War and Its Aftermath 1954-1982 / 820 America gradually became involved in Vietnam. / 822 President Johnson escalated the war. 825 Building Critical Thinking strategies: Distinguishing False from Accurate Images 833 Highlights of American Life: Vietnam-era F'rotest Music / 834 Turbulence characterized 1968. / 836 The war ended 975. / 841 Voices from the Past: A Vietnam Veteran 843 Touring the Past: Vietnam Veterans Memorial / 848 21A Philip Caputo Encounters a Different Kind of War 850 21B William Ehrhart Has Trouble Identifying the Enemy / 852 21C "Sometimes It Takes Tragedy to Bring People Together" / 854 21D Richard Van de Geer Describes the Fall of Saigon l 856 21E Eleanor Wimbish Writes to Her Son 858 Chapter 22 Planning Pages / 861A Chapter 22 An Era of Turmoil 1968-1974 / 862 section i Americans hoped Nixon would restore stability. / 864 Building Critical Thinking strategies: Demonstrating Reasoned Judgment / 867 section 2 The American economy underwent a transition. / 869 Highlights of American Life: Americans on the Moon / 872 Geography in American History: Sunbelt Migration / 874 section 3 Nixon and Kissinger tackled problems in foreign affairs. / 876 section 4 Watergate caused Nixon's downfall. / 882 section s Theme Essay: Watergate produced positive results. 889 Voices from the Past: Constitutional Faith / 890 22A Richard Nixon Goes to China 892 22B The Existence of the Watergate Tapes Is Revealed 894 American literature Dispatches by Michael Herr / 898 The Way to Rainy Mountain by N. Scott Momaday / 900 unit survey /902 American characteristics Ingenuity / 906 writing strategies: Define and Explain / 907 Unit 6 Planning Pagea / 907 A Chapter 23 Planning Pages / 909A Chapter 23 The Triumph of Conservatism 1974-1988 / 910 Unit G America and Its Future / 908 Chapter 24 Opportunitites and Challenges 1988-Present / 944 23A An Afghan Teenager Comes to the United States / 936 23B Milton and Rose Friedman Celebrate the American Economic Miracle / 938 23C Colin Powell Becomes Head of the Joint Chiefs 940 section t Ford tried to restore national confidence in government. / 912 section 2 Carter inherited enormously complex problems. 1915 Building Critical Thinking Strategies: Identifying Alternatives / 917 section 3 Reagan sparked social and economic improvements. / 923 Highlights of American Life: Stand and Deliver: Jaime Escalante / 924 section 4 Reagan tried to reestablish American prestige in the world community. / 928 Voices from the Past: Sincerely, Samantha Smith 929 1 The Republicans remained in power. 946 2 The Cold War ended but Middle East tensions mounted. / 950 Geography in American History: The Persian Gulf Crisis / 956 3 U S. population changed rapidly . 958 Voices from the Past: Making History in America / 962 4 Cities produced problems and opportunities. / 964 Highlights of American Life: The Special Olympics / 968 5 Theme Essay: America examined its priorities. / 971 Building Critical Thinking strategies: Predicting Consequences / 974 Touring the Past: Cape Canaveral and the Kennedy Space Center / 976 source readings 24A Teresa Palomo Acosta Recalls Her Mother's Handiwork / 978 24B Connie Kang Defends Korean Values / 980 24C The Ellis Island Immigration Museum Opens 982 240 Gaylord Nelson Reflects on Earth Day 984 American literature The Joy Luck Club by Amy Tan / 992 UNIT survey/ 994 AMERICAN CHARACTERISTICS Religion l 996 writing strategies Analyze and Interpret / 997 For teacher's convenience the Student Text Reference Section is duplicated in all three parts of the Teacher's Annotated Edition Atlas / 1000 Gazetteer /1059 U S. Data Bank /1017 Index /1063 Biographical Dictionary / 1032 Acknowledgments /1076 Glossary /1046 Chapter 24 Planning Pages / 943 A xvii iAmendment, lor example, ensures a reasonable bail and prolection (mm cruel and unusual punishments. The writers of the Constitution realized that personal rights must be balanced against the rights of others and against the legitimate needs of society. The Constitution does not protect the right to persuade other people to overthrow the government by force, for ex- amplc. In times of national crisis, certain rights, sich as habeas corpus, can be suspended temporarily. However, the suspension of any right has always been highly controversial in the United Stales. For example, many Americans disagreed that the military emergencies o( the Civil War were sufficient reasons to suspend habeas corpus. Determining when a limit on civil liberties is proper is usually the responsibility of the judicial branch. In protecting and clarifying individual riglils, the courts have also expanded the scope of those rights. The rights of minorities and women were poorly protected. Aj Supreme Court Justice Thurgnod Marshall reminded Americans during the bicentennial ulthe Constitution, when the framers used the phrase "We the People," they did not have in mind Ihe majority of America's citizens. "On a matter so basic as the right to vote, (or exam- ple.' Marshall noted, "Negro slaves were ex- duded. although they were counted for representational purposes—at three-fifths each Women did not gain the right to vote for over a hundred and thirty years." Among those also neglected in 1787 were Indians and white men without property. Slavery, Patriots cried out against a king who threatened to reduce them to slavery, yet many Americans were slaveholders themselves. "How is it," mocked British writer Samuel Johnson, "that we hear Ihe loudest yelps lor liberty from the drivers of negroes?" Simple self-interest was not the only reason that slaveholders hesitated to end slavery. Thomas Jefferson, for instance, agreed that slavery was morally wrong: "I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is just." Yet this great visionary thinker, himself a slaveholder, could imagine no alternative to slavery in the new nation. What role. Jefferson asked, would the tens of thousands of African Americans play in the United States if they were free? Surely, he wrote, former slaves couid never be American citizens. In Ihese views, Jefferson revealed himself as a man of his times. The Constitution did not challenge slavery, il tiptoed around it. The actual words "slave" and "slavery" do not appear, "other persons" and "such persons" are the code-word substitutes. Many of the framers undoubtedly hoped that the institution would gradually disappear through state action. The actual effect of the Three-fifths Compromise and Ihe extension of the slave trade, however, was to give a solid legal basis for the existence of slavery. Indian rights. The Constitution granted Congress the power "to regulate commerce , . . with the Indian Tribes." This single reference to Indians expressed a federal intention to treat Indian tribes as sovereign nations. Over tlte next eight decades, the relation between the government and the Indian tribes would produce 389 treaties. Congress constantly promised that Indian lands would not be taken without consent except in "lawful war." Chiefs ot live Plains Indian tribes and U.S. officials met in 1867 at Medicine Lodge. Kansas, a site regarded as sacred by the Indians. The treaty negotiated there opened the area to settlers and to the railroads. settled lands in the West with eastern centers ol commerce and industry. The fjreat expansion of agriculture provided northern industry with much of its raw materials Cotton from the South kept New England textile mills humming. Wheat and com from the West kept the flour and grain mills producing flour and meal for domestic use and export. Cattle and sheep farmers provided not only meat for the North's rapidly growing population. but also raw materials lor Ihe region's shoe factories and woolen mills. The growth of the textile industry, which provided cloth for the new ready-to-wear clothing industry, created a demand lor new looms, steam engines, and other machinery. This demand, in turn, stimulated the growth of the machine-tool industry. metal working shops, iron foundries, iron and coal mining, and railroads. Immigration was another factor adding to Ihe growing economic strength of the North. During Ihe 1850s about three million immigrants entered the United States from northern Europe, many from Ireland and Germany. The North's growing economy, based on the free enterprise system, offered immigrants an opportunity to raise their standard of living. The tremendous influx of immigrants into the North greatly enhanced its industrial strength. Businesses were able to draw on a huge, cheap labor supply. In addition, the immigrants expanded the market lor agricultural and industrial products and added greatly lo the North's cultural development. The South and slavery. While free labor, immigration, and industrial growth were transforming the North, the economy ol the South remained comparatively unchanged, The southern economy depended almost entirely on agricultural products: sugar cane, rice, tobarco—and, most of all. cotton. The planting, cultivating, and harvesting of cotton required many workers. Consequently, many white southerners believed that slave labor was essential lo their economy. At least two-thirds of all while southerners in the 1850s lived on small farms on which the farming family consumed all or most of what was raised and owned no slaves. The other third of the population owned slaves, but very lew planters—perhaps less than one percent— owned more than 100, However, even those who owned no slaves were linked to slaveholders by ties of kinship or hoped to own slaves someday themselves. The large slaveholders also held a great portion of the South's wealth and wielded tremendous political power. They convinced most other white southerners that, without slavery, the South's economy would collapse. This iron toundry at West Point. New York, illustrates the North s tremendous advantage in industrial development. New York Slate had more than twice as much manufacturing as the entire South John F. Weir (1841-1926) painted The Gun Foundry while still in his early twenties The railroads altered the character of the West. Key Tertn: Chisholm Trail Reading Preview As you read this section, you will team: 1. where the government encouraged the growth of railroads. 2. which two groups helped to open up the West. 3. about the relationship between the growth ot ranching and the American cowboy. Chinese Immigrants, shown here building a railroad bridge in the Sierra Nevada, alto made important contributions to western tanning, mining, and wine industries In I860 the options available to someone traveling to the American West were both limited and dangerous. People and products leaving the eastern states endured months of difficult travel by land or by sea. Since the 1830s many Americans had clamored for a Pacific railroad as a way to make the route to the West faster and safer. Little did they imagine the immense changes such a railroad would bring. -g The government encouraged the westward expansion of railroads. Although many government leaders professed that a Pacific railroad should or could never be built, most Americans did not listen to their doubts. The promise ot the West was a powerful attraction, and the building of a Pacific railroad inevitable. Planning the Pacific railroad. The railroad's starting point and route were not nearly as clear as its purpose. Much of the West had yet to be carefully mapped and surveyed, and nobody knew if a safe route existed that would allow lor the engineering demands of a railroad. In addition, politicians of all sorts, eager lor the economic benefits that would surely go along with the railroad, argued that their territory offered the only perfect location. As the Civil War drew closer, the debate locused on two routes—a southern trail, supported by Jefferson Davis, and the Emigrant Trail, a route that followed the basic path of westward-bound settlers through America's midsection. After a series of surveys and debates that spanned three decades. President Lincoln ended the argument in 1862. The Civil War emphasized to die federal government the need lor a railroad that would provide the quickest way to move troops, ammunition, and medical supplies. In the midst of the war. Congress look advantage of the South's absence, and that ot Davis, and passed the Pacific Railway Act, which Lincoln signed. The act set up charters for two railroad lines, which, when they met. would span the country. The first the Union Pacific, would build a rail system extending westward from Omaha, in the Nebraska Territory. The second, the Central Pacific, would build eastward from Sacramento, California. In addition, the U.S. government agreed to provide financial assistance lor the railroad companies, giving them loans and land granLs. Building the Pacific railroad. Civil War veterans, freed slaves, Indians. Mormons, and immigrants, mainly Irish and Chinese—all rescinded to the recruiting efforts of the railroad companies. To provide shelter, food, and en- ■Ml' ....... tat 250 500 Kilometers Federal Land Grants to Railroads, as of 1871 Land reserved tor grants to railroads Approximate area ot land actually received by railroads Area forfeited by railroads The Federal government granted lands to the railroads in a checkerboard pattern ot one-mile square sections. Section granted to the railroads AWi wrumu Right of way Seel ion held by the public Albers Equal-Area Projection tertainment for these, rat] crews, semiperma- nent camps or villages sprouted up at intervals along tlie route. Among the workers, the Chinese men proved to be particularly valuable to the railroad. Championed by Charles Crocker, the bull-headed boss contractor of the Central Pacific, some 6,000 Chinese men worked for the railroad company by 1866. They were recruited both from California Chinatowns and from rural districts in China. The Chinese workers endured much discrimination on the job. They were scorned for being different and ridiculed for their unfamiliar diet, long pigtails, straw hats, and floppy blue pajamalike clothing. Still, they were respected for their strength, endurance, and courage. The work of the railroad crews was strenuous, dangerous, and slow. At the peak of their labors, the work crews laid two to five miles of track a day. Most of the work was heavy physical labor, made more challenging by the extreme weather conditions of both the open prairie and mountains. Slowly, determined crews armed with hammers, sledges, iron hand drills, and kegs of black powder forged tunnels through thick walls of solid rock and spanned wide rivers and valleys with wooden bridges. Movement By providing !he means to move people and goods, the railroads increased the value of western lands. To encourage railroad building, the federal government granted land as shown. In what region was the most land torteited by the railroads? Critical Thinking Why did the federal government support railroad building in the West? The lanky, gray-eyed cowboy of Hollywood fame rarely existed on the range. At least a quarter of the cowboys were African Americans and possibly another quarter were Mexicans. Although cowboys celebrated heartily at the end of a long drive, the booming cow towns experienced little violence. The cowboys established their own laws and enforced them fairly. Nat Love, an ex-slave from Tennessee, was a black cowboy who became a proud, rugged, self-made frontier hero. As a teenager after the Civil War, Love found his opportunities limited in the South and headed west. In 1869 he arrived in Dodge City, Kansas, and embarked on a 20-year stint on the cattle trails. Seven years later, he entered a rodeo at Deadwood City in the Dakota Territory and left with his most treasured prize, as he later recalled: I never had a horse pitch with me so much as that mustang, but I never stopped sticking my spurs in him . . . until I proved his master. Right there the assembled crowd named me Deadwood Dick and proclaimed me champion roper of the western cattle country. By 1880 the era of the big cattle drive was ending. As the rail network expanded into Texas, many ranchers switched from rounding up stray cattle to raising and breeding the longhorns. Eventually, a surplus supply of cattle resulted, and the price of beef plummeted to $10 This is the finest fence in the world. Light as air. Stronger than whiskey. Cheaper than dirt. All steel, and miles long. The cattle ain't born that can get through it. 1870s, a crowd gathered at the barbed-wire enclosure. Several dozen Texas longhorn steers were milling around in the background. Gates calmly told the crowd that he was going to drive the cattle into the corral. Some spectators laughed, some jeered, some made bets, and some moved back for safety. On Gates' command, the cattle were driven into the corral. The cattle bolted for space, but the prickly wire "i *a>> With these words, John W. Gates, one of Texas' first barbed wire vendors, began a demonstration of his product. He had spent several days stringing up a barbed-wire corral in the middle of San Antonio. Curious onlookers had not been able to get a word out of Gates about the purpose of the project until the corral was complete. ighlights of American Life Immigrants challenged American society. Key Terms: nativism, xenophobia, Chinese Exclusion Act Readin9 Preview As you read this section, you will learn: 1. how the-new immigrants compared to those who came before them. 2. how the new immigrants were received. 3. how the immigrants created new lives for themselves. growth experienced by America's indus- , [ties was fueled largely by new arrivals to the j United States. Between 1877 and 1890, some ' six million immigrants poured into the nation, many finding work in factories, steel mills, and packing plants. Their reasons for coming to the United States were many. Some came to escape intolerable conditions at home, others came lo work and earn some money for their iamilies. Still others came seeking the promise of America, the hope for a better future for them and for their children. The words of . Emma Lazarus, which were placed on a plaque il the base of the Statue of Liberty in 1903, spoke to many a weary traveler as they made their way to Ellis Island, the reception center lor immigrants entering the United States at New York City: I Give me your tired, your poor. I Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed to me. I I lift my lamp beside the golden door. Immigrants of the late 1800s were different from previous newcomers. [Despite the statue's words of welcome and fprumise, the immigrants who entered the United Slates at the end of the 19th century were not always greeted with open arms. The country that was built upon the ideals and labor of immigrants was now having second thoughts about extending the invitation of citizenship to others. An important difference was the immigrants themselves. During the 1880s a shift occurred in the origins of America's immigrants. Before this time, immigrants to this country had come primarily from northern and western Europe— England, Ireland, France, Germany, and Scandinavia They were always white, mostly literate, and except for the Irish and some Germans who were Roman Catholic, mostly Protestant. They were also accustomed to living under a constitutional govemmenL Assimilation into American society was relatively easy for them. By contrasL the new immigrants came mainly from eastern and southern Europe and from Asia—Greeks, Poles, Russians, Italians, Slavs, Turks. They found blending into the existing culture much more difficult. The new immigrants were different both from earlier immigrants and from native-born Americans in several significant ways. They brought a new set of political, religious, and cultural values. In addition, their reasons for leaving Europe or Asia and their visions of America led them to seek out new variations of the American promise. Essentially two types ot immigrants came to America at this time—migrant workers and permanent settlers. The migrant workers, often called birds of passage, never intended to make the United States their home. Unable to earn a living in their home country, they came to America, worked and saved, and then returned home. Most were young men in their teens and twenties, principally Italian, Chinese, Greek, or Mexican. The permanent settlers, several million of them, came with no intention of ever returning to the land of their birth. They came with their families, looking for political and religious freedom and economic opportunity. The Jews who fled nearly unbearable hardships in Poland and Russia were typical of this group of immigrants. Mary Antin, a Jewish girl from Russia, was one of the new permanent immigrants. In 1894, when she was 13 years old, Mary left her home in Polotzk, Russia, to be reunited with her father, who had emigrated three years earlier to Boston. To reach the freedom that they yearned for in America, Mary, her mother, and her three sisters endured a long and grueling voyage. At one point in a train ride across Germany, Mary recalled a scene of: Bewildering contusion, parents losing their children, and little ones crying; baggage being thrown together in one corner of the yard, heedless of contents ... the confused passengers obeying all orders like meek children, only questioning now and then what was going to be done with them. Ethnic sheet music was one of the signs of America's growing immigrant population. How did the source of immigration from Europe change from one decade to the next? Critical Thinking Why might this change have occurred? Eventually, Mary arrived in Boston, only to be frustrated by the slow efforts of the customs officials. They asked "a hundred or so stupid questions," examined all of their baggage, and checked their health—but finally they let the Antins pass into Boston. At long last, Mary had reached America, which, to her mind, was "like a nest to homeless birds." The new immigrants were met with hostility. At this point in American history, when economic hard times came frequently, the new immigrants were not warmly welcomed. Na- tive-born Americans were both suspicious and resentful of immigrants, especially those from southern and eastern Europe. If American business leaders saw in the immigrants a bottomless pool of cheap labor, other Americans saw something different Anti-immigrant attitudes, called nativism. took many forms. Workers saw compelilion, in particular competition that was willing to work for lower wages. Protestants saw Catholics and Jews. Educators saw illiterate hordes. Politicians saw peasants, unfamiliar with the workings of democracy and a constitutional government. Still others saw dark-skinned, thick-browed peoples whom they considered inferior and possibly dangerous. In short, many Americans developed a sense of xenophobia, a hatred or fear of foreigners or strangers. They acted accordingly. They posted signs that read, "No Jews or Dogs Al- lowed." They called the Chinese "coolies" and the Italians "wops" and "dagos." all derogatory names. The ethnic jokes that still surface today have their roots in this period of ethnic hostility and violence. The fears of Americans led the U.S. government to enact several laws in tile late 1800s that restricted immigration. The Chinese were the first to feel the golden door closing on them. In 1882 the Chinese Exclusion Act suspended Chinese immigration for ten years and dramatically restricted the rights of the Chinese already in the United States. The act, which was later extended, demonstrated the lengths to which nativism and racism could go and set a precedent for the future exclusion of other immigrants. The new immigrants forged new lives with religion and education. Once firmly in the United States, the new immigrants faced a world vastly differently from the one they left. An unfamiliar language, new freedoms, and a different set of customs all forced these new Americans to adjust and adapt. They did so in remarkable wavs. Most new immigrants settled in America's growing cities, where unskilled factory labor was much in demand. As a walk through the ethnically diverse cities of New York. Chicago. Miami, or Los Angeles would show you even today, the immigrants began to shape the cities around them. Most new arrivals tried to balance the old and the new—retaining their traditional culture for their families while also adapting to life in their new country. To do this, they spoke their native language, practiced their religion, and read their own newspapers. Tightly knit ethnic communities developed in many of America's large cities. Immigrant associations sprang up to help the newcomers. Groups such as the Polish National Alliance provided assistance in finding housing and work, offered insurance plans, and sponsored such community activities as baseball teams and youth programs. Religion and education were two important means of support for the immigrants. For many Polish and Irish immigrants, the Roman Catholic Church offered spiritual guidance, education, and a sense of community. Another group of immigrants. Eastern European Jews, established synagogues and religious schools wherever they settled, teaching the Hebrew language and raising their children with a Jewish heritage. For Mary Antin, the young Jewish immigrant. education was her father's "chief hope for [his] children, the essence o( American op- portunity." In America, Ihis too was possible, and free lo alL For Mary, her introduction to American education was a special treat a step on her way to becoming Ihe author of the book Promised Land. Father himself conducted us lo school. He ■ would not have delegated that mission to ■ the President of the United States. He had awaited the day with impatience equal to mine. ... At last the four of us stood around the teacher's desk; and my father, in his impossible English, gave us over in her charge, with some broken word of his hopes for us that his swelling heart could no longer contain. ... I think Miss Nixon guessed what my father's best English could not convey. I think she divined that by the simple act of delivering our school certificates to her he took possession of America. Identify Key People and Terms Write a sentence to identify: nativism. xenophobia, Chinese Exclusion Act Locate Key Places What purpose did Ellis Island serve? Master the Main Ideas 1. Analyzing reasons for immigration: How did the new immigrants differ from the old? 2. Analyzing reactions to Immigration: Whal was the prevailing attitude of native-born Americans toward the new immigrants? 3. Synthesizing information: In what ways did the immigrants create their new lives in America's cities? Immigrant children learn to salute the American hag in a New York City school around 1889. As this photograph by the Danish American journalist and reformer Jacob Rits (1849- 1314) suggests urban schools were important centers for sharing both old and new culture and knowledge Apply Critical Thinking Skills: Distinguishing False from Accurate Images For many years people thought of the United States as a melting pot. in which immigrants of various backgrounds blended together into a common American culture Recently, however, people have been referring to Ihe country as a salad, in which the different ingredients come together in a bowl while still retaining their individual qualities. In this image, immigrants to the United States create together an interesting mix of cultures. Which image do you find to be the more accurate in the United States today? Use evidence to support your answer. In contrast to the Knights, the American Federation of labor (AFL), formed in December 1886, was a loose federation of craft unions. The founders of the AFL hoped to preserve and extend the craft union movement with a separate union for every skill, rather than one union for all workers. English-born Samuel Gompers, the short, crusty head of the cigarmakers' union, was elected the first president. Under Gompers' direction, the AFL ignored politics and concentrated on building strong organizations among skilled workers. When depression struck in the 1890s, the AFL and most of the national craft unions survived. Previously, unions had grown in times of prosperity and collapsed in times of depression. Women and unskilled workers remained outside the craft unions. Despite steps toward labor reform, most workers did not belong to the AFL or any other union. Unskilled and easily replaceable workers found it hard to organize. Their ranks included a rising number of women, both married and single. like most women, African Americans and Asian immigrants were also excluded from the AFL craft unions. Both groups awakened white fears of a lower class that would depress wages. In the 1890s, as segregation was becoming the law of the land in the South, most AFL craft unions ignored the AFL policy that prohibited discrimination against African Americans. Only the interracial United Mine Workers (UMW). formed in 1890, had a significant number of African American members. Unions on the West Coast had groWn in the 1880s by blaming Chinese immigrants for driving down wage levels. Exclusion of Chinese immigrants became a political demand of unions, and no union admilted Chinese workers as members. Some African Americans and women did join the unions. Richard L Davis, twice elected to the national board of fhe UMW, worked as a coal miner and union organizer in West Virginia and Ohio until he was blacklisted in 1898, The blacklist, a list of workers who were considered troublemakers, became a powerful weapon when circulated among employers. Workers whose names were on the list usually found it impossible to gel another job. Davis expressed the cruelty of the blacklist: I have been threatened: I have been sandbagged: I have been stoned, and last of all deprived of the right to earn a livelihood for myself and family. 1 do not care so much for myself, but it is my innocent children that I care for most, and heaven knows that it makes me almost crazy to think ot it. Women delegates to the IBtS national meeting ot the Knights ol Labor gather around one ol their leaders. Elizabeth Flynn Rodgers, holding her two-week-old son. above. Rodgers headed the Chicago chapter in 1S86 and While still in his forties, Davis died of black lung disease, caused by breathing coal dust. Mary Harris Jones devoted herself to the labor movement after losing her husband and four young children to yellow fever in the 1860s. An outspoken Irish immigrant, she was known as Mother Jones and the "miners' angel." Jones led marches and fought child labor. Criticized once for not being ladylike, she wanted that powerful industrialists such as John D. Rockefeller wanted women to be timid. She told them, "Don't be ladylike. God almighty made women and the Rockefeller gang of thieves made ladies." Mather Janes is shown below toward the end ol her career. Ill In American Voices you will find the question of agency running throughout the narrative. To organize their research and study, historians often rely on broad themes that span large periods of history. Accordingly, eight major themes are emphasized throughout American Voices. Using these themes will help you to understand better the flow of U.S. history, to leam how events and movements are connected across time and with one another. Listed at the beginning of each unit, you will find the themes that are developed in that unit. Furthermore, each chapter review includes a discussion of the most important themes in that chapter—how they were developed, tested, or changed over time. The eight themes selected are listed here, followed by a brief discussion of each. ■ Our society reflects racial, ethnic, and religious diversity. ■ Our economic system is organized around free enterprise and the protection of private property. ■ The American political system is built upon constitutional and representative government. ■ Conflict and cooperation have been essential elements in the development of the United States. ■ Americans have made choices based on geography as they interacted with the environment. ■ Americans express social and political concerns within a religious and ethical framework. I The American belief in a unique national destiny influences its relations with other nations. I Encouraging technological and scientific innovation has helped shape American society. Some people who have been part ot American history include, clockwise from bottom left, cowboys in Bronco Basting. 1895 (Charles Russell); a colonial lamily. 1798 (Ralph Eart); a 19th-century Mexican American grinding com in Calilomia: a contemporary Native American in New Mexico; and Cuban Americans in Miami. ## theme: Our society reflects racial, ethnic, and religious diversity. Throughout American history cultural diversity has been a crucial fact of life. The United States is indeed a land of immigrants, enriched by people of different colors, faiths, and ethnic backgrounds. As American Voices will show you, sometimes Americans have found this diversity a strength, sometimes a stumbling block. We have faced its challenges and difficulties with both energy and genius, pessimism and violence. Two conditions have combined to make America's multicultural experience unique among countries with diverse populations. First, new groups have joined the American community all throughout its history. enriching American life and expanding its culture. Second, the United States has struggled with contradictory ideals concerning immigrants: the wish to promote cultural diversity and tolerate differences and the desire to Americanize each new wave of immigrants. The United States honors its diverse heritage in many ways Students from Brentwood. Calltomia. at top. reflect America's multicultural mis. In Chicago, at bottom. Philippine Americans celebrate Philippines Independence Day. Historically as well, people ot many ethnic and racial backgrounds have contributed to American society—including this Japanese immigrant family around 1900. center left, and Harriet Tubman, an African American abolitionist and humanitarian in the 1800s. center right. l Lalu Nathoy Arrives in San Francisco 1872 California Lalu Nathoy (1853-1933) was raised in a poor and drought-stricken peasant village in North China. Seized from her family by bandits, she was shipped as a slave to America, where she was auctioned off to a Chinese saloon-keeper in an Idaho mining camp Gaining her freedom, she married, ran a boarding-house, and eventually homesteaded a twenty-acre farm in Idaho The following passage, an excerpt from Thousand Pieces ol Gold, a novel by Ruth- anne Lum McCunn based on the life of Lalu Nathoy. describes Lalu's arrival in San Francisco The "Madam" to whom the narrator refers was the woman in China who had arranged Lalu's passage to America The "demons" are Americans, Like the hold of the ship, the San Francisco customs shed was dimly lit. but at least the lanterns did not pitch and sway, and the air. though stale and stinking from the press of unwashed bodies, did not reek of vomit or human waste. If anything, the din from hundreds of voices, mostly male, had grown louder. Bui there was life and excitement in the shouting, joyful expectation in the rush for luggage, relatives, and friends. Lalu, waiting for her turn to come before the customs officer, caught the contagion of nervous excitement, and she fell the same thrill, bright and sharp as lightning, that had shot through her when the Madam had told her she was going to America, the Gold Mountains at the other end of the Great Ocean of Peace, ro "I have never been there, but Li Ma, the woman for whom 1 bought you, says there is gold everywhere. On the streets, in the hills, mountains, rivers, and valleys. Gold just waiting to be picked up...." Hugging herself inwardly, she had pictured her parents' and brothers' faces when she gave her father the gold that would make him the richest man in the village. The pride they would have in her. x their qianjin [ke an jin, "thousand pieces of gold." lalu's family nickname]. And she had held fast to this picture, as to a talisman [good-luck charm]. First, when the Madam had turned her over to Li Ma the crotchety, foulmouthed woman who would take her to the Gold Mountains Then, during the long voyage, when only the men's talk ol gold had kept alive her dream of going home. And now, as she Wu Nathoy shown on her MMmg day. August 13. 1194 when she was married h miner Charlie Semis. gain the right to land, Lalu must success" fully pretend to be the wife of a San Francisco merchant. Over and over, during the long weeks crammed in the hold of the ship. Li Ma had forced Lalu and the other five women and girls in her charge to rehearse the stories that matched their papers, sternly warning. "Pass the examination by customs. and you will soon return to China a rich woman, the envy of all in your village. 54 Fail, and you will find yourself in a demon jail, tortured as only the demons know how." Could the torture be worse than the journey she had just endured? Lalu so thought of the sweltering, airless heat and thirst that had strangled the words in her throat, making her stumble when she recited for Li Ma. earning her cruel pinch- ings and monotonous harangues. The " aching loneliness that came from homesickness and Li Ma's refusal to permit the girls to talk among themselves. The bruising falls and the tearing at her innards each time the ship rocked, tossing her off " the narrow shelf that served as bed, knocking her against the hard wood sides of the hull. The long, black periods of waiting for the hatch to bang open as it did twice each day, bringing a shaft of sunlight, gusts of life-giving salt air. the smell of the sea.... Lalu tossed her head, straightened her jacket, and smoothed her hair. That was all over. Behind her. No more than a bad eo dream. She was in America, the Gold Mountains. And soon, just as soon as she gathered enough gold, she would go home. "Next." Lalu felt herself shoved in front of the customs officer. She had never been close to a white man before and she stared amazed at the one that towered above her. His skin was chalk white, like the face of *> an actor painted to play a villain, only it was not smooth but covered with wiry golden hair, and when his mouth opened and closed, there were no words to make an audience shake with anger or fear, only a senseless roaring. Beside him. a Chinese man spoke. "Your papers. Give him your papers," Li Ma hissed. "My papers?" Lalu said in her native Northern dialect. "I've..." Li Ma snatched the papers from Lalu. "Don't mind the girl's foolish rambling You'll see everything's in order. Here's the certificate of departure and the slip with her husband's address here in the Great City." Gold flashed as she passed the papers up to the Chinese man beside the demon officer. "A respected tradesman he is. Could have his pick of beauties. Why he wants this simpleton back is anyone's guess----" The Chinese man laughed. He passed the papers to the customs officer. Again gold flashed. They talked between them in the foreign tongue, their eyes stripping Lalu, making her feel unclean. Finally, the demon officer stamped the papers. Smirking he thrust them down at Lalu. Her face burning with embarrassment, she hugged the precious papers against her chest and followed Li Ma past the wooden barricade, She was safe. Discussing the Reading 1 .What does Lalu Nathoy believe about America7 What does she believe about Americans7 2.How is her entry into America arranged? Identifying Assumptions When Lalu gets her close view of a white American, of what is she reminded? How does this impression reinforce her preconceptions about Americans7 an Cattle trails "tm Equal-Atm Protection Cattle Trails and Cow Towns, 1870s r~~~i ' 1 Railroads Cow towns Home range o* Texas Longhorn ge area Ol i cattle AL \ n-5^—. " map study ttd loading chutes. One of the most famous trails to lead into Abilene was the Chisholm Trail Follow it on the map above as it Sretches northward from San Antonio. Texas. It took two to three months to travel. The growth of ranching gave birth to the American cowboy. To move the cattle from southern Texas to Kansas, a new type of worker—the American cowboy—was born. Since longhorns could not be easily captured or herded on foot, the Americans borrowed the methods of the Mexican vaqueros. horse-mounted herders who were expert at branding, roping. and roundups. The American ______ | cowboys also borrowed much of their equipment, all suited for tire rough life of the range, from their southern neighbors—the Mexican saddle, the lariat, chaps, boots, spurs, and hat The word "chaps," (or example, comes from the Spanish chaparreras. meaning the thick leather trousers worn to ted one's legs. Movement The growth of ranching depended upon railroads moving cattle to midwestern cities such as Chicago for processing Where did the Western Trail begin and end? How many miles long was it? Critical Thinking Why was the era of long cattle drives short lived? thnkally diverse cities of New York. Chicago, liami. or Los Angeles would show you even )day. the immigrants began to shape the cities (ound them. Most new arrivals tried to bai- lee the old and the new—retaining their tra- itional culture for their families while also dapting to life in their new country'. To do this, ley spoke their native language, practiced leir religion, and read their own newspapers, ightly knit ethnic communities developed in nany of America's large cities. Immigrant associations sprang up to help j fa newcomers. Groups such as the Polish Na- onal .Alliance provided assistance in finding Wising and work, offered insurance plans, and mnsored such community activities as base- ell leams and youth programs. Religion and education were two important leans of support for the immigrants. For many dish and Irish immigrants, the Roman Cath- iic Church offered spiritual guidance, educa- tm. and a sense of community. Another group f immigrants. Eastern European Jews, estab- shed synagogues and religious schools wtier- they settled, teaching the Hebrew nguage and raising their children with a Jew- fi heritage. For Mary Antin, the young Jewish immi- pnt. education was her father's "chief hope [his] children, the essence of American op- ortunity." In America, this too was possible, free to all. For Mary, her introduction to can education was a special treat, a step her way to becoming the author of the book mJ Land ther himself conducted us to school. He ■■ Id not have delegated that mission to H e President of the United States. He had ited the day with impatience equal to mine. At last the four of us stood around the "er's desk; and my father, in his impossible fish, gave us over in her charge, with some ken word of his hopes for us that his swelling could no longer contain. ... I think Miss guessed what my father's best English Id not convey. I think she divined that by the act of delivering our school certificates tier he took possession of America. Identify Key People and Terms Write a sentence to identify: nativtsm, xenophobia, Chinese Exclusion Act Locate Key Places What purpose did Ellis Island serve? Master the Main Ideas 1. Analyzing reasons for immigration: How did the new immigrants differ from the old? 2. Analyzing reactions to immigration: What was the prevailing attitude of native-born Americans toward the new immigrants? 3. Synthesizing information: In what ways did the immigrants create their new lives in America's cities? Immigrant children learn lo salute the American flag in a New York City school around 1889. As this photograph by the Danish American journalist and reformer Jacob Ri is (1849- 1914) suggests, urban schools were important centers for sharing both old and new culture and knowledge. Apply Critical Thinking Skills: Distinguishing False from Accurate Images For many years people thought of the United States as a melting pot, in which immigrants of various backgrounds blended together into a common American culture. Recently, however, people have been referring to the country as a salad, in which the different ingredients come together in a bowl while still retaining their individual qualities. In this image, immigrants to the United States create together an interesting mix of cultures. Which image do you find to be the more accurate in the United States today? Use evidence to support your answer. "Don't Come Back Till You Sell Them All" Around 1900 New Mark City Lined with stalls and pushcarts, bustling Hester Street (shown in the photograph on the lacing page) was the heart of the Jewish neighborhood in New York s Lower East Side. The photograph of a bread vendor s stall on this page was taken by the Danish American journalist and reformer Jacob Rlis (res] (1849-1914), larnous for his crusade against slum conditions in New York. w o A Polish immigrant girl recalled her first experience as a street peddler in the following anonymous account, Growing up in New "fork's Lower East Side at the turn of the century, her previous contact with peddlers had been only as a customer Her father, a tailor who was experiencing one of his idle penods," tried to earn some money sewing petticoats, which she was directed to sell. Mother was having a Baby in an East Broadway Maternity Hospital. So I became the cook. Also, standing on a box, I scrubbed the children's overalls and stockings. My dad was experiencing one of his idle periods. He sat at his sewing machine, thinking of his father in the Old Country, he, too, had sat at just such a sewing-machine; and what did he make? Petticoats! So be it! If it was good enough for his father, it would be good enough for him! He took his last few dollars that he had saved to get mother out of the hospital, and bought some white calico and yards of white lace and began to make some petticoats. Perhaps he could sell them quickly before mother came home from the hospital; but who could sell them on a push-cart for him? He swallowed a dry tear in his throat and called me with downcast eyes. "Here, take these down across the street and put them on a paper on the sidewalk. Whatever they will offer you for them, take it; maybe 25C or 35c or even 15C but don't come back without money don't come back till you sell them all." I was dumbfounded. Me... did he mean me? I should sell them like a street < peddler? What would my poor mother think, in the hospital there, if she knew1 Mama! I screamed and ran down the steps, as though possessed. Hugging the bundle close to my heart. I flopped down 35 on the last step in the dark hall—and thought to myself—Lillian, next door— she has no father, her mother has a pushcart just downstairs—they eat every day—I saw them myself through the fire" escape window, yesterday.—They seemed happy, and unashamed, even proud! Lillian helps her mother some times at the pushcart, when her mother goes to buy chicken. How will my mother *5 feel? She won't know. I whispered to myself: we must eat too... the kids are hungry and yesterday we made hamburgers; today I don't see any meat in the store. Stoically I arose, put out my chest, and sc crossed the street, walked a few feet, lest someone who knew me should see me, and determined, set my wares on the ground. In a few minutes women began as Discussing the Reading 1 .What seems to have been the father's attitude toward sewing petti- coats7 Toward having his daughter peddle them on the street? 2.What appears to have been the principal reason for the girl's reluctance to peddle the clothing her father had made? Recognizing Values In this young Polish immigrant's account of her first experience as a street peddler, there are several indications of what values her family regarded as important. What are these values7 Cite lines from the reading to support your answer picking at them. "Such fine work! How much? Poor child, don't you know? I'll give you 20C, but really you can get from someone else maybe 35C; maybe even 50C." I sold her two of them. A little more courageous, then, I sold some at 35c and eo eventually some with a little soil, at 15C. Late into the night. 1 stood there, afraid to go home without a complete sell out; until it commenced to rain ... Then I sold out at any price, and hurriedly pushed my way " through the crowds, back across to my father. What his thoughts were while I was away. I cannot say. He said not a word, pocketed the money and the next day. he sent me for my mother. He was too proud to be annoyed by charity and could not bear the questions they asked. He just would not go and lower himself; that is all there was to it Japanese "Picture-Brides" Adjust to Ai imerica 1890s-1920s Far West and Midwest The great majority of the first Japanese immigrants that came to the United States were males; in the years immediately after 1900, for example, they outnumbered female immigrants 6 to 1. When these men wanted to marry, those who could afford to returned to Japan to find wives Some of the others employed the "picture-bride" system, in which friends or relatives back in Japan arranged a marriage after the immigrant and his prospective wife had exchanged photographs. According to Bill Hosokawas history of the Japanese in the United States, Nisei: The Quiet Americans, "Such marriages were usually solemnized by proxy. Under Japanese law a woman was considered married when her name was entered on her husband's family record, strictly a bookkeeping process. " The following excerpt from Hosokawa s book describes the picture-bride system. (The Japanese refer to immigrants as Issei [e'sa'j, "first generation": the children of the Issei are the Nisei [ne'sa'j, "second generation") The picture-bride system provides intensely interesting human studies. Both parties to a proxy marriage were anxious, of course, to put on the best face 5 possible both before and at the time of meeting. Men and girls from the same village who were matched were likely to know at least something about each other. But often brides and grooms, seeing each other for the first time at dockside, discovered that the marriage partner looked nothing like the photograph submitted for examination. A bald or gray-haired man was likely to be photographed with his hat a on. Men who did not have a decent suit to their names were photographed in borrowed or rented outfits. A butler or a janitor might be photographed in front of the mansion or factory building where he zo worked, and if he neglected to provide the details, it was easy for the bride to assume that in the wonderful land of America where everyone was wealthy, her husband owned the building. It was not unu- 2s sual for brides to leam the husband was a virtually penniless laborer, an itinerant farmhand or a coarse, uncultured misfit. On the other hand, many was the man who dreamed of a tender, gentle mate and m found he had drawn a shrew. One Issei woman recalls that her husband met her Ltoting somewhat uncertain a the perhaps contemplates her Mere In an unknown tart, a Japanese plcture- Me is shown just before toeing Japan for American in IfKI In the photograph on the facing page. The photograph tekw shows picture-brides enuring in San Francisco in in San Francisco and took her home to a sod house on the Nebraska prairie. She could not understand that many Caucasian farmers in the Midwest of that time were living in soddies because of the shortage of lumber, and that the soddies were comfortably cool in summer and warm in winter. "You made me come all 40 the way across the Pacific to live in a hole in the ground like a wild animal?" she raged. Some of the women never got over their disappointments—"1 wept for ten years, and then I gave up," said one—but " a surprising number quickly made adjustments as pioneer women from other lands had done before them. The development of genuine love matches was not at all unusual. so Yoshito Fujii, [a] Seattle hotel opera- tor..., recalls that the innkeepers had a busy time ol it during the picture-bride period. Days before a ship was due, the bridegrooms would come into the city from farms and sawmill camps and engage a room. They would be waiting anxiously at dockside when the ship approached, some duded up with derbies and walking sticks, searching the girls lined along the rail for a face they could recognize. Usually it took several days for the brides to clear immigration, and each day the men would congregate outside the immigration station hoping for a glimpse of their brides. Chojiro Fujii [an earlier immigrant], who was an old hand and well-known to the immigration authorities, would be showered with questions each time he emerged from the building with a bride who had been cleared. She and her husband, shy and awkward in each other's presence, would be whisked to the Fujii Hotel. There she was quickly taken to an outfitter in the same building and provided with a complete set of American clothing and her feet, broadened by a lifetime of freedom in sandals, were jammed into the narrow, high-laced shoes that were the fashion of the day. Stripped of the familiar kimono, trussed into a corset, the bride's severance from all that she had known was quick and complete. Discussing the Reading 1. According to Bill Hosokawa, how did the familiar illusion of an America where wealth was universal operate within the picture-bride system? 2. What was the first process of "Ameri- canization" that the Japanese pic- ture-brides underwent on arriving in the United States? Do you think that this generally had a positive or negative effect on their attitudes toward their new lives in America'? Explain. Identifying Alternatives At the time the picture-bride system was in operation, arranged marriages were common in many parts of the world What are the advantages and disadvantages of arranged marriages? Skill: Recognizing Values reducing the Skill, in 1884 i Catholic church officials set goal of having every Catholic attending a Catholic school. A many parents belonging to er religious groups, particularly 'erans. had also chosen to edu- Te their children with a curriculum with religious values and pies. By establishing their schools, such parents hoped instill their religious values in ,tr children. What were those val- and how did they compare the values promoted in the " schools of the time? anting the Skill, values, 1 is. one's established ideals of . may differ significantly among Recognizing values of particular group thus helps to un- the group's goals and To recognize the values of a person or group, be alert to both words and actions. What ideals does a person support? By what values does a person live and work? Applying the Skill. Read the following words from a speech given in 1890 by the Roman Catholic Archbishop John Ireland about public education in America. It (the public school) treats of land and sea, but not of Heaven; it speaks of statesmen and warriors, but not of God and Chhst; it tells how to attain success in this world, but says nothing about the world beyond the grave. The pupil sees and listens, and sensibly forms the conclusion that religion is of minor importance. Religious indifference becomes his creed: his manhood will be. as was his childhood in school, estranged from God and the positive influences of religion. 1. According to Archbishop Ireland, what values were taught in public schools? What values did he believe were neglected? 2. The archbishop's speech was controversial with both Catholics and Protestants because in it he went on to say that the public schools should provide religious instruction. Why do you think the plan was controversial? How would such a plan mesh with the principle of the separation of church and state written into the U S. Constitution? The broad goals of compulsory education ! widely accepted, but not without contro- / about the content of this education and o would provide it. Conflicts flared up re- edly between Protestants and Roman ics, who by 1880 constituted the largest US. denomination. Since the early some Catholics had established separate ial schools, sensing that American ed- i had a Protestant orientation. Respond- to a concern about the direction of public ! education, the Catholic bishops met in in a council at Baltimore, Maryland. Council of Baltimore charged every Amer- Catholic community with building an ele- school. Faced with this burden and the realization that Catholic schools would reduce the demand on the public schools, some Catholics sought tax money to aid parochial education. Their demands brought strong antiforeign and anti-Catholic outbursts. Catholics and Protestants also fought over other issues, including the issue of language, in California. When statehood came in 1850. English became the language of instruction almost everywhere public schools were started. Only in Santa Barbara, where two-thirds of the townspeople spoke only Spanish, did influential residents force Spanish instruction. As a result. Spanish-speaking southern Californians established a Catholic school system in reaction to Yankee opposition to Spanish culture. , As I stood with the Statue of ply towering over me, I realized i what many have felt before— Amenca is another name for ' many Amencans take their i for granted. I cannot. For I was in solitary "t in a Communist prison, falsely accused of a spy for the West. My ordeal i on a very different August day > ago, when 30 or 40 Red [gangs of teenagers used by ~ment to attack the ' of communist leader Mao ! came to destroy my house. Oeen alone in my study , and though I knew it was a [useless] gesture. I picked up a of the Chinese constitution, against the constitution of the '$ Republic of China to enter |hate house without a search it," I challenged, young Red Guards grabbed iiution from my hands and it up. The constitution is i," they said. "We recognize the teaching of our Great rChairman Mao." . , . constitution is only as strong as :fs of its people, i Chang, Life and Death k Shanghai Paraphrase and Discuss "Men, their rights and nothing more; women, their rights and nothing less," declared Susan B. Anthony at the conclusion of a speech she gave in 1873 urging that American women be free to vote. What did she mean? One method that might help you understand what Anthony said would be to paraphrase her conclusion: that is, restate it in your own words. Which of the following would be the best paraphrase of Anthony's conclusion; (a) men and women are fundamentally the same; (b) men deserve only their rights and women shouldn't settle for less than their rights; (c) women deserve the right to vote. The best paraphrase is (b), because it most closely restates Anthony's words. Assignment: In a paragraph, paraphrase the excerpt from Frederick Douglass speech "What the Black Man Wants" that appears on the facing page. Then, in a second paragraph, discuss the central point that Douglass was making. Use the following process. Paraphrase the excerpt. Read the passage carefully. What attitude would the Abolitionists have had toward African Americans? Examine the language that Douglass used. What did he mean by such terms as mischief, disturb, interference, and positive injury? Rewrite the excerpt sentence by sentence, using simple, everyday English. Think about what Douglass was saying. What was Douglass' central point? What examples did he provide to expand on it? How does his central point fit in with the American ideal of liberty? How does his position apply to the lives of African Americans and other minority groups today? How do you feel about Douglass' point? Discuss Douglass' statement in a paragraph. Present his central point as your topic sentence. In the remaining sentences of your paragraph, explore one or more of the questions in the preceding step. Provide specific examples to support your points. Be sure to use appropriate transitional words and phrases to link up your sentences. Write an effective concluding sentence in which you sum up the points you have made about Douglass statement. Edit both paragraphs. Look over your paraphrase of the excerpt and your discussion of Douglass' central point. Does your paraphrase restate Douglass' points in the order in which he made them? Is the topic sentence of your discussion paragraph clear? Is your concluding sentence an effective summary of the points you have made? Proofread and rewrite your paragraphs. Go over both paragraphs, correcting any errors in grammar, spelling, and punctuation. Rewrite both paragraphs. Good city goverment: two views Point Government by experts ■ Experts make decisions scientifically ■ Government is honest, efficient, economical ■ Nonpartisan citywide elections center power in business- dominated hands Counterpoint Government under a boss ■ Decisions of boss reflect will of most voters ■ Government reaches out to problems of the community that experts ignore ■ Elections by ward give power to minorities and working class an existing law to a vote. South Dakota became the first state to approve the initiative and referendum in 1898. Many states later adopted these measures even though the processes are cumbersome. Some cities and states also have recall laws, allowing voters to remove an official from office. A reform in politics and government swept California after Hiram Johnson's election as governor in 1910. The square-jawed governor had campaigned on one theme: "Kick the Southern Pacific out of politics." The railroad was the largest landowner and the largest employer in California and had dominated state politics for 40 years. Under Johnson's leadership, California adopted a number of laws and constitutional amendments that regulated the railroad and public utilities and limited their political power. The legislature also instituted the direct primary, initiative, referendum, recall, the non-partisan ballot, and cross-filing, which allowed candidates, without stating their party affiliation, to place their names on the primary ballots of all parties. In contrast to these liberal measures, Johnson had the legislature pass a law in 1913 aimed at Japanese immigrants that prohibited aliens from owning land in California. The courts finally held the law unconstitutional in 1952. Reformers broadened activities of state and federal governments. Upton Sinclair's novel The Jungle caused a national sensation. President Theodore Roosevelt appointed a commission to investigate, and it confirmed Sinclair's charges. Congress responded by passing two reform measures in 1906. The Pure Food and Drug Act banned impure or mislabeled foods and drugs. Meat Inspection Act provided for federal inspection. Both were milestones on the to today's consumer-conscious government The Interstate Commerce Commission up in 1887 to control railroad rates, was first federal regulatory agency. Calls for refon had led states to establish similar independs regulatory commissions. These government bodies usually could investigate and apply got eminent regulations to ensure competition i protect consumers or employees. Many six commissions exist today, at both state and let eral levels. In most states, for example, regt latory commissions control the rates charge by utilities serving the public, such as tell phone, electric, or natural gas companie Regulatory commissions show a key eleinei in reform: a desire to settle conflicts betwJ special interests scientifically through invest gation and mediation by experts. Identify Key People and Terms Write a sentence to identify: commission system, city-manager plan. Robert M. La Follette, direct primary, initiative, referendum, recall. Pure Food and Drug Ad I Meat Inspection Act Locate Key Places What state was called the laboratory of democracy"? Master the Main Ideas 1. Understanding reform movements: I Describe two new reforms progressives I demanded at the local level. 2. Understanding democratic beliefs: I What measures did reformers introduce I to end corruption at the state level? 3. Understanding economic development: How did reformers expand the activities of state and federa I governments? Apply Critical Thinking Skills: Identifying Central Issues What contradictions might exist between ""■ progressives goal of extending the role o! I the voter in politics and the progressives I tendency to rely on experts? Gateway to 12 million newcomers, Ellis Island embodies the heritage of a nation of immigrants. Island Once a three-acre dot in New W Harbor, Ellis Island has had 4 names, owners, and uses. It wall purchased from Indians by Duufl colonists in 1630. Fisherman their nets there, and families ( to picnic. The island was pnva^ owned for many years, most nol bly by namesake Samuel Ellis, if New Jersey farmer. The feberaff government acquired the isiandB 1808 and used it as a fort and ammunition depot. Ellis Island found new purposfl 1890 when the federal govern* assumed direct control of imm* tion in New York City. The islaifl was doubled in size, old buildmfl were remodeled, and new < constructed Completed in 16 the wooden immigration facility I was destroyed by fire in 1897 Construction began immediate)! on a fireproof complex of brick limestone structures. These wef crowned by the French Renais-| sance splendor of the main building. The new facilities opened in 1900, just in time to catch the crest of the great "third wave M immigration in the years 1900ta"" 1914. Immigrants arrived mnu* bers far beyond the dreams d | t ovemment planners—more than million in the peak year of 1907. ^instruction raced to keep pace, and Ellis Island expanded to more an 27 acres. New arrivals were transferred rom their ships to Ellis Island by larges. As they entered the main luilding, they checked their bag- age. then headed for the Great lall on the second floor. The stair climb itself was their first test; inspectors watched for those who had difficulty. After passing a brief medical exam, immigrants pro- seeded to the registry room—the iteat Hall—for an examination of heir documents, their finances, ana, m later years, their learning. Generally, adult immigrants had to show that they were capable of work, had the price of a rail ticket (about S25), and could read and ante. Immigrants who passed were given a landing card and e free to enter the United les. The outbreak of World War I quickly pinched the flow of immigrants to a few hundred thousand per year; restrictive laws of the 1920s would maintain the squeeze. For several decades Ellis Island was as much a detention and deportation center as a gateway for newcomers. Virtually unused after World War II, Ellis Island closed in 1954. Vacant buildings were abandoned to the ravages of rust and rot as the government occasionally debated the island's fate. Not until the 1970s did the government commit itself to restoring Ellis Island, and not until the 1980s did a public fund-raising drive generate the hundreds of millions of dollars necessary for the task. In 1990 the Ellis Island Immigration Museum opened in the restored magnificence of the main building. The Great Hall now echoes to the footsteps of new visitors, many of them remembering grandparents and great-grand- parents who walked there long before, crossing an extraordinary threshold and winning for themselves and their descendants a new destiny as Americans. ■aniaii ■ ■ *" Ellis Island Immigration latum is located in New York approiimately one mile ol Manhattan A Russian immigrant describes her experiences: The examination process at Ellis Island was stressful to most immigrants. Nina Goodenov, who arrived in 1911, explains why. What factors contributed to her ordeal? As far as Ellis Island was concerned, it was a nightmare. After all. none of us spoke English. We had no idea where we were going and no idea what was to he done to us. We had no idea what they wanted of us. There were hundreds and hundreds of people and they were treated exactly like sheep. "Go here. Go sit here. Wait here. Wait there." It took a day and a night. You had no place to sleep. You had to sleep on the benches, just sitting up A medical inspector folds back the upper eyelid over a special instrument, 1913. The status of citizens of Puerto Rico was further clarified by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1901. !n a series of historic decisions known as the Insular Cases, the Court ruled, in effect, that Puerto Rico and the other new possessions were not fully part of the United States and that their people were not automatically entitled to the guarantees of the U.S. Constitution. In other words, these decisions said, the Constitution does not follow the flag. Congress passed the Jones Act in 1917, conferring U.S. citizenship on the Puerto Ricans and making the upper house of their legislature elective. The governor and supreme court continued to be appointed by the president, and its laws subject to presidential veto until 1952 when Puerto Rico became a self-governing commonwealth. A referendum was planned for the 1990s offering Puerto Ricans a range of options from statehood to independence. The United States became a Pacific power. Key Terms: Philippine insurrection spheres of influence. Boxer Rebellion indemnity. Russo-Japanese War Reading Preview As you read this section, you will learn 1. what action Americans took regarding IN independence movement in the Philippines. 2. what policy Americans defended in China, 3. what country the United States refused to! challenge In Asia. Identify Key People and Terms Write a sentence to identify: Henry Cabot Lodge. Albert Beveridge. George F Hoar. Platt Amendment. Foraker Act, Insular Cases Locate Key Places Where is the U.S. naval base in Cuba located' The acquisition of the Philippines and GuaJ gave the United States two potentially impwi tant sites lor naval bases near China and Japm| During the Spanish-American War. Congn annexed Hawaii. Late in 1899 Great Brito Germany, and the United States agreed tl Germany and the United States would divi Samoa. These possessions made the Unit States a major power in the Pacific. Master the Main Ideas 1. Analyzing U.S. foreign policy: (a) How did the imperialists justify annexation of the Philippines? fb) Why did the anti-imperialists oppose annexation? 2. Analyzing political campaigns: How did the issue of imperialism affect the 1900 presidential election? 3. Analyzing U.S. foreign policy: (a) How did the Platt Amendment define the status of Cuba? (b) How did the Jones Act in 1917 change the status of Puerto Rico? Apply Critical Thinking Skills: Recognizing Values Was American impenalism a betrayal or a fulfillment of the nation's ideals, or both? Explain. Americans suppressed independence in the Philippines. McKinley's re-election in 1900 ended any praj ped for immediate Philippine indepe When Dewey's vidory came in early May 18 Ihe Philippine independence movement, led Emilio Aguinaldo [a me'lyo a ge nal'doj, tablishcd a provisional government and loo control throughout the islands except for Ml nila. 'Die revolutionaries were divided themselves, however, and the American tary forces, which began to arrive in carefully avoided any actions that might recognition of the rebel government. The olutionary assembly declared independenJ from U.S. rule early in 1899. and the RlipmJ attacked U.S. forces in Manila. American ■ ties termed the Filipinos' struggle for in- ence the Philippine insurrection. | Quelling the independence movement in the tines required three years, the lives of American soldiers and at least 20.000 and more than $170 million. In hing the uprising, American troops re- to the same policy of reconcentracion had been so widely condemned when 1 by the Spanish in Cuba. Resistance eon- into mid-1902 even though American > captured Aguinaldo in 1901. | In 1900. before the army had suppressed the pine insurrection. President McKinley nted William Howard Taft to head a com- sion governing the Philippines. Under his ership, public schools, hospitals, and mod- I sanitation came to the islands along with h-needed reform in land ownership. | In 1902 Congress set up a government for t Philippines similar to that in Puerto Rico, er the act. Filipinos became citizens of the pine Islands but not citizens of the United , The Philippine Islands were to have a lathe body, one house of which was to be rfy elected and the other appointed by I governor. The president of the United s appointed the governor, i the first Philippine legislature met in half of its members favored independence from the United States. Congress made both houses of the Philippine legislature elective in 1916 and promised independence. However, independence was delayed until 1946. Americans defended the Open Door in China. Alter the United Slates acquired the Philippines by conquest and purchase tram Spain. Filipino insurgents at outposts like this fought hundreds of engagements against American soldiers. Many Americans, including the African American soldiers who fought against them, sympathized with the Filipinos desire tor independence. Emilio Aguinaldo. inset, led the rebellion. From its new Asian bases, the United States began to expand its trade and investment in East Asia, especially in China. Weakened by corruption, natural disasters, and civil wars, the Chinese government could not resist attempts by European powers to gain control over large parts of its territory. By the turn of the century, several nations had carved out trading areas in China, called spheres of influence, where year after the United States declared its Door policy, in 1900, a Chinese secret ; called the Boxers rose up to expel fo- from China, and 242 missionaries murdered. The Boxers were so-called by because their name translated to s harmony fists." Among the Ameri- lorred to flee during the Boxer Rebellion Absalom and Caroline Sydenstricker. .terian missionaries who came to China Hillsboro. West Virginia, as newlyweds in Their seven children learned to speak before they learned English, and four died in China, victims of tropical dis. Their daughter, Pearl Comfort, was eight old at the time the Boxers rebelled and described how bewildered she felt when Chinese friends began to avoid her and ily. Her mother tried to explain: nothing to do with ns. she said, for we had never been cruel to the Chinese ' we taken their land or their river ports, white people had done the evil, and our she promised me, understood this and hate us. ... I could not understand ("e who were still ourselves and un- *d. should be lumped with unknown white unknown countries who had been we were not, robbers and plunderers. It w that I felt the first and primary injustice I was innocent, but because I had the fair blue eyes, the blond hair of my race I ed, and because of fear of me and my walked in danger. the Sydenstrickers returned to China the mission movement again prospered, [named an American agricultural expert As the popular novelist Pearl Buck, she : the first woman to win a Nobel Prize hire for her books about China. United States took part in an armed in- by Great Britain. France. Germany, and Japan that crushed the Boxer However, Secretary of State Hay firm stand against those who wanted to China by dividing up more of its lerri- ad. China was required to pay a huge indemnity' (repayment for damage or loss) to these nations. After paying its citizens for losses suffered during the rebellion, the U.S. government returned its share of the indemnity to China. The Chinese government used the money to send students to the United States. In spite of this sign of mutual friendship. Chinese students and merchants often experienced discrimination in the United States. Furthermore. the 85.000 to 90,000 Chinese already living in the United States were frequently the victims of anti-Chinese prejudice. The Chinese Exclusion Act was renewed indefinitely in 1902. barring Chinese nationals from immigration into the United Stales—a step favored by American labor leaders. The exclusion policies were extended to Hawaii, the Philippines, and Cuba to make certain no Chinese laborers en- The Sydenstricker family with Pearl, left, her younger sister. Grace, and Wang Amah, their Chinese nurse, are shown on their relum to China after the Boxer Rebellion. An older brother. Edwin, was Ihen a college student in the United States. tered the United States indirectly. The characters above translate "Goun She Fa Szl" and wish someone good fortune and much wealth in the new year. The United States refused to challenge Japan in Asia. Americans kept a close watch on East Asian developments, especially the rise of Japan as a major power. Before 1904, both Russia and Japan had coveted Manchuria, a northern region of China rich in coal and other resource I and with the potential for industrializatm I President Roosevelt hoped that neither Russial nor Japan would gain dominance. Japan went to war with Russia in 1904 and ! 1905 over Manchuria and nearby Korea, win-1 ning a stunning victory. For the first time, an I Chinatowns Just as American forces were establishing outposts and influence near China, Chinese immigrants in the United States were creating small outposts of their own within American cities. These Asian communities came to be known as China- towns. Though American diplomats spoke of an "open door policy" for China, in America itself Chinese people were finding only closed doors during difficult economic times. In the late 1800s many Chinese miners, farmers, and workers left the small western towns where they had settled and gathered together in the larger urban centers. By the early 1900s. Chinatowns had sprung up in San Francisco, Los Angeles. Seattle, Chicago, New York, and Boston. The streets of Chinatowns were lined with Chinese restaurants and grocery stores. Chinese lanterns hung outside of ornately decorated temples. Merchants painted their wrought-iron balconies bright yellow and green and planted flower boxes of cheerful flowers. Chinese notices hung on wooden walls, and men with long, braided hair would stand before the wall, reading the community news. Peddlers hawked traditional Chinese sweets and tempted children with colorful, hand- painted toys. Chinatowns, with their exotic sights and sounds, drew tourists from near and far. However, tourism was of secondary importance to the people who lived in these communities. One resident of Chinatown remarked: It is only in Chinatown that a Chinese immigrant has society, friends and relatives who share his dreams and hopes, his hardships, and adventures. Here he can tell a pke and make everybody laugh with him; here he may hear folktales told which create the illusion that Chinatown is real) China. Today many Chinatowns continue their historic role as haven communities and as bright beacons of Asian contributions to American history. ighlights of American Life Firecrackers pup as masked dragon dancers mu] through the narrow, crowded streets of New Yon I City's Chinatown to celebrate the Chinese New 1 Year. France |*WSS WOMKN Of AMERICA I Ruy WAR SAVINGS STAMPS 4 ****** '■■ I" ■ *■ tWKWWt Not all members of Congress agreed. Senator George W. Norris, a Progressive Republican from Nebraska, Senator Robert Li Follelte of Wisconsin, and four other senators voted against the war resolution. Opponents in the House included Jeannette Rankin of Montana, who had just become the first woman representative. Rankin declared. "1 want to stand by my country, but I cannot vote for war. I vote no." After four days of debate. Congress declared war. Posters like that above made the selling ot Liberty bonds into a crusade. For those with limited means, bonds could be purchased on an installment plan or war savings stamps could be pasted in a book and redeemed lor bonds. Although this poster addresses women, most savings stamps—more than a billion dollars' worth— were bought by schoolchildren. American propaganda sometimes incited anger and hatred. The cartoon at right appeared the day before a German American immigrant. Robert Paul Prager. was seized by a mob. wrapped in an American flag, and killed as a suspected spy near Collinsville. Illinois. Americans united to support the war effort. The American decision to enter the war came at a crucial point. The Allied armies were exhausted, and U-boats were making quick work of Allied merchant ships. Financing the war. When the war began. British control of the seas put the Allies in a strong position to buy supplies from the United States, By early 1917 American companies had loaned $1.5 billion to Great Britain and half that amount to the other Allies to pay for war materials and foodstuffs. At this point, the U.S. economy was heavily dependent on selling war supplies. The secretary of the treasury, William Gibbs McAdoo, who was Wilson's son-in-law, convinced the president that he could find money to fight the war and also fight inflation by borrowing from the public. Posters and bond rallies with such film stars as Douglas Fairbanks and Mary Pickford encouraged Americans to purchase Liberty bonds or Victory bonds, as the loans were called. The government raised $21 billion in five well-publicized bond drives and an additional $11 billion through taxation. Silencing opposition to the war. Not all Americans fully supported the war. For example. a pro-German weekly editorialized that German American draftees should not be forced to fight their kin. Some Irish Americans also refused to rally to the British cause, especially after the British government brutally suppressed an Irish independence movement in 1916. The Socialist party condemned the war as an evil that was part of the capitalist system. Many people came to regard all socialists and pacifists as pro-German traitors. In order to encourage support for the war President Wilson established the Committee on Public Information. George Creel, a young newspaper editor and muckraker, was chosen to head the committee. Artists, writers, and] speakers helped whip up enthusiasm for the I American cause in what Creel called "the I world's greatest adventure in advertising." Unfortunately the fervor whipped up byl Creel had its ugly side. Patriotism became anl excuse for persecuting people with German! names and for banning the music of Bach. Bet-1 thoven, and Wagner. Even eating Germanl was considered disloyal, so sauerkraut renamed liberty cabbage. Many schools teaching the German language, and •language books were burned. As eartv as 1894 Theodore Roosevelt had ned "hyphenated Americans"—per- whose loyalties were divided between the States and the old country. Woodrow took up the theme. He further added wartime hysteria by telling Americans that "military masters of Germany" had "filled unsuspecting communities with vicious ) and conspirators," Congress passed the Espionage Act in 1917, i at checking espionage (spying) and trea- and prohibiting use of the mails to send nable materials. The act, used to ban so- ist publications from the mails, seriously ed the socialist movement The Sedition , passed in 1918, barred "disloyal utter* "which included criticism of the govem- i or the Constitution and disrespect for the rican flag. Some 1.500 people were arrested for violat- these laws. John Schrag was a Mennonite s in Burrton, Kansas, whose religious be- forbade support of the war. Schrag was ed by' a mob. When a (lag thrust at him to the ground, they covered him with yel- paint and had him jailed for flag desecra- (treating the flag with disrespect). Many :rs went to prison, including Eugene V. ■j, the socialist leader. When opponents of war challenged the laws as unconstitu- 'I, the Supreme Court ruled that freedom speech was never absolute. No one has the I to shout "fire" in a crowded theater, said ce Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., nor to say > that might endanger the security of the e United States needed to raise, in. and equip an army. army was far from ready for action in April i. Congress passed the Selective Service in May. requiring all men between the ages 21 and 31 (later 18 through 45) to register the draft. Local draft boards then deter- who would be called to duty. Of the 29 divisions that saw combat in the war, 11 were formed of draftees. When Alvin York registered for the draft, he asked for an exemption on religious grounds. His draft board denied the request because, they said, the Church of Christ in Christian Union to which he belonged was not a "well- recognized" sect. York was inducted in November 1917. Private York excelled on the rifle range, but his mind was troubled. He told his company commander, "Sir, I am doing wrong. Practicing to kill people is against my religion." After a furlough, and hours spent in prayer, York resolved his crisis of conscience and returned to the army. Eventually, along with about two million other American soldiers, he served in France. Nearly 4(K),(XK) African Americans also served during World War I in segregated army and navy units. The war proved a bitter exper- Amenca s most celebrated war hero. Sergeant Alvin C. York, is photographed at the end ol the war wearing, left to right, the Congressional Medal ol Honor, tor gallantry In action, and the French Croix de Guerre [krwa do ger'J. meaning war cross, for bravery York's drafl registration card, claiming exemption as a conscientious objector, is also shown. Women took pride in learning new job skills in mills and factories The shipyard workers above posed in front ol their handiwork. The women carried hot rivets in cone-shaped holders and used tongs to insert the rivets into holes that had been drilled in two melal plates. Another worker hammered the open end ol the rivets to meld the plates together. Note lhal the women wore slacks, which did not become popular generally until World War II. The Hispanic woman at right posed lor Ihe photographer al Beeville. in southern Texas, in Ihe early 1900$. Many Mexicans came to Texas then as Ihe cattle industry began to give way to cotton (arming. Helene Abbott Sayre was one of the Chicago Urban League's first social workers from 1917 to 1932. Sayre, a Canadian by birth, was in her forties and married with four children when she started and had already pioneered the kindergarten program for African American students in the St. Louis, Missouri, schools. Her first League post was as a League liaison charged with the well-being of 600 African American women employed at Montgomery Ward's mail-order business. She helped black women succeed in their jobs and smoothed racial tensions among workers. Seeking better jobs and higher pay, African Americans also found discrimination and prejudice. Racial tensions in some places led to lynchings. In the factory city of East St. Louis. Illinois, at least 39 African Americans were killed and as many as 6,000 left homeless after the burning of their neighborhood in a 1917 race riot. Mexicans migrated to the Southwest. A large wave of Mexican immigrants entered the United States between 1910 and 1921 for three main reasons. First, the completion of rail lines in northern Mexico in 1910 drew Mexican! workers to the Southwest. Mexican laborl played a key role in this region's emergence asl an agricultural empire. Second, the Mexican! Revolution in 1911 and the confusion and d&l orders before, during, and after the revoluliow drove many Mexicans to the United States al search of some means of earning a livelihood! Third, the U.S. wartime labor shortage brou(5i| an easing of immigration restrictions. One of many thousands of new immigrants, Ernesto Galarza, came to Sacramento, California, with his mother and two uncles in 1911 when Ernesto was just six. Sacramento in 1911 was a melting pot of na- tionalities— Mexicans, Japanese. Koreans, Yugoslavs, Poles, and Irish, as well as many "home-grown Ameri- cans.'' "The American- i o( Mexican me was no smcxrth matter," later wrote. He described his first school as "not so much a melting pot as a griddle Miss Hopley [the principal] and her help- warmed knowledge into us and roasted ra- hatreds out of us." An Italian schoolmate Galarza get a job selling newspapers. Matti also who pointed flatI could keep a copy Union to take home, the first regular r we had in the house. At night I picked words from the headlines and read them to t would listen. It was I who brought the lines home that said an Austrian duke had assassinated and that there was a war. Spanish influenza struck Sacramento in , killing Galarza's mother and uncle. After iig his way through high school and col- Galarza became a noted author and . He also became a leading crusader in to organize Mexicans and other farm e war brought new jobs and ilical power to women. war called men to the front, the labor poof women became an important part of nation's war effort. Much of the work fell the area of volunteer labor—making ; knitting sweaters, planting victory ns, or canning fruits and vegetables. r, demands for increased production opened opportunities for women in in- For example, women learned to rivet ips, stitch wings for airplanes, and mix icals for explosives. They drove delivery s, loaded and unloaded ships, carried the and served as streetcar conductors. As Se women took advantage of new oppor- African American women moved into tn department stores, meat-packing plants, tortile mills that had once been reserved white workers. sometimes developed between men women workers. In Bethlehem, Pennsyl- where steelworkers had to put in a 13- day. machinists deliberately slowed down production to improve their bargaining position. The men were hostile toward women machinists who worked quickly. Some wartime gains were later lost However. the war did prove the potential strength of women as a skilled and semiskilled workforce. Leaders of the women's suffrage movement had high hopes that the war would help women at last win political as well as economic equality. President Wilson had refused to support women's suffrage in 1913, but in 1918 he told Congress the women's suffrage amendment was "vital to the winning ol the war." You will read about the success of the suffrage movement in the next chapter. Identify Key People and Terms Wrrte a sentence to identify: Bernard Baruch. Herbert Hoover, assembly line, Great Migration, Urban League Locate Key Places What city was the site of a violent race riot in 1917? Master the Main Ideas 1. Analyzing the economic impact of wars: How did the new government agencies marshal U.S. economic resources for total war? 2. Understanding contributions of racial and ethnic groups: Why did African Americans migrate to the cities of the North and West during World War I? 3. Understanding causes for immigration: Why did Mexican Americans migrate to the U.S. Southwest between 1910 and 1921? 4. Analyzing the economic impact of wars: (a) How did the war affect women's job opportunities? (b) Their political power? Apply Critical Thinking Skills: Analyzing Cause and Effect Given Americans' longstanding fear of powerful governments and their tradition of iaissez faire, how do you explain their willingness to accept wartime controls over the economy in 1917 and 1918? nomination in 1920 led him to keep up the intensity of his antiradical campaign. The red scare kept Palmer's name in the press and on the minds of voters. The facts of the Palmer raids did not support the need for the widespread suppression of civil liberties. Few of the men and women arrested were aliens or revolutionary agitators. The Palmer raids had netted some revolutionary pamphlets, but only three guns. Palmer's concern that foreign revolutionaries were invading the United States, however, was shared by many. Almost one-third of the states passed strict laws designed to punish radicals. These laws applied to men and women wm advocated violence as well as to those whoa® tually took violent political action. Other Americans came to believe that I red scare and the Palmer raids were a | threat to civil liberties than were the comn^ nists. In 1920 some of these people formed! American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)jB challenge the constitutionality of laws that ® olated the Bill of Rights. Many also questioned Palmer's personal n lives for the raids, and his credibility began® suffer. The attorney general's downfall earner the spring of 1920. First a new secretary ■ more than 3.000 African I American newspapers ap peared. Today prominent African American pers include the Daily Defender. New Amsterdam News, the burgh News Courier, am the Los Angeles Sentinel In Their Own Voice ighlights of American Life Immigrants in the United States may have been distressed by the social turbulence of the 1920s, but at least they had the advantage of reading about events in their own language. Virtually every big city in the nation had newspapers published for the needs of its ethnic citizens. At their peak early in the 20th century, about 1.000 foreign language newspapers were published in nearly 40 languages, including German, Lithuanian, Italian, Polish, Spanish, Chinese, Japanese, and Yiddish. About 140 of these papers were published daily. African Americans had their own journalistic tradition, first forged in the cause of antislavery. Freedom's Journal (1827) and Frederick Douglass' North Star (1847) were two that led the way. Eventually, was appointed. Louis F. Post, who was by the lack of order and justice in r's actions, canceled thousands of his ts and released hundreds of people from Palmer then announced that a massive unist demonstration would take place in York City on May 1. a day of celebration honor of working people. The holiday. TB as Labor Day, was associated with so- and communism. Palmer ordered a show of force, with police and federal flooding the city. May 1 came and went, no sign of radical activity. Popular confi- in Palmer quickly faded, and the Palmer ■ came to an end. > prepare La Prensa. a language newspaper In tale Teias. In 1928. masthead below is trom a Din paper. Cherokee Phoenix ■| was the first Native erican newspaper. More n 300 Native Amencan sspapers are now pub- led in 34 states, wr the years the foreign guage press has defied in circulation and in mber of papers. Today 40 dailies and 200 eKIies are publishing. l robust exceptions to decline are Spamsh- guage newspapers, put 100 of them are curly being published. Hugh most are in the utfiwest. the two largest BDiario-La Prensa in I# York City and Diario las Americas in Miami, ese papers help sustain journalistic tradition of sping people informed in own voice. The Sacco-Vanzetti case focused anti- immigrant sentiment. Although Americans lost confidence in Palmer, hostility toward immigrants persisted. Books with titles such as The Passing of the Great Race warned that Anglo-Saxon citizens were losing their nation to hordes of "twisted . . . filthy" southern Europeans and Jews, who were, and would remain, un-American. Nativism. with its anti-immigrant attitudes, was clearfy on the rise. Two laws were passed in the early 1920s to slow immigration—the Emergency Quota Act in 1921 and Ihe National Origins Act in 1924. The second law set an immigration quota of two percent of each national group counted in the 1890 census. Since southern and eastern Europeans had not arrived in large numbers until 1900, the law gave western and northern Europeans an advantage. For example. Great Britain and Ireland could send 62.574 people a year, Italy only 3,845. Japan. China. India, and other Asian nations were each limited to 100 immigrants a year. The newest immigrants to the United States came from Mexico and Puerto Rico. As in the 1800s. many Mexicans moved north to work as agricultural laborers in Ihe Southwest. Large numbers of Mexicans also Huwed into growing cities such as Denver. San Antonio. Los Angeles. and Tucson. They often lived in low-rent, inner-city districts in which services and conditions were poor. These urban Hispanic communities. known as barrios, were often rich in Mexican culture and tradition. Puerto Rican immigrants likewise headed to American cities in the 1920s. Most moved to New York City where they formed barrios in parts of Brooklyn and Manhattan. These Puerto Ricans usually found work in manufacturing, hotels, restaurants, and domestic service. As with the Mexicans, however, Puerto Rican communities also contained well-educated professionals such as doctors, lawyers, and business owners, many of whom served as leaders of their ethnic communities. In 1920 hostile attitudes toward immigrants came to the forefront with the Sacco-Vanzetti case, involving two Italian immigrants. Nicola Skill: Distinguishing False from Accurate Images Introducing the Skill. At midnight on August 22, 1927. a group of Italian immigrants waited for word of the Sacco and Vanzetti executions. When the news of their deaths arrived, the people wept— for the two men whom they believed to be innocent and for the American dream that had failed them. Americans wondered about the red scare and the national hysteria about immigrants that threatened the American ideal of "liberty and justice for all." Why were Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti convicted of a crime for which the prosecution had not proven guilt beyond a reasonable doubt? How might the public's image of immigrants in the 1920s have influenced the court's final decision? Learning the Skill, sorting out the events and emotions of the trial of Sacco and Vanzetti calls for the skill of distinguishing false from accurate images Much of the popular opinion at the time of the trial portrayed recent immigrants as undesirable troublemakers and agitators. Was this an accurate image of the immigrants in the 1920s? Or were the members of the Sacco-Vanzetti jury showing signs of prejudice, that is. a bias that has become a firm and unreasonable judgment about someone or something? In the robbery and murder trial of these two men, many observers and historians believed that prejudice, and a false image of immigrants, played a role in the conviction. To support this claim, people point to the fact that Bartolomeo Vanzetti had 14 witnesses to confirm his alibi that he was not at the crime scene. Still, the jury decided that these witnesses, all Italian Americans, were unreliable and found Vanzetti guilty as charged. To identify images as false or curate requires you to compare given image to evidence presen in a source that is considered credible on the subject. Check also to see if actions or statements can be supported by fact or evidence—or only by opinion. Applying the Skill. Consider the image presented in the following story: While gathering information for a novel based on the Sacco-Vanzetti case, writer Upton Sinclair visited the Sacco family Frustrated with the family's lack of cooperation. Sinclair concluded that there was "some dark secret there." He evidently believed that the family was hiding some knowledge of Sacco's guilt. What other conclusions might Sinclair have drawn from the situation? How might false images of immigrants have affected his judgment? Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti stood accused of robbing a shoe factory in South Braintree. Massachusetts, and killing its paymaster and a guard. Both men had given false statements during the initial interrogation, but neither had a criminal record. None of the stolen money was found in their possession. Despite a weak case against the men. a jury found them guilty of murder in July 1921. Sacco and Vanzetti were sentenced to death. Were the two men guilty? No one can sure. Their defenders, among whom were large group of Italian Americans, claimed they had been convicted because of their litical views and ethnicity instead of the dence. Both men were anarchists who be" that any form of government was an essary evil and should be abolished. It was political radicalism, supporters insisted the fact that they were immigrants, that ia verdict of guilty. Read Building Critical ng Strategies at left to learn more, i and Vanzetti were executed in 1927. they became heroes to some who : critical of the apparent bias against the i born. the poor, and the politically rad- l On the 50th anniversary of their deaths in fi Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis I Sacco and Vanzetti. lican Americans sought new ortunities after World War I. i Americans were eager to share in the erity of the 1920s. Black veterans were optimistic More than 350.000 k men had served in the armed forces dur- IWorld War I, primarily in Europe. In the |ice they had experienced more freedom I less discrimination than they had ever mi at home. Because they had helped to I for a democratic world, these veterans be- i their nation would treat them with honor j they returned. hope that racial discrimination would ! at home quickly' faded. The short but Be postwar economic depression and the ! competition for peacetime employment racial tensions. A severe housing 1 in northern cities further aggravated 1 situation. In 1919 black frustration and s anger and fear prompted a new wave of I incidents across the country, worst of these race riots occurred in . A young African American boy, play- [in Lake Michigan, floated across an imagery line dividing Chicago's white and black hes. The boy was hit by a rock, believed i thrown by a white man. and knocked aous. He then drowned. Fighting on the i followed, and streets filled with angry [protesting crowds that night. After five Evidence, 6,000 national guard troops were I in to restore order. In all. 38 people were I and 537 injured. About 1.000 African ns were left homeless, their houses de- i by white mobs. ite the intolerance they encountered, \ Americans continued to flood northern l Bv 1930 some 2.5 million African Ameri- African American Population. 1950 VorU City African American Population Shift: 1910,1930,1950 More than 30% black 15% to 30% black 5% to 15% black Less than 5% black Top three black urban centers Regions Which southern states lost the most African Americans by 1950? Critical Thinking Why did Illinois and New York show gains in black population from 1910 to 1950? African American Population. 1910 African American Population. 1930 City A still Irani Charlie Chaplin's classic film The Gold Rush serves as a backdrop lor some ot the most memorable aclors and films ot the 1920s Mickey Mouse, lop left, debuted in Steamboat Willie (1923). Ihe first cartoon to use sound Rudolph Valenlino. top right, performed the role ol the handsome Arab seducer with Agnes Ayres in The Sheik (1921). Paul Robeson, lower right, achieved worldwide lame with his 1930 London appearance as the lead actor in Shakespeare's Othello He was Ihe most respected African American actor ol his time. Al Jolson. lower left, introduced Americans to Iheir lirst movie with sound. The Jan Singer. Jolson performed Ihe role in blackface, wearing makeup lo look like an African American A Jewish immigrant Irom Lilhuania. Jolson brought an electric energy to Ihe screen. 50? traying a world of luxury and leisure, of moral freedom and hard-won success. Charlie Chaplin was the most popular film star of the 1920s. Chaplin s tramp-clown, in bag©? pants and derby hat. became the universal symbol of American cinema. His films were quite different from the showy spectacles of De Mille. Through such classics as/I Woman of Pans (1923) and The Gold Rush (1925). Chaplin criticized the social order of the 1920s. The filmmaker offered sympathetic portraits of the poor while spoofing the pretensioas of the wealthy. Other film stars included Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks—America's favorite couple—and Rudolph Valentino, an Italian-born heartthrob. In 1927 Warner Brothers added to the movie mania by introducing the first "talkie." The Jazz Singer With the addition of sound, the popularity of films increased still more. The animated cartoon, a product of the genius of Max Fleischer and Walt Disney, drew younger Americans into the theaters as well. Disney's famous creation Mickey Mouse debuted in the first cartoon to use sound. Steamlxxit Willie, in 1928. Wall Disney himself provided Mickey Mouse's voice. like the radio, the movies did little to promote positive attitudes toward different ethnic groups. Mexicans generally appeared as sleepy-eyed peasants. Likewise, roles for African American actors were limited to those portraying humiliating stereotypes. African American actors fared somewhat better in the realm of live theater, where shows with all-black casts or black stars played on Broadway in New York City every year of the 1920s, In New York's Greenwich Village. Charles Gilpin played an important role in Eugene O'Neill's classic Emperor Jones (1920), a successful play performed in Harlem. On Broadway the hit of the 1921 season was Shuffle Along, a musical with an all-black cast whose star was a talented young woman named Florence Mills. Black actors continued to win featured roles in Broadway hits in the 1920s and 1930s with such shows as Runnin' Wild, Porgy and Bess, and Green Pastures (1929 Pulitzer Prize winner for drama). One SUPRLMiTRUj^ VVAONtB singer Young women took the lead in the 1920s. Key Terms: flapper. Grand Ole Opry Reading Preview As you read this section, you will learn: 1. what the flapper symbolized. 2. how women's lives changed during the 1920s. 3. how urban and rural culture both developed in the 1920s. Often historians speak of a national mood during a decade or an era, which though not shared by everyone, is strong enough among middle-class Americans to dominate national life. The nicknames given to the 1920s—the Jazz Age. the Roaring Twenties—support the notion that the mood of that decade was more self-indulgent than the pre-war Progressive mood of self-sacrifice. As the contemporary writer F. Scott Fitzgerald put it, the postwar generation was disillusioned with reform and idealism for they had "grown up to find all Gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in man shaken." The goal of many young men and women of the Jazz Age was to live for the here and now. woman who had abandoned all older view J femininity and women's roles. The flapper pfel ferred to be sexy and daring rather than sin and innocent. She smoked in public drank m quor, swore, and flirted openly with men. Her appearance advertised her new moof Hemlines rose above the knees, dropped below the hips, and body corsets were thrown away entirely. Long which in previous decades was a woman! crowning glory, was left on the barter shod floor. "Bobbed" hair, the shorter the better.TM placed it. Cosmetics, once the mark of I woman of loose morals, became a stands* part of the new look. Fjitrepreneurs were qiw to see the potential. Beauty parlors opened M in cities across the country, and the cosmetil^ industry grew quickly. The flappers were by no means only wl women. Young African American women New York City and other urban areas chose; abandon their long skirts as did Chinese Aim ican teenagers in San Francisco. A worker* The flapper was the symbol of a new youth culture. The essential elements of the new culture were freedom and spontaneity. Young white Americans seemed, to their elders at least, determined to ignore all traditional rules of behavior. The older generation was shocked as their sons and daughters abandoned the waltz for the rhythms of jazz, drank bootlegged liquor out of hip-pocket flasks, and raced their cars at breakneck speeds. The symbol of this revolution in morals and manners was the flapper. She was a young Actress Muriel Redd ot Chicago has her hair bobSed* j the Hotel McAlpin barber shop in New Yort City" ® Congregational Mission in San Francisco's L'own described the young women of 4: The Chinese girls bob their hair, wear "dresses, and look just like American The Chinese teenagers created a cultural blend for themselves. One girl ~ted, "On weekends we'd go eat won- and drink orange freeze at the soda foun- "Their parents, though, often had difficulty' ding their children, especially when /changed their given names to American , "My parents wanted me to grow up a Chinese girl, but I am an American and I accept all the old Chinese ways and s," explained Flora Belle Jan of Fresno, o a modem American teenager, the flapper r shocking. In the 1920s, however, this ' lemale ideal disturbed adults who had raised with Victorian images of the sexes, new woman seemed to them to signal the ; of the nation's moral standards, flappers and other Jazz Age young peo- borrowed, and largely misinterpreted, und Freud's theories of psychoanalysis in to justify their behavior. The Austrian- sdentist and doctor had developed a new for treating troubled patients, a based upon the theory that abnormal was often the result of unconscious suppressed fears or desires. By examining i s thoughts and feelings through a pro- called psychoanalysis, Freud hoped to certain mental disorders. Without reading 's complex theory carefully, or at all, an followers of this new psychology that mental health depended on sat- g all one's desires. Repression, that is, ' over human drives or desires, thus led nal problems. They concluded that and lack of inhibition were necessary 's mental health. en's lives were changed by technologies. flapper was only the most sensational ex- i of a changing identity for women. In changes in hair style or hemline, in ap- or courtship rituals, may not have been particularly important to millions of married or older women. For them, the new scientific technologies and the consumer orientation of the era had a more revolutionary impact on their lives. One developing technology had a dramatic impact on many women's lives. Because of the availability of inexpensive and safe birth control. the national birth rate fell for the first time during the 1920s. As discussed in Chapter 8, Margaret Sanger led the battle for women's access to birth control. Throughout the decade she encountered fierce and well-organized opposition from the Roman Catholic Church and others who believed that sexual abstinence was the only moral means to prevent conception. Other new technologies had unexpected effects. Although electric appliances were promoted as labor-saving devices, they did not lighten the average homemaker's workload. Instead, advice columnists and product advertisements encouraged women to use the new appliances to meet higher standards of cleanliness. They equated cleanliness with motherly love and tried to make women who did not keep spotless homes feel like failures. In addition. the availability of household appliances stopped a trend toward such jobs as taking in These young Chinese American women show the influence ol two cultures. Their clothing Is Chinese, bul their hair is bobbed in the latest American fashion. They are playing mahjong, a Chinese game that became an American tad in the 1920s laundry and baking outside of the home. As a result, the household chores expected of women increased in the 1920s. Ruhe Lopez, a young Mexican American woman, was born in Mazatlan. Mexico, but moved to Los Angeles, California, with her American husband, a mechanic. Lopez, though she considered herself to be Mexican by heart and by "race," adapted herself quite easily to the life of a young American woman. She took on a number of different jobs—landlord, real estate agent, chauffeur, and movie studio ex- tra—so that she and her husband would be able to dress and live well. Ruhe Lopez described their good life to an interviewer: I get up in the morning at seven and make breakfast for my husband and myself. This consists of mush, eggs, milk, and coffee. I also prepare his lunch and take him to his work in the automobile which we have bought and then I go to mine. At noon when I come home I make ham and eggs or anything for lunch or take my lunch in a restaurant. I come early in the afternoon if I don't have anything to do, and after I have fixed and swept the house, I get supper ready. That is our big meal, as it is with the Americans. I make Mexican stews, vegetables, and American side dishes, chocolate, milk, and coffee, frijoles. etc. I buy pies and sweets and we have a good supper. Then we go out to a movie or some dance hall or riding in the automobile. Urban and rural culture developed separately in the 1920s. The 1920 census showed that for the first time in the nation's history more people lived in towns and cities than in the countryside. About 54 million Americans lived in urban areas, compared to 52 million in rural areas. These figures did not mean that the average American lived in a major urban center. Only one in four resided in a city of more than 100,000 people. Nevertheless, the population shift was significant. Despite the trend to an urban society, rural culture in this country remained strong. Many people resisted the spread of urban culture and values fostered by the radio, syndicated papers, and movies. In particular, churches fought to preserve their from this invasion of new manners, and ideas. Prohibition, strongly supported rural Protestant Americans, was one of the resistance to urban culture. Some advcxates of rural culture realized the media could be used to spread their val and traditions as well. Singing groups such the Carter Family acquired a national follow through their appearances on a weekly I cast from the Grand Ole Opry. a musical in Nashville, Tennessee. With these 1 night performances at the Opry. the C and similar groups introduced Americans to form of country music that kept alive the tradition of the English, Scottish, and Irish tiers of the mountain regions of the Arne continent. Identify Key People and Terms Write a sentence to identify: flapper. Sigmund Freud, Grand Ole Opry Locate Key Places In what city was the Grand Ole Opry located? Master the Main Ideas 1. Understanding cultural development: What was the significance of the flapper as a new for women? 2. Recognizing the impact of science and technology: In wtiat ways did technological innovations all women's lives during the 1920s? 3. Understanding cultural development: (a) What evidence is available that America was becoming urban culture in the 1920s? (b) How rural America respond? Apply Critical Thinking Skills: Demonstrating Reasoned Judgment Historians and writers have said that the national mood of the 1920s was one o! disillusionment and self-indulgence. How might you characterize your decade of the 1990s? A Piercing Chill African American Gordon Parks would achieve success as a photographer, writer, composer, and filmmaker. In 1929. however, he was 16 years old and supporting himself in high school with a /ob as a bellboy when the Depression touched his world. What immediate effects did the Depression have on Parks? The newspapers were lull of it, and I read everything I could get my hands on, gathering in the full meaning of such terms as Black Thursday, deflation, and depression. I couldn't imagine such financial disaster touching my small world; it surely concerned only the rich. But by the first week of November I too knew differently; along with millions of others across the nation. I was without a job. All that next week I searched for any kind of work that would prevent my leaving school. Again it was, "We re firing, not hiring." "Sorry, sonny, nothing doing here." Finally, on the seventh of November I went to school and cleaned out my locker, knowing it was impossible to stay on. A piercing chill was in the air as I walked back to the rooming house. The hawk had come. I could already feel his wings shadowing me. Many Mexican Americans stayed in the United States throughout the Depression, hoping to find a future in taming or sheepherding. This group is herding sheep in New Mexico. None of the defendants was ever acquitted by a southern jury, but neither were any of them executed. After several trials, charges were eventually dropped for four of the teenagers. Another four were paroled, and one— Haywood Patterson—escaped from his work gang. Nearly 20 years later, in 1950, the last of the Scottsboro defendants was released from prison. African American gains. The NAACP. the most prominent organization promoting the advancement of African Americans, continued through the 1930s to work for legal and political gains. They also struggled to gain a foothold for African Americans in the emerging labor movement. The NAACP continued what in the long run would be its most significant contribution to the advancement of African Americans, l^w- yers working for the NAACP filed suits in courts around the country challenging segregation laws, occasionally winning importanl victories. These efforts continued through the 1940s and into the 1950s until they culminated in the 1954 Supreme Court decision Broun v. Board of Education, which destroyed the legal I basis for school segregation. In the 1930s, hew-1 ever, segregation survived virtually intact I throughout the South. Many Mexican Americans were forced to leave the country. Massive immigration from Mexico (exemptedI from the immigration restriction laws ol thej 1920s) had significantly increased the Hispanic] population of the United States by the 1930s.j The Southwest and California attracted Ilia largest numbers of immigrants, as thousands! of Mexicans migrated north to work in thef fields and in menial jobs in American cities a towns. Throughout the western United States. 1 ican Americans occupied much the same f sition as did African Americans in the I and East. They were generally the poore^ group in every community' and faced wdq spread discrimination in the search for and housing. They were barred from public cilities or forced to use them under hu conditions. ? farm 1 ■'Vill.il I > puJ in the South, many Anglos (non-Hispanic Americans) reacted to hard times by ing into the low-paying jobs held by Chi- (Mexican Americans). Some prejudiced Americans demanded that no Chicanos hired while Anglos remained unemployed, j result. Hispanic unemployment was soon higher than unemployment in the general population. !y orchestrated campaigns encouraged Mexicans to move back to Mexico, public officials simply rounded up and took them over the border. Other cities such as Los Angeles offered free train tickets to Mexico. From 1929 19,14. some 425.0(H) people—mostly Texas, California, Indiana, and Illinois— to Mexico. Since many of the deed were U.S. citizens—the American-born s, wives, or children of Mexican al- deportations violated their basic civil ilorced wav an Americans were forced out of general labor market. most Americans during the Great Depres- Asian Americans were forced to deal with unemployment and financial crisis. How. they also faced racial discrimination in and education. Great Depression served to intensify al- ; existing biases in American society. One Chinese American, in search of a job, against these racial biases: thousands of fair- ed. blue-eyed collegians elbows, looking for a job, with thousands ilar tinted fellows working for a raise, to lake his place the moment he slips, is a chance for a person with a yellow skin? nos in the United States faced a distinct of their own during the Depression .Technically, these people were not fo- ; since they came from the Philippines, L territory acquired at the end of the Span- rican War. Although they were denied jip. they were allowed entry to the States. Between 1910 and 1930. the Filipino population on the mainland jumped from 406 to 45,208, including some 30,000 in California alone. Filipinos found work in three main areas—agriculture, domestic service, and the fisheries of the Northwest and Alaska. Most Filipinos worked as farm laborers, traveling with the picking seasons through the various fertile valleys of California, Montana, Washington, and Oregon. When the Depression lowered their wages, many Filipinos rebelled. Some joined with Mexican farm workers to strike. Although defeated by government action, tfie experience inspired some 4,000 Filipinos to form their own labor union to fight low wages and racial discrimination. Identify Key People and Terms Write a sentence to identify: Scottsboro case Locate Key Places In which state is Scottsboro located? Master the Main Ideas 1. Understanding the impact of depressions: How did some families manage to survive in the 1930s? 2. Understanding the impact of depressions: In what ways did women experience discrimination during the Depression? 3. Understanding the impact of depressions: In what ways did the poverty and discrimination of African Americans intensify in the 1930s? 4. Understanding the impact of depressions: Why were many Mexican Americans forced to leave the country during the Depression? 5. Understanding the impact of depressions: What was the economic experience of Asian Americans during the Depression? Apply Critical Thinking Skills: Making Comparisons Compare two of the major court cases of the 1920s and 1930s—the Sacco-Vanzetti trial and the Scottsboro trial. What similanties exist? What differences? Use evidence to support your answer This I Remember Mexican American leader Cesar Chavez was only a child during the Depression, but he will never forget the losses and dislocations that the Chavez family shared with millions of others. Why is Chavez determined to remember these events? ttognized that the severity of the Depression ude it impossible for traditional agencies to Biorm their tasks. "I see millions of families mng to live on incomes so meager that the d of family disaster hangs over them day by C Roosevelt once said. "I see one-third of nation ill-housed, ill-dad, ill-nourished." In his first months as president, therefore, rosevelt established the first of many New leal relief agencies. The Federal Emergency leief Administration (FERA), created in May, mneled federal money to state and local gov- mments to assist their own struggling relief forts. It had a budget of $500 million, which b dedicated director, Harry L Hopkins, pent as quickly and efficiently as he could. By the end of the summer, however, Hop- ms and Roosevelt both realized that the FERA ludget would not be enough to get unem- oyed and otherwise dependent Americans rough the cold winter months ahead. In No- nnber they won congressional approval of a r relief agency, the Civil Works Administra- " (CWA). The agency provided federal jobs the unemployed—a significant departure n the FERA. which subsidized existing state ■i local agencies. CWA workers labored on lad and school repairs, airport expansion, and ter relatively small public works projects. Harry Hopkins, in his capacity as the head (FERA. had the wisdom to hire a talented imialist Lorena Hickok. to report to him on Americans were dealing with the Depression. During three years of traveling. Hickok CWA workers in Florence County, Wisconsin, make repairs and improvements in one ol the county's public buildings Oh, I remember having to move out of our house. My father had brought in a team of horses and a wagon. We had always lived in that house, and we couldn't understand why we were moving out. . . . And then we were in California, and migratory workers. There were five kids—a small family by those standards. It must have been around '36. I was about eight. Well, it was a strange life. We had been poor, but we knew every night there was a bed there, and that this was our room. ... But that all of a sudden changed. When you're small, you can't figure these things out. You know something's not right and you don't like it, but you don't question it and you don't let that get you down. You sort of just continue to move. . . . This I remember. Some people put this out of their minds and forget it. I don't. I don't want to forget it. I don't want it to take the best of me, but I want to be there because this is what happened. This is the truth, you know. History. 30s, however, was his growing preoccupa- with the outside world. In particular, Roo- "lt faced the rise of dictator Adolf Hitler in traiany. International crises would soon jw the United States into war. lie New Deal had a limited effect on morities and women. jwi read previously, the Depression hit minty groups especially hard. The last-hired. B-fired syndrome hurt them from the very pning. bringing high unemployment and iespread poverty. The Blues I been down so long, >t seems like up to me. This line, common to many blues songs, could have been sung with feeling by millions of people during the Depression of the 11930s. The blues, a type of I music developed by African Americans in the South in the late 1800s, first gained recognition with white audiences in the 1920s. Such artists as Gertrude (Ma) Rainey. Bessie Smith, and later, Billie Holiday, belted out their gutsy lyrics as band members imitated the rhythm of their singing with the saxophone, piano, or trumpet. These and other blues artists used their music to combine humor with despair. The release many people felt from listening to the blues helped them Keep The New Deal and African Americans. In many ways the Roosevelt Administration was more sympathetic to the cause of racial equality than any of its predecessors. The president appointed a number of African Americans to positions in the federal government. For example, Roosevelt appointed Mary' McLeod Bethune. a black educator, to the advisory committee of the National Youth Administration. an agency set up to provide jobs for needy young people. Because of her efforts, African Americans received a fair share of NYA funds. In addition, Harold Ickes, a strong sup- their sanity through the Depression. Although the blues can take many forms, most blues songs have 12-bar verses with three lines each. The second line is usually a repeat of the first, and the third line completes the thought. Blues lyrics are highly personal, dealing with sorrows, rejection, and anger, often in a witty or amusing manner. Blues musicians use many elements of African music. These include simple instrumentation that mimics or echoes the singer's voice in a call-response pattern, a musical shout that changes pitch suddenly and dramatically, complex patterns of rhythm, and improvisation. Admired and imitated around the world, the blues is a unique African American product. lighlights of American Life Ma Rainey, Bessie Smith, and Billie Holiday adorned many record labels in Iheir time, also appearing live at such clubs as New York City's Savoy, center. Ma Rainey led the band shown below during the 1920s. Mary McLeod Belhune, the most influential member ol the black cabinet, became the first African American woman to head a federal agency porter of civil rights, hosted the much publicized black cabinet in the Department of the Interior. This group—which included Clark Foreman, as Ickes' personal assistant, and Robert C. Weaver and William H. Hastie as lawyers—worked together to push the Administration to end segregation. In addition, many New Deal relief programs provided African Americans with fair assistance. Programs poured federal funds into black schools and hospitals in the South, and provided work relief to unemployed African Americans in the North. There were strict limits, however, to how far Roosevelt would go to assist African Americans. He feared that to do more would so antagonize powerful southerners in Congress that he would be unable to win approval of any of his programs. So he opposed the demand of the NAACP and others for legislation to make lynching a federal crime. Roosevelt also did little to challenge hiring and wage discrimination in the local administration of New Deal relief projects. The New Deal and Mexican Americans Fewer in number and scattered throughout the I Southwest, Mexican Americans had less polit-1 ical clout than African Americans. Like blade I Americans, though, they were deeply affected I by such New Deal programs as the AAA Mi-1 grant farm workers were often laid off when! acreage was reduced. Still, the New Deal did help in some wa\s| For example, the Farm Security Administration! set up camps for migrant farm workers in Cali I ifomia. In addition. FERA. CCC, and WPA pro-1 grams hired unemployed Mexican American^ for relief jobs. However, many people of Mexican descent! had difficulty qualifying for relief assistance. An non-citizens, Mexican aliens could not get aJ sistance. Mexican American migrant worker^ also had trouble because they did not live Ion) enough in the same place to meet resid requirements. Also, legal statutes exdu farm workers from the benefits of such pro! grams as Social Security and the National Lag bor Relations Act The New Oeal and Native Americans. brighter side of the New Deal's treatment t minorities was the so-called Indian New I In 1933 President Roosevelt appointed Jo Collier as commissioner of Indian affairs. I this role Collier had Congress create the I Emergency Conservation Program, a CCC-tyjj project for the reservations. Through this | gram, tens of thousands of Native Ameri built dams and reservoirs, installed fences a lookout towers, and conducted extensive | and weed control projects. Collier also worl to make sure that the PWA, WPA. CCC < NYA actively hired Native Americans Collier also pursued another pressing iss in Congress—the breaking up of Indian I lands. As a result. Congress passed the India Reorganization Act in 1934. The act ended! government's 47-year-old program of alk tribal lands to individual Native Americans a white settlers and provided funds for groups to purchase new lands. It also i nized tribal constitutions and lifted bans on f use of Native American languages, ceren and traditional dress on the reservations The New Deal and women. The New Deal I an important moment for American en to gain a foothold in national politics, elt appointed the first female member I the cabinet in American history: Frances his secretary of labor. He named than 100 other women to positions hout the Administration. Eleanor Roo- ty becoming an active and outspoken on of reform causes, served as an ext to thousands of women. | Again, there were limits. Few of the women I the New Deal could be called feminists by V modem definition of the term. They were i interested in winning equality for women i in winning special protections for them— as barring women from especially arcs and dangerous work. Perkins, for ex, opposed the Equal Rights Amendment, jit would eliminate the female protective iation for which she had fought Ihrough- l her career. John Collier meets with Blackfoot chiefs in 1934. Navajo women in New Mexico practice the traditional craft ol weaving blankets. Mexican American teenagers receive training in lood catering. Members ol the 442nd Regimental Combat Team, right, head lor the Italian front in 1943. Nisei soldiers, tar right, visit their families and triends while on furlough at a USO club In Heart Mountain. Wyoming. war. Other women enlisted in the navy (WAVES), the Coast Guard (SPARS), and the Women's Auxiliary Ferrying Squadron (WAFS). Some women also entered the Women's Reserve of the Marine Corps. Before the war, married women were encouraged to stay at home with their families. By 1942, however, songs such as "We're the Janes Who Make the Planes" urged women to put on pants, tie up their hair in bandannas, and contribute to the war effort More than six million previously unemployed women joined the work force. " Rosie the Riveter" in her overalls and cap soon became the symbol of the woman wage earner "making history wo k j I for victory." .As more and more women were trained fdfl skilled jobs, union membership climbed Fufl hundred thousand women belonged to umcd in 1940. By 1944 the number had risen to than three million. Despite the number of American wo who were drawn into the work force, mobi zation levels did not reach those of Britt where women were drafted into war work, J did they match those of the Soviet Uni^ where women served in combat units. After ( war, three-quarters of the female wart Go for Broke! The 442nd Regimental Combat Team was called the "Christmas Tree regiment" for its many decora- tons for bravery. No American army unit in history ever earned more awards and few endured more casualties. The 442nd had one further distinction: its soldiers were Nisei (ne sa'). second-generation Japanese Americans. The unit began with the 100th Battalion of the Hawaiian National Guard, which was largely composed of Nisei. Called up after Pearl Harbor, these soldiers helped man Hawaii's defenses for months, but then they were abruptly recalled, shipped to Wisconsin. and issued wooden rifles for training. The men clamored for a chance to fight, and in 1943 the War Department formed a Nisei unit, the 442nd, with the 100th Battalion as its nucleus. Most of the all- volunteer unit came from Hawaii: about a third enlisted from the mainland. Some of the Nisei soldiers had been living in the internment camps where many Japanese Americans had been placed during the war. Ironically, many of the volunteers who would be fighting to free Europe t friends and families I behind barbed wire in t United States. Sent to Europe, the' fought against the i house by house, hill by" up the length of Italy. In seven costly campaigns, | the 442nd attacked with I headlong intensity refl in its motto, "Go for I The Nisei soldiers suffer! more than 9.000 i and accumulated morel ighlights of American Life Iters remained employed, but the majority r their wages fall. labor unions increased their member- their bargaining power also increased, working people prospered because I overtime increased their wages. [Once people had more money to spend, demand for goods increased. By using controls and increased taxation, the nment kept inflation under control, rationing, or issuing coupons to i much a person can buy. the govem- nt reduced demand, but assured people of nimum supply of scarce goods. 000 individual citations rater, including one da! ot Honor, 52 Distin- sried Service Crosses. 1560 Silver Stars. 1 war s end the 442nd I received seven Presi- ibat Distinguished Unit ttons In saluting the a soldiers, President man said, "You fought only the enemy, but you grit prejudice—and you Mexican Americans. Besides bringing new job opportunities to women and to African Americans, the wartime labor shortage also stimulated an influx of Mexican workers. Almost 400,000 Mexican Americans served in the military. Although prejudice resulted in some wartime riots and discrimination against His- panics—even those in uniform—the economic conditions of most improved significantly. The most blatant incidents of discrimination took place on the West Coast against the Japanese Americans. Racism forced Japanese Americans into internment camps. Racial prejudice against Japanese Americans was deeply rooted in the United States long before the Japanese attack of Pearl Harbor. Some West Coast farmers resented Japanese American success in truck farming. This was evident in an article published in the Saturday Evening Post in May 1942 in which the Grower-Shipper Vegetable Association expressed their racist views; "We're charged with wanting to get rid of the (Japanese] for selfish reasons. We might as well be honest. We do. . . , They came into this valley to work, and they stayed to take over. . . After Pearl Harbor prejudice against the Japanese Americans intensified as anti-Asian groups spread fears ttiat they would commit acts of sabotage. Although some officials genuinely believed that a danger of sabotage or espionage existed, no evidence of such conspiracies ever surfaced. In February 1942, however. President Roosevelt responded to pressure from paranoid military officers and self-seeking fanners and politicians by ordering the establishment of the War Relocation Authority. This agency had the job of evacuating more than 110.000 Japanese Americans from the West Coast and shipping them off to internment camps located in isolated parts of California, Arizona, Ulah, Colorado, Wyoming, Arkansas, and Idaho. The barbed-wire-enclosed internment camps were like prisons. The men, women, and children who were forced to stay in them lived in wooden shacks furnished only with the barest Albers Equal-Area Projection ov " Japanese American Internment Camps, 1942-1945 Internment camps 1 Tule Lake 2 Manzanar 3 Minidoka 4 Topaz 5 Poston 6 Gita River 7 Heart Mountain 8* Granada 9 Hobwer 10 Jerome map study Location The map shows locations of camps set up to intern Japanese Americans during World War II. The move for internment gained momentum after the Japanese attack on Peart Harbor in December, 1941. More than 110.000 people were sent to these camps under the authority of Ihe federal government. In which slates were internment camps located? Critical Thinking Why were internment camps located in isolated areas away from the West Coast? of necessities—cots, light bulbs, and not much else. Food, medical care, and schools were inadequate at best. Sumio Nichi was in the food business in California in the 1930s. A second-generation Japanese American, he was ordered in 1942 to leave for an internment camp. Years later, he was asked how this order affected his activities. He explained; We had a big farm near Salinas, California. Lettuce, celery. cauliflower. ... We had our own packinghouse. ... We had an inventory of 580.000 worth of equipment. The people around, the whites, knew we had to leave. They were just standing around, waiting. I was thinking of storing it, but they told us we couldn't do it. It would be hampering the war effort. So they set up appraisers. I got S6.000 for it. After the war. . I took a trip back to Salinas. I couldn't lease one acre of land. Nothing available. The people who took over our place, they're doing quite well. Despite their treatment. Japanese Americans were eager to prove their loyalty to the United States in whatever way they could. As soon as the government permitted them to do so. 18.000 signed up for military duty and went to Europe to fight in the 442nd Regimental Combat Team. In the hilts of Italy and in eastern France, the 442nd saw some of the heaviest fighting of the war. At the war's end. it had w fame as one of the most decorated units United States military history. In December 1944 the Supreme Court he the case of Korematsu v. United States. Court upheld the constitutionality of the ev uation order. However, Justice Frank M voiced a dissenting opinion when he said the internment of the Japanese Americans minded him of the Nazi treatment of the J In 1976 President Gerald Ford p We now know what we should have known then— not only was the evacuation wrong but Japa Americans were and are loyal Americans. Ont battlefield and at home the names of Japan Americans have been and continue to be wri' in American history for the sacrifices and contributions they have made to the well-beij and the security of this, our common Nation In 1988 Japanese Americans received a mal apology from the United States gov ment for the harm it had caused in v their civil rights during World War II. C also voted to compensate the survivors in amount of $20,000 each. Arthur Morimitsu pressed the views of many survivors: Frankly, a lot of us (inter- nees] were not looking for monetary (payments). We wanted recog that we were loyal, that interning loyal Anr citizens was wrong. Americans perceived new global responsibilities. Germany, Italy, and Japan emerged World War II completely at the mercy of f conquerors, with their governments thrown and their economies shattered C less numbers of refugees swarmed th central Europe destitute and with little f Throughout Europe and east Asia the was equally bleak. The British had L constantly since September 1939. By Aifl 1945 their country was in severe economu^ tress. Their merchant navv had suffered t Above, a Japanese American family from Los Angeles loads Iheir belongings onto a truck that will take them lo an internment camp in 1942. Above left, a Japanese American youth, with identification lags dangling from his shirt, patiently waits lor his parents to be processed. i submarines, and many of their over- investments had been sold to pay for The French army was also ruined. ; had been a major battleground of the t Al the war's end. the country was left with d-out transportation system and deep I political divisions. The war had left the t Union with a staggering 20 million dead, ng many civilians. A million people had [ starvation in Leningrad alone. Millions ! were also on the verge of starvation. 14 years of fighting with the Japanese, i still faced a savage civil war. Around the colonial empires had begun lo crack, ng advantage of Europe's weakened posi- . colonial subjects began organizing inde- lence movements. i contrast, the United States emerged from |war stronger and more powerful than it had r been. Although nearly 400,000 American i had been lost, very few of these were d. Confronted with such a broken world, i discarded its isolationist foreign pol- started to assume responsibility for [ a new global political and economic . Part of this dramatic shift in policy came i effort to avoid the mistakes of appease- L which had done so much to bring about I destructive war in history. Identify Key People and Terms Write a sentence to identify: A. Philip Randolph. Oveta Culp Hobby, rationing, internment camps Locate Key Places What U S. city was the nation's wartime defense production capital? Master the Main Ideas 1. Analyzing the economic impact of war: In what ways did World War II affect the American economy, particularly the labor force? 2. Analyzing information: How did Japanese Americans show their loyalty to the United States during the war? 3. Studying the effects of U.S. involvement in foreign affairs: How did the nation regard the policy of isolationism after the war? Apply Critical Thinking Skills: Recognizing Bias With enemies such as Hitler and the Japanese militarists, it was easy for Americans to think ot themselves as fighting a war against racism. However, the United States itself was not free of racism in the 1940s. Where could one find evidence of racism and discrimination in the United States during World War II? Daniel Inouye Defends the War-Time Record of Japanese Americans 1941-1945 Hawaii Darnel Inouye [6 no'wS] was 17 years old when Japanese warplanes attacked Pearl Harbor on December 7 1941. After graduation from high school in 1942, Inouye enlisted in an army combat team composed entirely of Nisei [ne' sa'] volunteers. (Ni- sei—"second generation"—are children of Japanese immigrants.) Inouye's unit fought in Italy where he was badly wounded, losing his right arm. After the war, Inouye became a lawyer and entered politics in Hawaii. In 1963 he became the first Japanese American elected to the Senate. In the following excerpt from his autobiography, Journey to Washington (1967) Inouye described the 'grief and shame and anger" he experienced on the morning of the attack on Pearl Harbor by Japan After the first wave of Japanese planes attacked Inouye reported to a Red Cross aid station to help with the wounded. It was past 8:30—the war was little more than half an hour old—when I reported in at the aid station, two classrooms in the Lunalilo Elementary School. 1 had gained the first six years of my education in this building and before the day was out it would be half-destroyed by our own antiaircraft shells which had failed to explode In the air. Even now confusion was in . command, shouting people pushing by each other as they rushed for litters and medical supplies— I grabbed a litter and rounded up a couple of fellows I knew. "Where're we going?" one yelled at me. o "Where the trouble is! Follow me!" In a small house on the comer of Hauoli and Algaroba Streets, we found our first casualties. The shell had sliced through the house. It had blown the front out and x the tokens of a lifetime—dishes, clothing, a child's bed—were strewn pathetically into the street. I was propelled by sheerest instinct Some small comer of my mind worried x about how I'd react to what lay in that car-] nage—there would be no textbook cuts and bruises, and the blood would be real I blood—and then I plunged in, stumbling! over the debris, kicking up clouds of dustl x and calling, frantically calling to anyone! who might be alive in there. There wasnol answer. The survivors had already tied | and the one who remained would never speak again. I found her half-buried in the i', mbble, one of America's first civilian deadof the Second World War.... Remembering those traumatic dayi the great turning point of my life, I can seel how my need to become totally invoke* "o in the war effort sprang from that invidJ ous [unjust] sense of guilt, the imisiblfl cross lashed to the back of every Aisati the instant when the first plane beanJ that rising sun appeared in the sky maj " Pearl Harbor. In actual fact, of course. had nothing to feel guilty about, and all r*" tional men understood this. And still 1 knew of no American of Japanese desce® who didn't carry this special burden, aiw " who didn't work doubly hard because djj it The provocations were sometimes s<| vere. We began to hear disturbing stori* of what was happening to the Japaneseotf the mainland. Along the West Ce thousands of families were summarily ip rooted, taken from their homes, often twelve hours notice, and moved to " cation" camps on the incredible j that this whole class of Americans, and poor, alien and citizen, men. womej and children, was a security risk. I think that most Americans now that this was a dreary chapter in our tory. But I believe it to be equally recently inducted Asian Mean recruits (above) umt at Basic Training, tamp Shelby. Mississippi, in 1M3 Daniel Inouye (above right) delivers a speech tetore Congress, inouye s ydltical carter began in what v" then the territorial Hawaiian House ol Representatives. followed by M terms In the territorial Senate. He served two terms b de United States House ol Representatives before being UKiedln the U.S. Senate. tant that they understand that greed, as much as war hysteria, made possible this momentary triumph of the vigilante mentality. In every city and town where Japa- ", n nese-Americans settled, there were those who envied their neat little farms, those who coveted their homes and gardens and jobs. And when their hour came, these human vultures struck with cunning " n and cruelty, offering two hundred dollars for land that was worth two thousand, five dollars for a nearly new refrigerator. And stunned by this upheaval in their lives, unable to make a better arrangement in the " few hours given them to settle their affairs, the Nisei were forced to surrender the fruits of a lifetime's labor, for a pittance. Had it not been for a few courageous m and outspoken men, the same bitter situation might have prevailed in Hawaii— | But] despite widely published concern that the Nisei were a sort of built-in fifth column [group of traitors] in Hawaii, not a u single act of sabotage or subversion was ever charged to an American of Japanese ancestry from the day the war began until the day it ended. The Nisei bought more war bonds than any other group in the Is" lands. And when the Army finally permitted them to volunteer for the service, more than ten thousand men showed up at their draft boards, approximately eighty percent of all qualified males of military age. And still we could not escape humiliation, discrimination, even internment— And even those of us whose personal liberty was never threatened felt the sting of suspicion. We felt it in the streets where white men would sneer at us as they passed. We felt it in school when we heard our friends called Jap-iovers. We felt it in our homes when military police and F.B.I. men came looking for shortwave sets, letters in code and only the good Lord knows what else. Everywhere there were signs that admonished us to "Be American! Speak American!" Discussing the Reading 1. Why did Daniel Inouye feel the need "to become totally involved in the war effort" (lines 39-40)? 2. How do you imagine he reacted to the slogans "Be American! Speak American!"? Are the two synonymous? Explain. Distinguishing False from Accurate Images What image did Daniel inouye use to describe those who bought up Japanese American property when the owners were sent to internment camps? Was he justified in using this image? Why or why not? \ ^ The watershed event in the recent history of Cuba was the communist revolution, which produced a flood of refugees to the United Slates after Fidel Castro came to power in 1959. Even earlier, many Cubans had come to America seeking a better life. Some of these immigrants settled in New York City, where novelist Oscar Hijuelos [e hwa'los] was born of Cuban parents in 1951 In his novel The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love (1989). Hijue- los described the adventures of Nestor and Cesar Castillo, two young musicians who travel from Havana to New York in 1949. The day the brothers arrived I in New York, fresh from Havana, in January of 1949, the city was covered in two feet of snow. Flying out of Havana on a Pan Am Clipper to Miami for $.49.18, they then took the Florida Special north. In Baltimore they began to encounter snow, and while passing through a station in northern Maryland, they came across a water tower that had burst and blossomed into an orchid- shaped, many-petaled cascade of ice. Pablo (their cousin] met them at Pennsylvania Sla- ____________ lion, and. hombre [om bra, man! as an exclamation], the brothers in their thin- soled shoes and cheap Sears. Roe- _______________ buck overcoaLs were chilled to the bone. On the streets, people and cars seemed to disappear in the snowy winds like shredding phantoms. (They dissolved in a snow that wasn't anything like the snow they'd seen in the movies in Havana, nothing like Bing Crosby's angelic "I'm Dreaming of a White Christmas" snow, or the snow they'd imagined in dreams, lukewarm like the fake frost on a movie house Mr-Conditioned sign.) Their thin-soled Cuban shoes soaked through, and when they stomped their feet in Pablo's lobby, they could smell the fumes of gas and electric heaters in the halls, Pablo and his family lived at 500 La Salle, west of 124th Street and Broadway, in uptown Manhattan. It was a six-story tenement, constructed around the turn of the century to house the servant class, and it had a simple sloop with eel tJ m ule I] jt I ll.iri'H A family and love make a man happy, not just playing Ihe mambo. black curlicue railings, a narrow doom* framed in a crenellated brick archway. Abewl this rose six floors of black wrought-iron Brel escapes and lamplil Venetian-blinded window* It was two minutes from the 125th Street El. all overnight train ride and forty-five-minute f from Havana, and five minutes from the heartland of syncopating rhythm, as thd used to say in those days. From its roof yd could see Ihe Hudson River and the domed ad pillared mausoleum that was Grant's Tomb tol ward the northern edge of Riverside Park* 122nd Street and all the way over to the doCM and the lines of commuters and cars waitd to board the ferryboats for New Jersey. That same night, Pablos wifci cooked them a great feast md because it had been snowing M their feet were cold, she wash* their numb toes in a pan of iw water. She was a practical mi ___________ kindhearted woman from (hied [o're en'ta, a province in Cud for whom marriage and childbearing were d great events in her life. She lived to take cm of the men in that house, slaved washing dd clothes, cleaning the house, cooking, and* tending to the children. Those first cold dm the future Mambo King spent most of his id in the kitchen drinking beer and watchingiber prepare big pots of stew and rice and bd and fried plafonds [pla'tanos, plantain, J kind of banana). F'rying up steaks and m chops and long strings of sausages that Pad would bring home from his foremans ion the meat planL Tlie smoke would escaped the windows, and neighbors, like their ] lady. Mrs. Shannon, would shake their Pablo's wife would cook breakfast, chorizos [cho re'zos, sausages] and then iron their clothes. She sighed a An excerpt from by Oscar Hijuelos aleK' after sighing, she smiled, a state- ol fortitude: her plump, dimpled face tiled by long, long eyelashes whose were like the hands of a dock. That iwhat she was like, a dock, marking her r with her chores, her sighs punduating the 'A family and love." he heard again. "Thai's [ makes a man happy, not just playing the ikrt '' And in those days Pablo would drive them id in his Oldsmobile to see the sights, or brothers would ride the subway all over the boroughs, faces pressed against the win- re. as if counting the pillars and flashing for fun. Cesar favored iment parks, circuses. ae houses, burlesques, and games, while Nestor, a quiet, docile, and tor- ted man, enjoyed nature and going to the places that Pan's children loved the most. He liked to take children to the Museum of Natural History, he would revel in walking among the of so many reptiles, mammals, birds, insects which had once vibrated, shim- l crawled, flown, swum through the and which were now preserved in row row of glass cases. On one of those days, Cesar, Pablo, and the kids posed proudly a photograph before the looming skeleton Tyrannosaurus Rex. Afterwards they walked to Central Park, the brothers strolling tor as they used to down in Havana. Back it was tranquil and clean. Old ladies themselves everywhere and young snuggled in the grass with their girls. Pic- on the green, they ate thick steak and drank Coca-Colas, enjoying the line as they watched boats float across the There was a bit of malevolent prejudice in the air. lake. Best was the Bronx Zoo in springtime, with its lions prowling in their dens, the buffalo with their great horns and downy fur foaming like whitewater beneath their chins, long- necked giraffes whose heads curiously peeked high into the skirts of trees. Beautiful days, beyond all pain, all suffering. At this time in New York there was a bit of malevolent prejudice in the air. postwar xenophobia [zen'a fo'be a. a hatred or fear of fo- reigners], and budding juvenile delinquency on the streets. (And now? Years later? A few of the Irish old-timers stubbornly hanging on can't believe what happened on their street, the sidewalks jammed now with dominoes, shell games, card players, and radios and fruit-ice wagons, those old fellows wandering about furtively like ghosts.) Cesar would remember being shushed on the street _________ for speaking to Nestor in Spanish. having eggs thrown at him from a rooftop as he marched up the hill to Pablito's in a flamingo-pink suit. They learned which streets to avoid, and not to go walking along the docks at night And while they found this part of life in New York depressing at first, they took solace in the warmth of Pablo's household: the music of Pablo's record player, the aroma of cooking plantains. the affection and kisses from Pablo's wife and his three children made them happier. That was the way it happened with most Cubans coming to the States then, when every Cuban knew every Cuban. Apartments filled with travelers or cousins or friends from Cuba. . . . Critical Thinking Drawing Conclusions The narrator attributes some of the prejudice encountered by the Castillo brothers to postwar xenophobia.' Why might tear of foreigners be heightened after a war? AMERICAN LITERATURl Up to the time I started teaching," wrote Tomas Rivera (1935-1984), "I was part of the migrant labor stream that went from Texas to ... the Midwest. I lived and worked in Iowa. Minnesota. Wisconsin, Michigan, and North Dakota." This experience is reflected in his novel And the Earth Did Not Devour Him (1971), which deals with the lives of Mexican American migrant workers in the 1940s and '50s. The following reading, The Portrait.' comes from that novel. I As soon as the people re- I turned from up north the portrait salesmen began arriving from San Antonio. They would come to rake in. They knew that the workers had money and that was why, as Dad used to say, they would flock in. They carried suitcases packed with samples and always wore white shirts and ties; that way they looked more important and the people believed everything they would tell them and invite them into their homes without giving it much thought. I think that down deep they even longed for their children to one day be like them. In any event, they would arrive and make their way down the dusty streets, going house to house carrying suitcases full of samples. I remember once I was at the house of one of my father's friends when one of these salesmen arrived. I also remember that that particular one seemed a little frightened and timid. Don Mateo asked him to come in because he wanted to do business. "Good afternoon, traveler. I would like to tell you about something new that we're offering this year." "Well, let's see. let's see . . ." "Well, sir, see, you give us a picture, any picture you may have, and we will not only enlarge it for you but we'll also set it in a wooden frame like this one and we'll shape the image a little, like this—three dimensional, as they say." Doesn't he look real, like he's alive? "And what for?" "So that it will look real. That way. . . kxil let me show you . . . see? Doesn't he look ruJ like he's alive?" "Man. he sure does. Look, vieja [ve a hi " woman, an affectionate term for a man's wif* This looks great. Well, you know, we want* to send some pictures to be enlarged . . . t* now. this must cost a lot, right?" "No. I'll tell you. it costs about the same. (■ course, it takes more time." "Well, tell me, how much?" "For as little as thirty dollars well deliver■ to you done with inlays just like this, one III* size.'' "Boy, that's expensive! Did* you say it didn't cost a lot mo* Do you take installments'" "Well. I'll tell you. we ha l new manager and he wartH everything in cash. It's very work. Well make it look like nfl Shaped like that, with inlays . . . take a lodH What do you think? Some fine work, would* you say? We can have it all finished for you* a month. You just tell us what color you w* the clothes to be and we ll come by with iijf j finished one day when you least expect, iranM and all. Yes, sir, a month at the longest nj like I say. this man, who's the new mana* he wants the full payment in cash. He's vtn demanding, even with us." "Yes, but it's much too expensive. "Well, yes. But the thing is, this is very ^ work. You can't say you've ever seen poi done like this, with wood inlays." "No, well, that's true. What do you vieja?" "Well, I like it a lot. Why don't we order a® And if it turns out good ... My Chuy [Chfl . . . may he rest in peace. It's the only h for i 1 w? ] by Tomas Rivera have of him. We took it right before he left Korea. Poor m'ijo [me ho', mi hijo. my son|, never saw him again. See . . . this is his ure. Do you think you can make it like that, : it look like he's alive?" "Sure, we can. You know, we've done a lot them in soldier's uniforms and shaped it. like see in this sample, with inlays. Why. it's than just a portrait. Sure. You just tell me size you want and whether you want a ' or square frame. What do you say? How I write it down?" "What do you say. vieja, should we have it " like this one?" •Well. I've already told you what I think. I like to have m'ijo's picture up like that and in color." "All right, go ahead and write down. But you take good care that picture for us because it's only one we have of our son a up. He was going to send one all dressed up in uniform the American and Mexican crossed over his head, but he no sooner there when a letter arrived telling us that was lost in action. So you take good care r Don't you worry. We re responsible people. ' we understand the sacrifices that you peo- make. Don't worry. And you just wait and when we bring it. you'll see how pretty it's na look. What do you say. should we make uniform navy blue?" *But he's not wearing a uniform in that pic- :— 1" 'No. but that's just a matter of fixing it up some wood fiber overlays. Look at these, one, he didn't have a uniform on but we one on him. So what do you say? Should make it navy blue?" "All right.' "Don't you worry about the picture." And that was how they spent the entire day. going house to house, street by street, their suitcases stuffed with pictures. As it turned out. a whole lot of people had ordered enlargements of that kind. "They should be delivering those portraits soon, don't you think?" "I think so, it's delicate work and takes more time. That's some fine work those people do. Did you see how real those pictures looked?" "Yeah. sure. They' do some fine work. You can't deny that. But it's already been over a month since they passed by here." "Yes. but from here they went on through all the towns picking up pictures . . . all the way to San Antonio for sure. So it'll probably take a little longer." Children found a sack full of pictures, all worm-eaten and soaking wet. "That's true, that's true." And two more weeks had passed by the time they made the discovery. Some very heavy rains had come and some children, who were playing in one of the tunnels leading to the dump, found a sack full of pictures, all worm- eaten and soaking wet. The only reason that they could tell lhat these were pictures was because there were a lot of them and most of them the same size and with faces that could just barely be made out. Everybody caught on right away. Don Mateo was so angry that he took off to San Antonio to find the so and so who had swindled them. "Well, vou know, 1 staved at Esteban's house. Drawing Conclusions One type of irony occurs when what happens In a literary work is contrary to what is expected How is the conclusion of The Portrait' ironic? And every day I went with him to the market to sell produce. I helped him with everything. I had faith that I would run into that son of a gun some day soon. Then, after I'd been there for a few days, I started going out to the different barrios [bar'e oz, neighborhoods] and I found out a lot that way. It wasn't so much the money that upset me. It was my poor vieja, crying and all because we'd lost the only picture we had of Chuy. We found it in the sack with all the other pictures but it was already ruined, you know." "I see. but tell me. how did you find him?" "Well, you see, to make a long story short, he came by the stand at the market one day. He stood right in front of us and bought some vegetables. It was like he was trying to remember who I was. Of course, I recognized him right off. Because when you're angry enough, you don't forget a face. I just grabbed him right then and there. Poor guv couldn't even talk. He was all scared. And I told him that 1 I don't remember too well how Chuy looked. wanted that portrait of my son and that l| wanted it three dimensional and that he'd I get it for me or I'd let him have it And I we with him to where he lived. And I put him I work right then and there. The poor guy < know where lo begin. He had to do it i memory." "And how did he do it?" "I don't know. I suppose if you're scare! enough, you're capable of doing anythin! Three days later he brought me the portrait finished, just like you see it there on that tan by the Virgin. Now tell me. how do you &kH the way my boy looks?" "Well, to be honest. I don't remember I well how Chuy looked. Bui was beginning to look more 5 more like you. isn't that so?" "Yes, I would say so. __________ what everybody tells me That Chu/s a chip off the ! block and that he was already looking like ney There's the portrait. Like they say, one and H*! same. Dont look back. Something may gaining on you. iSatchell Paige, "How to Keep Young" 1989 I want to . . . major in pharmacy, y hero is] my second uncle, y uncle and aunt] came here to :a and he didn't know how to k a word of English. Now ve been here six years and he s pharmacist. He makes a lol ol y, they have a nice house, and I went to where he works, he uced me to his staff. I was 'ed. They all understood his ish! I said. This is a miracle!'' he answered. Sook, America is tb miracles come true. Sook, an 18-year-old Korean immigrant 1990 I know that American films are criticized for their happy Tigs, but I do not agree with this. that this Is a remarkable ity, which gives the spectator and builds a healthy soul for nation, so I like it. Russia there are no happy Russian actor Aleksandr intsov, in New York Times interview Paraphrase, Summarize, and Discuss "You've got to AC-CENT-TCHU- ATE THE POSITIVE," urged an American popular song of the 1940s; "Eliminate the negative. Latch on to the affirmative, Don t mess with Mister In-between.' How would you restate the song's message in your own words? Assignment: Write a clear, well- organized paragraph summarizing and discussing the excerpt from William Faulkner's Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech on the facing page Paraphrase the speech. In order to ensure that you understand what Faulkner said, restate the excerpt from his speech in your own words To do this, read the speech carefully Determine the meanings of unfamiliar words from the context of the speech. Look up in the dictionary any words you still do not know. Rewrite the speech sentence by sentence. Use plain, straightforward English. Summarize the speech. Reread the speech and your paraphrase of it. Ask yourself the following questions: What is Faulkner's central statement about mankind? Where in the speech does he present this main idea? Write Faulkner's central idea in a clear sentence. In a second sentence, summanze the assertions that he makes about this idea. Discuss the speech. Think about Faulkner s central idea. Is Faulkner right, or is he being too optimistic? Does what you know of history support his assertions about human beings? What experiences in your own life cause you to believe in or doubt humanity's capacity for compassion, sacrifice, and endurance7 Organize your Ihoughts on these questions and express them in several clearly written sentences. Be sure that your examples are specific. Rewrite your draft. In a single paragraph of approximately 250 words, present your summary of Faulkner s central idea, your opinion of his view, and the supporting evidence you have gathered. Edit and proofread your paragraph. Reread what you have written to improve the organization and to correct errors in grammar, punctuation, and spelling. grievances. King met with young gang leaders in order to convince them to return to nonviolent tactics, but many newspapers urged King to call off the Poor People's Campaign. On April 3 he addressed a mass meeting in Memphis and confessed that he was uncertain about what lay ahead. "We've got some difficult days ahead," he told the audience. "But it really doesn't matter with me now, because I've been to the mountaintop." King hinted that he might not be there, but black people would "get to the promised land." The following evening, an assassin shot Kif as he stood on the balcony of his Mem hotel room. King's death led to a new wauej urban racial violence. Thousands of pe; took to the streets to protest the loss of fl) most well-known advocate of nonviole Even after King's death, the Poor Pe Campaign continued for several months i I'f-ple'i K i.ndff Community Murals During the years of the civil rights movement, members of minority groups expressed pride in their accomplishments, their heritage, and their culture by painting murals on the walls of buildings in their communities. In the iate 1960s and the 1970s, thousands of people in cities across the country joined with artists to design, sketch out, and paint such murals. Some of these murals centered on portraits of community or national heroes. Others depicted the history and contributions of various minority groups. Still others portrayed the dreams people held for their future. Many of the murals had a very strong effect on people who worked on them and on the entire community where the murals were located. In some cities, the murals served as a new backdrop for local meetings on important issues. In others. the murals encouraged people to maintain and beautify other parts of their neighborhood. However, the most important function of these murals was to inspire and instill personal pride. For example, not long after the Wall of Respect, a community mural on the south side of Chicago, was completed. a young man stood gazing at it for a long time. A passer-by stopped to ask the youth what he was doing. The youth replied that he was gaining his strength from looking into the faces of the African American leaders shown i the mural. Many of the murals painted in the 1960s and 1970s are still displayed t day in Hispanic. Asian, an African American neighbor! hoods in cities across the country. Some have been touched up or repainted many times. They serve < testimony to the power j pie gain from working l gether to meet their goals.1! ighlights of American Life This wall mural in East Us Angeles reads: "The present sr struggle, the future is ours My Own Kind of American The 1960s brought a new emphasis on the cultural diversity of the United States. Many Americans stepped forward to express pride in their racial and ethnic heritage. In 1964 one middle class Mexican American explained his sense of citizenship. How does John Salazar s very name express his dual hentage? My first name is English and my second name is Spanish, My ancestry is Mexican, but if you ask me what I am. I'll tell you I'm an American and I'm a good American. I've worked for this country and fought for it. I would also die for it. But I want the right to be my own kind of American. I would no more renounce my Mexican heritage than the Anglos would renounce the English language. I am just as American as the Anglos, but my ancestors came from Mexico. I'm a Mexican American and I'm proud of it. We Mexican Amencans can contribute to the greatness of our country. All we need to do is organize, state our wishes, and vote. Native Americans from AIM stand guard In their two-month occupation of Wounded Knee. South Oakota. in 1973. Dakota, holding it for two months while demanding changes in the reservation system. Many Indian tribes afso began filing law suits to regain lands and rights they claimed had been promised them in old treaties but then had been taken away by the government. By the early 1970s. some tribes were winning significant victories in these efforts. Hispanic Americans. Many Hispanic Americans also responded to the turbulent climate of the late 1960s by developing a sense of ethnic identification and organizing for political and economic power. Far more numerous than Native Americans (more than nine million according to the 1970 census), Hispanics were also highly diverse in origin. Some were Puerto Rican immigrants, concentrated in New York City. Some were Cuban refugees, many of them living in southern Florida. Mexican Americans, who lived mostly in Texas, California, and other areas of the Southwest, made up the largest group of Hispanics. The Mexican American group included descendants of families who had been living in Mex l ican territory when it was incorporated into the j United States in the mid-19th century. It alsol included an uncounted (and growing) number I of illegal immigrants who had come to America I in search of employment. Affluent, middle-class Hispanic Americans enjoyed impressive successes in the 1960s and j 1970s in occupying major positions of political and economic power. They won seats in Cowl gress. governorships, and mayoralties. They! rose to the head of major businesses andjj professions. Most Hispanic Americans hwJ ever, continued to encounter poverty and dis| crimination in much the same way that African Americans did. Hispanics produced no civil rights move! ment equivalent to that of African Americana women, or Native Americans. One group, howl ever, attracted significant attention by organ! izing to protest oppression. In California describe a place where members of diverse immigrant groups blend together, or assimilate. by adopting the rules and values of a new society. Some older immigrant groups believed they had advanced in the New World by becoming a part of the melting pot. The more militant racial and ethnic movements of the 1960s, however, involved groups—blacks. Indians, Hispanics—who had long been barred from assimilating by legal and cultural discrimination. These groups seemed less willing to accept the standards of the mainstream society. They were demanding, instead, recognition of their own. distinctive identities. Their de- mand—a radical challenge to traditional notions of assimilation—was the recognition of ethnic and cultural diversity not as an obstacle to be overcome by the melting pot, but as a very positive force. United Farm Workers leader Cesar Chavez speaks with Salinas. California, farm workers in 1981. Chavez's efforts with migrant farm workers helped spark an outburst ol ethnic conciousness among Mexican Americans that swept through urban areas of the Southwest in the late 1960s and early 1970s. I lie Mexican American farm worker Cesar I Chavez (who had been born in Arizona) cre- I J!"l a union of migrant farm workers, most of Idiom were Hispanics. His United Farm I Workers began a long strike against growers I in 1965 to demand recognition of the union I and increased wages and benefits. It also en- I listed the support of liberals and students by I organizing a nationwide boycott of table grapes I and lettuce grown in the United States. In 1970 I Chavez won a major victory when the growers I of more than half of California's table grapes | signed contracts with his union. I At the same time, some Hispanics were gen] erating controversy by demanding that Amer- lican public schools teach their children at least In part in Spanish. This call for bilingualism, teaching subjects in two languages, generated Strong opposition from many non-Hispanics. ■ They saw bilingualism as a threat to the na- | lion's cultural unity. The efforts of African Americans. Native " Americans. Hispanic Americans, and others to | emphasize their group identities, was a challenge to the traditional American idea of the ■melting pot." Melting pot is a term used to Identify Key People and Terms Write a sentence to identify: Tom Hayden, SDS, Free Speech Movement, counterculture, hippies, Betty Friedan. National Organization tor Women. American Indian Movement. Cesar Chavez, United Farm Workers, bilingualism Locate Key Places 1. Where is Haight-Ashbury located? 2. Where is Wounded Knee located? Master the Main Ideas 1. Analyzing reform movements: Why did many northern white students turn to social activism? 2. Studying cultural developments: What were some of the ways in which the counterculture rejected traditional standards? 3. Analyzing reform movements: What caused the resurgence of feminism? 4. Analyzing reform movements: What were some of the gains made by ethnic groups dunng the 1960s? Apply Critical Thinking Skills: Making Comparisons In the 1960s some observers noted that the melting pot had changed to a tossed salad. What did they mean? "God Is Beside You on the Picketline" 1966 California In March 1966, in the midst of a long and bitter strike by grape-workers, Mexican American labor organizer Cesar Chavez (1927- ) led a 250-mile Easter march from Delano, California, to the state capital. Sacramento, to dramatize the plight of migrant farm laborers. As most of the farm workers were Catholics, the march took on the character of a religious pilgrimage A sign on the union hall at Delano proclaimed, 'God Is Beside Ybu on the Picket Line"; and the marchers carried a banner with the image of the Virgin of Guadalupe, patroness of Mexico. In the fol towing statement. Chavez expressed his view that the (arm workers' cause was rooted in their religious faith In the "March from Delano to Sacramento" there is a meeting of cultures and traditions; the centuries-old religious tradition of Spanish culture conjoins with s the very contemporary cultural syndrome of "demonstration" springing from the spontaneity of the poor, the downtrodden, the rejected, the discriminated against bearing visibly their need and demand for to equality and freedom. In every religion-oriented culture "the pilgrimage" has had a place: a trip made with sacrifice and hardship as an expression of penance and of commitment— " and often involving a petition to the patron of the pilgrimage for some sincerely sought benefit of body or soul. Pilgrimage has not passed from Mexican culture. Daily at any of the major shrines of the x country and in particular at the Basilica of the Lady of Guadalupe, there arrive pilgrims from all points—some of whom may have long since walked out the pieces of rubber tire that once served them as a soles, and many of whom will walk on their knees the last mile or so of the pilgrimage. Many of the "pilgrims" of Delano will have walked such pilgrimages themselves in their lives—perhaps as very * small children even—and cling to the memory of the day-long marches, the camps at night, streams forded, hills climbed, the sacral aura of the sanctuary, and the "fiesta" that followed. " But throughout the Spanish-speaking world there is another tradition that touches the present march, that of the Lenten penitential processions, where the penitentes would march through the •o streets, often in sack cloth and ashes,. some even carrying crosses, as a sign of j penance for their sins, and as a plea for the I mercy of God. The penitential procession j is also in the blood of the Mexican-] w American, and the Delano march will therefore be one of penance—public j penance for the sins of the strikers, theirl own personal sins as well as their Yielding perhaps to feelings of hatred and revenge J " in the strike itself. They hope by the march! to set themselves at peace with the LordJ so that the justice of their cause will be ] purified of all lesser motivation. These two great traditions of a great sc people meet in the Mexican-Americaii with the belief that Delano is his "cause! his great demand for justice, freedom, and respect from a predominantly foreign cultural community in a land where he was u first. The revolutions of Mexico were primarily uprisings of the poor, fighting for bread and for dignity. The Medea®; American is also a child of the revolution] Pilgrimage, penance, and revoluti M The pilgrimage from Delano to mento has strong religio-cultural tones. But it is also the pilgrimage of a a* tural minority which has suffered front! hostile environment and a mine which means business. Ill Cesar Chavez (center) joins a group of protestors at a (arm sorters rally where symbols and emblems of the United Stiles. Catholicism, and Mnlcan-American culture mingle In the early 1960s Chavez was successful, shore others had tailed, in organizing the lirsl agricultural workers' union, the United Farmworkers Discussing the Reading 1 .What "meeting of cultures and traditions" did Cesar Chavez identify in the farm workers' march to Sacramento? 2.What function of "purification'' did Chavez hope the march might serve? Maiklng Comparisons Compare the religious values underlying the songs of the civil rights movement (Source Reading 19B) with those identified by Cesar Chavez in his statement An Afghan Teenager Comes to America Late 1980s Brooklyn, New 'fork In late December 1979. Soviet troops invaded Afghanistan, a mountainous country bordered by the Soviet Union, Pakistan, Iran, and China Before the Soviets withdrew ten years later, three million of Afghanistan's 16 million people had fled the country. Among these refugees were six-year-old Abdul and his family. After a long stay in Iran and a short one in Pakistan, the family settled in Brooklyn. New 'fork Abdul was interviewed by Janet Bode for her book New Kids on the Block Oral Histones of Immigrant Teens (1989). In the following excerpt from the interview. Abdul talks about the process of adjusting to his new life in America Like most Afghans, Abdul and his family are Muslims, followers of Islam, the religion established by the Arab prophet Muhammad (a.d. 5707-632) I was fourteen [when I came to America). Within a month of arriving, 1 enrolled in a big public high school. I remember I was happy that I was coming to school again to leam something, to become someone But I was scared, too. The school counselor just looked at me and said, "If you're fourteen, you're in the eighth grade." Getting used to studying after six years was hard. I had to leam English because my family didn't speak it and we couldn't talk to anyone. One period a day they put me in ESL English as a Second Language. The words began to become a little familiar to my ears. But the American kids gave me a hard time. They made fun of me. And the curse words! All day. Every day. If the teacher asked me a question and 1 knew the answer, when I said it because I couldn't pronounce it well and I had the wrong accent, they laughed at me. I felt very bad. I couldn't do anything about iL Even if I had wanted to get physical, fight with them, it wasn't good. I'm not an animaL I'm a human being. I have a brain. I can talk. Why fight? Being peaceful. I think, is the best way. Some teachers knew what was going on, but they didn't care. I was a' problem they didn't need. I wanted to go back to Afghanistan I hated this place. I didn't have any friends, i A young Kuchi nomad boy poses lor his photograph near Bamyian, Afghanistan. The turban, traditionally worn by Afghani males, covers a skull cap. I didn't have anyone to talk to. I still don't " have a lot of friends, good friends, like best friends. My sister and brothers went to a different school. I was lonely, but I had to deal with it 1 went through it I went to school. I came home. And I had to study <o hard to leam English. Like in social studies I had to read, then I'd find a word where I didn't know the meaning and I had to look it up in the dictionary. It would take me a long time to do just one page. " Now I'm seventeen and the American kids don't always know that I'm a foreigner. They tease less. I found out that if you act the way they do, say the things they say, do the things they do, they will be calm. So I try not to act strange to them. I wear T-shirts and stone-washed jeans and aviator glasses. My hair looks like their hair. I'm about five feet ten inches. Clint Eastwood and Charles Bronson are " my heroes. After school I watch TV— "Three's Company" and "Different Strokes"—to help me know what's going on in American families, what they do. There are no others from Afghanistan to in my school. Afghan people are spread all around. You can't find them too much. In each city you can find one or two. That's it. Sometimes I tell people where I'm from and I'm very surprised that they don't m know Afghanistan. They are very weak in geography. They say, "Where's Afghanistan? Is it a town? Do they have cars? Do they have school?" 1 always think about my country, going to there one day, seeing it, practicing my religion with no problem. Religion is very important in my life. I am Muslim. We have a small mosque [a Muslim house of worship] where we go on Saturdays. From eleven to three 1 go to religious school. I study Dari and Pashto, the two languages of my country. Then from eight to midnight. I go to mosque. I believe in Allah and his Prophet Muhammed. The Qur'an ao [kur an', or Koran] is the holy book. There are rules, the Islamic rules, for everything, for daily life. But here 1 can't practice my religion when I should. Five times a day I should pray, the first time before sunrise. I can do that with my family, but at school I can't say to my teacher, "Please, teacher. 1 need to leave because I must pray." Also the food in school is a problem. I'm not allowed to eat all kinds of food; pork, for example. I just eat pizza because of the cheese, that's all right Other things I don't eat. because I don't know how they make it Or it's not right the way it should be for a Muslim. So I do without. I don't date. My religion forbids it My marriage will be arranged. For a Muslim, your parents have to decide who you should marry. For me, my mother and my uncle will discuss it and decide. Then they will say, "This girl is good for this son." That's fine with me. In fact l think it's perfect. I know my mother; she went through it herself and she knows. I don't have to think about disease. I know I'm going to many someday, so why should 1 date girls? I listen to my mother. I don't want to change my culture and forget my language. Discussing the Reading 1 .What kinds of difficulties did Abdul have in adjusting to his new life in America? 2.What strategy finally helped him overcome some of these difficulties? Racognixing Values How important was his Muslim religion in Abdul's life? What role did Islam play in Abdul's ad|ustment to American life9 Linking Past to Present The proud Vietnamese family shown in Iron) ot their new restaurant in Springfield. Massachusetts, is among a growing group ol Asian immigrants to achieve success in America, a place many ol them have called "the mountain ol gold. The "mountain ol gold' was not always accessible to Asians Before the mid-1960s quota systems and exclusion laws virtually barred Asiaa immigrants from tbs country. The immigrants at the Angel Island internment center, inset, were refused entrance to Amenca is the late 1920s and were forced to return to their homes in Japan and China. Opportunities and Challenges 1988-Present Americans long have been known for meeting difficult challenges and seizing opportunities. The immigrants who first settled our nation overcame tremendous ad- CHAPTER PREVIEW versity and brought to life their most passionate dreams through ingenuity and hard work. Todays new immigrants, many of whom are Hispanic or Asian, are no different in character. They too are striving for many of the same dreams. What is it about Americans that make them so determined to succeed at whatever they do? Anthropologist Margaret Mead once noted that Americans are successful In this chapter you will learn about the many changes and challenges experienced by Americans during the first years of the Bush Administration. because they never dwell on the past: "They are committed to the future ... to experiments, to adventures, to new ways of life. . . ." In the 1990s future-minded Americans, new and old, will be called upon to meet the many challenges presented by the modem world, a world that is experiencing revolutionary changes. What are some of these changes and how will the nation and its leaders respond to them? Will the world of the near future be a better place in which to live as a result of their actions? 1 The Republicans remained in power 2 The Cold War ended but Middle East tensions mounted 3 Population characteristics changed rapidly. 4 Cities produced problems and opportunities. 5 Theme Essay: America examined its priorities. 1985 1966 1988 Bush wins presidential election igsg The Berlin Wall crumbles: Bush orders an Invasion of Panama: China crushes democracy movement in Beijing 1990 Many Soviet republics initiate formal breaks with the Soviet Union: South African government frees Nelson Mandela:! environmentalists hold second Earth Day partly because housing costs and other expenses directly related to family size were increasing dramatically. The wider availability of contraceptive and sterilization procedures also contributed to the declining birth rate. So did the legalization of abortions. By the 1980s abortion had become the most commonly performed surgical procedure in the country. The declining birth rate, combined with increased life expectancy, meant that the average age of the American population was increasing. More than 12 percent of all Americans were over 65 at the end of the 1980s, a figure that was projected to rise to 20 percent by the end of the century. Only 8 percent had been that old in 1970. The "graying of America," the phrase often used to describe the increase in the percentage of people over 65, was partly responsible for the rapidly growing costs of Medicare and other social programs for the elderly. A wave of non-European immigrants came to America. .An even more dramatic change in the American population came as a result of massive new immigration into the country in the 1970s and 1980s. This new immigration was spurred by the passage of the Immigration Reform Act of 1965, which eliminated provisions in early immigration laws establishing quotas on the basis of national origins. Before 1965 American immigration policy had favored immigrants from northern Europe. After 1965, although the law continued to limit the total number of immigrants, people from all nations could compete lor the available spaces on a first-come, first- serve basis. It was as easy to immigrate legally from Asia or Latin America as it was to immigrate from Italy or Ireland. The result was a dramatic change in the sources of immigration. In 1965 about 90 percent of the immigrants to the United States came from Europe. Twenty sears later, only 10 percent of the new arrivals were Europeans. At the same time, the numbers of new arrivals in the United States increased dramatically, as quotas were expanded to admit refugees from southeast Asia and other areas of the world troubled by political unrest. In the 1970s more than four million legal immigrants entered the United States. In the 1980s six million more newcomers arrived. In addition, many immigrants entered the country illegally, perhaps as many as came legally. The immigration of the 1970s and 1980s was the largest of the 20th century. The new immigration was producing a dramatic change in the character of the American population. People of white European background had made up more than 90 percent of the American population in the 1920s. In the 1980s they made up under 80 percent. By the mid 21st century', many predicted, white Americans of European background would make up less than 50 percent of the population. Time magazine ran a cover story in 1990 entitled "America's Changing Colors." It was an indication of how important a presence new immigrant groups from all parts of the world were becoming to American life. Two groups. Hispanics and Asians, dominated the new immigrant population. The Hispanic American population grew enormously in the 1980s. More than a third of the legal immigrants to the United States were Hispanic in every year after 1965. The vast majority of the millions of illegal immigrants were also Hispanics. By the Under the revised immigration laws ol 1986. illegal aliens who could prove that they had come to the United States before 1982 could receive amnesty by tiling tor citizenship. Below, applicants in New York City rush to meet the May 4. 1988. amnesty deadline. Percentage of State Population H More than 15% " 10-15% J Less than 5% 84.576 1986 —133.825 1980 Movement The Hispanic American population includes people from various countries. Which nationalities are shown on the graph? Which nationality lost population in some years since 1965? Critical Thinking Why might numbers of Hispanic Americans be greater in the Southwest than in other regions? Why might numbers of immigrants increase or decrease year by year? The 1980 census had listed six percent ol the population as being of Hispanic origin. The 1990 census was almost certain to show a much higher figure. The large numbers of uncounted illegal immigrants suggests that the real percentage has long been higher stilL Demographers—people who study' changes in population groupings—say that Hispanic Americans will become the largest minority in the United States by the year 2080. passing African Americans. As you read earlier. Hispanic Americans responded to the turbulent climate of the late Puerto Rico 1950 end of the 1980s, Hispanics formed more than a third of the population of New Mexico, about a quarter of the population of Texas, and more than 15 percent of the populations of California, and Arizona. Many Hispanics also lived in Colorado, Wyoming, Illinois, New York, New Jersey, and Florida. Hispanic communities had very high birth rates, which contributed to their growth. Traditionally. Hispanics have valued having large families. In addition, many Hispanic Americans are Roman Catholic, a religion that has shunned most methods of birth control. 1980 Other Hispanic Countries Mexico Cuba Thousands of Immigrants 1960s by developing a sense of ethnic identity and organizing for increased political power. How well has this diverse group of Americans done in these endeavors? Increased political power. By the early 1990s, Hispanic Americans had been elected or appointed to many important political positions. In 1988 President Reagan appointed Lauro F. Cavazos, a Mexican American, as Secretary of Education. Thus, Cavazos became the first Hispanic American to be named to a president's cabinet. In 1989 President Bush reaffirmed Reagan's confidence in Cavazos by keeping the Texan in his cabinet. Cavazos, the former president of Texas State Technical Institute, maintained that his most important mission would be to help reduce the nation's 25 percent high school dropout rate. He continually urged, "Please, children, do not leave school." He also pledged to make education more accessible to disadvantaged students. Cavazos resigned his post in late 1990. In 1990 the U.S. Senate confirmed President Bush's appointment of Dr. Antonia Coello Novello. a 46-year-old native of Puerto Rico, as surgeon general. A pediatrician and former head of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Novello became the first woman and the first Hispanic American to hold the important post Before becoming surgeon general, she headed a national task force investigating the special problems of children Kith AIDS. Novello said that finding solutions to the AIDS problem should be one of the nation's top priorities in the coming years. Increased voter registration. In addition to Cavazos and Novello. many other Hispanic Americans achieved success in national, state, and local politics. Much of their success can be attributed to a greater awareness within Hispanic American groups of the importance of voting. Groups such as the Southwest Voter Registration Project, organized in 1974 by Willie Velasquez, a Mexican American, were very successful in adding Hispanic Americans to the voting rolls. Between 1974 and 1988, Velasquez organized nearly 1,000 voter registration drives, resulting in the addition of more than one million voters. Asians were the largest group of newcomers to America. By the 1980s Asian immigrants were arriving in even greater numbers than Hispanics. They made up more than 40 percent of the total of legal newcomers. Vietnam, Thailand. Cambodia. Laos, the Philippines, Korea, and India were the main sources of Asian immigration. In 1990 the United States had nearly seven million Asian Americans. They lived mainly in large cities and in the West. Some of the new Asian immigrants were refugees, including many Vietnamese driven from their homes at the end of the Vietnam War. Large numbers of Top. in 1990 Texas high school students Mary Torres and Nora Morales, at the tar right, organized an etlort lo assist pupils In Mexico by bringing them much needed school supplies. Lauro Cavazos, above left, and Or Antonia Novello. above right, were two top Hispanic members ot the Bush Administration. Ml Making History in America The arrival of immigrants from Asia in the 1970s and 1980s caused some Americans to quip that the Statue of Liberty might be facing the wrong direction. Historian Ronald Takaki was prompted to tell the story of Asian immigrants in American history. How does Takaki suggest the broad range of Asian involvement in American history? In America, Asian immigrants and their offspring have been actors in history—the first Chinese working on the plantations of Hawaii and in the gold fields of California, the early Japanese immigrants transforming the brown San Joaquin Valley into verdant farmlands, the Korean immigrants struggling to free their homeland from Japanese colonialism, the Filipino farm workers and busboys seeking the America in their hearts .... Their dreams and hopes unfurled here before the wind, all of them—from the first Chinese miners sailing through the Golden Gate to the last Vietnamese boat people flying into Los Angeles International Airport—have been making history in America. And they have been telling us about it all along. boat people—Vietnamese refugees who put to sea in crowded vessels without any clear des- tination—ultimately found their way to America. They suffered terrible dangers and hardshipsduring their longandarduous journey. Many Asian immigrants were highly educated professionals seeking greater opportunities in the United States. As with most new immigrant groups. Asian Americans found adjustment to the very different culture of the United States extremely difficult. An example was Ba That, an elderly Vietnamese woman who came to America in 1975 after the fall of Saigon. Bom in a farming village in South Vietnam in 1914 and raised in a traditional Vietnamese family, she had relatives killed fighting for both sides in the long struggle to determine Vietnam's future. By the 1950s Ba That and her husband had moved to Saigon. As a result, she later recalled: We automatically were associated with the French [and later with the Americans]. Because of this, all of our relatives who remained in the villages hated us as the enemy. The war separated everyone. Ba That had two sons in the South Vietnamese military. Toward the end of the war. she began to worry what would happen to her sons and the rest of her family if the communists seized control of Saigon. She emptied her bank accounts. sold much of her property, and used the proceeds to buy a small boat. Just before the city fell, Ba That, her husband, and several of her children boarded the boat and sailed down the Saigon River to the sea. (The Saigon River is a small river that drains into the South China Sea just northeast of the Mekong Delta This delta can be located on the map on page 823.) There they were taken on board a ship of the South Vietnamese navy and later transferred to an American ship. Weeks later, they arrived at a United States refugee camp in Guam, an island east of the Philippines. Ba That was very sad when she left Vietnam. However, she recalled: When I boarded the American ship I was ■ happy because I knew we had left and ■ were not going to die. . . . After waiting night after night [in Guam], our names were finally called, and all of our family who were in the camp went to the United States together. On arriving in America. Ba That and her family were handed over to a sponsor who took them into his home in a small town in a southern state. Later, they rented a small townhouse nearby, which local church groups helped them furnish. For two years they lived on a combination of charity and the small earnings j her children made from mowing lawns, gar- j dening. and working in a shoe factory. Ba That j looked back on this later as a happy time, when the family remained closely knit and the com-1 munity seemed to welcome them. However, I her children wanted better schools than were 1 available in the town, and so finally, at their ] urging. Ba That agreed to move west. 9(2 Living in a city on the West Coast, far from the sponsors and church members who had eased their first years in America, Ba That felt isolated and afraid. "I regret that we moved. I prefer to live in the countryside, as we first did when we came to America," she said. Instead, she found herself completely dependent on her children. Because she found it difficult to learn English, she had difficulty getting around the city, shopping, even answering the telephone. She considered herself a stranger in a foreign land: "Here in America. I just remain. I don't change my traditional ways: I still keep them." At the same time, however, her relationship with her children was changing. They were adapting to the new country more rapidly than she was. and they treated her. she felt, with less and less respect She said. "I see that children do not obey me as much as when they were in Vietnam. Here we need them more: they don't need us." Asian immigrants such as Ba That suffered not only from the problems of disorientation and adaptation. They also were victimized by discrimination. Asian Americans were resented in part because other Americans viewed them as successful. True, statistics showed that Asians as a group tended to excel academically and had higher-than-average family incomes. However, these statistics were somewhat mis- Left. crammed into small boats. Vietnamese refugees seek permission to enter Hong Kong In 1990. Above. Asian American engineering students perform a test at the Massachusetts Institute ot Technology (MIT). leading. Most Asian Americans live in urban areas, places where incomes are higher for everyone. A wider dispersal of the population would probably give Asian Americans lower average incomes. In addition, several members of the family usually contribute to the family income, further distorting the picture. According to Robert 0. Oxnam, president of the Asia Society, the stereotyping of Asian Americans as successful is a disturbing phenomenon: The most pervasive worry among Asian Americans is that they have been typecast as superstars who achieve wonders in a few limited fields, particularly science and mathematics. "When I was in high school," says Richard Mel, Jr., an assistant to New York's Mayor Koch, "I once got a 65 on a math quiz. The teacher scolded me, You're Chinese! You're supposed to be good in math.*" Such stereotypes need to be vanquished, says I. M. Pei, a well-known Chinese American architect who spoke to Oxnam about problems facing Asian Americans: People must realize that there really isn't such a thing as an Asian American. There are Chinese, Koreans, Japanese, Vietnamese, Indians and so forth. So many different experiences. We need to understand their differences and complexities, their successes and failures. The first priority for Americans is to learn more about Asia. Cities produced problems and opportunities. Key Terms: gentrification, AIDS, deinstitutionalization Reading Preview As you read this section, you will learn: 1. what two contrasting developments shaped the character ot American cities in the 1980s. 2. what caused the homeless crisis. 3. what African American leaders believed was essential to black progress. Identify Key People and Terms Write a sentence to identify: demographers, Laura F. Cavazos. Antonia Coello Novello. Willie Velasquez, boat people. I. M. Pei Locate Key Places 1. Into which body of water does the Saigon River drain? 2. Where is Guam in relation to the Philippines? Master the Main Ideas 1. Perceiving cause effect relationships: What two factors contributed to the graying of America? 2. Analyzing the impact of immigration: How did the Immigration Reform Act of 1965 help to produce a dramatic change in the character of the American population? 3. Perceiving cause effect relationships: What were two factors that led to the large increase in the Hispanic American population? 4. Analyzing the impact of immigration: What challenges did new Asian immigrants face during their first years in Amenca? Apply Critical Thinking Skills: Making Comparisons How did the experiences of the German and Irish immigrants you read about earlier in this book compare with the experiences of Hispanic and Asian American immigrants? Two contrasting developments shaped the character of many American cities in the 1980s: On one hand the nation's cities experienced impressive growth and remarkable affluence. On the other hand, the cities also experienced continuing urban decay and the growth of a desperate poverty not seen in the United States since the early industrial era The homeless, the poor, and inner-city African Americans suffered the most. American cities exhibited both wealth and poverty. The growing affluence of many American cities was a result of shifts in the nation's economy. As the industrial sector of the economy grew less important, more and more people gravitated to positions in the service sector—in management, finance, retailing, and others— that were concentrated in large cities. At the same time, many families in the 1980s were experiencing great prosperity. This prosperity was spurred by three factors. First, the government developed tax policies that favored the affluent. Second, a speculative boom drove stock prices to record levels. Third, many women entered the workplace, introducing a second income to a substantial number of families. As a result of these developments, many affluent men and women were leaving the sub- I urbs and moving back into downtown areas. I Properties in declining neighborhoods were I bought by wealthy professionals, or developers I eager to attract them, and then refurbished. I This process is known as gentrification Although gentrification helped attract I higher-income people back into cities, it also I drove many lower-income people out of neigh- I borhoods in which they had long lived. Hous- I ing prices in central cities climbed rapidly, and I people of moderate incomes found it increas- I inglv difficult to live there. The people who re- I mained, more and more, were the very rich I and the very poor. Public services in most cities were financially I strained. As a result, such vital institutions as I schools, public transportation, police, and pub- I lie housing were severely underfunded. In I some minority neighborhoods, schools became I virtual war zones—partly because students I could see little point in getting an education I when there seemed to be so few employment I opportunities for them at the end. The drug epidemic. The rate of violent I crime in most major cities rose rapidly in the I late 1980s. That was a result of many things. I perhaps most important the desperate poverty of urban neighborhoods. I lowever. another important factor was a drug epidemic that was reaching virtually every city in the country. The development in the late 1980s of a new, less I expensive form of cocaine known as "crack" I created an expanded market for this highly addictive drug. Demand for crack grew so great in some areas that the dmg trade, although illegal, became one of the biggest businesses in the United States. Those profiting from the trade fought to protect their positions in this competitive and lethal world, contributing to a wave of murders in many large cities. The drug epidemic hit hardest in poor urban neighborhoods, where cocaine and other sub- I stances appealed to people who wanted to escape what they perceived as a meaningless, hopeless life. Crack provided no escape lor Ihem, however, because they quickly became dependent on regular doses of the white powder. Unable to afford to pay for it, drug users often turned to crime to finance their addiction. Both the Reagan and Bush administrations launched "wars" on drug use in the United States, with much fanlare but few results. Efforts to stop the flow of drugs into the country from Latin American nations, particularly Colombia, in northern South America, proved largely futile. Police forces were overwhelmed by the problem and did not have fhe resources to effectively enforce laws. Although there were signs in the early 1990s that drug use was in decline among middle-class Americans, many of whom were frightened by the highly publicized deaths of some famous drug users, the epidemic showed no signs of declining in poor urban neighborhoods. The AIDS epidemic. Closely related to the drug epidemic was an even more frightening phenomenon of the 1980s and 1990s: the appearance of a new and deadly disease known as Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). This disease, which scientists first identified in 1981, is the product of a virus transmitted between people by the exchange of certain body fluids. The virus destroys the body's immune system, its normal ability to fight diseases, and makes people highly vulnerable to such diseases as pneumonia and various forms ot cancer. Not everyone infected with the AIDS virus necessarily develops the AIDS disease; the virus can lie dormant for many years. However, those who do develop the disease are virtually certain to die from it Government troops in Peru's Upper Hualiaga Valley destroy coca plants used in cocaine productioo Despite such efforts, drug harvesting in Peru and other South American countries flourishes in part because tamers have lew other sources ol income. "Knotted with Love the Quilts Sing On" time frame Born in 1949. the Chicana poet Teresa Pal- ig7g omo Acosta currently does research in Hispanic studies for the Texas State Histori- geoghaphic setting cai Association. In the following poem, first Texas published in 1976, she celebrated the family history reflected in her mother's handmade quilts The 'michigan spring" mentioned by Acosta refers to the season tn which migrant workers go to that midwest- ern state to pick crops; "santa fe work shin" is one provided to employees of the Santa Fe Railroad: "corpus christi" and "plainview" are in Texas. My Mother Pieced Quilts they were just meant as covers in winters as weapons against pounding january winds A pair ol leather boots and a colorful patchwork quilt, arranged by Illinois artist Tom Heflin, lorm the sunny still lile titled Patchwork, 1981. Although Heflin Is a contemporary artist, some ol his work recalls a type of 19th-century American still lile painting that sought lo tell a story through the artist's choice and arrangement of objects. twf * ' t but it was just that every morning I awoke to these October ripened canvases passed my hand across their cloth faces and began to wonder how you pieced all these together " these strips of gentle communion cotton and flannel nightgowns wedding organdies dime store velvets how you shaped patterns square and oblong and round positioned & balanced then cemented them with your thread a steel needle a thimble n how the thread darted in and out galloping along the frayed edges, tucking them in as you did us at night oh how you stretched and turned and rearranged your michigan spring faded curtain pieces my father's santa fe work shirt the summer denims, the tweeds of fall in the evening you sat at your canvas —our cracked linoleum floor the drawing board me lounging on your arm x and you staking out the plan: whether to put the lilac purple of easter against the red plaid of winter-going- into-spring whether to mix a yellow with blue and white and paint the corpus christi noon when my father held your hand whether to shape a five-point star from the * somber black silk you wore to grandmother's funeral you were the river current carrying the roaring notes forming them into pictures of a little boy reclining a swallow flying " you were the caravan master at the reins driving your threaded needle artillery across the mosaic cloth bridges delivering yourself in separate testimonies. oh mother you plunged me sobbing and laughing into our past 4i into the river crossing at five into the spinach fields into the plainview cotton rows into tuberculosis wards into braids and muslin dresses so sewn hard and taut to withstand the thrashings of twenty-five years. stretched out they lay armed/ready/shouting/celebrating knotted with love the quilts sing on Discussing the Reading 1 .How was the pattern ol migrant farm labor reflected in Teresa Palomo Acosta's poem? 2.Which member of Acosta's family played the most important role? Cite lines from her poem that support your answer Recognizing Values Based on this poem what things were important to Teresa Ralomo Acosta? What feelings toward her family did she reveal? Connie Kang Defends Korean Values 1990 Brooklyn, New Mark Early in 1990. several African American groups began a boycott of a grocery store owned by Korean immigrants in the Flat- bush section of Brooklyn. The African Americans charged that an incident in which a Haitian woman had allegedly been mistreated by one of the store's owners reflected the general lack of respect with which the Koreans treated their black customers Later in 1990, African Americans began another boycott of a Korean-owned grocery. The second protest soon ended, but the original dispute was still unsettled when the following editorial, by K Connie Kang, an Asian American journalist, appeared in the New York Times on September 8, 1990. The "Confucian culture" mentioned by Kang is the code of social conduct based on the writings of the Chinese philosopher Confucius (551 - 479 b.c ). Emphasizing familial duty and respect for tradition, Confucianism has had an enormous impact on Asian civilization. One of the two black-led boycotts of Korean grocers in Brooklyn ended last week, but the original, eight-month boycott continues. It is no longer a commu- " nity affair, but a national concern. As an Asian-American, I was jolted at the beginning of the boycott, which allegedly began with an assault on a customer by a store employee, by a comment from " a black resident: "The Koreans are a very rude people. They don't understand you have to smile." Would she have reacted differently had she known smiling at strangers just isn't " part of the Korean culture? Would it have made a difference had she known Koreans are just as "unfriendly" to their own because they equate being solicitous to being insincere? The Korean demeanor is so the absence of a demeanor. Koreans have a name for it: mu-pyo-jung. It means "lack of expression." Koreans who travel or live abroad are often concerned that this bait causes misunderstanding. Before the 1988 Seoul Olympics, South Korean officials launched a television and radio campaign urging citizens to greet visitors with a friendly smile. Some tried but found it difficult As one housewife told me: "It's hard to smile at strangers when you're not used to it It seems so phony." Though it may be difficult for most Americans to tell Koreans apart from Japanese and Chinese, who have been in this country much longer, the contrast between Koreans and their Asian neighbors is striking. Having suffered invasions and a long period of colonization by Japan in this century. Koreans have had to fight for their lives to retain their language and culture. Koreans are feisty. They certainly don't fit the subservient or docile Asian stereotype. And Koreans live by cheong—a concept that has no Western translation. Cheong is love, respect, affinity and loyalty rolled into one. Cheong comes only with A crowd gathers on a Brooklyn street, listening to an Alrtcan American speak out on the boycott of Korean businesses. time, and only betrayal can end it. For a so people who live by this ethos [the characteristic attitudes of a group], a mechanical smile is hard to produce. In America's inner cities, newcomers from Korea do business where no one else will, and where frustration levels are high___Culturally and socially, the newcomers are ill equipped to run businesses in America's inner cities. But because they, like other Asian immigrants, are denied mainstream jobs, they pool their resources and start mom-and-pop stores. Inner-city African-Americans wonder how these newcomers, who can hardly speak English, have the money to run ". their own businesses when they themselves can't even get a small loan from a bank. They have little hope of escaping the poverty cycle, yet they see new arrivals living in better neighborhoods and driving w better cars. What they don't see are the 16-hour days and the deep sacrifices made for their children. They don't see the contributions of family and friends, and the informal money-lending system called kye that Koreans use instead of banks. All immigrants go through an "Ameri- can passage" that requires cultural insight on both sides. Koreans, like other Asians m who live in the U.S. mustn't forget that they are indebted to blacks for the social gains won by their civil rights struggle. Asian-Americans must also remember that while the Confucian culture has " taught us how to be good parents, sons and daughters and how to behave with people we know, it has not prepared us for living in a democracy. The Confucian ethos lacks the social conscience that " makes democracy work. It isn't enough that we educate our children; we need to think of other people's children too. One of the boycotted grocers told me this had been a painful but valuable ex- h perience: "We Koreans must leam to participate in this society,'' he said. "When this is over. I'm going to reach out. I want to give part-time work to black youths." By working together, maybe we can do "" privately what institutions can't With Asian-American drive and African-Amer- ican political experience, we can make it work not only in New York but in Los Angeles. San Francisco, Oakland and Chicago. Discussing the Reading 1. What did Connie Kang say is meant by mu-pyo-jung? 2. What debt did Kang feel that all Asian Americans owed to African Americans'7 Recognizing Values According to Connie Kang, what values are emphasized by Confucian culture'7 What values are emphasized by democracy? Do you agree with Kang that Confucianism might not be a good value system tor people living in a democracy? If you disagree, explain how the values of Confucianism and democracy harmonize ttl The Ellis Island Immigration Museum Opens 1990 New Mark City In 1892. when the federal government assumed responsibility for processing immigrants to the United States, it opened Ellis Island as a reception center for these newcomers to America A 27J-acre site in the upper part of New Mark Harbor. Ellis Island processed more than 70 percent of the 24 million immigrants who entered the United States between 1892 and 1954. the year the center was closed Abandoned during the succeeding decades, the buildings on Ellis Island were badly deteriorated when a $156 million renovation program was begun in the mid-1980s. On Sunday, September 9, 1990. the renovated Ellis Island Immigration Museum was dedicated by Vice- President Dan Quayle. The following excerpts are from an article on the museum's dedication that appeared the following day in the New York Times. Ellis Island, the imposing and often difficult door to America for millions of the country's immigrants, reopened today as a tourist attraction, the Ellis Island Im- s migration Museum------ Greta Ugbogbo. one of 46 new citizens sworn in at the ceremony by Associate Justice Antonin Scalia of the Supreme Court of the United States, sat brimming with newly American smiles until someone asked her feelings about the Beaux- Arts (bo zar', an ornate iate-19th centuty style of architecture) building in front of her____M iss Ugbogbo said that her grand- a father had been detained inside when he left their native Grenada and sought entry into the United States in the early 1940's. He was held on the island because no family members had come to pick him up, " she said. While on the island, her grandfather contracted tuberculosis, which he passed on to his eldest daughter upon his return to Grenada, Miss Ugbogbo said. Both died n of the disease. "It's sad thinking about the grandfather I never knew." said Miss Ugbogbo. who left Grenada [in 1981 ]. "And then it's very happy to be not just a part of America, but ao a part of this ceremony." Louis Villamarin, an 86-year-old retired plumber_____ recalled what had followed the last time he had entered the building, as a 19-year-old Spaniard: On doctors' or" ders, he had been stripped, poked, prodded and questioned, for what seemed like hours. But that day, he said, his sense of discomfort had been overwhelmed by the to thought of what awaited him off the island. ... "It wasn't too bad then," Mr. Villamarin said, and then he corrected himself: "It was beautiful. It is beautiful." 4iv Inside the main building's old baggage room, Clara Larsen sat in her wheelchair recalling all the people who had been there on her last visit. That was in 1911, when concessionaires were not above try" ing to separate 12-year-olds from their worldly goods. Today, a still wary' Mrs. Larsen, now 92, said she viewed the island's overhaul with skepticism. Named as one of sue Immigrant Guests of Honor, Mrs. Larsen, who was born in On a pier at Ellis Island, the immigrant family (on the facing page) pauses to catch their first glimpse of New Yorit City, about 1912. On the right is Ellis Island as It appears today. Although today the "Great Hall " is as hushed as the gallery of a museum, some people remember their experiences in what was once a "Tower of Babel" as hundreds of new arrivals to America spoke excitedly in dozens ol languages. the Russian Ukraine and fled the czarist pogroms against Jews, was seated on a dais with dignitaries representing all those who passed through the island, eo But two grandnieces recounted her day in the spotlight; she was nearly elbowed out of line for the ferry by executives from A.T. & T. [one of the renovation's corporate sponsors], fought a Secret Service man " for access to an elevator, spent an hour wajting in line for food, and then was spirited to a special table just in time to miss the V.I.P, brunch entirely. "The interior's different," Mrs. Larsen n> said, "but the bureaucracy is the same."... On the museum's front lawn were some who represented the newer hopes and troubles of immigration. Herbert, a 20-year-old Salvadoran who declined to give his last name for fear of being deported, paused from his grass- trimming chores to say that from the looks of the great hall, he surmised that earlier " generations of immigrants must have had it better. "It's much different now," said Herbert, a deserter from the United States-backed Salvadoran Armed Forces. "Now when " you come in, you come through Mexico." His Nicaraguan co-worker Henry, who fought United States-backed contra rebels as a Sandinista soldier, said he, too. had found a hole in the fence separating Ti- 9o juana, Mexico, from Southern California. And they agreed that while the gateway had changed, the United States still beckoned immigrants with incentives that were magical as well as monetary. 95 For instance, they said, even as illegal aliens they were able to work on the Ellis Island Immigration Museum. Discussing the Reading 1 .What was similar about the recollections of Louis Villamarm and Clara Larsen of their experiences as young immigrants passing through Ellis Island7 2.What impressions of the experiences of earlier immigrants was drawn by the Salvadoran immigrant Herbert from the appearance of the buildings on Ellis Island? Do you think his inference was valid? Formulating Appropriate Questions Henry, the former Sandinista soldier, had presumably been opposed to American intervention m the affairs of his country, yet still chose to come to the United States Formulate a series of questions that you might ask him to elicit his reasons for choosing to live in the country that was funding his former enemies, the contras Charts, Graphs, Tables 1890 1920 1940 1960 1980 1988 9 Women _] Men * % ot civilian workforce Source U S, Sweenol tin Ctrmi* Germany Italy Great Britain Ireland Austria Canada Russia (U S S R.) Mexico West Indies Sweden Norway China France Greece Poland Portugal Japan India Netherlands Romania Other Source Immsrjtwn s mtunuiatwn Services (In thousands of immigrants ) 1024 