__.A HistorV of Theunited States Daniel J. Boorstin Brooks Mather Kelley Ruth Frankel Boorstin Needham, Massachusetts • Englewood CUlTs. New Jersey Credits: editorial: David Llppman. Marir E. Norris. Marisa Slblo Shuff Design: Martuccl Studio. Samuel S. Wallace. L. Christopher Valente Photo Research: Russell Lappa. Pembroke Herbert & Sandl Rygicl/Plclurc Researih Consultants Production: Pauline Wright. Richard Ingram Marketing: Jeffrey M. Iklcr. David R. Zarowtn Pre-press Production: Roger Powers Manufacturing: Bill Wood Half Title: Chlldc Hassam, 'The Fourth of July." (detail). Courtesy Berry-Htll Galleries. New York Title Page: Chllde Hassam. "'rite Fourth of July." Courtesy Berry- Hill Galleries. New York Table of Contents Credits: 1. "Mrs. Elizabeth Freake and Baby Mary." (detail). Worcester Art Museum. Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Albert W. Rice 2. "Boston Massacre," American Antiquarian Society 3. "Seminole Chief Osceola." (detail), by George Cat- Un. National Portrait Gallery. Smithsonian Institution, on loan from the National Museum of American Art 4. "The Battery." (detain. Museum of the City of New York 5. "The Emaneipatlon Proclamation." (detain. A.A. Lamb: National Gallery of Art. Washington. D.C.. Gift of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garblsch 6. "Canon of the Rio Las Animas." by William Henry Jackson. Colorado Historical Society 7. "Dewey? We do!" (detail). Art Resource. NY 8. "Flappers." (detail), by John Held. Jr.. Culver Pictures 9. "Cologne In Ruins." Wide World Photos 10. "The Atom Bomb," Department of Energy 11. "Martin Luther King. Jr., at Lincoln Memorial 1963." Wide World Photos 12. "Brandenburg Gate Celebrations." Anthony Swan/ Black Star Copyright 1992 by Prentice-Hall. Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced In any form or by any means without |>ermission in writing from the publisher. Printed in the United States of America A Division of Simon & Schuster Englewood Cliffs. New Jersey 07632 Making Connections Text Credit: "First Fig" (p. 616) from Collected Poems, by Edna St. Vincent Millay. Copyright > 1950 by Harper & Row Publ. Reprinted by permission of Harper & Row Publishers. Inc. Making Connections Credits: 73TL "London Bridge," by John Vlsscher. The British Library: 73TR "The Spanish Mission and Presidio." by Louis Chorls. The Bancroft Library. University of California. Berkeley: 173TL "The Second Continental Congress approves the Declaration of Independence." Historical Society of Pennsylvania (detail); 173TR "Alexander Hamilton," by Charles Willson Peale. Independence National Historical Park Collection: 247TL "Wooden figure of Andrew Jackson." Museum of the City of New York: 247TR "Webster replies to Robert Haync," by G.P.A. Healy. City of Boston Art Commission. painting located at Faneull Hall. Boston: 328B "Geese in Flight." Leila T. Bauman: National Gallery of Art. Washington; Gift of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch (detail): 329TL "Slaves Dancing." Abbv Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Center. Williams- burg, Virginia; 329TR "Original Cover Sheets for Music dedicated to Cyrus W. Field." Library of Congress; 409TL "The Emancipation Proclamation," A.A. Lamb: National Gallery of Art. Washington. D.C.. Gift of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garblsch: 409TR "Chief Joseph." Smithsonian Institution; 479TL "The Grand Opening of the Brooklyn Bridge," by Currier and Ives. Art Resource. NY: 479TR "Adver- tising Improved Farm Machinery." The Oakland Museum: 573TL "Ida Tartiell," Culver Pictures: 573TR "World War I shipyard," Library of Congress; 617TL "Henry Ford's Assembly Line." Brown Brothers: 617TR "Flappers." by John Held. Jr.. Culver Pictures: 703TL "Destroyer Shaw exploded In Pearl Harbor Attack." Wide World Photos; 703TR "New Deal Opponents." The Condo Nast Publications. Inc.: 77ITL "Republican nomination In 1952," Wide World Photos: 771TR "Marlin Luther King." Bob Fitch/Black Star; 84 PPL "Desperate refugee I11 Vietnam." Philip Jones Griffltlis/Magnuin: 841TR "President and Mrs. Nixon's Visit to China." Magnum: 943TL "U.S.M.C. Troops in Operation Desert Storm." Peter Turnley/Black Star: 943TR "President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev meet in Washington. D.C. in 1987." Peter Turnley/Black Star 23456789 99 98 Iv 97 96 94 93 92 List of Maps xiv List of Charts and Graphs xv List of Primary Sources xv A Note on American Pictorial Art xvi Prologue xix l The Making of Americans..............................1 Chapter 1 What Europeans Found: The American Surprise 2 Christopher Columbus: Who he was and why he came 3 Before discovery 6 Why Europeans went exploring 10 Spanish adventurers 12 French and English exploration 22 Chapter 2 An Assortment of Colonies 26 The Spanish Empire 27 A great and victorious England 30 The planting of Virginia 34 The Puritans come to New England 38 Other Europeans in North America 44 The proprietary colonies 46 Chapter 3 New Ways in a New World 50 Many kinds of Americans 51 The colonists govern themselves 61 Britain against France 66 vil Forming a New Nation 1763—1800 Chapter 4 The Road to Revolution and Victory 76 The British take a collision course 77 Declaring independence 84 How British power was overthrown 90 Chapter 5 From Confederation to Nation 102 New state governments 103 The Continental Congress 106 A weak confederation 108 Writing a nation's constitution 115 The states ratify 121 WC=>S The American discovery 127 The making of America 129 Forming a new nation, 1763—1789 135 Chapter 6 The United States Begins 148 The nation in the 1790s 149 George Washington sets the course 152 Foreign affairs for a new nation 159 John Adams and the rise of parties 165 E pluribus unum: One Made from Many 1800—1840 Chapter 7 Jefferson in Power The man and his policies Buying Louisiana Jefferson, Marshall, and the courts Trouble on the seas Chapter 8 Struggles of a Young Nation The War of 1812 Madison and Monroe The Missouri Compromise The Monroe Doctrine A national spirit Chapter 9 The Jacksonian Era A second Adams in the White House The new politics Jackson takes command Banks and money viii A Nation Growing and Dividing 1800—1860 Chapter 10 The Flourishing Land Drawing the people together The Industrial Revolution America's leading import: People The rise of the West The cotton kingdom Chapter 11 Reforming and Expanding An age of reform The abolition movement Westward ho! Texas and Oregon War with Mexico Chapter 12 The Failure of the Politicians The Compromise of 1850 How the compromise collapsed The nation comes apart The election of 1860 Chapter 14 To Punish or to Forgive? "With malice toward none" Andrew Johnson and the Radicals "Black Reconstruction" The North withdraws The divided South Chapter 15 The Passing of the Frontier Indian wars and resettlement Seeking gold and silver The cattle kingdom The farmers' frontier The Rocky Road to Union 1860—1 Chapter 13 A new kind of war The first year: 1861-1862 The widening conflict Gettysburg to Appomattox. 1863-1865 lx r The New Industrial Age 1865—1900 Chapter 16 The Nation Transformed 412 Railroads and big business 413 Rock oil lights up the world 419 City goods for country customers 422 Buyers' Palaces 425 Things by the millions 427 Labor begins to organize 430 Chapter 17 The Challenge of the Cities 436 The growth of an urban nation 437 Reformers and self-helpers 444 The spread of learning 446 Bridge-building heroes 450 Going up! elevators and skyscrapers 453 New towns in the country 455 Chapter 18 Politics in the Gilded Age 458 Parties in balance 459 The Democrats come and go 463 The fanners' revolt 468 Our money: Gold versus silver 475 1789-1898 A new nation A nation expanding, reforming, and dividing The nation transformed Democratic Reforms and World Power 1890—1920...........503 Chapter 19 The United States and the World 504 Looking outward 505 Expanding on the seas 508 War with Spain 510 Chapter 20 The Progressive Era 520 Theodore Roosevelt's Square Deal 521 Middle-class reformers 527 Taft in the White House 532 Woodrow Wilson and the New Freedom 536 Seeking a world role 540 Chapter 21 The United States and World War I 546 A spark ignites Europe 547 Helping to win the war 556 The home front 560 Losing the peace 567 x From Boom to Bust 1918—1932 Chapter 22 Return to Normalcy, 1918—1929 576 The postwar reaction 577 Searching for the good old days 583 "Keeping cool with Coolidge" 588 Life in the Jazz Age 592 Chapter 23 The Coming of the Great Depression 598 A prosperous nation 599 The big crash 601 Foreign affairs in a gloomy world 609 The election of 1932 613 Depression at Home and Aggression Abroad 1933-1945 ............................ Chapter 24 "Nothing to fear but fear itself" 620 Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal 621 From recovery to reform 631 The end of the New Deal 637 Chapter 25 Reshaping American Life 642 Problems on the farm 643 The problems of black Americans 646 The New Deal and women 649 The struggles of labor 652 Chapter 26 Clouds of War 656 Foreign Affairs, 1933—1939 657 The battlefield is everywhere 664 War comes to the United States 670 Chapter 27 A World Conflict 674 Mobilizing for defense 675 "The end of the beginning "—1942 679 Victory in Europe 685 The war in the Pacific 695 xi Postwar Problems 1945—1960 Chapter 28 Truman: Neither War nor Peace 706 Beginnings of the cold war 707 Dealing with a new world 711 President in his own right 721 Chapter 29 Eisenhower, Moderate Republican 728 The Republicans return 729 Everybody's New Deal 734 The fight for equality 738 Difficulties abroad 742 Chapter 30 Mobile People and Magic Machines 750 A changing people 751 Everyday life transformed 756 Education and religion 763 Art and the machine 766 Turbulent Times 1961 — 1974 Chapter 31 Years of Hope and Promise 774 John F. Kennedy wins 775 Learning hard lessons 778 Facing Communist challenges 783 A New Frontier 788 The tragic end 792 Chapter 32 LBJ: From the Great Society to Vietnam 796 Taking the reins 797 The Great Society 801 Black revolt and youth rebellion 804 Vietnam: "The most unpopular war" 809 Chapter 33 The Rise and Fall of Richard Nixon 816 Electing the President, 1968 817 Nixon's first term 820 The fall 830 xii The United States Looks Ahead Chapter 34 In Pursuit of Civil Rights for All 844 The two ideals 845 Dealing with racism 850 Women seek equality 855 Spanish-speaking peoples 860 New waves of immigration 865 The American Indians 867 New vistas of equality 870 Chapter 35 Changing Leaders in Washington 876 Gerald Ford becomes President 877 Carter: A campaigner as President 882 The United States and the world 888 New foreign initiatives by Carter 892 New directions 896 The changing economy 900 Chapter 36 The Emergence of a New World 906 Troubles abroad 907 Successes and failures 913 New problems for "the Teflon President" 919 The end of the Reagan years 925 The end of the cold war 931 A dangerous world 937 Epilogue: The Mysterious Future 944 Appendixes Atlas of Today's World 946 Presidents and Vice-Presidents of the United States 958 The Declaration of Independence 959 The Constitution of the United States 965 Glossary • *• 1000 Index 1012 xiii i 1. Many kinds of Americans During the seventeenth century the English settlements in America grew slowly. One hundred years after the landing at Jamestown the colonies still held only 250.000 people. Then the 1700s saw immigration and a high birthrate create the first American population explosion. The number of people more than doubled every 25 years. By 1765 they counted two and a quarter million. These were no longer just European emigrants, but a new breed of people, shaped by a New World. A land of many peoples. The people who lived in the thirteen colonies at the end of the French and Indian War came from many lands. But the population was more English than ii would ever be again. Since about 60 percent of all the white settlers had come front England, it is not surprising that the English language. English customs, English law. and English ways of government dominated the land. Pennsylvania had the most mixed population of all, hut even there the English stock made up at least half of the population. What transformed Britons into Americans was that here they had the challenges of living with Africans, Scots. Scotch-Irish. Irish. Portuguese Jews. Swedes, Finns, Swiss, and even a few Austrians and Italians. This made life here much more interesting than life back home. Of course It made some new problems, but It created new opportunities. These many peoples had come for many different reasons. Most came because they wanted to. some because they were forced. Some, like the Swedes, learned English and became Americans quickly. Others, like the Germans, tried to hold on to their own language and their own customs, even in this New- World. Still others, like the indentured servants and many of the blacks from Africa, might have wanted to become full- fledged Americans but were nol yet allowed I hat chance. Black Americans had been brought here against their will. Most were slaves, but at an early date there were a few who were free. In __________________________________________51 1765 the colonies held 400.000 blacks scattered from Massachusetts Bay to Georgia. Over half worked on the tobacco plantations in Virginia and Maryland. Only 40.000 were found farther north. Besides colonists of English or of African descent. the largest group consisted of the Scots, the Irish, and the Scotch-Irish I the Scots who had tried to settle in Ireland). These hard- bitten. intelligent people took naturally to the frontier. They could usually be found in the "back country." This was a new American expression for the unsettled lands that stretched from Pennsylvania down through the mountains into the Carolinas. A smaller number were the Germans, industrious and thrifty, who settled mainly in Pennsylvania. So many came in the mid-eighteenth century that the English settlers there feared that the whole colony would become German. The Germans worked large farms on the rich limestone soil. Some of their descendants are still working the same lands today. They are often mistakenly referred to as Pennsylvania Dutch (from Deutsch. meaning Germanl. They were ingenious and willing to try new ways. For hunting they replaced the old-fashioned musket with the accurate long rifle of frontier fame. For travel they built the sturdy Conestoga wagon, which took many pioneers west. And to warm their houses in the winters, which were much colder than those in Europe, they developed and improved the iron stove. The French Protestants, a small group, had an influence all out of proportion to their numbers. These Huguenots came to America after 1685 when the French government deprived them of their religious freedom and their right to take part in government. An older French law. the Edict of Nantes, which had once given them religious liberty, was repealed. Now they joined the stream of refugees who. over the centuries, came here to escape persecution. It was against the law for them to leave France, but they came anyway. Their intelligence and their skills enriched the colonies. One famous descendant of the French Huguenots was Paul Revere, who made the celebrated ride in 1775 to tell the people that British President Adams's speech, promised to loan France $10 million, and paid a bribe of $250,000 to Talleyrand. When they heard these insulting demands, the envoys answered, "No! no. not a sixpence." Marshall and Pinckney returned home at once. There they stirred the nation's patriotism and fervor against France by t he story of their treatment. The whole incident was known as the XVZ Affair," because the Secretary of State had substituted the letters X. Y, and Z for the names of the agents whom Talleyrand had sent to ask our commissioners for bribes. Naoal war u>ith France. Republicans and Federalists alike rallied to support Adams in his measures to compel respect for our envoys as "representatives of a great, free, powerful, and independent nation." For a rare moment in his life, the peppery John Adams was popular everywhere. Fellow citizens applauded his language of defiance. They bellowed the new national song. "Hail. Columbia." They adopted as a slogan (to serve again and again later in our history) the toast proposed at a banquet for the returning hero John Marshall: "Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute!" Prepara- tlons for war were begun. Again Washington was called to lead the army, though it was agreed that he would not be expected to leave his home at Mt. Vernon unless there was open battle. Hamilton was to be second in command. A new Navy Department was created by Congress. War was not formally declared, but Congress renounced the treaty with France that had been signed in 1778 and authorized our ships to prey upon French commerce. Actually, during the two years 1798-1800 a stale of war at sea existed with France. More than 80 French ships were captured. Talleyrand now saw that he could not threaten or bribe the United States. Not wanting war, he hastened to assure our minister to Holland that a new American commission would be received with due respect. At that moment President Adams, to his everlasting credit, resisted the demands of Hamilton and many other Americans (ineluding his own Cabinet) that the nation should fight. That might have been a popular decision, but it would not have served the weak new nation. To the surprise of Federalist Hamiltonians, Adams sent a message to Congress simply nominating a new minister to France. He would send envoys to deal with this sly Talleyrand. Four days al ter the new envoys sailed, the upstart Napoleon Bonaparte overthrew the corrupt Directory. Napoleon, intent on establishing his power In France and Europe, wanted no trouble with the United States. In September 1800. therefore, he signed an agreement that ended the treaty of alliance of 1778. thus freeing the United States from any obligation to help France in war. In return the United States gave up all claims against France lor damages done to our shipping by French cruisers since 1793. This fair bargain enabled the United States to enter the 1800s at peace. The Alien and Sedition Acts. 1798. In 1798 when anger against the French had become the most violent, the Federalists took advantage of the situation. They passed a series of laws to suppress Republican opposition and insure power for their own party. But. in fact, they misjudged the temper of the nation. Their oppressive measures outraged many Americans and helped lead to the downfall of the Federalist party. Leading Federalists believed—or pretended to believe—that most foreigners who came to the United Stales joined the Republicans. In the Naturalization Act. then, they extended the time it took to become a citizen from 5 to 14 years. In the Alien Act they gave the President at once the power to deport any alien he thought dangerous to the nation's security and then, in time of war. the power to deport or arrest all aliens who came from an enemy nation. The Sedition Act was especially harsh. It provided a heavy fine and a jail term for any person found guilty of "combining and conspiring to oppose Ihe execution of the laws, or publishing false, scandalous, or malicious writings against the President. Congress, or the government of set* an industrialized nation of cities. He hoped the country could remain a community of farmers who governed themselves In local assemblies. The government in Washington should coniine itself, he thought, to managing the nation's dealings with foreign powers. Such a task could be performed by only a few public servants. Pursuing this policy, Jefferson aimed to reduce the army and navy and to apply the public revenue to paying off the public debt. No longer. Jefferson said, would the government "waste the labors of the people under the pretense of taking care of them." For his Cabinet Jefferson selected the ablest men. including the architect of the Constitution. James Madison of Virginia, to be Secretary of State and Albert Gallatin, a brilliant Swiss-born financier from Pennsylvania, to be Secretary of the Treasury. Following Jefferson's ideas Gallatin insisted on strict economy in government. He introduced a modern budget with specific sums for each item of national expense. The amount of money spent on the army and navy was reduced by half, and about 70 percent of the nation's revenue, more than $7 million a year, was used to pay off the national debt. The Alien and Sedition Acts, which had expired at the end of the Adams administration, were not renewed. A new naturalization act was passed, restoring the short five-year waiting period for those who wanted to become citizens. The Bank of the United States was allowed to continue, as was the tariff. But the excise tax that had started the Whiskey Rebellion was repealed. There was not a great deal to distinguish Jefferson's policies from those of the Federalists. The Barbary pirates. We remained at peace with the nations of Europe during Jefferson's first term. Our commerce and wealth increased rapidly. But one foreign problem grew more serious as our commerce expanded. For many years the Arab rulers of the Barbary States on the north coast of Africa (Morocco. Algiers. * "*. ^ ■" ) -i s. \ OTTOMAN t, ^ EMPIRE •c I'OKTUGAL j $pA1N / k * k tA I 7 £ R i JV f Algiers ' Tuni" ■ The Barbary States ■. -'Tripoli \ y \) f i ) new way of manufacturing. Soon the Interchangeable System was used to make all sorts oi things. Even before the Civil War. locks and watches were actually cheaper In the United States (where they were made by this system) than they were In countries blessed by many skilled locksmiths and watchmakers. This is what we mean by "mass production." It means producing masses of items of exactly the same kind. It means, as Whitney explained, using the skill of the machine instead of the skill of the worker. In France, for example, a young matt had to work lor years as an apprentice before he finally became a master gunsmith. But In America the machine became specialized, not the worker. Here what you needed was general intelligence so you could handle complicated machinery. Here the worker had to be quick to learn new ways. Since things produced in this way were cheaper, more people could afford to buy them. When there was a wider, more prosperous market. other people were encouraged to make still more inexpensive things to sell. Each worker's time was worth more, for now he could produce more of anything—guns or locks or watches— in a single day. The employer could afford to pay him more and still make a profit. Almost anything could (and would) be manufactured in this new way. Out of all this grew an American Standard of Living that astonished an envious world by giving more things to more people than ever before. Section 2 Review 1 How were the Industrial Revolution and the Transportation Revolution linked? 2 What contributions did Lowell and his associates make to the development ol the factory system? 3 What role did Eli Whitney play in the development of mass production? 4 Critical Thinking: Drawing Conclusions. How did the Industrial Revolution bring about a national economy? ______________________________________265 3. America's leading import: People To occupy the land, to build the roads, canals, turnpikes, and railroads, to staff the factories, the United States needed people. It was not surprising, then, that the United States became a nation of immigrants. Reasons for coming to America. While Europe became more and more crowded. America offered open air and cheap land. When families in Europe could not find food or places for their children in school or as apprentices, they naturally thought of America. In Europe, too. it was an age of turmoil. Between the time of the American Revolution and the American Civil War. there were revolutions and dictatorships in France. Spain, Germany, Greece. Italy, and Belgium. And ll was an age of floods and famines. There were lots of reasons why people in Europe might want to get away from their old world. The disasters of Europe made refugees by the millions. And there were plenty of reasons why someone would want to come to America. Of course. Samuel Waugh painted this colorful scene of immigrants debarking from a ship In New York Harbor around the year 1855. New York Public Library the old legends started in the early advertising brochures had enticed people to the colonies. These still brought people to the new nation. Now there were lots of new legends—of rich land, undiscovered mines, and fast-growing cities. And there was the real-life romance of a new nation with its doors open and its people's eyes on the future. When voti had so little to lose, why not go to America? During the 1820s only about 500,000 people migrated to the United Slates. But then the pace quickened. In the 1630s and 1840s, 2.5 million men. women, and children arrived, and in the 1850s. 2.7 million. It was lucky that the United States had so much unfilled land. The overtlow of the Old World could find a place in the New. Peoples who did not know one another or who had fought against one another could now live side by side. America would be called the "last best hope of earth." The story of European hopelessness is a story of American hope. In the years between the American Revolution and the Civil War. the two great sources of new Americans were Ireland and Germany. Events in those countries far across the Atlantic Ocean helped make the United States a world nation. The Irish and the potato famine. Potatoes were the main food of the Irish poor. But suddenly in the fall of 1845 a blight hit the potato crop and spoiled a third of it. In 1846 the blight destroyed the whole crop all over the country. The potato blight continued until 1850. Tens of thousands died of starvation. Weakened by hunger, hundreds of thousands died of disease. Death haunted the land. Even before tin- famine, the Irish had been coming to America by the thousands. Downtrodden by English rule, they had tried to revolt many times, but they were not able to throw off their English masters. So some Irish had come to America. The United States, in the phrase of the time, was "a sort of half-way stage to Heaven." To many Irish it seemed almost as hard to get here as to reach heaven, because the cost of a steerage ticket across the ocean (be- tween $12.50 and $25) then seemed so high. Let lers written back to Ireland made everyone want to come. "This is the best country in the world." wrote one Irish girl from New York City in 1848. One new arrival wrote back with glee that the Irish here "eat the pig themselves, and have plenty of bread to their potatoes." "Every day is like a Christmas Day for meat." And now the Irish came by the hundreds of thousands. Through the port of New York City alone, between 1847 and 1860. from Ireland there came over a million. That was nearly half of all the Europeans who landed in New York in those years. The Irish in America. But once the Irish had landed in Boston or New' York or some other port city, they had very little choice altout where to go. Few' had the money or the desire to mow to a lonely western farm. The larming they knew in Ireland did not make them lovers ol the land. So most of them stayed in the port cities of the eastern seaboard where they could enjoy the fellowship of others recently arrived from the old country. Many of those who did move westward in the early years used their strong arms and sturdy backs to dig canals and build railroads. When the digging of the Erie Canal began in 1817. there were not many Irish around. But before it w'as completed eight years later, the Irish were arriving bv the thousands. On the canal they w'ere well known for their strength, courage, and willingness to w'ork. Irish contractors organized teams of their fellow immigrants. When the Erie Canal was finished in 1825, the enterprising and industrious Irish immigrants moved on to help build other canals and then the railroads. They helped bring life to many new western cities. Soon people could say that "of the several sorts of |tower working at the fabric of the Republic—water-power, steam- power. and Irish-power." none had worked harder than Irish-power. The Germans emigrate. The other large group of new arrivals in the years before the Civil War w'as the Germans. Nobody planned it that way, but whenever and wherever the people of Europe suffered, the United Stales Tt"r Mr Imperii I ail Museum of Art. Hiirrt* BrUtbanr Dick Fund. 1941 Many Irish immigrants helped to build the Erie Canal. This lithograph shows the excavation process at Lock port. New York. A horse drives the treadmill lhat powers the primitive crane. somehow gained. Over there. 1816 was the terrible "year without a summer."The Rhine River flooded, floating away bams and livestock. Autumn storms uprooted fruil trees. Hunger and misery cursed the farmer. We cannot be surprised then lhat during the following year about 8000 Germans arrived in American porls. Again in 1829-1830. the winter was one of the worst in the history of Europe. People froze because there was nol enough wood to bum In fireplaces. Food was scarcer than ever, and prices went up. By 1832. more than 10.000 Germans were coming to America in a single year. As suffering inihe German countryside deepened. II became plain lhat their government was nol going to help. Then Germans started coming to America by the tens of thousands. They continued to arrive in vast numbers till nearly the end of the 1800s. In 1854 alone (when Germans were half of all immigrants to the United States) they7 numbered nearly a quarter-million. The move to America became a craze. Overnight, people would decide to leave Germany, and they would depart the next morning. A 13-year-old boy with a pack ou ills hack walked 300 miles to the French port of Le Havre in ol der to find passage to America. The Germans revolt. Throughout these years, revolutions were brewing in Germany. In 1815 at the end of the Napoleonic Wars the rulers of Europe met at the Congress of Vienna to shuffle boundary lines and restore the old monarchies. Nearly 40 German states were organized Into a loose German Confederation dominated by Austria. Wanting democratic rule and freedom from Austria, students formed secret societies and studied new constitutions. Feas- ants refused to pay taxes and roughed up tax officials. In central Europe, Prince Metternich, the clever and calculating Austrian foreign minister. was in charge. He had seen the terror of the French Revolution of 1789. and he hated democracy. which he imagined was always government by a moh. lie organized tyranny in Germany. But even Metternich could not prevent protests like that in May 1832 when 25,000 people gathered in a small German town to drink the health of Lafayette Ithe hero of the American Revolution) and to demand a republic. Metternich's policies created a rising Hood of refugees. By 1848 there was civil war and a full- fledged revolution in Germany. The land was in turmoil, and many had to flee when the rebellion collapsed. The political refugees. These political refugees from Germany were not many—perhaps only a few thousand. But they included some, like the daring Carl Schurz. who became eminent here and helped to build in the United States the democracy they could not build in Germany. Back in Germany he had joined the rebel forces against the government. When the leader of his movement was put in prison, at the risk of his own life he helped his friend escape. When the German Revolution failed. Schurz came to the United States. His career covered the whole country. Alter becoming a lawyer in Milwaukee, he campaigned for Lincoln in 1860 and fought as a general on the northern side at Gettysburg. He was minister to Spain, senator from Missouri, and then served in the Cabinet as Secretary of the Interior. As the career of Carl Schurz and many other liberty-loving Germans showed, Germany's loss was America's gain. New Americans from Germany built whole cities like Milwaukee, and helped make Milwaukee a brewing center for American beer. They spread all over the country. becoming farmers, teachers, professors, lawyers, doctors, and journalists. They built prosperous businesses. Many others besides #.",*//. /",/ //",■ t--i-M 'A.----- v K.^U.r ft I* ^ 4 . yftr- r* * 4- S— r - y------• 4,* 4____✓ 4U TIh- Huntington Library. San Marino. California The flags of the United States and Germany decorate tiir menu cover for a parly on March 2. 1899, honoring Cart Schurz. Carl Schurz fought on the Union side in the Civil War. The Germans brought with them some new ideas for schools. They believed in physical education. and many early physical education teachers were German. They persuaded Americans to build gymnasiums attached to schools. Until the Germans came, it was not usual to send children to school before they were old enough to read. The Germans brought over the Kindergarten (a German word meaning "gar- den for children ") where children as young as four years old could learn by playing. The idea caught on. and soon there were American kindergartens everywhere. The great migration. In the half-century before the Civil War. although the largest numbers came from Germany and Ireland, immigrants were coming from other places, too. Thousands came from the Scandinavian countries. from the Netherlands, Belgium. Switzerland, France. Italy, and elsewhere. The nation was growing bv a great migration. And these other new Americans, like the Irish and the Germans, worked in factories and on farms. They. loo. helped dig the canals and build the railroads which transformed the United States from a land of farmers into an industrial giant, a leader of the world. Section 3 Review 1 Name some factors that led 5 million immigrants to enter the United States between 1820 and 1860 2 What part did the Irish play in the Transportation Revolution? 3 Critical Thinking: Recognizing Cause and Effect. How was civil unrest in Europe related to immigration to the United States? 4. The rise of the West Between 1818 and 1850 the lands west of the Appalachian Mountains became the nation's breadbasket. American workers would eal hel- ler than ever before. The farmers of the American West also fed the factory laborers of Europe. Though the South did not realize it. wheat— not cotton—was king. The moving American. "In the United States." the young French traveler Alexis de Tocqueville noted during his visit in the 1830s, *anian builds a house in which to spend his old age. and he sells It before the roof is on." The people of the United States had become Americans by moving from other lands. They continued to move after they reached the New World. Over the next hill, round the next bend, in the next state, there they hoped to find the will-o- thc-wtsp 'success." In their constant movement these migratory people transformed half a continent. They cleared the forest and broke the thick turf of the prairies with the improved steel plows of the Industrial Revolution. They cut the grain with new mechanical harvesters. In 1810 only one American in seven lived west of the Appalachians. By 1840 more than one in every three lived there. Most of these Westerners still lived on farms in the forest or on the prairies. where they grew com and wheat and raised meat for home and market. To serve them and handle their crops, new cities sprang up and began to dot the land. Instant cities. In places where people still alive could remember the sound of the Indian war whoop and the shadow of the virgin forest, there sprouted cities. On riverways and the joining of rivers appeared Pittsburgh. Cincinnati. St. Louis. Louisville. Memphis. Minneapolis and St. Paul. Davenport. Des Moines. Omaha, and hundreds of others. On the Great Lakes and at the river entrances lo the Lakes, men and women created Rochester. Buffalo. Cleveland, Toledo. Detroit, and Chicago. An astonishing crop of elties sprang up quickly in the lands west of the Appalachians. When before had so many cities grown so fast? In the years between the Revolution and the Civil War. Americans went west to start new cities. Many hoped to make their living out of city-building. Some hoped to make money out of selling the land. The wilderness was worth very little, but once a city was there, land became valuable. Then some people would want to buy land for houses, others for farms to raise vegetables and chickens and eggs for the people of the nearby city. The great cities of the Old World had been built on their rich past. People had come first, and then there followed newspapers to give them news, inns to house the travelers, theaters and opera houses to entertain the crowds, colleges and universities where learned men could gather and the young could be educated. Bui that was much too slow and haphazard for Impatient, purposeful Americans. Western city-builders wanted their city first. They wanted to sec it even before the people were Qiapter 10 T^eview Focusing on Ideas 1. Describe the role of federal, state, and local governments in the development of roads, canals, and railroads Why did people seek such help from the government? 2. Identify at least three people who played major roles in the early stages of the American Industrial Revolution Show how each contributed to the growth of industry 3. What "favorable conditions" awaited immigrants to the United States? 4. What arguments would you expect an abolitionist to use in condemning slavery? What arguments did some white Southerners use to defend the institution of slavery? Taking a Critical Look 1. Identifying Central Issues. Explain how the completion of the Erie Canal might have benefited each of the following: a wheat farmer in northern Ohio; a merchant in Buffalo: a Dutch immigrant family headed for Michigan Territory; an Albany hotel owner 2. Making Comparisons. Compare pre-Civil War Irish and German immigration with regard to motives' lor coming: dates: numbers; settlements; and contributions. 3. Demonstrating Reasoned Judgment. How was the birth of western cities a testament to American optimism? Your Region in History 1. Geography. Identify major roads, canals, and railroads built in your state or region between 1820 and 1860 How did these transportation developments affect where people in your state or region chose to settle? 2. Culture. What immigrant groups settled in your state or region between 1820 and 1860? When and where did they settle? What contributions did they make? 3. Economics. What kinds of manufacturing if any. developed in your area in the period 1820 1860? Why did they develop there? Historical Facts and Figures Synthesizing Information. Look at the table below to help you complete the following exercises (a) Summarize the overall immigration trend between 1820 and 1855 (b) Summarize the changes in the overall immigration trend that occurred between 1856 and 1860. (c) Using information from this chapter, write a hypothesis that explains the immigration trends between 1820 and 1860 Source US, Immigration and Naturalization Service Kansas-Nebraska Act 1854 Free States and Territories Slave States and Territories Open to Slavery under Compromise ot 1850 Open to Slavery under Kansas-Nebraska Act Angry rallies were held across die North In protest over the Kansas-Nebraska Act. The question of slavery In the United States had now been transformed into a battle over whether slavery should be allowed to spread Into the territories. Expansion and slaoery. There was one odd but significant truth about the bitter congressional battle over the spread of slavery into the territories. It was a battle over slavery where it did not exist and might never go. This did not make the struggle any less heated. Yet it did conceal an important fact. Many Northerners, of course, were against l he expansion of slavery because they hated the 'peculiar institution." But many others opposed its spread into the territories not so much because they disliked slavery as because they did not want to live near or compete with blacks. Several midwestern states such as Illinois and Indiana had even put in their constitutions a ban against blacks moving into their slates. These restrictions were seldom enforced. Many Northerners would have been willing to guarantee slavery where it already existed in order to be sure they would never run into blacks—slave or free—in the western territories. Southerners failed to recognize the extent to which the opposition to the spread of slavery was actually opposition to blacks. They saw it as an attempt to bar them and their property (slaves) from the territories. To them it appeared to be just one more way t he power of the North was being used to injure the South and prevent it from growing. The new Republican party. The Kansas- Nebraska bill was greeted by anger in the North. Public meetings were held In many states. At one such meeting at Kipon. Wisconsin, the mcmlH-rs decided to organize a new party to resist the extension of slavery. To show their conned ion to Jefferson's Democratic-Republican party, they now chose the name "Republicans,' which had been dropped by the Democrats. On July 6. 1854. the party was launched at a meeting in Jackson. Michigan. Its platform III declared that slavery was "a great moral, social, and political evil." (2) demanded the repeal of the Kansas-Nebraska Act and the Fugitive Slave Act, and (31 resolved to sink all political differences and unite in the battle against the extension of slavery until the fight was won. During the summer and fall of 1854, convcnlkms In Maine. Vermont. Massachusetts. Ohio, and New York organized units of this new Republican or "Anti-Nebraska" party. The congressional elections in November 1854 produced a revolution in American politics. The old Whig party—which in recent years had been held together by nothing but the desire for office—was shattered. Its northern members deserted and moved Into the ranks of other parties. The Democratic party staggered but did not collapse. Of the 42 northern Democrats who had voted for the Kansas-Nebraska Act. only 7 were reelected to Congress in 1854. The Democrats had held a substantial majority in the 1852 Congress, but In 1854 there were only 83 Democrats to face 108 of these new Republicans and 43 representatives of another newr party—the Know-Nothings. The Know-Nothing party. Numerous parties quickly appeared and as quickly disappeared during the active year of 1854. Only two of these new parties proved significant—the Republicans and the Know-Nothing party. The Know-Nothings were a reaction to the ever- increasing flood of immigrants into the country. The party grew out of the Order of the Star- Spangled Banner. This was a secret association formed in 1849 to combat the political influence of "foreigners, " especially Homan Cal ho- lies. Its real name was the American party, but everyone called it the Know-Nothing party because its members evasively replied, "I don't know." when asked about the party's activities. Ever since then, "Know-Nothing" has been a name for people who refuse to face the real Issues of their day and instead seek refuge in hate and prejudice. In the election of 1854 the Ucpublicans and the Know-Nothings together won enough seats to control Congress. It was not always clear, in fact, who was a Republican and who a Know- Nothing, since the Know-Nothings were still partly secret. It appears that nearly a majority of the members of the House were both Republican and Know-Nothing. Bleeding Kansas. When the Kansas- Nebraska bill became law. Douglas boasted that "the struggle over slavery was forever banished from the halls of Congress to the western plains." He was wrong about the halls of Congress but right about the western plains. For the Kansas-Nebraska Act would bring bloodshed to Kansas. The major problem with the doctrine of "pop- ular sovereignty" was that it did not say when a territory could decide about slavery. As a result. there was a race for Kansas from South and North. The first to gain control, the first to create a majority—of Northerners or South- erners—would decide the fate of slavery in the territory. Antislavery New Englanders organized and raised money to rush Free-Soil emigrants to During the 1850s Kansas was known as "Bleeding Kansas." in this lithograph, the Battle of Hickory Point, a village about 25 miles nortli ot Lawrence, is shown. A band of proslavery men. armed with a cannon, are attacking the settlement of Frec-Sollers. Anne S. K. Brown Military Collection. Providence. HI (drlnll) ,-^i iiV: — ii. Xs Lyp: •#"*, (Chapter 15 The Passing of the Frontier By the time of the Civil War, more than two centuries after the first colonist arrived in New England, half the nation's land was still nearly empty. The frontier—a ragged line of settlements from the East — ran through part of Minnesota, along the border of Iowa. Missouri, and Arkansas and then swung westward into Texas. Reaching in from the West Coast there was also a thin line of settlement in California. Oregon, and Washington. Between these two frontiers there were only a few islands of settlers, such as the Mormons in Utah, the miners in Colorado, and the Mexican Americans in New Mexico. Even in the "settled" areas on the edge of the open land, it was often a long way between neighbors. In that vast open space between the two frontiers there lay an empire. A land as large as all the rest of the occupied United States. A half-known land as large as all of western Europe. It had often been passed through by trappers hunting furs, miners seeking gold, and settlers hurrying on to California. Washington, and Oregon. But the highest mountains were still un- climbed. the swiftest rivers still unmapped. During and after the Civil War. the American people pushed into the unknown. They settled the land even before it was discovered by the explorers, geographers, painters, and naturalists. And the fact of settlement before discovery allowed Americans to dream big dreams. It fostered an optimistic, competitive, booster spirit. It produced a new kind of American. The Go- Getter out there helped find and develop the riches of the new American empire. New American ways of life were invented by a wide assortment of Go-Getters—cattle ranchers and cowboys, miners, farmers and their families. companies, the lands were worth little or nothing They only became valuable after the railways were built. Then these lands would heroine prosperous farms and profitable sources lor the nation's iron, copper, and oil. Standard time. Americans loved speed. And railroads made it possible for them to race across the continent faster than ever before. Tlie trains that sped from city to city brought strange new problems. One trouble which had not been noticed till then was that every town had its own clocks set to its own particular time. The astronomers said I hat it was "noon" when you saw the sun reach Its zenith—the highest point in the heavens. Since the earth was constantly in motion, and since the sun rose sooner when you were more lo the east, then whether it was yet noon obviously depended on where you were. Imagine what this meant for a railroad! The Pennsylvania Railroad tried to use Philadelphia lime on its eastern lines. But that was 5 min- uics earlier than New York lime and 5 minutes later than Baltimore time. In Indiana there were 23 different local times. In Illinois there were 27. and in Wisconsin 38. Most railroads used the local time for their arrival in each station. In between cities there was the greatest confusion. Yet for speeding Iranis a few minutes could make the difference between a clear track and a fatal collision. Finally it was suggested that instead of using 'sun time" they should use a new kind of'"rail- road time"—which would be "standard time." For the United States as a whole, you could mark off on a map a few consptcuous time bells—up and down Ihe whole country. You would only need four—eastern lime, central Umc. mountain time, and Pacific time—each several hundred miles wide. Standard time would be exactly the same for all the places within each zone. At the edge of each belt the llmr would c hange by a whole hour. These lime zones would be marked on maps, and then Knybody could know exac tly what time 11 was everywhere. This was a sensible plan, but it took a long time lo convince everybody that they ought to The TIkiiiui* fJlImuisr liiMIhifr of Anieru .m Hi*lor> mid Ail. TUten In the oil painting above. Chinese workers cheer as a Central Pacific train heads into a snowshed built to protect 11 from heavy snow in the Sierras. tamper with "God's time." Finally, at noon on November 18. 1883. the plan for standard time was adopted, and people everywhere set their watches to the new time. Standard gauge. Standard time helped to draw all the nation's railroads together. But ot her steps were needed too. In 1860 there were about 350 different railroad companies and about 30.000 miles at railroad tracks in the United States. Yet there was not really a national railroad network. The main reason was that the many railroad Itnes were not on the same "gauge." The gauge Is the distance between the two rails measured from the inside of one rail to the inside ol the other. There were many different gauges. Some railroad builders put their tracks six feet apart, but some put them closer together. There were at least eleven gauges in general use. A railroad car that would just fit one gauge would not run on narrower or wider gauges. If you wanted to send a package any distanc e by railroad, il had lo be taken out of the ear that fit ted one gauge and moved into a ear to fit the gauge of the next railroad, in 1861 a package 1. The growth of an urban nation During the years after the Civil War there was not only a movement westward to settle the Great Plains, but also another great movement of people from the country to the cities. When the Civil War began, only one American in five was living in a city. By 1915, cities held half of all Americans. Between 1860 and 1915 the nations rural population just about doubled, but the urban population grew more than 700 percent. Farmers move to the city. The new cities grew' mainly in the East, the Middle West, and the Far West, but they could be found wherever Industry was developing. The new city-people came from everywhere. Railroad builders sent salesmen overseas to boast the wonders of the American farms and persuade immigrants from European cities and farms to come settle along their tracks in the West. At the same time, many American farmers in the East and Midwest were moving away from the land to the city. Behind them in the jwuntryslde they left ghost villages. One such village in New England had a population of two inhabitants, one living on each side of the broad street. The abandoned church and the dilapidated schoolhouse were being taken apart for lumber and for kindling wood. Some of the fanners had gone west, but most had gone to the cities. By 1910 more l han a third of t he people living in American cities had moved in from | American farms. Immigrants come to the cities. Of the 25 million immigrants who came to the United States I between the Civil War and World War 1. most settled in the cities. Outside of cities many of them I would have felt lonely and lost. They loved the I friendly bustle and wanted to be close io people like themselves. And some of them had no choice. They had spent everything to cross the ocean and had no money left for a trip west. Within the big American cities iherc sprouted little immigrant cities. By 1890 New York City held as many Germans as Hamburg, twice as many Irish as Dublin, half as many Italians as Sldlr Ill&kirlral Swirly of Wisconsin immigrant women gather ill the market square of a iniddlewestern town in Ihe 1890s. One (far leftl has adopted an Amerlcan-style hat. Naples. And besides, there were large numbers of Poles, Russians. Hungarians. Austrians. Norwegians. Swedes, and Chinese. Four out of five New Yorkers either were born abroad or were the children of foreign parents. The Germans and Irish who had come before 1880 were found nearly everywhere in the United States. There were also lots of Canadians in Boston and Detroit. Poles in Buffalo and Milwaukee, Austrians in Cleveland, and Italians in New Orleans, The urban mixture. Cities were sometimes called the nation's 'melting pots." Perhaps they should have been called "mixing bowls." The adult immigrant sometimes became Americanized only slowly. But very quickly a whole colony found its special place in American life. Just as the new United States had first been made from thirteen different colonies, now a great nation was being made from countless colonies of immigrants. Wherever you came from, you could find a neighborhood in New York or in Ihe other big cities where you could feel at home. Whether you were from Germany. I tiily. Hungary, or Poland. you could shop in your own old-country units in this democratic nation. In New York City during the days of boss Tweed between 1866 and 1871. the city was looted of some $100 million by the boss and his underlings. Other political groups, "rings" as they were called at the time, robbed Philadelphia. Pittsburgh, and other cities. Many reformers blamed this stale of affairs on the immigrant who. they said, was "a European peasant whose horizon has been narrow, whose moral and religious training has been meager and false, and whose ideas of life are low," But Philadelphia, where 47 percent of the population was native born of native-born parents, was as corrupt as New York, where 80 percent of the residents were of foreign birth or foreign parentage. The immigrant and the politician. Immigrants did tend to vote for the boss and the followers of his political "machine." But this was because the machine members—often aider- men, or city councillors—provided friendly help. They supplied government jobs and money and advice. A new arrival who was arrested for a petty crime could turn to the aider- man of his ward to find him a lawyer or to persuade the judge to let him off. The alderman Evwetl Shinn, who began his career as a newspaper artist, painted "Cross Streets of New York" In 1699. Hr was one of the group of painters known as die "ashcan school" hr cause they chose scenes (rotn everyday city life as subjects for their canvases. The coOcrnoa ">l il"c Corcoran Gallery of Art. Gift of Marftdirt M Hitchcock organized benefit dances. The money paid lor dance tickets would go to some worker who had been crippled at his work or to a widow who had no way of supporting her children. The aider- man found doctors for the sick arid brought groceries to the poor. He reached into his pocket to give a few dollars to needy orphans or to men wanting a new start in business. He was a one-man United Fund. No wonder immigrants voted for him and for the machine again and again. The disappearing frontier. The problems of the Gilded Age—corruption in government and business, strikes, and labor violence—worried Americans. Why was it all happening? One bright young historian. Frederick Jackson Turner, who had been raised in the backwoods of Wisconsin, thought he knew the reason. The Census of 18H0 had announced that the United Slates no longer had an unbroken line of wilderness frontier. Turner proposed the theory that this disappearanee of the frontier explained many of the country's troubles. According to Turner, what had made America the Land of Promise was not cities but the frontier. The free land out west, he said, had also been a safety valve. In earlier times If a family in an eastern city wanted a second chance, they could move out west. But now that the country Austrian-horn .t. Keppler's lithograph cartoon from ihr magazine Puck shows a group of well-to-do Americans barring the entry of a new immigrant. The Newcomer sees what the Oldeomers cannot— the shadows looming behind them of their own Immigrant fathers. Culver iVturr* was being filled up. it was no longer possible to find a second chance by going out to the edge of civilization. Now if you were an unlucky newcomer in a slum, there appeared to be no escape. Oldcomers uersus Newcomers. For a while tt seemed that the country might be divided between Oldcomers and Newcomers. Oldcomers themselves, of course, had come from immigrant families, but their families had been here fora long time. Among them were the rteh and famous. Few of them were crowded into slums. In the older eastern stales that still controlled Congress, the Oldcomers were in c harge. They were most of those who had money and education and power. But the Oldcomers did not agree on how to cure the country's ills. Some tried to help the immigrant learn new wavs, but some were simply frightened. They wanted to keep the country the way it was. They blamed the troubles on the Newcomers. Their answer was to slam the door. Simply because their families had been here longer, they' felt that the whole nation belonged to them. At Harvard College a group of New England blue bloods thought that their world was coming to an end. Three young men in the class of 1889. Charles Warren. Robert DeCourcy Ward, and Prescott Farnsworth Hall, had been taught by their professors that there was an ■'Anglo- Saxon" race superior to all others. The race was supposed to be separated from other races not by color but by their homeland. The "superior" people were supposed to be from England and Germany. And that just happened to be where the families of Warren and Ward and flail had conic from! These young men had been raised near Boston. Their parents were horrified by the hordes of "vulgar" immigrants and especially by those with unfamiliar ways from Ireland and from southern and raslem Europe. These New England aristocrats said that the nation's problems could be solved by keeping out all people who were not like themselves. Five years alter their graduation, Warren and Ward and Hall formed the Immigration Ltiult Slcm Ccdfrrllorvt allfomid Historical Society Chinese Immigrants, dressed In traditional clothes and with their hair in long pigtails, walk down a si reel in San Francisco's crowded Chinatown about 1880, Restriction League to persuade Congress lo pass laws to keep out all "undesirable" immigrants. In their League they enlisted famous professors and writers. Their real object was to keep out the "new" immigrants—the Newcomers. These new Immigrants, they argued, were the main cause of the increasing crime, the strikes, and most of the troubles of the country. The literacy test. To keep out "undesirables" they proposed a "literacy test." According to their proposed law persons over fourteen years of age who wanted to come into the United States would have to prove that they could read and write. They did not have to know English, provided they could read and write their own native language. At first sight the test seemed harmless enough. Actually it was aimed against people from certain countries, such as Italy and Greece, where poor peasants had no chance to go to school. The Boston blue bloods believed that because Newcomers from such countries were not "Anglo-Saxons" they must be "inferior." But in thetr proposed law they did not dare list particular countries. There already were many people in the United States from those countries. They would be insulted—and they, too, elected members of Congress. Year after year the Immigration Restriction league tried to persuade Congress to pass a literacy test. But even when they finally" pushed their bill through Congress, they did not manage to make it into a law. One President after another vetoed the bill. President Grover Cleveland called the law "underhanded." because it did not say what it really meant. President William Howard Taft said the United States needed the labor of all immigrants and should teach them to read. President Woodrow Wilson agreed. All three Presidents said the law was un- American. The United States had always been "a nation of nations." It made no sense to keep out people simply because they had been oppressed. America was a haven for the oppressed. Here the starving could find bread, and the illiterate could learn to read. In 1917. however, when the war in Europe was frightening Americans, the literacy test finally had enough votes in Congress to pass over President Wilson's veto. Out on the West Coast, Oldcomers feared Newcomers from Asia. They worried about imaginary hordes that might come across the Pacific. And they had persuaded Congress to pass a Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882. Then, in 1907, President Theodore Roosevelt without the use of any law against the Japanese persuaded the Japanese government to stop their people from emigrating. This un-American agreement came to be called the "Gentlemens Agreement." And this became the slang expression for any agreement to discriminate against people when you were ashamed to admit what you were really doing. Section 1 Review 1. Identify or explain: "melting pots" and "mixing bowls," dumbbell building. Tweed Ring, political machines, aldermen. Turner's frontier thesis. Immigration Restriction League. Chinese Exclusion Act. Gentlemen's Agreement. 2 What movements accounted for the growth ot cities after the Civil War9 3. Describe a typical tenement house 4 Why and how was a starl made on limiting immigration? 5 Critical Thinking: Recognizing Cause and Effect. Why did immigrant colonies form in the cities? Why did they lose their separateness9 2. Reformers and self-helpers Not all the Oldcomers were frightened. Some became reformers. If the country had too many strikes and loo much crime, they said, that could not be blamed on those who had Just arrived. It was mainly the fault, they satd. of the Americans who had been here longest and who had had the most chance to make the country better. Who had built the cities and the slums where the poor were condemned to live? Who were the members of Congress and the leaders of business and the police officers? It was noi the Immigrants' fault if the nation was not prepared to receive them. Jane Addams. One of the most remarkable of the reformers and one of the most original Americans of the age was Jane Addams. She was horn with a deformity of the spine which made her so sickly that after graduating from college in 1882 she had to spend two years in The Museum of the City of New York Jacob Rlis took this picture of immigrant children saluting the Hag at the Moss Street Industrial School In New York City ill the early 1900s. In rural areas the one-room schoolhouse was usual. Women's colleges multiplied rapidly in the years after ihe Civil War. In 1861 Matthew Vassar. who had been born in England and had made his fortune as a brewer and in whaling, founded Vassar College. When Vassar advertised to attract students to his college, he also publicized the importance of higher education for women. Before long there were more women's colleges, including Wellesley (1870). Smith (1875). and Bryn Mawr (1880). Many other new colleges, especially in the Middle West, were open to women as well as men. And the number ol women in college grew from 9000 in 1869 to more Ilian 20.000 in 1894. Education for black Americans. Wealthy men and women, mostly from the North, also gave millions of dollars to help educate black people. By 1900 there were already about 30.000 black teachers. John D. Rockefeller, for example, had contributed over $50 million, most of it to train more teachers for black schools. The South spent less money than other parts of the country on education of all kinds. And blacks there had to attend separate, and Inferior, schools. How then were* they to get ahead? Black leaders could not agree. One wav was proposed by Booker T. Washington. Bom a slave. Washington worked his own way upward until he was famous throughout the world. His own story of his life. Up from Slauery (1901). was read by millions. In 1881 Washington founded Tuskegee Institute in Alabama. There he trained thousands of blacks to be better farmers and mechanics, to make a good living, and to help build their communities. He believed in a step-by-step way "up from Chapter 18 T^eview Focusing on Ideas 1. In the 1880s and 1890s, what stand on the "cheap money" vs. "sound money" issue would you expect each of the following persons to take and why: An elderly city couple living on their savings? A Kansas wheat farmer? A factory worker? A merchant selling chiefly to farmers? A banker9 2. The Gilded Age was a period of governmental reforms. Describe three important reforms 3. How did President Arthur's administration prove that the office of President can lift a person above narrow party politics? Taking a Critical Look 1. Expressing Problems Clearly. Show that control of the national government was closely divided between the two major parlies from 1876 to 1896. How did this situation make for "an age of timid Presidents"? How did it stimulate the rise of the Populist Party? 2. Distinguishing Fact from Opinion. Grover Cleveland has been criticized for being more concerned with managing the government and controlling spending than with facing the issues ol the day What evidence can you find for or against this criticism? Which is more important for a President—to be a good manager or to be a political leader? Your Region in History 1. Geography. Which party's candidate received your state's electoral votes in the presidential I elections of 1876, 1880, 1884, and 1888? Compare your state's election results to the returns in other states in your region Did your region vote as a bloc? 2. Culture. What leaders from your state or region were active in national politics and the struggles of the Gilded Age? What were some of [ their accomplishments? rtonti rxxtY o***** - c* • urn Fvpivwe 3. Economics. Can you identify a great-grand- parent or other relative who lived during America's Gilded Age? How did he or she earn a living? What economic reforms would he or she have supported or opposed? Give reasons for your answer. Historical Facts and Figures Drawing Conclusions. Study the chart below to help answer the following questions: (a) In what year were the profits from the sale of wheat the highest? the lowest? (b) What was the relationship between the amount of wheat produced and the price farmers could obtain for their crop after 18709 (c) If you were a wheat farmer facing a wheat market in which that relationship between price and production existed, what would be your economic concerns9 How would you protect your investment in farmland, livestock, crops, and equipment? Source Histotical Statistics ot the United Slates workers to return to their jobs. In extreme cases, he took over the plant. Employers, on their part, were forbidden to discharge workers lor union activities. Wherever possible, the government insisted on reducing the workday to eight hours. As a result of government support, the membership of labor unions doubled. In spite of a 50 percent rise in prices between 1914 and 1918, labor s real Income rose 20 percent above the prewar level. Mobilizing minds. The government also wanted to enlist the minds of the people in the war effort. Millions of Americans had opposed our entry into the war. Some German Americans. naturally enough, did not want to fight against the land of their ancestors. Some Irish Americans felt themselves traditional enemies of the English. Socialists declared that the war was only a capitalist dogfight. Midwest Progressives said the nation should devote itself to reform rather than war. And then there were the pacifists who said that war—only murder under another name—could never be justified. How could the government convert these reluctant citizens? How could it whip up enthusiasm for our friends and hatred for our enemies? How could it sell war bonds and keep people hard at work? For these tasks President Wilson created the Committee on Public Information. George Creel, a journalist, was appointed chairman, assigned to "sell the war to America." In May 1917 the Creel Committee began publishing a dally Official Bulletin of the war news that the administration wished to make public. The committee hired professors, writers, artists, and lecturers by the thousands. Their job was to convince and to reassure Americans that the war was a crusade for freedom and democracy. The Germans were portrayed as hateful beasts, barbarous "Huns" out to dominate the Western world. This effort helped create a war fever with sad aftereffects which long outlasted the war. It stirred up spy scares and a frantic hunt for traitors. Otherwise sensible Americans now refused to play Beethoven or Wagner. They dropped German courses from the schools. They turned "sauerkraut" into "liberty cabbage" and converted "hamburger" into "Salisbury steak." But this anti-German madness was really anti-American. For without the hundreds of thousands of immigrants from Germany the nation would have been much poorer. The United States—"a nation of nations"—had been created by people from everywhere and was enriched by all their languages and cultures. The attack on civil liberties. The Espionage Act of 1917 gave the President powers of censorship. It enacted heavy penalties against anyone who handed out information about any place connected with the national defense. To urge resistance to the laws of the United States, to refuse to do military duty, or to hinder the draft now became crimes punishable by prison terms. The Trading with the Enemy Act of 1917 obliged any newspaper printed here in a foreign language to furnish the Postmaster General with English translations of everything it published about the war. The Sedition Act of 1918 went even further than the infamous Sedition Act of 1798 against which Jefferson and Madison had protested. For the 1918 law imposed penalties on anyone who used "disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive" language about the United Stales government, flag, or uniform. It empowered the Postmaster General to refuse to deliver mail to anyone who. in his opinion, was using the postal service in violation of the act. With this barrage of propaganda and new laws. Americans who disagreed in any way with the activities of the government were hounded and harried. In 1917 more than 1100 striking copper miners who were members of the radical Industrial Workers of the World were taken forcibly from Arizona to New Mexico, where they were interned. IWW leaders were thrown into Jail. Eugene V. Debs, the many-time Socialist candidate for President, was sentenced to jail for ten years for denouncing the war in 1918. While still in jail he ran for President in 1920. His sentence was finally commuted in 1921 This was a strange way to fight a war for freedom and democracy. How could the nation im- Following his example, excllablt* citizens were roused to vent their fears and their hales against any Americans who seemed "different." These included blacks. Jews, and Catholics, along with all reformers. Somehow, forgetting that the nation had been built by immigrants. Palmer and his followers aimed their blasts against all "foreigners. " The /ear of foreigners. During the war the Immigration Restriction League had finally obtained passage of the law that every immigrant must be able to read to be admitted to the United States (p. 4431. But they were not interested just in literacy. They had strong racial, religious, and ethnic prejudices. In fact, they wanted to cut down immigration from Russia. Poland. Maly, and the other countries of eastern and southern Europe. The nation had been enriched by the thousands who had come here from those countries between 1890 and 1910. But the restrictionisls had an odd theory of their own about "superior" and "inferior" races. They pretended that it was a science. Really it was only a way of dressing up their prejudices. Their own ancestors happened to come from northern and western Europe. "1'hey liked to think, therefore, that all the best people came from there. The restrictionisls Included university presidents and were led by eminent New Englanders. It would take many years to remove the stain they left on our immigration laws. The nation seemed to have forgotten its own origins! Free immigration had made the United States a free nation. Then in 1921 national quotas for immigrants were introduced. The National Origins Act of 1924 reduced quotas until, in 1929. only 150.000 Immigrants were allowed to enter the United States each year. The quota from each country was based on the "national origins" of the people of the United States in 1920. This favored northern and western Europe, since the large immigration from other parts had come more recently. The National Origins Act barred all Chinese. Japanese, and other Asians. It is not surprising that in Japan there were "hate America" meetings held on "Humiliation Day," July 1. 1924. On the other hand. Canadians and Latin Americans were exempt from the law's provisions. The 1920s saw the first large immigration to the United States of Mexican Americans. The "new" Klan. While the Immigration Restriction League used the laws, another group was using terror and violence to enforce their prejudices. A new Ku Klux Klan apjK-ared in the South and the West. It pretended to be In the old southern tradition to defend the rights of the "best" people. But in fact it was led bv a collection of roughnecks and human dregs, with some respectable followers, who made a career ol harassing blacks, Jews. Roman Catholics, and all "foreigners." Somehow they were able to enroll about 4.5 million "native born. white, gentile Americans." These Included many who wanted someone to blame for lack of jobs and many who were worried by the turmoil of postwar Europe. Somehow the Klan came to dominate the politics of several states. To enlist and keep its members, the Klan shrewdly used all sorts of hocus-pocus. They had passwords, marched about in white sheets, and held secret meetings. But they were no laughing matter. They whipped and killed innocent citizens. They burned buildings and brought terror to whole communities. Yet they seldom went to jail for their crimes, because they bullied sheriffs and judges into joining them. The conviction in 1925 of the Indiana Grand Dragon for murdering his secretary marked the beginning of the end of the "new" Klan. The newspapers then began to expose the crimes ol the Klan. and respectable Americans avoided It like the plague. Sacco and Vanzetti. Every' epoch of American history has had its martyrs. Their names enter the folklore. John Brown was a willing martyrnl the fight against slavery, in this later age Nicoia Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti. tw'o Italian- born immigrants, became unwilling martyrs in the struggle for equal justice for all. In 1920 a holdup took place at a South Brain- tree. Massachusetts, shoe factory. A paymaster ingly large 4.8 million. During that election 123 women won seats in state legislatures. And two women, Miriam A. "Ma" Ferguson of Texas and Nellie T. Ross of Wyoming, wives of former governors, were elected governors of their states. Government helps business. "If the federal government should go out of existence," President Coolidge once said, "the common run of the people would not detect the difference for a considerable length of time." That was ihe way he thought it ought to be. For him "free enterprise" simply meant the freedom of business from government rules. Regulation, he believed, would make business less profitable. And, according to Coolidge, it was profitable businesses that made the whole nation happy and prosperous. "The man who builds a factory builds a temple," he declared. "The man who works there worships there." Some people said the President was making business into a religion. Regulatory agencies, like the Federal Trade Commission and the Federal Reserve Board, were put in the charge of men who would help the businesses they were supposed to regulate. The FTC urged whole industries to agree on trade policies. Some of these agreements tended to create monopolies. Secretary of Commerce Hoover also promoted these "fair practice" agreements so that industries could share information on products and markets. Hoover believed that the day of cutthroat competition was over. Now. he thought, the Department of Commerce should help them cooperate for better products and higher output. The Supreme Court helped this process along. In 1920 the Court ruled that United States Steel was not a monopoly even though the company controlled 40 percent of the steel industry. This still did not. the Court said, "un- reasonably restrain trade." With this green light—and with the help of Hoover and the regulatory agencies—companies all across the land merged to create larger units. By 1929. only 1289 firms produced three-fourths of all goods turned out by corporations. In many industries a few big firms were setting prices through trade associations. The Supreme Court still said that these industrial trade groups were not restraining trade. And the country prospered. Most Americans were doing better. The price of shares on the stock market was going up rapidly. The economic picture looked promising. The farm problem. There were a few areas that were slow to recover after the war. The textile. leather, and soft coal industries were weak. Blacks. Indians, and Mexican Americans still had little share in American prosperity. The obvious big problem was the distress on the farms. Now no one could ignore this problem, because the farmers had learned to speak up Farmers were growing poorer while much of the rest of the country was growing richer. It seemed that the more they produced, the less they were paid for their crops. At the same time their clothes, their farm implements, their fuel, and the other products they had to buy were going up. Their taxes were rising. When the farmers demanded help, they did get higher tariff protection. But this did little good. High tariffs on farm products could not keep prices up when there were surplus crops. Now the farmers demanded more direct aid. Senator McNary of Oregon and Representative Haugen of Iowa devised a scheme to use government money to save the farmer from the free market. The idea behind their complex plan was to keep up the price of staple crops regard less of what happened to other prices. The federal government would buy the surpluses that would have driven down farm prices if they went on the open market. The government then would either hold the produce unUl the market for it improved or it would sell the produce abroad. The MeNary-Haugen bill failed to pass Congress in 1924 and 1926. In the next two years it did pass, but Coolidge vetoed it each time. "Farmers have never made money," he said. "I don't believe we can do much about it." The election of 1928. Near the end of his fourth year in office. Calvin Coolidge announced (in one of his longer speeches). "1 do not choose to run for President in 1928."Inhis place the Republicans named the able and 1. Problems on the farm But It was far easier for Eleanor Roosevelt to sing with the Bonus Army or for FDR to speak warmly to "my friends" over the radio than for the government to change the daily lives of people in trouble. The problems of the farmers, for example, were varied and complicated. No single law could give all they needed. Some farmers needed electricity. Some were fighting dust storms. Others, working as tenants, were not getting a square deal from their landlords and had no way to share in the government's bounty. Many could not afford to buy the tractors or combines to make their land profitable. Slill others, who lived on worn-out land, had no money to buy fertilizer. Nor did they know how to renew their land by planting diverse crops. Their problems seemed as overwhelming and unmanageable as nature itself. The dust storms. In the 1930s the Great Plains began to blow away. Bountiful rains in the 1920s had encouraged farmers to plow the fragile grasslands wit hou t worry i ng abou t the future. Then the rains ceased. Drought cursed the whole mid-continent from Canada to Mexico. The sun baked the land Into a brittle, powdery crust. Nineteen states in the heart of the nation became one enormous "Dust Bowl." Crops shriveled. Cattle died. When the wind blew', the topsoil—with no living roots to hold it in place—swirled into the air. Great, dark, yellowish clouds filled the sky. choking the nose and throat, blotting out the sun and causing street lights to be turned on at midday. The precious soil of the Great Plains blew all the way to the East Coast—even sifting into the White House—and on out into the Atlantic Ocean. Many families whose fields grew only dust gave up. They loaded their old cars with what they could cam' and left the land where they had been raised. The "flivver" that Henry Ford had invented no longer carried them to a holiday in town. Now instead it took them on their desperate quest for a better life—anywhere. They moved in all directions, without a clear destination and with no real plan. The "Okies" from Oklahoma and the "Arkies" from Arkansas ___________________________________________ 643 headed west. A third of a million people from those states and from Texas, the Dakotas. Kansas. and Nebraska hit the road. Thousands ended up in California as migrant laborers picking fruit and vegetables and living in squalid camps. Their hard Journeys and their frustrated lives can never be forgotten, lor they became I be long-suffering heroes of John Steinbeck's powerful novel. The Grapes oj Wrath. The mild climate and the legend of its golden land made California the number one goal of the migrants. In 1939 that state tried to stem the tide by passing a law forbidding poor migrants to enter. But two years later the Supreme Court declared the law unconstitutional. A quarter-million Mexicans seeking work went lo California during the 1930s. Other Mexicans, along wilh Filipinos. Okies. Arkies, and Other migrants—at least another 100.000— moved north into Colorado. Wyoming, and Montana to work in the sugar beet fields. But. unlike the Okies, they had no Steinbeck to tell their story. Conserving the land. FDR's own experience had shown him the need for soil conservation. The land on his ancestral eslate at Hyde Park. New York, had been worn oul by centuries of unscientific farming. He renewed that land by planting thousands of trees "in the hope that my great grandchildren will be able to try raising com again—just one century from now." Trees would help stop the dust storms on the Great Plains. Farmers across the nation followed iheir President's example. With seedlings from the government they planted 200 million trees across the expanse extending from the Dakotas to Texas. For years experts had said no trees would grow on the western plains. But these trees took root. Their growth surprised the experts and helped other farmers, too. by making new "shelter-belts." conserving water and holding in place the precious topsoil. The New Deal, from its start, tried new ways to help the farmer. As early as 1933 a Soil Erosion Service was set up to preserve the farmer's most valuable resource. Farmers and CCC boys were taught terracing and contour farming. Then the Soil Conservation Act of 1936 aimed University of South Carolina at Aiken During the 1930s the number of women working increased from 10.6 to 13 million. Many worked In factories and were able to join the CIO. Firestone Rubber. General Electric, and some major textile firms signed CIO contracts. Unions would play a strong new role in American industrial life. As never before, workers would look to them to hear their grievances and protect their rights. The power of factory owners over their workers was much reduced. Through the NLRB, the federal government supported the unions. Challenged by the success of the CIO. I he AF of L swung into action to expand its membership. Between 1936 and 1938 membership in all unions increased from 4 million to 6 million. Soon big labor would face big business. JVeui union members. The membership of the old-line craft unions of the AF of L had been mostly Americans of the older immigration— English. Scots. Germans, Irish, and Scandinavians. Out of fear and from prejudice these unions commonly excluded the later comers from southern and eastern Europe in addition to blacks and women. The new CIO unions welcomed all these groups with their theme song. "Solidarity Forever." Women found new openings in the factory because the CIO began to recruit workers wiih- out regard to sex. Within a few years nearly a million women joined the unions. But even in the unions women were not yet quite equal. For example, the liberal Amalgamated Clothing Workers still allowed women to be paid less than men for the same work. The unions themselves showed dramatic changes. The International Ladies Garment Workers Union, whose members had been largely Jewish at the end of World War I, now in the mid-1930s was nearly half Italian. Before 1940 many of i ts members were Puerto Ricans. By opening their doors the unions had the power to open opportunity for new immigrants and the children of immigrants. The labor movement continued to harbor large pockets of prejudice. Despite the example of the CIO, certain unions—especially in building trades—continued to exclude blacks. Puerto Ricans. Mexicans, and others whom they considered "different." Farm laborers migratory workers, and domestic servants remained outside the ranks of organized labor. Neither the unions nor the New Deal could bring an end to unemployment. Even after the mobilization for war in 1940 had provided thousands of new jobs, there were still 6 million out of work in 1941. Not until 1943 would the nation reach Tull employment. Sectior" 4 Review I 1. Identify: John L. Lewis, Samuel Gompers, William Green. CIO 2 How did some employers try to break stokes7 3 What gains did American labor unions make in the years 1936-19387 4. What groups formerly left out of unions made big gams through the efforts of the CIO? 5 Critical Thinking: Making Comparisons. How did an industrial union differ trom a craft union? Foreign Relations Committee pul off any changes in the law until the next session of Congress, which was to meet in January 1940. Continuing problems with Japan. Meanwhile. on July 26. 1939. the State Department moved against the Japanese war machine. Japan was told that in six months we would end the Japanese-American Commercial Treaty of 1911. This freed Congress to stop the sale of war materials to Japan. The Japanese had been invading China with arms bought in the United States. And the Japanese were disturbed by news that their new ally Nazi Germany had made a sudden alliance with Japan's old enemy Russia. For a lime Japanese expansion in Asia was slowed. War comes to Europe. In Europe the attempts to appease Miller seemed only to whet his appetite for more conquests, lie had risen to power by telling the German people that Communist Russia was their prime enemy. Now he shocked the whole world when he announced a nonaggression pact with Stalin In 1939. The secret terms gave Germany western Poland, while the Soviet Union was free to take Finland. Estonia. Latvia, eastern Poland. Bessarabia (in Romania), and Lithuania. The Nazis believed that In this way they would protect themselves against war on two fronts. In return Russia would gain a buffer zone against Germany— and a temporary assurance against attack. Throughout the summer of 1939 Hitler demanded that Poland return to Germany certain districts containing people of "German blood." Wand, bolstered by Britain and France, stood Its ground. Then on September 1. without warning. Hitler invaded Poland. Two days later England and France declared war on Germany. Then Stalin's armies marched into Poland from the cast on September i 7. Within two weeks, on September 29, brave, long-suffering Poland was divided between the two tyrants. The United States reacts. Unlike President Wilson 25 years before. Roosevelt did not ask the American people to be neutral in thought as writ as deed, lie invoked the Neutrality Act of 1937 when war broke out. But in a fireside chat, he reminded the American people. "Even a neutral cannot be asked to close his mind or his conscience." President Roosevelt called Congress into special session on September 21. 1939. He asked them to change the "cash and carry" Neutrality Act of 1937 and repeal the embargo on selling or shipping arms to the belligerents. He believed it was urgent for the United States to find ways at onee to help the Allies against Hitler. If the United Slates waited, the barbaric forces might win. and then ii would be too late. Many voices were raised against his attempt to break out of our isolation. Among them were Senator William E. Borah of Idaho and the nation's hero. Colonel Charles Lindbergh. "Prepared- ness" Republicans like Henry Stlmson and Frank Knox supported the President. Alter a biller debate Congress voted the Neutrality Act of 1939. It helped the forces of democracy by repealing the arms embargo. Section 1 Review 1. Identify or explain: Adolf Hitler. Mein Kampf. National Socialist party, concentration camps. Josef Stalin, Benito Mussolini, Francisco Franco, Lazaro Cardenas. Panay. Tydings- McDuffie Act. neutrality laws. Neville Chamberlain, appeasement. 2. Locate: Ethiopia, Rhineland, Montevideo. Manchuria, Yangtze River, Sudetenland. Albania. Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania 3. What conditions in Germany led the people to accept a dictator? 4 Cite instances where the government followed Roosevelt's Good Neighbor policy 5 Whal was the outcome of the Munich Pact? 6 What events in the summer of 1939 led to the outbreak of World War II? 7 Critical Thinking: Recognizing Cause and Effect. Whal factors contributed to ihe isolationism of many Americans? How did these Amencans try to isolate the United States? mend action to bring racial equality into the armed services. By 1949 (he army, navv, and air force had abolished racial quotas. They finally realized, as The Crisis had said during World War II. "A jim crow army cannot fight for a free world." In the Korean War of 1950-1953 Americans of all races fought side by side. Black Americans and Che homeJront. One of the most effective fighters for racial equality at home was the black labor leader. A. Philip Randolph. Born in Florida, he attended the City College of New York, founded a magazine, and became active in the Socialist party. He created the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters in 1925 and after a bitter fight won recognition from the Pullman Company, which manufactured and ran the sleeping cars on American railroads. The march on Washington that Randolph organized in 1941 threatened to bring 100,000 blacks to the capital to protest against racial discrimination in wartime hiring. Under this pressure, even before (he march could lake place. President Roosevelt issued his historic Executive Order 8802. This outlawed any discrimination on the basis of race, creed, color, or national origin in the federal government or in defense factories. A Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC) was appointed to enforce this policy. Roosevelt s order did not end discrimination. But substantial progress was made in both industry and government. As in World War I the flood of blacks from the South to northern cities for jobs in the booming war factories increased racial tensions. In 1943 there were race riots in a number of cities. The worst of them, in Detroit, left 25 blacks and 9 whites dead. After World War I about 80 percent of all blacks in the United States still lived in the South. But by 1950 nearly half of them lived in other parts of the country. During the war. black Americans, like other Americans, were becoming more and more citified. Outside the South nearly all of them were living in cities. And in the South they too were moving off the farm. Along with other Americans, they were churning quickly and easily around the country. It was harder than ever lor the old South to keep its old ways. Japanese Americans are interned. Japanese and Americans of Japanese ancestry had long faced discrimination on the West Coast. After Pearl Harbor their situation became much worse. For no good reason, other citizens blamed them for what the Japanese militarists had done and even began to suspect that they might be helping the enemy across the Pacific. Western politicians and frightened military men pressured FDR to remove them from the coastal states. President Roosevelt gave in. Early in 1942. under the excuse of national security. 110.000 Japanese Americans were rounded up. There was no evidence that these Americans were disloyal. They were forced to sell their homes and businesses on short notice and at sacrifice prices. They then were confined in camps, watched by armed guards, and treated as if they were dangerous. Not until alter the presidential election of 1944 did the government change its policy and begin to release these innocent citizens. Despite this humiliating treatment. 1200 men volunteered from the camps to serve in the United States armed forces. In a segregated unit these soldiers in the 442nd Regimental Combat Team fought heroically in Italy. Another Japanese American battalion was recruited from Hawaii, where there was no internment because there were so many Japanese. In time of war it is harder than ever for a free nation to preserve its freedoms. Defending the country becomes a matter of life and death. Dissenters are open to the charge of being traitors. This is a true testing time of democracy. In World War II. except for the disgraceful treatment of Japanese Americans, the nation's record was far better than it had been in World War I. Women and the tear ejffort. The need for workers opened economic opportunities for women. Now. instead of being dissuaded from Library erf Coopesfl Ordered to leave their homes and businesses on short notice by the United States government, anxious Japanese Americans wait in Los Angeles for a train to take them to an Internment camp. takingjobs as they had been during the depression. they were urged to go to work. Six million women joined the 12 million already in the labor force. They took on a wide variety of jobs and surprised the men who had said they were too weak and delicate to be lumbetjacks. blast furnace operators, stevedores, or blacksmiths. They proved that they could handle all these jobs. And they also operated complex machines in shipyards and airplane factories. Many for the first time could show their talents as doctors, dentists, chemists, and lawyers. "Rosie the Riveter" became an inspiration for all Americans. Black women benefited, too. Before the war a greater percentage of black women worked than white. But they were generally restricted to low- paying jobs as domestic servants or farm laborers. When war came, they found more interesting and better-paying jobs. Nearly half a million black women who had worked as domestics left that work during the war to take positions in factories. When World War II ended, it seemed that once again women might be forced to leave their jobs to make places for returning servicemen. But this time a much larger proportion was offered work in peacetime production. Prodded bv war. the nation discovered its women and helped women discover themselves. The rise of McCarthy. At this moment a clever and unscrupulous politician began to play upon the fear and helplessness felt by Americans. It was hard to explain how the strongest nation in the world had reached such a pass. Was this the fault of traitors inside the United Slates? Joseph R. McCarthy. Republican senator from Wisconsin, gave them the answer they wanted to hear. On February 9. 1950, in a speech in West Virginia he charged that the State Department was infested with Communist agents. He waved a piece of paper on which he said were listed their names. His charge, repeated over and over, increased the alarm. Even after McCarthy was unable to find a single Communist in the State Department, many troubled Americans still listened to him. McCarthy became the strongest political power in the country outside of the major party leaders. Even Presidents feared to cross him. Protecting the United States. Members of Congress, loo, seemed panicked by the internal threat for which there was so litUe proof. But most of all they wanted to prove that they were not soft on communism. In 1950 Congress passed the McCarran Internal Security Act. It required Communist or "Communist-front" organizations to register with the Attorney General. These included groups that were not Communist at all but which, it was suspected, might harbor some Communists. Of course, it was Impossible in practice for any large organization to prove that it had no Communists. The suspect groups had to provide membership lists and financial statements. Membership in the Communist parly itself was not made a crime, but employment of Communists in defense plants was forbidden. In case of an inter- na! security emergency, the act gave the President sweeping powers to round up and detain anyone who might even possibly commit espionage or sabotage. President Truman vetoed the McCarran Act. He said that it was worse than the Sedition Act of 1798 (p. 167) and that it took a "long step toward totalitarianism." But the law was passed over his veto. Using the excuse of "internal security," in 1952 Congress passed a new immigration law. the McCarran-Walter Act. Again Truman vetoed the bill, but again it was passed over his veto. The law kept the quota system, which favored immigrants from northern and western Europe. It provided a complicated and insulting system of loyalty checks for foreigners who wished to visit the United States. It also gave the Attorney General the power to deport immigrants for being members of Communist and Communist-front groups even after they had become citizens. The law did include one small victory for lhe American tradition. It finally allowed Asians living in ihe United States to become citizens and set a quota permitting about 2000 to enter the country each year. The fears of Communist subversion were heightened by the arrest of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg and Morton Sobell. on the report of Klaus Fuchs that they had passed key secrets about the atomic bornb to the Russians. In March 1951 the Rosenbergs. after a lengthy trial, were sentenced to death for a crime "worse than murder." Sobell was sentenced to 30 years. The Rosenbergs were executed in 1953. As with Sacco and Vanzetti back in the 1920s. many citizens doubted that the Rosenbergs were guilty. Or they believed that even if they were guilty, the nation was not well served by inflicting this drastic penalty in peacetime. Ctiul war in Korea. Troubled by Lhese problems at home, Americans soon discovered that from the other side of the globe the Soviets could find ways to threaten the American peace of mind. Civil war exploded in Korea in June 1950. Korea was an ancient country (the size of Mississippi and Indiana together) on a peninsula in East Asia, opposite Japan. Its borders touched Communist China and the Soviet Union. It had been annexed by Japan in 1910 and was surrendered to the Allies in 1945. At the end of the war Russian troops had moved into the country as far as the 38th parallel. American troops had freed the country south of that line. Korea was supposed to be united under a government chosen by free elections ordered by the UN in 1947. But the Soviet Union prevented the vote from taking place. Instead the Soviets set To sign the Elementary anti Secondary Education Act. LBJ went back to the one-room schoolhouse in Stonewall, a mile from his birthplace in Texas, where he had gone as a bov. He knew how to make the ceremony into a warm human drama. Present there were his first teacher and also seven Mexican Americans who had attended the school in Cotulla. Texas, when" he had taught before graduating from college. A flood oj bills. President Johnson had chosen the right strategy. After these two controversial bills passed so easily, his others found clear sailing. The list of important laws passed by the 89th Congress was eye-popping. It covered the nation. There were laws to beautify the highways (supported by his wife. Lady Bird) Appalachia was a main target of the War on Poverty. Amid great natural beauty, millions lived there in extreme poverty. Bill Strode Black Suit and laws for clean air. There was a law to insure truth In packaging. The Appalachian Regional Development Act gave to the poverty-stricken mountainous region stretching from Pennsylvania to Alabama and Georgia $1.1 billion for highways, health centers, and industrial development. The cities, too. received their share. The Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965 aided construction of a quarter-million units of low-rent public housing. "Urban Renewal"—the clearing of slums and rebuilding of cities— received $2.9 billion. The rents of tow- and moderate-income families were subsidized. Congress created a Department of Housing and Urban Development. To head the department Johnson named Robert C. Weaver, ihe first black in the Cabinet. The following year. Congress established the Department of Transportation. The Immigration Act of 1965 abolished the quota system. Each year 120.000 persons could come from Western Hemisphere lands. Another 170.000 could be admitted from all other na tions. but not more than 20,000 of these could come Irom any one country. Families of people already in the country, skilled workers, and re(- ugecs had priority. Congress voted billions for the war on poverty—and for exploring outer space. LBJ's program offered something for nearly everybody. The power of books. Presidents had great power. But so did authors. Rachel Carson, a slight, modest woman, graduated from Johns Hopkins University and became a famous marine biologist. Her poetic books about thr oceans and the seashore introduced Americans lo the wonders ol life in ihe unpolluted sea. Then in 1962 she published Silent Spring—a blockbusting book on a most unlikely subject. She showed that pesticides—especially DDT— were damaging the environment more than anyone suspected. The poisonous new chemicals used to wipe out destructive insects were passing through the food chain—from Ihe insects to Ihe birds who ale the insects. Birds were dying from the poisons meant for insects. One day, she warned, we might awaken to a It would take a long time to make opportunity equal for all Americans. There would never be perfectly equal opportunity, even with a whole system of free education for all. There would always be differences between families. Naturally some parents would be more anxious than others for their children to go on with their education. And. of course, better-educated parents in homes where there were lots of books would be able to give their children a head start in the competition. Still, a great deal could be done to make opportunities more equal. In the southern states where slaveiy had flourished and where blacks continued to be treated as second-class citizens, the public schools were often not equal at all. And in big cities in the North, segregated black neighborhoods tended to leave their children at a real disadvantage. When the Supreme Court of the United States in 1954 outlawed segregation in the public schools, it took a big step to insure that educational opportunities would be more equal. The 1962 law against segregation in federally funded public housing helped. After the anti-poll tax amendment to the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) was finally adopted in 1964 and the Voting Rights Act was passed in 1965, blacks in the South were able to use their votes to elect officials who would protect their rights and improve their opportunities. The years after World War II saw these and other strenuous efforts to fulfill the American dream of equal opportunity. Immigrant problems and immigrant inequality. The blacks were not the only Americans whose opportunities had not been equal. Every immigrant group except the English had their painful problems. They had been kept out of the best schools, the best colleges, the best neighborhoods, and the best jobs. With only a few exceptions, there had been no civil rights laws or constitutional amendments to protect them. In fact, as we have seen (p. 443), some of the most respectable, richest, and best- educated Americans actually formed organizations purposely to discriminate against new immigrants. When the Irish came here in the 1840s as refugees from the potato famine and from religious persecution, they were treated as intruders by some of New England's oldest residents. Factories and offices needing employees displayed the sign saying. "No Irish Need Apply," The Know-Nothing party, beginning as a secret society in New York City in 1849, organized discrimination against Catholics and immigrants. Its special targets were the new Irish Americans and the many German Americans who had been moving into the Middle West. Hatred against Catholics was again organized in 1887 in a group that called itself the American Protective Association. Its members poured slanders on the thousands of recent Italian and Polish immigrants. In 1894, when the flood of immigrants came from central, eastern, and southern Europe, many leading Bostonians (whose parents had immigrated some time before) joined with professors and university presidents from Harvard. Wisconsin, and California to form the powerful Immigration Restriction League. Among the groups most discriminated against were the Jews. Seeking refuge from ghettos and persecution in Germany. Poland, and Russia. Jews brought with them a tradition of learning and a reverence for books and education. Many were eager to pursue their studies in the best universities and medical schools. But the best universities, like Harvard and Yale, set up shameful restrictive quotas, which deprived Jews of their equal chances. Chinese, Japanese, and Korean immigrants, too. suffered more than their share of discrimi- nation—simply because they also wanted their full opportunities as Americans. The school board in San Francisco even tried to force their segregation in the public schools until President Theodore Roosevelt made them stop. At the dawning of the twentieth century there were 76 million people in the United States Of these, more than 10 million had themselves been born outside the country, and more than one-third of all Americans—26 million—had at least one foreign-born parent. Although people Lctf Skoo^fors Wfxxllm Camp ft Assoriam Many young people were iimong the new wave of Immigrants that came from Asia. They took quickly to the ways of their new country. Tills group obviously enjoys being Hoy Scouts. boasted that this was a nation of immigrants, nearly every kind of immigrant at some time had suffered some sort of discrimination! The social disease of discrimination, as we have seen, lasted violently into the modem century. In the 1920s the Ku Klux Klan, along with its hocus-pocus and its costume of white sheets, dared to target its terror against Catholics. Jews, and blacks in the South and the Midwest. When the able A1 Smith ran tor President in 1928. he lost votes merely because he was a Catholic. During World War II, FDR gave in to panic and put thousands ot Innocent Japanese and Japanese Americans into concentration camps. And when John F. Kennedy was nominated for President in 1960. political leaders wondered whether the time had yet come when a Catholic could be elected. Prejudice and discrimination, then, were not (he monopoly of any one pari of the country or of any one period. Perhaps they would never be entirely cured. But the United States had made a good start. The traditional American open door policy at home gave refuge to oppressed people from the whole world. The Emancipation Proclamation and the Thirteenth. Fourteenth. and Fifteenth amendments to the Constitution were long-overdue steps. In World War II the United States had fought the dis- crim Inal ion. barbarism, and racial superstil ions of the Nazis. Now Americans were ready again to move ahead. Civil rights laws, supported by Presidents of both parties beginning with Truman, declared that the American conscience had been newly awakened. In our land the twentieth century would be another century of progress for human equality. Section 1 Review 1 How did Jefferson's "natural aristocracy" differ from the Old World aristocracy? 2 What makes discrimination a "social disease"? 3. How is a system of free education, open to all, related to the ideal of equality? A Critical Thinking: Expressing Problems Clearly. Why do the twin American ideals of freedom and equality sometimes lead to social conflict? 2. Dealing with racism Righting past wrongs was not easy. Americans loved speed. They expected to accomplish in a few years what elsewhere had required centu- ries—or had never been tried. And Americans, too, had a faith that law's could cure almost anything. By the Eighteenth Amendment and the laws against alcoholic beverages. Americans should that they believed laws could cure the social ills of drunkenness. In that they wrere disappointed. But could law's speedily cure discrimination? Congress and the states passed new laws and set up new commissions. Still the problem was more complicated and deeper rooted than it seemed at first. Programs to cure past ills also created new problems. Trying to integrate the schools. The Supreme Court decision in 1954 outlawed racial segregation. Southerners fought a long, losing battle against the law of the land, but by the late 1970s legal segregation in the South had ceased. The age-old system of separate public schools and colleges for the races came to an end. But racism survived in the form of private schools that white parents set up to avoid integration. Increasing numbers of white students went to these private schools or moved to other school districts where there were fewer blacks, in some areas, schools which had been integrated after the Supreme Court decision came to be attended largely by blacks, which defeated the purpose of integration. In northern cities, neighborhoods were often racially segregated. Sometimes, too. school boards tried to prevent integration. They built new schools and drew the lines of school districts to keep the races separate. The courts held this kind of segregation just as unconstitutional as the separate schools in the South. To prevent segregation the courts took control in some cities. But the courts had no experience in running public schools. They ordered that students be bused to schools in other neighborhoods to provide a racial balance. Violence erupted in communities where w'hite parents Iried to slop the buses. Boston was scarred by the struggle. A judge there ran the school system for over ten years. But Buffalo, New York, set the nation an example. Aided by federal money and the patient help of parents, the schools there were peacefully integrated. Buffalo showed howr "magnet" schools with special programs could bring white students back to the public schools. In 1987 a Judge found segregation again in Little Rock. Arkansas, just 30 years after federal troops had overseen the admission of black students to Central High. During those years, whites had moved to the suburbs and whole neighborhoods had become segregated. So the city and nearby school districts continued to battle in the courts over the best ways to integrate the city's schools. Busing was one method of counteracting segregation. But it brought many new problems. Some children had to waste long hours riding on buses. It was hard for parents to stay in touch with teachers who were no longer in their neighborhood. To avoid busing, many whiles moved away and soon the schools were segregated again. All across the country parents disagreed. Some fell that the benefits of mixed schools outweighed all the problems. Others— Air* VmwMumum To bring about racial balance In northern schools, students were sometimes bused from one neighborhood to another. white and black—missed their neighborhood schools. "Affirmative action" and "reverse discrimination" Another new kind of problem was created by what were called "affirmative action" programs. Affirmative action grew out of the civil rights movement of the 1960s. It was designed first for blacks, and then for other minority groups and for women, to do something positive to correct past Injustices. It gave preference to women, blacks, and other minority persons for particular jobs or for college and professional school admissions even though they were not better qualified than other applicants. This tended to produce "quota" systems. The programs meant, of course, that all equally qualified persons did not have an equal chance for these jobs or schools. The purpose of affirmative action, which many Americans approved, was to give new advantages to groups that had suffered from discrimination. It tried to make up for past injustices. But people who were not in the "minority" groups now' felt they were being discriminated against. They thought it was not their fault that women, blacks. Latinos, Native Americans, or Asians had suffered in the past. "Backlash" described a new kind of prejudice created by the efforts to remove old prejudices. Some white male workers and students could not understand why others were receiving special preference. They called this "reverse discrimination." and brought lawsuits to secure their equal rights. The Supreme Court was unsure how to deal with affirmative action. In the Bakke case in 1978. it ruled that setting a specific quota for minority students in each class at a medical school tiiat received federal funds was unconstitutional. But the Court said some more flexible program might be legal. And the very next year, in the Weber case, the Court approved a job-training program designed to reflect the racial characteristics of the area surrounding a private company's factory. Under President Reagan, the Justice Department tried to stop affirmative action plans. Officials of the department said they wanted a "color-blind, gender-neutral society" where all paths were open and no special help was given to anyone. They were heartened when the Supreme Court ruled that the Memphis Fire Department could not ignore its seniority system to keep newly hired blacks w'hile it laid off longer-serving whites. The Court said that the Memphis blacks could not show that they personally were victims of discrimination. Bui then, as the Justice Department pushed to overturn goals and quotas, the Supreme Court supported affirmative action plans. In 1987 in California, under an affirmative action plan. Santa Clara County promoted a woman over a man who had received a higher score in the job interview. The Court upheld the county's "moderate and flexible" plan. This was the Court's first decision on an affirmative action plan to help women. The Supreme Court limits affirmative action. The Supreme Court remained uneasy about affirmative action programs. And the Justice Department under President Reagan and. after 1989. under President Bush continued to push for a "color-blind, gender-neutral" approach to discrimination. The Supreme Court's membership became more conservative under President Reagan and the Court began to be sympathetic to the Justice Department view. In January 1989, In the case of Richmond v. Croson. a 5-4 majority came out firmly against most affirmative action programs. They struck down a law of the city of Richmond, Virginia, which ordered that 30 percent of all public works funds should go to minority-owned construction companies. The Court said that the law violated the rights of white contractors to "the equal protection of the laws" (sec. 1. XIVth Amendment). And the majority made it clear that they would view any law favoring blacks with as much suspicion as they would a law favoring whites. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, for the majority, wrote t hat any other approach would mean that "the ultimate goal of eliminating entirely from government decision making such irrelevant factors as a human being's race will never be achieved." The majority said that it would allow such laws only if they served the "compelling" purpose of correcting "identified discrimination." But they made it clear that any law of that type would be subject to "strict scrutiny"—that is. it would be looked at closely to see that it only remedied a specific problem and did no more. Few laws, followers of the Supreme Court noted, ever survived strict scrutiny. The minority objected strongly to the decision of the majority. Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote. "I never thought that 1 would live to see the day when the city of Richmond. Virginia, the cradle of the Old Confederacy." wanting to limit "persistent discrimination.' would be prevented from doing so by the Supreme Court, "the supposed bastion of equality." Later that same year the Court interpreted Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 In such a way lhal critics felt il had been nullified. While saying that they still agreed with their 1971 decision in Griggs v. Duke Power Co. they, in fact, turned it around. In Griggs the Court had rided that an employer had to prove it was not discriminating. The Court ruled that Duke Power Co. had not proved the high school diploma it required for employment was necessary. "Good intent or absence of discriminatory intent does not redeem employment procedures or testing mechanisms," it had said, "that operate as built-in headwinds' for minority groups and are unrelated to measuring job capability." But now in their 1989 decision in Ward's Cove Packing Co. v. Antonio, the Court said employers no longer had to prove that a requirement was necessary. Instead, the Court ruled that it was now up to applicants and employees to prove that a requirement was unnccessaiy and discriminatory. This made It extremely difficult to prove discrimination, civil rights lawyers complained. And Just a few days later that Supreme Court ruled that even affirmative action settlements reached with the approval of lower courts could be challenged. The Court said, in Manin v. Wilks, that an eight-year-old agreement in Birmingham, Alabama, that had tried to open up senior positions in the fire department to blacks could be legally challenged by white firemen. Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote. "A voluntary settlement in the form of a consent decree between one group of employees and their employer cannot possibly 'settle.' voluntarily or otherwise, the conflicting claims of . . . employees who do not join In the agreement." This ruling, which also applied to agreements involving sex discrimination, seemed to open up again many agreements long thought settled. Civil rights activists were deeply disturbed by these decisions. The Court had now brought to an end. they feared, what some cailed the Williams Photography Studio These two construction company owners tn Richmond. Virginia, had a better chance of getting work before the Supreme Court struck down the city's affirmative action law. Second Reconstruction—the progress on civil rights that began with the 1954 school desegregation case. Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas. The Supreme Court further restricted civil rights laws when, in a decision upholding the Civil Rights Act of 1866. they limited its reach. They ruled 5-4 in 1989 that while the act did prevent discrimination in hiring practices, it did not. as some lower courts had assumed, prohibit discrimination at work. Still, even now. not every Court decision went against extensions of civil rights. In a case involving Kansas City. Missouri, the Court ruled 5-4 in April 1990 that a judge had the power lo order a local government to raise taxes in order to carry out programs to reduce school segregation. And that June it upheld Iwo federal affirmative action programs aimed at increasing ihe number of minority-owned television and radio stations. The Court said that the federal government had greater leeway in creating affirmative action programs than did state and local governments. In response to the Court's limitations on affirmative action programs. Congress in 1990 passed a bill that, while explicitly denytng any attempt to prescribe quotas, tried lo allow such plans. But George Bush, who had become President in 1989. vetoed the bill saying that it would still lead to quotas. Congress was unable to override his veto. Deep-seated problems. In education, and in the better jobs opened up by education, there was real progress for black Americans. By the 1980s blacks spent almost as many years in school as whites. Far more blacks were finishing high school and going on to college. But there was a troubling sign. The percentage of blacks. Hispantcs. and Native Americans enrolled in colleges and universities peaked in the 1970s and then began to decline. By the later 1980s, for blacks, this trend had been reversed, but only through intensive recruitment. And some of the nation's top universities complained that they were still nol receiving enough minority applications. The percentage of blacks in skilled jobs rose in the 1960s by about 50 percent. Between 1960 and 1980, the number holding professional. technical, and managerial jobs skyrocketed. Law schools and medical schools desperately searched for qualified students. Special scholarships were offered and colleges scrambled to find black professors for their faculties. Now there were many more blacks in the courts, in banks and businesses. In the early 1980s. blacks gained places on the highest courts of ten states. President Johnson appointed the first black. Thurgood Marshall, to the Supreme Court. He also brought the first black into the Cabinet, when he named Robert C. Weaver as Secretary of the new Department of Housing and Urban Development. President Carter named a black woman. Patricia Roberts Harris. to speak up? It was considered manly for men to stand up for their rights—and why shouldn't that also be womanly? Others were puzzled because It seemed that In the United States women already had more freedom to go where they pleased and do what they pleased than women anywhere else. In fact, there were few formal or legal barriers. Instead. the style of American life stood in the way. Women (unlike men) were always expected to put home and family first. This kept them from reaching the top in business and the professions. It also discouraged employers from giving women the high positions for which they really were qualified. If a woman had another child, or if her husband s job was moved Lo another city, then she was expected to give up her own Job—in order lo care for her child or go with her husband. Even if a woman was single, employers feared she might marry and then they would lose her. As famed anthropologist Margaret Mead observed. "The very fact that the formal barriers are down reduces women to battling with feather-soft barriers that never really yield but instead smother the attacker." The status of women. Statistics confirmed the arguments of the new feminists, in 1971, for example, full-time working women were paid only 59 percent as much as men. Women with college degrees earned only half as much as men with similar education. Women made up 38 percent of the labor force in 1970 and by 1990 they had increased to 45 percent—56 million working, many of them wives and mothers. Among the reasons for this were inflation, the better education of women, and the rising American standard of living. Many women wanted jobs that gave them new challenges. Still, one-third of all female workers were employed in clerical tasks—as secretaries, file clerks, and telephone operators. Few were executives or managers. In the early 1970s women accounted for only 7 percent of the physicians and only 3 percent of the lawyers. But during these years the number of women in medical and law schools increased rapidly. By 1980 they made up one-fifth of the medical students and one-third of the law students. Still many women were not yet in the positions that their talents deserved. But the American tradition of free speech and the right to organize made sure that they would be heard. The rising level of education helped. In I960 only 35 percent of American college students were women, but by 1978 that figure had risen to 48 percent. And in the late 1960s some formerly all-male colleges like Yale and Princeton began to admit women. Women now demanded their full share of the American tradition of equal opportunity. The pioneer and the immigrant traditions also played a part. When a family first came to America or moved into the unfamiliar West, women had lo make important decisions. They had to find new ways to keep the family well fed, well schooled, and happy together. Ever since colonial times, foreign visitors to this country had noticed the power of American women and sometimes made fun of it. But the opportunities for women had not yet been brought into an urban age of technology and large industry. The drioefor equal rights. The new feminist movement took many forms. Betty Friedan's National Organization for Women demanded changes to bring women into "the mainstream of American society ... in fully equal partnership with men." Small militant groups even called for female separation, the end of the family. and the end of separate masculine and feminine roles. The first national success of the women's rights movement came by accident. When the House of Representatives was debating the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Congressman Howard Smith of Virginia offered an amendment lo Title VII lo bar job discrimination on the basis of sex as well as race. He did this not to assist women, but because he thought this would help defeat the entire measure. Instead, the bill with his amendment became law. This ban against sexual discrimination would be used in businesses, schools, and colleges. As the movement gained momentum. Congress added its support. In 1972. two-thirds of the members of both houses of Congress ap- Rob Nrlaun'Putwr Group In the years after World War II women entered new and exciting Helds that once would have been closed to them. woman journalist observed, "a woman is born Into a society which has acknowledged her right to the freedom to choose the role she wants." Section 3 Review 1 Identify or explain: Betty Friedan, NOW. Equal Rights Amendment, Roe v. Wade 2 If there were few legal barriers to the advancement of women by Ihe 1960s, what factors held back their efforts to achieve equality? 3 Critical Thinking: Distinguishing Fact from Opinion. Cite evidence showing (a) gains by women by the 1970s and 1980s and (b) continued male-female inequality. 4. Spanish-speaking peoples During these years of civil rights movements, other groups organized for equal rights. After women and blacks, the largest such group was the Spanish-speaking people, whom the census bureau called Hispanics. Their population was growing at a rate five times faster than non- Hispanics. Demographers predicted that they would be the largest minority in the United States by the year 2000. They had come from many places and at many limes. Some of lheir ancestors came to America with the Spanish conquerors in the century after Columbus, and their families had lived here for more than 400 years. Others emigrated to the mainland United States from Spain. Cuba. Puerto Rico, and other Caribbean islands, as well as from Latin American countries. The Mexican Americans. Nearly two-thirds of all Spanish-speaking people in the United States are Mexican Americans. They are both the newest of the new Immigrants and the oldest of the old. The ancestors of many of them settled in the Southwest and California in the 1600s and 1700s (p. 29). Those early settlers were followed by millions of others. By the late 1980s there were over 20 million Mexican Americans in the United States and thousands more were entering the country every year. By far the largest number of them have continued to settle where their first settlements lay—in California. Arizona. New Mexico. Colorado, and Texas. Their language and their culture give a special rich llavor to the food and shape the music, the architecture, and the literature in the whole region. Many Mexican Americans are descended from the intermarriage of Spanish and Indian peoples. They proudly trace their heritage all the way back to the great Aztec and Mayan civilizations. They generally call themselves by a variety of names: Mexican or Mexicano, Mexican American, Chicano (a form of Mexicano). His- pano. Latino, mestizo, and sometimes just La Raza (meaning "the people"). Conservative and hardworking, the Mexican Americans are largely Roman Catholic in religion, with strong family ties, and they ding to the Spanish language. # Although originally a rural people, now, like the whole nation, they are mainly urban. Fully 80 percent have settled together In city neighborhoods, which they call barrios. From the very beginning the differences of religion, language, skin color, and culture between the Mexican Americans and other Americans (whom they call "Anglos" or "gringos") created conflicts. Each group tended to think its own way of doing things was better. But In most areas Anglos were the majority, in control of government, courts, and schools. Mexican Americans were often discriminated against. Great numbers of them ended up in low paying Jobs where no (raining was needed. The rise of a "Brown Power" movement. The Mexican Americans organized their own groups _______________________________________861 to voice their needs. Their first civil rights group, founded in 1929, was the League of United Latin American Citizens. The thousands of veterans who had fought in World War II formed the Mexican G.l. Forum. Then, in the tumultuous 1960s. Mexicans began to speak out more loudly. During the 1960s there developed a Chicano or "Brown Power" movement. Among its most outspoken leaders was the feisty Reies Lopez Tijerina, or El Tigre. Born in Texas, he led a fight in New Mexico for the return of the lands he said Lhe Anglos had stolen from the first Spanish-speaking settlers. But many of the conservative Mexican Americans, like Senator Joseph Montoya of New Mexico, disapproved of Tijerina's radical program. And instead of "Chi- cano." which some of the young had begun to use as a symbol of pride, they preferred to bo simply Americans. Another high-spirited leader was Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales of Colorado. He was a former prizefighter and once director of a war-on- jHwerty youth program. In 1965 his Crusade for Justice in Denver began to build Chicano pride by giving them jobs and providing social services in their own communities. Organizing farm laborers. Many Mexicans and Mexican Americans worked as poorly paid farm laborers. Some of these braceros (a Spanish word meaning laborers) came north under contracts to work in the fields. Others entered the country illegally by slipping across the long and difficult-to-patrol border between Mexico and the United States. They were called "wet- backs" because some of them swam or waded across the Rio Grande. Farm workers had always been the most difficult laborers to organize into a union. Since they came to work only for a season, and were spread across the countryside, it was hard to bring them together for meetings. But the shrewd and eloquent Cesar Chavez decided to try. and he had remarkable success. He had worked as a farm laborer himself. In 1962 he began to organize the migrant laborers— brown, white, and black—into a union. In 1965. when 900 Filipino grape pickers in another union went out on strike. Chavez's union decided to go out. too. The following year, the two unions merged to form the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee. Chavez, like Marlin Luther King. Jr., believed in nonviolence. He stuck to his principles through the long painful years of the strike against the owners of the vineyards in Delano. California. 1'his won him public support from church groups, from other unions, and from political leaders like Robert F. Kennedy. A brilliant publicist. Chavez organized an effective nationwide boycott of California grapes. When some of his followers resorted to violence, he protested by fasting for 25 days—and badly injured his health. But nonviolence prevailed. Finally, the opposition of the vineyard owners started to crumble. In 1970. after five years. many of them signed with Chavez's union. He had actually organized farm laborers into a union and won better pay and working conditions. Chavez had done what seemed impossible. Chavez himself stayed out of politics, but other Mexican Americans won high office. Both New Mexico and Arizona have elected Mexican American governors. Other Mexican Americans have been chosen for the Senate and the House, or to be mayors of large cities, like Henry' Cis- neros of San Antonio. Texas, and Federico Pena in Denver, Colorado. A Mexican American woman. Romana A. Banuelos, was named by President Nixon to be Treasurer of the United States. President Reagan appointed Lauro F. Cavazos as his Secretary of Education. President George Bush retained him and also appointed Manuel Lujan. Jr., Secretary of the In- Ccsar Chavez organized migrant workers in California into a union and led them in a long and finally successful strike against vineyard owners. He then tried to help other farm workers. Bob Furli RIark Star tcrior. and Antonia C. Novclio. Surgeon General. Mexican Americans were playing an evcr-larger role in state and national politics as die United States entered the 1990s. Puerto Rico and the Puerto Ricans. The Puerto Ricans were different from most other Hispanics because all of them were citizens of the United States before they arrived on the mainland. The special relation between Puerto Rico and the rest of the United Slates allowed them to go back and forth to their home island at will. The island of Puerto Rico had been visited by Columbus in 1493. even before any Spaniards had come to mainland America. When Columbus arrived, the Arawak Indians were already there. During the colonial period the island was settled by Spaniards and by black slaves imported from Africa. The land and the climate were ideal for raising sugar cane. And from the sugar was made the famous Puerto Rican rum. In 1898, alter the Spanish-American War. the United Stales took over the island. One of FDR's braintrusters. Rexford G. Tug- well, was sent to Puerto Rico as governor in 1941. There he and Luis Munoz Marin, a poetic and inspiring Puerto Rican political leader, produced 'Operation Bootstrap." This was a program to improve agriculture and attract industry to the island. In 1948 Munoz Marin became the island's first popularly elected governor. He led the way toward a special "Commonwealth" status lor Puerto Rico within the United States. The Commonwealth of l*uerto Rico was proclaimed on July 25, 1952. The following years showed how the resourcefulness and intelligence of people might make up for the lack of other natural resources. Under the ingenious "Commonwealth" plan. Puerto Rico became an independent self- governing state in voluntary association with the United States. Puerto Rico is represented in Congress by a resident commissioner who can speak but has no vote, except in committees. IHicrto Ricans do not pay federal income lax on money earned in Puerto Rico, and they do not vote in national elections. By 1970. with the aid of "Operation Bootstrap." Puerto Rico had the Wulr Wnrfcl l-holm Puerto Rican Day is a Urac for parades and celebration In New York City. highest per capita income and the best standard of living in Latin America. Still. Puerto Rican Incomes were low compared to those in mainland United States. After World War II. when the population grew rapidly, producing widespread unemployment, thousands of Puerto Ricans moved to the mainland. The emigration slowed in the 1970s. but by the late 1980s more than 2 million Puerto Ricans were living in the continental United Stales. About one-half lived in New York City, where many worked in the garment trades. The city now held more than twice as many Puerto Ricans as the island capital of San Juan. They were citizens, but in other ways they suffered many of the problems of earlier immigrants. Since they spoke another language, they felt strange and they formed their own neighborhoods where the signs were in Spanish. Strangers. without (he advantages of money or education. they. too. joined the American quest for equal opportunity. Many Puerto Ricans were nol salisfied. Some agitated with violence to try to win indepen derice so that Puerto Rico could be a separate nation. Others wanted Puerto Rico to become a slate in the Union. Still, in election after election the majority of Puerto Ricans voted to keep the unusual Commonwealth status. Meanwhile. Puerto Rico, with its delightful tropical beaches and its Spanish-American flavor, became a favorite vacation spot for thousands from the mainland. And Puerto Ricans were enriching the culture of the United States, through such figures as opera singers Martina Arroyo and Justino Diaz, guitarist Jose Feliciano, violinist Jose Figueroa, and actors Jose Ferrer. Rita Moreno. Chita Rivera. Raul Julia, and Hector Elizondo. The flight from Cuba. Throughout its history the United States has been a refuge for people fleeing turmoil and repression. After Fidel Castro seized power in Cuba in 1959 and began to create a Communist state, over half a million islanders fled to the United States. Some went on to settle In other lands, but nearly 400.000 chose to remain here. Many stayed in Florida, especially around Miami. Some of these newcomers dreamed and planned only for the day when they could return to their Cuban homeland. But others became Americans and began a new life. The Cubans who came to the United States in the first years after Castro's takeover were generally wrell educated, and over two-thirds were trained for white-collar jobs. Hardworking and ambitious, some of them soon rose to head banks and businesses. Large sections of Miami became almost as Cuban as Havana itself. This first wave of refugees was joined in 1980 by more than 100.000 Cubans who tied when Castro suddenly allowed dissatisfied citizens to leave. These new migrants were called "Marielitos" because they had come to the United States in a massive flotilla of boats that In 1980 Fidel Castro suddenly allowed dissatisfied Cubans to sail from the |"*rl of Muriel for Florida. In a brief period 100,000 went by small boats across the dangerous waters to Key West. UUvtcr Rtbbot Wnodlin (tamp A Assoc kiln* shuttled between the Cuban harbor of Mariel and Key West in Florida. These migrants, too. worked hard, built businesses, and often prospered. Once again the United States was a haven and a land of new opportunity. Section 4 Review 1. Identify or explain: La Raza, barrios. Joseph Montoya, Rodolfo Gonzales. Luis Munoz Marin, Operation Bootstrap 2 What are the chief groups lhal make up the Spanish-speaking peoples of the United States? Locate at least three major areas of settlement. 3 How does Ihe legal status of Puerto Ricans differ from that of other Hispanic immigrants to the United States? 4 Critical Thinking: Drawing Conclusions. How did the work of Cesar Chavez help bring about greater equality for all Mexican Americans? 5. New waves of immigration The United Stales was still the land of opportunity for oppressed people from everywhere in the late twentieth century. Refugees from war. revolution, persecution, and poverty, and tens of thousands simply seeking a better life— all flocked to what they considered the New- World promised land. They. too. sought equality and freedom. They enriched the nation with their hopes and their efforts, but they added problems. Asians from many nations. The fall of South Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia to the Communists in 1975 set off a massive emigration by land, sea, and air. Refugees fled to Thailand. Malaysia, Hong Kong, the Philippines, and China. Many hoped to come to the United States. To help those who had aided the United States during the Vietnam War. 125,000 Vietnamese were allowed to enter the country right away. It seemed that this was enough relief at the lime. But more thousands continued to flee. They filled the refugee camps in Southeast Asia and overflowed to the United States and other nations. By 1985. 728.000 of them had come to the United States. These new immigrants from distant lands did well. They were eager to become Americans. They worked hard and added a delightful new Asian spice to the life (and food) of the Untied States. Many Asian young people overcame the language handicap and did exceedingly well in school. President Reagan in his State of the Union message to Congress in 1985 pointed to Jean Nguyen, who was seated in the balcony beside Mrs. Reagan. .Just ten years before she had fled Vietnam with her family. and now she was about to graduate from the United States Military Academy at West Point. In 1988. in New York City, eleven of the fourteen finalists in a nationwide science competition were Asians. From other parts of Asia—from India. Taiwan. Korea, and the Philippines—they came by the tens of thousands. In the 1980s Asian Americans were the nation's fastest growing minority. Refugees from the Caribbean and Latin America. The poverty-stricken and turbulent Islands of the Caribbean sent another wave of immigrants. From Haiti, they were fleeing the brutal dictatorship of the Duvaliers. "Papa Doc" and his son. "Baby Doc." Half the people had no jobs in that island of hunger. Even after the long Duvaller rule (1957—1986) ended, they still came. A third wave of unhappy people arrived from troubled Central America, from strife-tom Guatemala. Nicaragua, and El Salvador. Many came in haste and terror without passports or visas. How were we to help these people without flooding our border cities with a new wave of the unemployed? To check the flow from Haiti, the government in the 1980s began to return those who came without permits. Other refugees were detained in prisons and camps while the courts decided whether they should be granted political asylum. Still the government found ways to Biiri Barthatatnrw/Btatk Siar With the rapid rise in the number of Asians in the United States, new Asian shops and restaurants catered to the tastes not only of the new immigrants hut also of native-born Americans. admit many refugees from the centers of poverty and violence around the world. Immigration reform. Immigrants t ame from trouble-spots on all continents—from Afghanistan. South Africa, the Soviet Union. Ethiopia, and Ireland. They came for a job and for a better life. Even if they had entered illegally they often found work. They were willing to take jobs that other Americans shunned, and they worked hard. Their children born here were citizens of the United States, according to the Constitution. And if they became legal residents, their relatives would be admitted to join them. President Carter proposed a law in 1977 to make legal all the illegal aliens who had been here since 1970. After that, employers would be fined for hiring illegal aliens. President Reagan asked for a similar law. But Congress refused to act. By 1986 the whole nation was troubled. The United States had been built by those seeking asylum from poverty and tyranny. Mow were we to adjust this tradition to the late twentieth century? In 1986 there were millions of illegal aliens in the United States. And more were entering every day. Unemployment and Inflation in neighboring Mexico drove thousands across our southern border. In late 1986, the Immigration and Naturalization Service reported that in just one year it had caught a record 1.8 million people, mosl from Mexico, who were trying to slip in. Thousands of others never became statistics. Finally Congress passed the Immigration Reform and Control Act in 1986. Illegal aliens who could prove that (hey had been in the United States since January 1. 1982. were allowed to become legal residents. For the first time, anyone hiring illegal immigrants would be fined. And our borders were to be more closely patrolled. Not everyone was happy with the law. but it was generally welcome. Until then there really was no clear policy. Laws on the books were sometimes enforced, sometimes ignored. Hispanics, especially (hose here for a long time, were glad. They no longer lived In the shadow of uncertainty. The United States had not opened the door wide to all comers. But it had not slammed its door. For many, this nation of immigrants remained a haven. Section 5 Review 1. What major immigrant groups sought refuge in the United States in the 1970s and 1980s? Why did they leave their homes? 2 Why were many Americans in favor of reforming immigration laws in the 1970s and 1980s? 3 Critical Thinking: Making Comparisons. In what ways is the "sanctuary movement" of the 1980s like the "underground railroad" of the mid-1800s? In what ways does it differ? 6. The American Indians After World War II when Americans tried once again to make opportunities equal, injustices of the American past came home to roost. It was one thing to give all Americans an equal chance for education and for jobs today. That was difficult, but not impossible. It was quite another thing to try to undo history. This problem arose in regard to the very first Americans. They were here, of course, centuries before the first Europeans or Africans. As the United States grew, their own cultures had not prospered. American Indians were not immigrants. were not settled in big cities, and for many years could not vote. They had little appeal for politicians. In colonial times, and for much of the 1800s, newer Americans considered them simply part of the wilderness to be cleared away. Later they were treated as "wards" of the government and put on reservations (p. 387). These were usually on land that nobody else wanted. Then during the twentieth century their numbers grew. Though in 1900 they totaled less than a quarter-million, by the 1980 census they numbered over 1.3 million. Not until the Snyder Act of 1924 were all Indians born in the United Stales admitted to full citizenship. The Native Americans had been the victims of varying whims of United States officials. Under FDR there was an Indian "New Deal." which aimed to hall the sale of their land, to restore tribal landholding, to rebuild the tribes, and to promote tribal culture. In a bold move FDR appointed outspoken and combative John Collier, the executive director of the American Indian Defense Association, as head of the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Between 1933 and 1945. Collier fought to enable the Indians both to preserve their old wavs and to participate fully in American life. During World War II. 25.000 American Indians served in the armed forces. They felt they Wilma Mankiilcr is die highly respected Principal Chief of ihe Cherokee*. T CanipMui-'Syipiui from an Illness like epilepsy. Some were veterans. Their numbers were large. In 1990 it was estimated that 43 million Americans— more than all the blacks, latinos, and Indians taken together—were physically or mentally handicapped. The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 forbade discrimination against the physically disabled in any of the programs, activities, and facilities tha) were supported by federal funds. Other laws aimed to prevent Job discrimination against handicapped persons. The new federal regulations for equal opportunity in some conspicuous ways eased the everyday lives of the handicapped. In 1977 federal regulations required that public sidewalks must not have a slope greater than 5 percent and could not be Interrupted by steps. Every public building had to have at least one main entrance designed for wheelchairs. In public places, too, some telephone booths and toilets had to be provided for use by the handieapped. In 1978 federal specifications required that new buses have a facility for boarding passengers in wheelchairs. To help the blind, the signs in public buildings had to be made with raised letters or numbers. Doorknobs leading to rooms not intended for public use had to have special ridges to make them identifiable to the touch. Wherever warning signals were given by sounds, there also had to be visual signals to warn the deaf. On TV. many programs were "closed-captioned" for the deaf. This meant that a special decoder would let the hearing impaired see (he program accompanied by printed captions. Even in 1978. when Congress was cutting other costs, it authorized S5.2 billion to be spent over the next four years to provide equal opportunities and legal protection for the handicapped. Mainstreaming. Other kinds of handicapped persons—the mentally ill and the mentally re- tarded—also gained. In 1965. community health centers were virtually unknown. Only ten years later they numbered more than a thousand. During these years, too. education of the mentally retarded was improved. By 1979 New laws to prevent discrimination against the handicapped have assisted many skilled individuals like this receptionist to find productive jobs and take their rightful place in the work foree. .tlm PlclitretVCUckiChlcaKo 