Revised Paul M. Roberts Paula A. Franklin Grateful acknowledgment is made to Joan Daves Literary Agency for permission to reprint an excerpt from I Have a Dream hy Martin Luther King, Jr. Copyright © 1963 by Martin Luther King. Jr. Copyright © 1993. 1986 by Amsco School Publications. Inc. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission of the publisher. Printed in the United States of America charters were usually people of wealth, social position, or influence at court. The lirst patent authorizing the establishment of a colony in America was granted by Queen Elizabeth to Sir Humphrey Gilbert. In 1578 and again in 1583, Gilbert tried to start a settlement in Newfoundland, but both efforts failed. Alter Gilbert's death, his colonizing rights passed to his half-brother. Sir Walter Raleigh. In 1587, Raleigh sponsored a settlement on Roanoke Island, off the coast of North Carolina. The settlement disappeared w ithout a trace sometime before 1590 and became known as the "Lost Colony." It soon became clear that the expense of planting a colony w as too great to be borne by a single individual. Therefore, groups of wealthy merchants and investors banded together to sponsor colonial projects. Some formed small companies w ith only a limited number of members. Others organized larger enterprises called joint-stock companies. Investors who purchased stock in such a company became shareholders and were entitled to a proportionate share of any profits earned. Jamestown The first permanent English settlement in America was made at Jamestown, in the region called Virginia. It was sponsored by a group of merchants and investors called (he London Company. The company hoped to earn a profit by mining precious metals, exporting New World products to Europe, and trading with the Indians. EARLY HARDSHIPS The first group of settlers (about 1(M) men) landed at the mouth of the James River in the spring of 1607. At the start. The English in North America 57 everything went wrong with the settlement. The Jamestown colonists, interested chiefly in finding gold, did not concern themselves with planting crops or building shelters. The place the colonists chose for the settlement was swampy and unhealthful. During the first seven months, more than half the settlers died of starvation and disease. Frequent Indian attacks also threatened Jamestown's survival. Captain John Smith, an adventurer and soldier, did much to save the colony. He took command and put all able-bodied settlers to work building houses and planting crops. Smith also succeeded in obtaining food from the Indians. Because of an injury, Smith returned to England in the fall of 1609. Without his leadership, the colony almost failed. The winter of 1609-1610 was known as the "starving time." a turn for the better Fresh supplies and more settlers kept Jamestown alive. But the colony remained on the edge of failure until several important changes took place: 1. Land Ownership. One of the main reasons for the lack of progress was the system of land ownership. Originally, the Jamestown colonists were merely employees of the London Company, which owned all property, including land. Later, under the governorship of Sir Thomas Dale, individual settlers received their own land. This change encouraged them to work harrier. 2. Family Life. The first few women came to Jamestown in 1611. Starting in 1620, many more were encouraged to come. As family life developed, the community became more settled and stable. 3. Tobacco Cultivation. Tobacco was a plant originally grown by the Indians. Its use had become popular in England during the 16th century. One Jamestown colonist, John Rolfe, made a successful business of cultivating and curing tobacco. Soon, the colonists were raising it on a large scale. In 1617, Virginia shipped 20,(MX) pounds of tobacco to England. Within the next ten years, the figure jumped to 500,000 pounds. 4. Increased Labor Supply. At first, the tobacco fields w ere worked by indentured servants. These men and women wanted to settle in the New World but did not have enough money to pay for their passage. They agreed to work for a certain period without wages for anyone who paid their way to America. During the time of the indenture agreement—usually from four to seven years—the servants received fond and clothing. In 1619. the first black Africans arrived as prisoners aboard a Dutch ship. They were purchased by the settlers as indentured servants. To meet the ever-growing need for labor, merchants later brought over other Africans and sold them to the colonists as slaves. 5. Relations With the Native Americans. Initially, the Indian leader Powhatan tried to drive out the Jamestown colonists. According to legend. John Smith was captured by the Indians and was about to be killed when the chiefs daughter, Pocahontas, saved him. In 1614, Pocahontas married John Rnlfe, the tobacco planter. For some time thereafter, there was peace between the English and the Indians. In 1622, the Indians broke the peace by killing nearly 350 settlers. The colonists fought back and drove the Indians out of the area. representative covehnment At the start, the Virginia colonists had little voice in their own affairs. Laws for the colony were made by a governor and a council—a group of men who advised the governor. All those officials were appointed by the London Company in England. Then, hi 1619, the V irginia Company (as the London Company was now called) allowed the colonists to form a representative assembly called the House of Burgesses. It was made up of two delegates, or bur- gesses, from each settlement in Virginia. The House of Burgesses was the first elective legislature in America. In 1624, King James I canceled the Virginia Company's charter and made Virginia a royal colony. This meant that the king appointed the governor and council. The colonists, however, continued to elect the members of the House of Burgesses. Plymouth The second permanent English colony in North America was at Plymouth, Massachusetts, near Cape Cod. (Earlier, John Smith had named this region New England.) The Plymouth colonists had intended to.settle in part of the territory granted to the Virginia Company. But their ship w as blown off course to the north. BECINMNCS The Plymouth colony was organized by Separatists, many of whom had been living in the Netherlands. The Separatists had gone there to escape religious persecution but were not happy because they wanted to raise their children in an English environment. For this reason, they decided to seek a new home in America. A group of English merchants agreed to finance the venture. In return, the Separatists promised the merchants all the profits earned by the colony in its first seven years. For the trip to America, some 35 Separatists were joined by about 65 other pimple from England. The non- Separatists were looking for economic betterment or adventure. Setting sail on the Mayflower in September 1620, the group arrived at Plymouth in December and established a settlement. The English in North America 59 Before landing, the Pilgrims, as these settlers came to be known, faced the need to form a government of their own. Since they were outside the limits of Virginia, they could not be ruled by the V irginia Company. Pilgrim leaders, therefore, drew up the Mayflower Compart. In this document, they agreetl to make and obey just and equal laws for the common good. This agreement is one of the earliest expressions of self- government in America. the: first years The Pilgrims suffered greatly during the first winter at Plymouth. Shelter was poor, disease widespread, and food scarce. Fortunately, the Indians proved to be friendly. Massasoit, an Indian leader, made a peace treaty with the Pilgrims that lasted for many years. Two other Indians, Squanto and Samoset, showed the Pilgrims how to grow corn and where to hunt and fish. In the fall of 1621, the Pilgrims set aside a day of thanksgiving for the year's blessings. They invited the Indians to join them in a celebration of peace and plenty—the first Thanksgiving. John Carver, the first governor of the Plymouth colony, died soon after the Pilgrims landed. His place was filled by William Bradford, w ho governed wisely for many years. Under Bradford's leadership, two important changes took place: (1) Kach adult male acquired land for himself. Earlier, all the land had belonged to the community and was worked in common. (2) The Pilgrims became financially independent by repaying the merchants who had sponsored the new colony. Massachusetts Bay In 1628. a small group of Puritans, led by John Endecott, settled in Salem, Massachusetts. I.ike the Separatists at Plymouth, these people came to the New World in search of religious freedom. The following year, leading Puritans in England formed a joint-stock company called the Massachusetts Bay Company. They acquired the rights to a large piece ol land in New England. Under the company's sponsorship, more than 1000 Puritans sailed to the Massachusetts Bay area in 1630, settling in and around Boston John Winthrop, an able and wealthy Puritan, was the first governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony. We must consider that we shall be as a City upon a Hill; the eyes of all people are upon us. —/oho Winthrop, addressing Puritan settlers before their ship landed in Massachusetts At this time, England was troubled by conflict between its Anglican rulers and religious dissenters. The result was the "Great Migration" of the 1630s. More than 60,000 people, unhappy about conditions in England, came to the New World. Of this number, about 20,000 settled in New England. The Massachusetts Bay Colony grew in strength. It first took over the Maine-New Hampshire region and, later, Plymouth Colony. Puritanism was the official religion of Massachusetts Bay. Everyone who lived there was forced to support the Puritan church. Only church members were permitted to vote and hold public office. The clergy held great political power as governmental advisers. They also supervised daily life to ensure that people lived according to Puritan values. Anyone who criticized the regime was threatened with banishment from the colony. The number of New England settlements grew steadily. Some were established by colonists who moved north and south from Massachusetts. Other colonies were founded by newcomers from England. Connecticut Thomas Hooker, a Puritan minister in Massachusetts, disapproved of the harsh rule of the Bay Colony's leaders. In 1636, he led a number of his followers westward to the fertile Connecticut River Valley. They settled in Hartford, which had been founded the previous year by a pioneering group from Hooker's congregation. Other colonists from Massachusetts founded the nearby river towns of Wethersfield and Windsor. Farther south, Puritans from England settled in and around New Haven. In 1639, Hartford, Wethersfield, and Windsor joined together to form a government. They drew up a constitution with provisions for (1) electing deputies from each town to a legislature, (2) choosing a governor, (3) limiting the terms of office of public officials, and (4) assuring fair taxation. This document, the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, was the first written constitution in America. Until the 1660s, the settlements in lower Connecticut acted independently as New Haven Colony. In 1662, King Charles II of England united all the towns of Connecticut into a single colony. Rhode Island Another clergyman who opposed Puritan rule in Massachusetts w as Roger Williams. His outspoken views on religious freedom angered The English in North America 61 Massachusetts officials. When they brought Williams to trial and ordered him back to England, he fled and took shelter among the Indians. Other colonists from the Bay Colony soon joined him. Williams then bought land in the Narragansett Bay area from the Indians and, in 1636, founded Providence. Anne Hutchinson was still another remarkable leader driven out of Massachusetts for religious reasons. With her followers, she moved to Portsmouth. Other Massachusetts colonists founded Newport and Warwick. In time. Providence, Portsmouth, Newport, and Warwick received a charter from England allowing them to set up a government. The four settlements formed a colons' known at first as Providence Plantations and later as Rhode Island. Under Roger Williams, Rhode Island adopted the principle of complete separation of church and state. This meant that the government could not pass laws restricting religious liberty. Nor could the government set religious standards for voting or holding office. Rhode Island was the first American colony to guarantee all its people religious freedom. As a result, the colony attracted people of all faiths. Many who were treated badly elsewhere, such as Quakers and Jews, settled in Rhode Island. New Hampshire and Maine As early as 1622, two English developers, Captain John Mason and Sir Ferdinando Gorges, acquirer! the rights to a large area in northern New England. In 1629, they divided their holdings. Mason took New Hampshire, and Gorges took Maine. The principal towns of New Hampshire were established between 1623 and 1640. Anglicans from England founded Dover and Portsmouth. Exeter was founded by followers of John Wheelwright, a Puritan minister who had been banished from the Bay Colony. In the 1640s, Massachusetts claimed and annexed all these settlements. It retained control of the area until 1679, when New Hampshire received a charter making it a separate royal colony. In Maine, beginning in the 1620s, a few small towns—Kittery and York, among them—were established along the coast and on rivers. Augusta, the present capital, was founded as a fur trading post on the Kennebec River in 1628. At Casco Bay, settlements that later became the city of Portland were established in 1631. Claiming that Maine, too. was within its boundaries, the Bay Colony took over the region in the 1650s. Massachusetts held Maine until 1820. South of New England lay a region that became known as the Middle Colonies. The first Europeans in this area, the Dutch, had established the colony of New Nethcrland along the Hudson River. By the 1660s, the colony had 8000 inhabitants. New York For many reasons, the Dutch settlement of New Nethcrland was a great source of irritation for England: 1. The English considered the area rightfully theirs, as a result of Cabot's explorations. 2. New Nethcrland was a barrier separating the English colonies in New England from those farther south. 3. The Dutch were carrying on extensive trade with the English colonies. in violation of English trade laws. The English in North America fa3 4. The English were envious of the profitable Dutch fur trade with the Indians. 5. England wanted to control New Amsterdam, with its fine harbor. overthrow of THE Dl'TCH When Charles II became king of England. he gave New Netherland (which he regarded as English territory) to his brother James, the Duke of York. In 1664, an English fleet sailed to New Amsterdam and calk'd for the surrender of New Netherland. Its governor at this time was Peter Stuyvesant, a haughty, bad-tempered man. I le wanted to resist the English, but the people refused to support him. Stuyvesant had to surrender without firing a shot. In honor of the Duke of York, the English changed the name of the colony and its main town to New York. Beverwyck, the settlement that had grown up around Fort Orange, was renamed Albany. covf.rnmfnt As proprietor (owner) of the colony, the Duke of York exercised complete control. I le ruled through an appointed governor anil council, and denied the people representation in the government. After the colonists protested, the Duke of Y'ork appointed Thomas Dongan as governor and authorized him to hold elections to a representative assembly. When it met in 1683, it drew up a Charter of Liberties and Privileges. This document provided for an elective assembly, freedom of worship, and trial by jury. Dongan's charter was short-lived, however. When the Duke of Y'ork became King James II in 1(185, he threw out the charter and did aw ay w ith t Ik- legislature. Representative government was not restored until 1691. New Jersey New' Netherland hail included the region between the Hudson and Delaware rivers. It had a few Dutch and Swedish settlers. When the Duke of York took over New Netherland, he gave the area betw een the rivers to two of his friends. Sir George Carteret and Eoril John Berkeley. The new proprietors named their colony New Jersey. They encouraged colonization by promising settlers large grants of land, representative government, anil freedom of religion. English Puritans and Quakers, as well as Scots. Scotch-Irish, and Germans, flocked to New Jersey. The colony grew rapidly. A group of Quakers purchased Berkeley's rights to the section known as West Jersey. Another group of Quakers and some non-Quakers acquired Carteret's province of East Jersey. In 1702, these new owners surrendered their governmental powers to the king, and the two provinces ol New Jersey were united into a single royal colony. Pennsylvania Like other English dissenters, members of the Society of Friends (Quakers) lacked religious freedom. They were persecuted not only in England but also in many of the American colonies. The Quakers, believing that war is sinful, refused to serve as soldiers or to pay taxes for military purposes. This stand, in particular, made them unpopular. william plnn's "holy EXPERIMENT" William Penn, the son of a wealthy English admiral, became an ardent Quaker as a young man. His father had long been owed a large debt by King Charles II. After the elder Penn died, his son inherited the claim. To pay it off, the king, in 1681. gave Penn land in the New World. The area was called Pennsylvania ("Penn's woods"). Penn planned a colony where people of all beliefs anti nationalities could live together in peace. They would be equal before the law and enjoy freedom of speech and religion. Penn called his plan a "holy experiment." The first settlers arrived early in 1682 and founded Philadelphia (city of "brotherly love"). Before the year ended. Penn arrived to take charge of his colony. He remained in Pennsylvania for two years. chow hi s prosperity l'oiler Penn's direction, Pennsylvania grew quickly. It became one of the largest and most successful of the English colonies, for several reasons: 1. Many Settlers. Penn believed in self-government, in making land available on good terms, and in freedom of religion. These ideas attracted many Europeans. Among them were English and Welsh Quakers, Irish Catholics, Scotch-Irish Presbyterians, and German Protestants of various denominations. (The Germans were the ancestors of the Pennsylvania Dutch of today.) Settlement spread northward and westward along the Delaware, Schuylkill, and Susquehanna rivers. Philadelphia became the largest city in the colonies. 2. Good Government. Penn wanted to guarantee his colonists a responsible and democratic government. To do this, he drew up a constitution that became known as the first Frame of Government. It provided fora deputy governor to be appointed by the proprietor and for a council and an assembly to be elected by the people. At its first meeting, held in 1682, the legislature adopted a code of laws for the colony. Based on Penn's proposals, the code was called the Great Law. It di dared that all people in Pennsylvania should have the right to worship as they pleased. (Only those who believed in the divinity of Christ could vote or hold office, however.) Provision was also made for the care of the poor and orphans, for protection against unfair trials, and for reasonable punishment and humane treatment for wrongdoers. The English in North America 65 River Albany (Ft. Orange. 16231* r f / / > £ ft . ir % Philadelphia 0682) v-dEHSEY da'*' ith (Elizabethtown. 1665) (Ft. Christina, 16381 | | Area settled by 1700 | ] French territory 3. Friendly Relations With the Indians. Penn dealt fairly and honestly with the Indians. He paid them for their lands and negotiated a treaty that hound whites and Indians in peace "as long as the sun and moon give light." Penn kept his promises to the Indians and remained on friendly terms with them as long as he lived. Delaware Among the earliest non-English colonists of North America were Swedes. One group, sponsored by a Swedish trading company, settled Fort Christina (present-day Wilmington) in 1638. Shortly afterward, more settlers arrived. They built forts along the Delaware River and named the region New Sweden. fab EUROPEAN EXPLORATION AND COLONIZATION T he idea of sharing the Indian fur trade with the Swedes did not please the Dutch. They also feared that Sweden would expand its colony. The Dutch, therefore, took over New Sweden in 1655. When New Netherland fell to the English in 1664, New Sw'eden also became English property. The new owner, the Duke of York, renamed it Delaware. To provide Pennsylvania with access to the sea, the Duke of York gave Delaware to William Penn. It remained "the three lower counties" of Pennsylvania until 1703. At that time, Delaware became a separate colony with a legislature of its own. But Delaware continued to share governors with Pennsylvania until the 1770s. After Jamestown began to do well, the Virginia colony grew steadily. Settlement spread from the banks oi the Janies River to the York anti Rappahannock rivers. Restless pioneers began to leave the coast for inland regions. As in other colonies, the frontier (the edge of settlement) moved constantly westward. In 1650, the population of Virginia was 18,500. By 1690, it was 53,000. Williamsburg, a settlement north of Jamestown, became the colony's capital in 1699. It remained the political, cultural, and social center of V irginia until 1780, when the capital was moved to Richmond. Maryland Meanwhile, settlement had begun just north of Virginia. The most important developer in this area was George Calvert, the first Lord Baltimore. He was a prominent Catholic nobleman and a friend of King Charles 1. Seeking a haven for Catholics, Lord Baltimore obtained a tract of land from the king but died shortly afterward. The grant then passed to his son, Cecilius Calvert. As proprietor of the colony, the second Lord Baltimore owned all the land and could assign, sell, or rent it as he saw fit. lie also had the power to levy taxes, establish courts, and control church matters. But he could not make laws without the advice and consent of the freemen of the colony. a coon start In 1614. a settlement was started at St. Mary's near the mouth of the Potomac River. Leonard Calvert, the proprietor's brother, became the first governor. The colony did well from the start. Climate and soil were well suited to growing tobacco. This crop soon became an important source of income. The English in North America 67 religious freedom for Christians Although Maryland was founded as a refuge for Catholics, Christians of all denominations were welcome. People from Virginia and New England, as well as from England, flocked to the colony. Soon Protestants outnumbered Catholics. Lord Baltimore wanted to prevent religious disputes and protect Catholics against discrimination. Responding to his request, the Maryland assembly passed the Toleration Act in 1649. It provided that all Christians were free to worship as they pleased. Although the law did not protect non-Christians, it was an important step toward full religious liberty in America. The Carolinas The region south of Virginia was named Carolina for King Charles I (Carolus in Latin). The earliest attempt to develop the area was made in 1629, when the king granted Carolina to one of his friends. But this venture produced no results. After Charles II became king, he issued a new charter to eight noblemen in 1663. They received the same proprietary rights as Lord Baltimore had in Maryland. Ten years earlier, in 1653, pioneers from Virginia had begun to move southw ard into Carolina, settling along the Chowan River near Albemarle Sound. Their farms became the colony's first settlement. To encourage others to settle, the proprietors offered liberal land terms, freedom of religion, and representation of landowners in an assembly. The proprietors brought in the first large group of settlers in 1670. They founded Charles Tow n (Charleston), which soon became a thriving seaport and main center of the colony. Among the immigrants drawn to Carolina were French Huguenots, Scots, Germans, and Scotch-Irish. From England came Anglicans, as well as Quakers and other dissenters. From the beginning, Carolina seemed to divide itself naturally into a northern and southern section. In the north, the colonists raised tobacco and produced forest products. In the south, the settlers grew rice anti indigo. (Indigo is a plant from which a deep blue dye is made.) Carolinians in the north traded mainly with New England merchants, while those in the south dealt directly with England. The Carolinians grew' dissatisfied with proprietary rule. Frequent quarrels broke out between the elective assemblies and the owners' officials. Unable to maintain law and order, the proprietors finally surrendered their charter to the king. In 1729, North Carolina and South Carolina became separate royal colonies. Georgia The last of the 13 original colonies to be established was Georgia, named after England's King George II. The colony was founded by James Oglethorpe, an influential member of the English legislative body, Pur liatnenl. 11 is purpose w as to provide a refuge for imprisoned debtors whn wanted to make a fresh start in the N cw World. (At that time, people who could not pay their debts were sent to jail ) The king supported* Oglethorpe's plan because a colony in Georgia would serve as a barrier to Spanish expansion northward from Florida. Oglethorpe arrivetl with a small band of settlers in 1733 and founded Savannah. Few debtors came to Georgia, but the colony did attract settlers from the Carolina* and from Germany, Switzerland, Scotland, and Wales. The colony was governed by a board of trustees, made up of Oglethorpe and his associates. Aiming to make Georgia a region of small, independent farms, the trustees limited landholding and forbade the use of slaves. These policies, though well-intentioned, w'ere opposed by the colonists and were soon abandoned. In 1752, the trustees surrendered their rights to the king, and Georgia became a royal colony. Colonial Life T"k English colonies in North America attracted more and more immigrants. At first, the newcomers kept to the customs they had known in their native lands. As the years went by, however, the colonists began to create a distinctly American culture. Population in colonial America grew steadily. In 1630, there were fewer than 6000 newcomers scattered along the coast. By 1775, the number of settlers and their descendants had risen to 2.5 million. Most of this growth was due to natural population increase—the excess of births over deaths. But immigration also added to the total. Settlers of Fnglish origin made up the largest single group in the colonies. There were also sizable numbers of Africans. Dutch, Irish, and Germans. Other, smaller groups included Belgians, French Huguenots, * Scots, Seotch-Irish. Spaniards. Swedes, and Welsh. Social Classes Class differences existed in colonial America. But they did not depend entirely on family background, as they did in Europe. A person s ancestry did make a difference, but so did occupation, property, and income. The population was divided into three broad classes: 1. The upper class controlled the economic, political, unci social life of the colonies. This group was made up of (a) plantation owners in the South Colonial Life 73 and large landholders in the Middle Colonies, (b) wealthy merchants in the cities of New England and the Middle Colonies, (c) Puritan clergymen in New England, and (d) government officials, lawyers, and doctors. 2. The middle class made up the largest part of the colonial population. This group consisted of (a) independent farmers with small plots of land, (b) skilled workers, and (c) shopkeepers and other tradespeople. 3. The lower class included mainly indentured servants and slaves. African Americans A major immigrant group in colonial America consisted of black people from Africa. In the mid-1700s, they and their descendants made up about 20 percent of the population of the English colonies. Almost all blacks were slashes. Slavery existed in all the colonies but was most widespread in the South. Southern tobacco and rice plantations were large and required much hard work. Most whites, having a choice, were unwilling to do plantation labor. Slaves, bound to their owners for life, provided a constant supply of labor. The slave trade brought to America thousands of blacks taken on the west coast of Africa, (The trade enriched many "first families" ol colonial times, among them the Byrds of Virginia and the Livingstons of New York.) Because of harsh conditions on the slave ships, many of the Africans died on the way to America. Those who survived lost their freedom and much of their culture. Expansion and Progress 187 Baltimore and Ohio and the Mohawk and Hudson (operating between Albany and Schenectady, New York). By 1840, nearly 3000 miles of track were in use. One invention that aided railroad growth was the telegraph, perfected by Samuel F. B. Morse in the 1840s. This instrument sent electrical sounds over wires. Morse also devised a code of dots and dashes (short and long sounds) to represent letters. Using the Morse code, a telegraph operator could tap out messages and transmit them almost instantly to distant points. In addition to speeding communication generally, the telegraph proved to be a valuable tool for routing railroad traffic. By 1860, a network of telegraph lines crisscrossed the United States east of the Mississippi. Another facet of American expansion in the early 1800s was population growth. By 1840, the United States had four times as many people as in 1790. Natural increase accounted for much of this growth, but immigration played a big role, too. The number of newcomers increased almost every year. The average number admitted annually in the 1820s was about 13.000. In the 1840s, the annual average jumped to nearly 143,000. More Germans and Irish Two events in Europe stimulated immigration in the 1840s. One was the failure of the potato crop in Ireland. Deprived of their main source of food, thousands of Irish starved to death. Thousands more fled to the 1790 1800 1810 1820 1830 1840 1850 1860 United States as their only hope for survival. The second event was a series of unsuccessful uprisings by Germans against their rulers in 1848. Fearing imprisonment or other punishment, many Germans left their homeland and came to the United States. Nativist Reaction Immigrants did not always get a warm welcome from "native-born" Americans—that is, whites who were descended from earlier European immigrants. The Germans were generally treated better than the Irish. Many Germans had money and could buy a farm or go into business. Most of the Irish were poor. They tended to cluster in slums in the cities where their ships docked (Boston, especially). They took whatever manual labor they could find, often at lower wages than Americans would accept. Another problem for the Irish was their Roman Catholic religion. In the mainly Protestant United States, distrust of Catholicism had been strong since the 1600s. Anti-immigrant feeling gave rise to nativism—a movement to "pro- tect" citizens from foreign newcomers. In the 1840s, nativists formed organizations to pavs stricter naturalization laws and to keep Catholics out of public office. In 1849, several of these groups formed a secret organization. the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner. Members were also called Know-Nothing* because they answered "I know nothing" when asked about the organization. The Know-Nothings did not last long as a political party, but nativism remained a strong force in American life. True-False Test 1. The first settlements in the trans-Appalachian West were made in " Kentucky and Tennessee. 2. The Northwest Ordinance set the pattern for the admission of new states into the Union. 3. The Industrial Revolution began in England in the 1700s. 4. America's early industries had trouble surviving because of government opposition. 5. The cotton gin helped both the farmers of the South and the factory owners of the North. 6. The era of canal building was followed by the era of turnpike building. 7. The Erie Canal connected the St. Lawrence River with Lake Erie. 8. Clipper ships were the world's first successful steamboats. 9. The first railroads in America were constructed in the 1830s. 10. Immigration from Europe increased during the 1840s. • The Homestead Act (1862) offered settlers 160-ac re farms in the West. Settlers were required to occupy the land for five years and pay a small registration fee. • The Morrill Act (1862) granted states large tracts of public land. Income derived from the sale of this land was to be used to establish in each state at least one college for the teaching of "agricultural and mechanical arts." • The Pacific Railroad Act (1862) authorized the building of a railroad to the Pacific coast. For its construction, the act provided grants of laud and federal loans. • The Lenal Tender Act (1862) authorized the issuance of treasury notes (greenbacks) as a substitute for gold and silver (specie). This move increased the amount of money in circulation and facilitated financial transactions. To help finance the war, the government imposed an income tax for the first time and levied heavy taxes on manufactured goods and consumer products. Large sums of money were also raised at home and abroad through the sale of bonds. The Northern economy was also bolstered by a continuous stream of European immigrants. More than 800,000 newcomers arrived during the wartime years. The new arrivals provided labor for factories and farms, and swelled the ranks of people moving westward. Peace Democrats in the guise of Copperheads threaten the Union cause. (Harper's Weekly, 1861) The Growth of Cities I\TIIK I'KHlol) from the Civil War to 1900, there was a strong trend toward urbanization—the growth of cities. In 1S60, less than 15 percent of all Americans lived in cities hav ing a population of 10,000 or more. By 1900, more than 30 percent did. Cities grew mainly because of industrialization. Urban factories and businesses encouraged many Americans to move from ruraT areas. Cities also attracted most oFthe immigrants wSo arriv ed in the United States during thispcriock----- In I3S6, the largest statue ever made, the Statue of Liberty, was unveiled in New' York Harbor. This gift of the people of France honored the Year Total Urban* Rural Number Percent Number Percent 1860 31,443,000 6,217.000 20% 25,227,000 80% 1870 38,558,000 9,902.000 25% 28,656,000 75% 1880 50,156,000 14,130,000 28% 36,026,000 72% 1890 62,947,000 22,106,000 35% 40,841,000 65% 1900 75,995,000 30,160,000 39% 45,835,000 61% •Urban population is defined as all persons living in places of 2500 inhabitants or more. United States on its 100th birthday in 1876. The statue's location at the entrance to the biggest American port made it a symbol of the nation's welcome and promise to immigrants. And those who sailed past it were numerous indeed. The trend in immigration was almost continuously upward during the age of industrialization, between 1860 and 1900, the number of newcomers averaged more than 200,000 a year. In some peak years in the 1880s, there were three times as many. Until the 1880s, most immigrants to the United States came from northern antTweslern Europe- Except for the Irish, most wereT'rbtes- tants. Except for the Germans and Scandinavians, their native language was English. Then, this so-called "old" immigration began to give way to a "new" immigration. More and more people came from eastern and southern Europe—Poland, Russia, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Balkan states, and Italy. There were not only thousands of Catholics but 1820 1830 1840 1850 1860 1 870 1880 1890 1900 The Growlh of Cities 303 also large numbers of Jews. Few of llie newcomers spoke English, and many could not read or write at all. By 1900, immigrants from eastern and southern Europe mifawmbcrcchthose from northwestern Europe. Patterns of Work and Settlement Because many of the new immigrants were poor and unskilled, they tended to settle in large cities, where they could find factory or construction jobs. Italians worked on subways and bridges in New York City and Boston. Poles and other Slavs mined coal, poured steel, and worked in the stockyards. Jews w ent into the garment industry or ran small stores. Chinese immigrants—who settled mainly on the West Coast—operated laundries and restaurants. Like those who came before them, the new immigrants felt more secure among their own people and often formed ethnic neighborhoods within cities. There was ' Little Italy" in New York City. Haintramck was a Polish community in Detroit. Several cities had Chinatowns. In such neighborhoods, the immigrants set up businesses and organizations to help them in their new life. Among these were welfare societies, newspapers. theaters, and sports clubs. Response to the Newcomers As in the past, American reaction to the newcomers was mixed. Business leaders welcomed the supply of cheap labor. But American wage earners were less happy. Desperately poor immigrants were often willing to work for less than the normal wage and to take jobs as strikebreakers. In general, people were somewhat suspicious of the "different" customs and "clannish" ways of foreigners. The strongest nativist opposition was directed against Roman Catholics. Members of the American Protective Association, founded in 1887, pledged not to vote for Catholics or employ them. Some Americans wanted the government to limit immigration. Little was done during this period, however. Congress did rule, in 1882, to keep out criminals, paupers, the insane, and those with certain diseases. But the law was not strictly enforced. Inspectors at Ellis Island in New York—the nation's main immigration station—had only two minutes to ask each new arrival 32 questions and complete a medical examination. The main exception to free immigration involved the Chinese. Feeling against them was so strong, particularly in California, that Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Art in 1882. It banned all Chinese immigration for lTfyears, and was later renewed. In spite of difficulties, the new immigrants did well in the United States. While adjusting to their new home, they, in turn, exerted an influence on the American way of life, contributing ethnic variety in food, music, literature, and art. Some of the immigrants became famous and wealthy. Many remained poor. But most found for themselves and for their children a better way of life than they had known in their home countries. America is God's Crucible, the great Melting-pot where all the races of Europe are melting and re-forming! playwright Israel Zangwill, in The Melting Pot, 1908 Between ISfiO and 1900, the number of American cities with 1(X),000 or more people jumped from 14 to 38. Urban centers offered not only jobs but also excitement, entertainment, educational opportunities, and such conveniences as electric lights and running water. How Cities Grew Most American cities were not planned. They just grew, as more and more houses and factories were needed and built. Since there was no (ten largest U.S. cities in 1900) New York (including 1,174,779 *3,437,202 Brooklyn) Chicago 109,260 1,698,575 Philadelphia 565,529 1,293,697 St. Louis 160,773 575,238 Boston 177,840 560,892 Baltimore 212,418 508,957 Cleveland 43,417 381,768 Buffalo 81,129 352,387 San Francisco 56,802 342,782 Pittsburgh 77,923 321,616 Politics and Protest 317 Party Politics During the late 1800s, Republicans and Democrats differed little on most issues. Both parlies were very conservative. Both of them were devoted to the theory of laissez-faire economics, and both employed the spoils system—rewarding loyal party workers with government jobs. Despite these similarities, Americans generally felt a strong loyalty to their own party and supported the partvLs eandidates vigorously. Voter turnout in national elections wasdugh-. The percentage of eligible voters that went to the polls was always more than 70 percent, and sometimes higher than 80 percent. (In the 20th century, by comparison, the average was to fall to below 60 percent.) On a national basis, the two parties had about equal strength. But each was stronger in certain regions than in others. In the solid South, where Republicans were associated w ith reconstruction, almost all white voters were Democrats. African Americans in the South were largely pro- Republican but were discouraged from voting (sec page 319). In New England and some of the plains states, most voters were Republicans. Party strength w as more evenly divided in the Middle Atlantic and Midwestern states. Campaigners therefore made their major appeals in these "swing" states. And almost all presidential candidates between 1868 and 1896 came front these1 key areas. The two parties also appealed to different groups of voters. Most native-born white Protestants (except in the South) tended to identify themselves as Republicans. Most "new" immigrants, especially Jews and Roman Catholics, joined the Democratic party. When studying politics in the late 1800s, it is helpful td consider the South as a special region. As earlier in the century, its economy and its racial makeup made it different from the rest of the country. Economic Development After the Civil War, many Southerners felt strongly that their economy should be more varied. Farmers relied too heavily on cotton. In addition. the region needed to industrialize, like the rest of the country. Southerners made some progress along these lines. Farmers planted more corn, wheat, peanuts, vegetables, and fruits. There w as industrial growth in lumbering, mining, tobacco processing, and steel production. Cotton textiles became a big business, too. For this industry-, the South, of course, had the raw materials. It also offered cheap labor, low taxes, and In 1908. Roosevelt called the state governors to a national conference on conservation. They discussed how to preserve and develop the nation's natural resources. As a result of this meeting, Roosevelt appointed a National Conservation Commission, headed bv Gifford Pinchot. It conducted the first scientific study of the country's water, forest, soil, and mineral resources. Other Actions In general, Roosevelt was a Progressive in his social policy. He invited Booker T. Washington to the White House for dinner, which pleased the black community (and angered Southern whites). lie also acted in a 1902 Pennsylvania coal miners' strike. When mine owners refused to negotiate with the strikers, Roosevelt took the unusual step of appointing an impartial committee to try to settle the dispute. The miners won some of their demands and went back to work. For the first time, a president had intervened in a labor dispute without taking sides against labor. In immigration policy, Roosevelt tried to steer a middle course. The number of Japanese immigrants had begun to increase in the 1890s. Most of them settled in the Western states, where many people became concerned about the competition for jobs. Nativists launched an emotional campaign against the "Yellow Peril," demanding that the government stop all Japanese immigration. In 1906, San Francisco announced plans to set up a segregated school for Japanese and other Oriental students. When Japan protested against this discrimination, Roosevelt persuaded the city to cancel its plan. He then negotiated a so-called "Centh-men'>cAgreenient" with Japan, by which that country agreed to restrict the migration iif laborers to the United States. After the election of 1904, Roosevelt announced that he would not seek another term. Four years later, he persuaded the Republicans to nominate his friend, Secretary of War William Howard Taft. The genial, placid Taft ran against William Jennings Bryan and won a sweeping victory in the 1908 election. Progressive Accomplishments As president, Taft was much less dynamic than Roosevelt, but he did manage to achieve a number of Progressive reforms. He continued the light against monopolies, initiating many lawsuits against trusts. In participation in tlie war effort made ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment easier. The United States raised $33 billion to fight the war. About a third of it came from taxes. The other two-thirds was borrowed from the public through the sale of government war bonds. Patriotic rallies and appeals stimulated millions of citizens to contribute to tlu.- war effort. Americans not only gave money to the cause. They also conserved fuel and food by observing ''gasless Sundays," "heatless Mondays," "meatless Tuesdays," and so on. Americans w ere exposed to an outpouring of anti-C.erinan propa- ganda—posters, news stories, and speeches. The Germans were pictured as savage "Huns" who murdered helpless civilians, looted their homes, and committed other atrocities. In response, a wave of hatred for anything Qerinan swept the country. The teaching of German in schools was forbidden. German music was banned from concert halls. People with German names were fired Irom their jobs. Even common German foods were renamed. Sauerkraut became "liberty cabbage"; wieners, "liberty sausage"; and hamburgers, "liberty steak." On the Western Front When the United States declared war, John J. Pershing was named commander of its army, the American Expeditionary Force (AEF) Ilis goal was to land a million U.S. troops in France by the summer of 1918— and he achieved it. The first American troops, in small numbers, went into action in the The Twenties 379 C. Harding of Ohio. The Democrats nominated another Ohioan, Governor Janies M. Cox. Cox centered his campaign on the issue of joining the League of Nations, which he favored. But most Americans had lost interest. They were more impressed with Harding's pledge to return the country to "normalcy.'* (This was a reference to "the good old days," a mythical past without problems.) Harding won by a landslide. America's present need is not heroics but healing; not nostrums {cure- alls] but normalcy; not revolution but restoration. —Warren C. Harding at Boston, June 1920 turning back Tile ct.oo*. One of the first steps of the new Republican administration was to reverse the Democratic policy of low tariffs. First. Congress passed an emergency tariff to raise rates on imported agricultural products Then, in September 1922, it passed the Fordney- McCumber Tariff, which set high duties on manufactured imporfsT Without effective foreign competition, most American-made products ruse in price. They still sold well abroad, however, because Europeans were able to borrow heavily from American investors. The United States acted to keep out foreign people, as well as foreign goods. In 1921, Congress passed the Emergency Quota Act. tin1 firsrtawTo set quotas. It limited the total number of immigrants in any year to .157,000. It also limited the number of people from any one country who could enter the United States annually. The total was set at 3 percent of that country's nationals who were living in the United States in 1910. A second law, the Immigration Act of 1924. lowered each country's quota from 3 to 2 perceiiCbased oiTthe census of 1890 instead.of 1910. FarTeweFpeople from eastern and southern ETifbpe had lived in the United States at the earlier date. Thus, this law reduced immigration from those areas of Europe hy. nearly So pereent-TvTueh was its intent. The 1921 law also put an end to all immigration by Asians. shady deals Harding's chief qualification for high office was that—in the words of his campaign manager—"he looked like a presi- dent." He did choose some able advisers. Charles Evans Hughes became secretary of state; Herbert Hoover, secretary of commerce; and Andrew Mellon, secretary of the treasury. But Harding also put a number of old cronies into important jobs. Although Harding was an honest man, many of his "Ohio gang" of friends were not. Two of them, the head of the Veterans' Bureau and The Twenties 385 freedom, encouraged an exodus from central cities to suburban areas, stimulated travel, and afforded new ways of using leisure time. The automobile also reduced the isolation of rural dwellers. It even changed relations between the sexes by providing young people with freedom and privacy unknown to earlier generations. For some, the new ways were exciting. For others, they produced uncertainty and fear. Despite its prosperity, the Twenties was a time of conflict and violence. Attacks on Radicals American society had long had its moderate critics. Among them were the Populists and Progressives of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. But other critics in this period had more extreme points of view. One group, the Socialists, opposed the capitalist economic system of free enterprise. They called for public rather than private ownership of factories, mines, utilities, and transportation systems. These changes, they believed, could be achieved through the democratic process. A leader in this movement was Eugene V. Debs, who helped form the Socialist party vj America in 1901. Several crusading figures of the Progressive era, including Upton Sinclair, were Socialists. The anarchists were another, more radical, group. They believed in doing away with government altogether. Many of them resorted to terrorism. It was an anarchist who assassinated President McKinley in 1901. Some members of the political left belonged to the Industrial Workers-ef the^World (IWW). a labor union founded in 1905. These so-called "Wobblies"- whether Socialists, anarchists, or others—believed that the AFL w"as too timid to achieve real reform. All the various radical groups included sizable numbers of immigrants from Europe. Many came from countries where political dissent was more common, and regarded as more respectable, than in the United States. WARTIME DEVELOPMENTS Americans had always been suspicious of radicals, and World War I increased this distrust. During the war, Gerntan-Americans were not the only targets of hate campaigns. Paci- fists—people opposed to w ar—were branded as "slackers" and ev en traitors. (Most radicals in Europe and the United States opposed the War, arguing that it would make capitalists rich at the workers' expense.) Congress passed laws that provided severe penalties for spying, obstructing the war effort, refusing to serve in the armed forces, and making I disrespectful remarks about the U.S. government. Constitution, or flag. I Under these laws, the government arrested more than 1500 persons. war PRODUCTION American industry tooled up to produce essential war materials, especially airplanes, guns, tanks, and ships. War plants operated 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. More than 20 million people worked in key war industries. This total included millions of women. They took over many jobs that had previously been open only to men. The GNP rose to more than $200 billion, and the national debt to some $260 billion. To finance the war. Americans invested billions of dollars in war bonds. Taxes were increased, and income taxes were collected on a pay- as-you-go plan. A part of each worker's earnings w as deducted in the form of w ithholding faxes. This system replaced the oldeFmotlind _of guying income taxes in one lump sum. The government rationed food and other scarce items, such as shoes, gasoline, and fuel oil. Millions of Americans joined in drives to collect paper and scrap metal for the war effort. RELOCATION OF JAPANESE-AMEHICANS Americans of the World War II era showed little prejudice toward citizens of German or Italian descent. But this tolerance did not extend to Japanese-Americans. Earls in 1942, government authorities decided that people of Japanese ancestry living near the Pacific coast might aid Japan if it invaded the U.S. mainland. Orders were issued to move them to relocation camps inland. Feelings against Asians had always been strong in thiTWestTlmd most people approved of the government order. More than 110.(MX) Japanese-Americans were uprooted. Given short notice of the transfer, many of them had to sell their homes and businesses at rock-bottom prices. Two-thirds of them were American-born citizens. None of them—or any other Japanese-Americans elsewhere in the coun- try—was ever found guilty of working for the enemy. In fact, thousands of Japanese-Americans enlisted in the armed forces and fought with distinction and bravery. After the war. w hen the relocation camps were closed, Japanese- Americans received some money to compensate for their sufferings. It amounted to roughly 10 percent of the value of their claims. In 1983, a congressional commission held that relocation had been a '^grave injns- tice." In its report, the commission blamed "racial prejudice, war hysteria, and failure of political leadership" for the internment. Five years later, the government granted $20,000 tax-free to each living-former internee. Allied war planners agreed that their first aim was to defeat the Axis in Europe and North Africa. When the United States entered the war in Act Purpose Provisions Civil Rights Act (July 1964) To speed integration of blacks into American society Outlawed segregation in public places and discrimination in employment; expanded voting rights Economic Opportunity Act (August 1964) To eliminate poverty Established Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO) to coordinate program in job training, education, and employment Elementary and Secondary School Act (April 1965) To upgrade American education Granted first large-scale federal aid to public schools Social Security Amendments (July 1965) To provide federal health insurance Set up Medicare and Medicaid systems Voting Rights Act (August 1965) To end limitations to black suffrage Suspended literacy tests and authorized federal registration of voters in some areas Immigration Act (October 1965) To change immigration policy Provided that former system of national quotas be eliminated by July 1968; set up new quota system, particularly for peoples of Western Hemisphere Political Concerns in a Troubled Period 507 Important Changes The biggest election turnout in 30 years brought victory for Clinton. He achieved a sizable electoral margin of 370 to 168 (with no electoral votes for Perot). But the popular total showed a closer race. While Clinton won 43 percent of this vote and Rush 38, Perot tallied a surprising 19 percent. This meant that he did better than any third-party candidate since Theodore Roosevelt in 1912. It also meant that Clinton—like Woodrow Wilson, among others—won with a plurality rather than a majority of the popular vote. Clinton's victory restored the Democrats to the White House after 12 years. It also brought generational change. Both Clinton and his running mate Senator A1 Gore of Tennessee were "baby boomers"—born after World War II. The 1992 election resulted in congressional change, too. Democrats remained in a majority, but there was substantial turnover, with more new members than there had been since 1948. (While only a few incumbents were defeated, others had lost in the primaries or bail decided not to run.) The number of women, blacks, and Hisnanics in Congress almost doubled. Among the sixWomen elected to the Senate was the first African American woman. Carol Moseley Braun of Illinois. Winners also included Congress's first representative* of Korean descent and its first Native American senator in 60 years. Although voters re-elected most incumbents, they indicated their dissatisfaction with professional politicians by voting not only for Perot but also for term limits. Initiatives in 14 states set limits of varying lengths on the terms of senators and representatives, and, in most cases, for state legislators as well. Only time would tell whether limits of this sort were constitutional. True-False Test 1 By 1980. the Western bloc of countries formed the largest membership group in the United Nations. 2. A notable achievement of President Nixon was normalizing relations with the People's Republic of China. 3. A special presidential election was held in 1974 after Nixon's resignation. 4. One of Gerald Ford's first actions as president was to pardon former President Nixon. 5. During Carter's presidency. American industries and consumers benefited from a decline in oil prices. (*, The Panama Canal treaties provided that control of the canal would be transferred to the UN bv the vear 2000. nation continued to attract other people from all over the world. After the quota system was ended in the 1960s, proportionately fewer newcomers came from Europe, and more from Asia. The total yearly limit on immigrants was set at 290,000, but the president had discretion to add to this number "for humanitarian concerns." Thus, in the 1970s thousands of refugees were admitted from Southeast Asia. In 1980, over 125,000 Cubans fled by boat from the Castro regime. Other "boat people" included thousands of Haitians. In addition, special provision was made for Soviet Jews in 1989 and for Kuwaitis and Lebanese in 1991. In 1990, a new immigration law raised the total yearly limit to 700.000 until 1995 and 675,000 thereafter. A special problem was the vast number of illegal immigrants, most of whom had crossed the border from Mexico. In 1980, an estimated 7 million Hispanics were in the United States illegally. These so-called "un- documented aliens" lived in the shadows, forced to accept low' w ages and often deprived of adequate education and health care. In 1986, Congress passed a law granting amnesty (pardon) to illegals living in the country since 1982. More than 3 million applied and received legal status. Without doubt, however, the nation still harbored many illegal immigrants, and thousands more were arriving every day. The Women's Movement Population shifts were not the only changes affecting the United States in the late 1900s. Another was a revival of feminism, sometimes called the women's liberation movement. ITs goal w as to gain full equality for American women. After World War. IT the idcaj^career-Toil American women was widely thought to be thaLoLfulLjime htynemaker. Millions of women did w'ork outside the home. But they usually did so only until they got married, or during emergencies. A significant change began to take place in the 1960s, sparked by the publication, in 1963, of Betty Friedan's book The Feminine Afgy/h/nc. Friedan argued that women wereTieing stifled and should lead fuller lives. Her message found a wide audience. Many people joined the National Organization for Women (WOW), which Friedan helped found in 1966. NOW and otherTeminist organizations worked to broaden opportunities for women. The feminists were aided by the Civil Rights AcLof 1964, which banned job discrimination on_the basis of sex as well as race. More women went to college and graduate school than ever before. More of them entered traditionally male professions—law, medicine, engineering. and police work. A notable breakthrough was President Reagan s 1981 appointment of Sandra J)ay O'Connor as the first wo m an Justice of the Supreme Court. Another was the 1983 flight of Sally K. Ride, America's Recent Changes in American Society 519 first woman astronaut to journey into space. Still another was the nomination of Geraldine Ferraro as the Democratic candidate for vice president in 1984. More and more women joined the work force, especially when the nation's prosperity was threatened by economic ills. In 1950. 34 percent of women over 16 held jobs. By 1990, this total had reached almost 60 percent. By this date, too. over half of all married women worked full time at jobs outside the home. Women still had important goals to attain, however. Most of them continued to hold low-paying jobs as clerks, waitresses, and the like. They earned less than men, even for the same type of work. For example, in 1989 the median yearly salary for a woman in a managerial job was $21,000; a man in a comparable position received $36,000, Women were also still underrepresented in politics, higher education, and corporate decision making. Woman's place is in the House and in the Senate. —Connecticut politician Gloria Schaffer, 1976 Ethnic Struggles In earlier times, Americans thought of their country as a "melting pot," Foreign newcomers were expected to discard their differences in culture and become part of a single American nationality. In the 1960s, a different ideal, cultural pluralism,, trained favor. Its advocates believed that ethnic groups should be proud of their distinctive customs and retain at least some of them. Out of this belief grew multiculturalism—an emphasis in schools and other institutions on teaching' about all the cultures thai buUTAmencar Not all ethnic groups found American society to be a truly open one. Black Americans had long been working to gain greater acceptance, as well as to end discrimination. Similar movements were organized by Hispanics and Indians. AFRICAN AMERICANS The civil rights movement of the early 1960s had a number of achievements to its credit. Most important, it had succeeded in nutting an end to legal segregation. The goals of leaders like Martin Luther King, Jr., became part of President Johnson's Great Society aims. They were embodied in such laws as the civil rights acts of 1964 and 1968. (Johnson also took an important step when he appointed Thurgood Marshall the first black Supreme-Court justice.! Some blacks opposed integration. Leaders like Stokely Carmichael wanted black people to remain separate From mainstream American society. Such militants stressed the concept of "black power." which would organize African Americans into strong political and economic power blocs. These did not materialize, however, and blacks' impatience with their slow progress was one factor in the ghetto riots that disrupted many inner cities in the late 1960s. The worst broke out in the spring of 1968. after Martin Luther King, Jr., was assassinated. Efforts to integrate public schools continued. The stress was no longer on de jure segregation—-segregation required by law. Instead, efforts were made to end de facto segregation. It existed without legal authority, usually because of traditional housing patterns that separated blacks from whites. One way of achieving school integration was to bus black children to white neighborhoods and white children to black ones. Although the Supreme Court upheld the legality of busing, it also ruled that courts could not force busing between a city and its suburbs. In the early 1990s. de facto segregation was the norm in many schools, especially in the North. Some blacks (as well as other minority groups and women) favored a policy known as affirmative action. This meant the active recruitment, in jobs and educaTIonT of people frO'm groups that had experienced discrimination. Many people opposed affirmative action because they considered it an unfair quota system. In 1978, the Supreme Court, in Regents of University of California v. Bakke. ruled against specific numerical quotas. But it did not outlaw affirmative action as such. There were some signs of progress for black Americans, who numbered about 30 million in 1990. Black enrollment in colleges and universities reached a record high. There were personal milestones, as well. One was the first space flight of a black astronaut. Guion S. Bluford, Jr., in 1983. Another was the strong showing of Jesse Jackson as a black contender for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1988. Two others occurred in 1989. L. Douglas Wilder became the first black to be elected governor of a state (Virginia). And Colin Powell became the first black to serve as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, But racism was still widespread in American society. And inequality still plagued African Americans. The rate of unemployment was more than twice as high for blacks as for whites. And the median income for a black family was only 60 percent that of a white family. HISPANIC Americans The second largest ethnic group in the United States was made up of Spanish-speaking Americans, known as liispanics or Latinos. Thev numbered about 20 million in 1990. (Added to this total Recent Changes in American Society 521 was a large number of illegal aliens.) Spanish-speaking Americans came chiefly from Puerto Rico. Cuba, and Mexico. Puerto Ricans were concentrated in New York City and other cities of the Northeast, Cubans in Florida. and Mexicans in California and the Southwest. Puerto Ricans and Cubans faced various problems. Some met discrimination simply because they were newcomers who spoke Spanish. Many Puerto Ricans were poor and uneducated, but they had the advantage of being U.S. citizens. Although Cubans did not arrive as citizens, they tended to be from the middle class and thus had an easier time finding work. Mexican-Americans formed the largest group of Hispanies in the United States. Some were descended from Californios and from Mexicans living in the Southwest before 1848. Most, however, had moved north more recently either as legal immigrants or as illegal aliens. Many were poor and illiterate. Lacking opportunities at home, they hoped to find jobs and improve their living conditions in the United States. Thousands of Mexicans worked as migrant field laborers. They were often exploited by growers, who took advantage of the fact that unofficial immigrants had no legal rights. In the 1960s, a Mexican-American, Cesar Chavez, organized migrant workers into a union called the United Farm Workers (UFW ). To gain support, Chavez, urged American consumers to boycott the produce of growers who refused to recognize the UFW. The UFW also organized strikes against uncooperative producers. The union won recognition from the growers in 1970, Activists in the UFW called themselves "Chicanos" (from the Mexican word chico, meaning "fellow"). Chicanos organized in cities as well as rural areas. One party. La Haza Unida, concentrated on political action, such as registering voters. Other Chicano aims were bilingual education (education in both Spanish and English) and improved public services in Mexican-American neighborhoods. native AMERICANS A small but distinctive minority, the American Indians had been involved in a struggle for ethnic survival for many centuries. During the New Deal period, they hqd I'M'll enroll raged 1,1 preserve their culture and nm their own affairs. But this policy was not very realistic. Most reservations were so poor that Indians who lived on them could not support themselves. Many had to depend on welfare, and a sizable number suffered from alcoholism and other diseases. In the 1950s. a ehange in ooliev called for terminalion-tdoing away with reservations) and relocation (moving the I-wUans-clscwherc), Most Indians resisted termination. And those who were relocated did not like urban life. Some 90 percent returned to their former homes. In 1970, President Nixon announced yet another policy—"self-determination without termination." It permitted Indians to supervise the various federal pro- the American ambassador to the United Nations) make up the cabinet. It meets with the president periodically to discuss government policy. The 14 executive departments and the independent agencies employ more than 3 million civilian employees. It is these workers whom most people think of when they speak of the federal bureaucracy. (A bureaucracy consists of the noneleeted personnel who perform the functions of a large organization.) The departments will he discussed in the order of their creation. The head of each is known as the secretary. The only exception is the Department of Justice, whose head is called the attorney general. 1. The Department of Stale (created in 1789) handles all matters relating to foreign affairs. It carries on diplomatic correspondence with other nations and maintains the Foreign Service. The State Department also negotiates treaties and issues passports. 2. The Treasury Department (created in 1789) collects federal taxes and other revenue, from which it pays the government's bills. It coins and prints money, and borrows funds through the sale of bonds. The Treasury Department operates the Secret Service, the Bureau of Narcotics, and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). 3. The Department of Defense (created in 1789 as the War Department and renamed in 1947) directs and coordinates the operations of the American armed forces. The three branches—the army, the navy, and the air force—exist as equal and separate departments within the Defense Department. Each is headed by a secretary. Only the secretary of defense, however, is a member of the cabinet. 4. The Department of Justice was not created as such until 1870. although the office of attorney general goes back to 1789. The Justice Department prosecutes violators of federal laws and administers the federal court system and federal prisons. Two of its important ageri cies are the Antitrust Division and the Civil Rights Division. Also within the department arc the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI and the Immigration and Naturalization Service. 5. Tin- Department of the Interior (created in 1849) contains a number of bureaus. One has charge of the management and disposition of public lands. Another develops and conserves natural resources. Still others supervise Indian affairs, national parks, and American overseas possessions. 6. The Department of Agriculture was created in 1802. although the secretary did not become a cabinet member until 1889. This department conducts research on animal and plant diseases, and works to improve seeds, develop hardier plants, and increase production. The Agriculture Department also supervises meat inspection, manages the national forest reserves, and administers federal farm laws. Civic Responsibility 551 Aliens There are several million people living in the United States who arc aliens —citizens not of the United States but of some other country. Those who have come openly to study, work, and, perhaps, stay permanently are legal aliens. They are protected by the laws and have most of the rights of citizens, except voting and holding public office, livery January, they must register with the Immigration and Naturalization Service, a branch of the Justice Department. There are also millions of illegal aliens in die United States. They have entered the country secretly and have no legal standing. Although many hold jobs, they are not entitled to benefits such as workmen's compensation and unemployment insurance. If caught, they risk being deported to their own countries. Naturalized Citizens Legal aliens who wish to become naturalized citizens of the United Slates may do so under certain conditions. Such persons must be at least IS years old. They must have been lawful residents of the United States continuously for five y ears, and phy sically present in the country for at least half this period. For spouses of U.S. citizens, the period of residence is usually three years. Special provisions are also made for veterans of the armed forces. An applicant for naturalization must also fulfill the following three conditions: 1. He or she must demonstrate an understanding of the English language, including an ability' to read, write, and speak words in ordinary usage. Exceptions are (a) persons physically unable to do so and (b) those who are over 50 and have been lawful permanent residents for at least 20 years. . 2. lie or she must be a person of good moral character, "attached to the principles and form of government of the United States." 3. lie or she must demonstrate a knowledge and understanding of the fundamentals of United States history and the princ iples and form of the American government. An alien who meets these conditions and wants to be naturalized first files a petition and pays a fee. The applicant must then appear at a preliminary hearing, with two witnesses who know him or her personally. At this hearing, the judge may ask questions to test the applicant's knowledge of American history and government. The applicant may be accompanied by a law y er or a representative of a social service agency. A .30-day waiting period follows the preliminary hearing. If no problems arise, the applicant then appears in c ourt. There1, he or she takes an oath, renouncing allegiance to the former country and swearing loyalty to the United States. Foreign-horn children under 16 automatically become citizens when both parents are naturalized. Naturalized American citizens are entitled to all the rights of native-born citizens, except that they cannot become president or vice-president. I hereby declare, on oath, that 1 absolutely ami entirely renounce and abjure all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state or sovereignty, to whom or which I have heretofore been a subject or citizen; that 1 will support and defend the Constitution and laws of the United States of America against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that l will bear arms on behalf of the United States when required by the law; that I will perform noncombatant service in the armed forces of the United States when required by the law; that I will perform work of national importance under civilian direction when required by the law; and that 1 take this obligation freely without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; so help me God. —The Oath of Allegiance Patriotism means love for one's country. This feeling is often aroused by symbols, such as flags and other objects designed to represent a nation's traditions and ideals. In addition, verbal expressions of patriotism—mot- toes, poems, slogans, and such—help people reaffirm national loyalty. Many American symbols are known and recognized the world over. The American Flag The Hag of the United States has 13 horizontal stripes, 7 red and 6 white. They represent the 13 original states. In the upper left corner is a rectangle called the union. It consists of 50 five-pointed stars against a blue background. There are 5 rows of 6 stars each, alternating with 4 rows of 5 stars each. The stars represent the states of today. The red in the Hag stands for courage; the white, purity; the blue, loyalty. 'I he American flag is often called the Stars and Stripes. It is also known as Old Glory. This name comes from a specific large I lag given to a Massachusetts ship captain, William Driver, in 1831. OKictN and chances During the colonial period, many different flags were in use in Britain's North American colonies. Several of them combined red and white stripes with a union consisting of the British Hag. The Twenties 387 In this 1919 cartoon, a torch-bearing "red" sneaks onto the American scene. (The Philadelphia Inquirer) Troubles for African Americans Wartime and the postwar years were a crucial period for black Americans. Almost 400,000 of them served in the armed forces. Thousands of others moved north to take jobs in factories. The black community hoped that its members would benefit from greater freedom and opportunity. But this was not to be. Black Americans still faced discrimination in jobs, housing, and civil rights. They also encountered racial antagonism and threats of violence. For the slightest of reasons, mobs lynched black people—many of them soldiers in uniform. Race riots broke out in more than 25 cities. The worst of them, in Chicago, left 38 dead. Much of this brutality was the work of the newly revived Ku Klux klan. The KKK, which had come into being during the Reconstruction era, had died out in the late 1800s. During the war, however, a new KKK became active. Its targets included Catholics, Tews, "reds," and foreigners. But its most mtehse~hatrecTwas reserved for blacks. The KKK worked secretly, and usually at night. White-robed and hooded members beat, tortured, and sometimes killed their chosen victims. The organization was at its peak in the mid-1920s, with 5 million i (lues-paying members. In some states, Klansmen wofTeleetion to high I office. In others, the KKK had such political power that people were I afraid to oppose it. But then the tide turned. Investigative reporters began I tn publicize the Klan's terrorist activities. Charges of corruption and graft Contents Unit 1 The First Americans 1 Chapter 1 From Nomads to City Dwellers 2 Hunters of the Ice Age • Agriculture and Other Advances • The Mayas and the Aztecs • The Incas Chapter 2 Indians of North America 16 The Southwest • The Southeast • The Eastern Woodlands • The Plains • The Plateau • The Great Basin • California • The Northwest Coast • The Subarctic • The Arctic Unit 2 ^European Exploration and Colonization 31 Chapter 3 Continental Europeans in the New World 32 The Background of Expansion * Early Voyages of Exploration • Spanish Colonies in America • Other Colonial Powers Chapter 4 The English in North America 52 England's Rise to Power • The First Footholds * Other New England Colonies *. The Middle Colonies • The South viii COMPREHENSIVE UNITED STATES HISTORY Chapter 5 Colonial Life 72 The People • Economic Developments • Religion ■ Political Affairs • Education • Colonial Culture • Everyday Life Unit 3 An Independent Nation 93 Chapter 6 Difficulties With England 94 The End of the French Threat • Increased British Control * A Worsening Crisis Chapter 7 The Revolutionary War 110 Attitudes of the People • The Early Months • The Middle Years • The End of (he War Chapter 8 Forming a New Government 129 The Confederation Period • The Constitutional Convention • Features of the Constitution • Ratifying Ihe Constitution Unit 4 Growth of the Republic 143 Chapter 9 The Federalist Period 144 Domestic Developments Under Washington • Foreign Affairs • Adams as President • The Election of 1800 Chapter 10 The Republicans in Power 156 Jefferson as President • The I ouisiana Purchase • Approaching Conflict • The War of 1812 • Two Important Moves Under Monroe Chapter 11 Expansion and Progress 173 The Westward Movement • The Beginnings of Industrialization ♦ Progress in Transportation • Increased Immigration Contents ix Chapter 12 The Age of Jackson 190 Changes in Political Life • From Adams to lackson • A Strong President • After Jackson Chapter 13 An Era ot Reform 201 Making Life Better • Improvements in Education • Women's Rights • The Crusade Against Slavery • A Developing American Culture Chapter 14 Expansion to the Pacific 216 Settling the Far West and Southwest • Compromise and Conflict • Surges of Settlement Unit 5 Division and Reunion 229 Chapter 15 Slavery and Sectionalism The System of Slavery • The Politics of Slavery • A Shaky Balance • Sectional Strains • The Elec tion of 1860 230 Chapter 16 The Civil War Early Years • Behind the Lines • Later Campaigns 244 Chapter 17 Reconstruction First Attempts at Reconstruction • Congressional Reconstruction • The Reconstructed South • The End pf Reconstruction 262 Unit 6 The Nation Transformed 273 Chapter 18 The Last Frontier Mines, Trails, and Rails • The Cattle Frontier • Farmers on the Plains • Tragedy for Native Americans • The End of the Frontier 274 Chapter 19 An Expanding Economy 288 Industrial Growth * Changes in Business Methods • The Free Enterprise System • The Problems of Labor Chapter 20 The Growth of Cities 301 The "New" Immigration • City Life * An Urban Culture Chapter 21 Politics and Protest 315 The National Scene • A Special Case: The South • Reforms and Controversial Issues • The Populist Movement • The Election of 1896 Unit 7 Emergence as a World Power 331 Chapter 22 Overseas Expansion 332 Acquiring New Territories * The Spanish-American War • Extending American Power • The Panama Canal Chapter 23 The Progressive Era 347 Voices of Protest • Reforms at City and State Levels * Theodore Roosevelt: Progressive President * Taft in the White House • Wilson's Administration Chapter 24 World War I 362 The European Conflict • The United States at War * Aftermath of the War * The League of Nations Unit 8 Trial and Hope 377 Chapter 25 The Twenties 378 Three Republican Presidents • The Economy in the "New Era" ■ Change and Tension • The Roaring Twenties Contents xi Chapter 26 Depression and the New Deal 393 The Crash and its Aftermath * The Early New Deal • Later Years • The New Deal Legacy Unit 9 War and Peace 411 Chapter 27 World War 11 412 U.S. Foreign Policy Between Wars * The Coming of War • Early Years of the Conflict ■ Allied Victory in Europe and Africa • Allied Victory in the Pacific Chapter 28 The Cold War 433 Planning the Postwar World ■ Beginning of the Cold War • Focus on Asia • Further Challenges to Peace Chapter 29 Prosperity at Home 453 Truman's Presidency • The Hunt for Subversives • Eisenhower in the White House • A Variety of Achievements Unit 10 Challenges of the Modern Era 473 Chapter 30 Idealism and Commitment 474 The Kennedy Years • Johnson and the Great Society • War in Vietnam Chapter 31 Political Concerns in a Troubled Period 490 The Nixon Years • Ford's Presidency ■ Carter in the White House ■ Reagan: A Shift to the Right • Bush Takes Over • Clinton and a Democratic Party Revival Chapter 32 Recent Changes in American Society 509 The Political Scene * The American Economy * People and Protest xii COMPREHENSIVE UNITED STATES HISTORY Unit 11 The Federal Government and Civic Responsibility 527 Chapter 33 The Federal Government 528 The Legislative Department * The Executive Department • The Judicial Department Chapter 34 Civic Responsibility 544 American Ideals • Rights and Responsibilities of Citizens • Becoming a Citizen • Americans' Patriotic Heritage Appendix 559 The Declaration of Independence 561 The Constitution of the United States of America 565 Presidents and Vice Presidents of the United States 594 Facts About the States 598 Glossary 603 Index 613 Maps Ice Age Migrations 3 Maya and Aztec Civilizations 10 Inca Civilization 12 Major Culture Areas of North America 17 Medieval Trade Routes 34 Routes of Portuguese Explorers 36 Early European Voyages to America 39 Spanish Explorations in America 42 Founding of French Canada 45 Exploring the Great Lakes and the Mississippi 47 English Explorations in North America 54 