America John A. Garraty Qoui'enu'ur Morris Professor Emeritus of History Columbia University Austin • New York * Orlando • Chicago • Atlanta • San Francisco • Boston * Dallas * Toronto • London JOHN A. CtAKKATY is a distinguished historian and writer and the Gouverneur Morris Professor Etncnlus of H istory at Columbia University. His books include the widely adopted college textbook The American Nation, biographies of Henry Cabot Lodge and Woodrow Wilson. The Great Depression, and the popular 1,0001 Things Everyone Should Know About American History. He has held Guggenheim. Ford, anti Social Science Research Council Fellowships. Professor Garraty is a former president of the Society of American Historians, editor of the Dictionary of American Biography, and eoeditor of (he Encyclopedia of American Biography. PHILLIP BACON is Professor Emeritus of Geography and Anthropology al the University of Houston. He served on the faculties of Columbia University and the University of Washington and is former Dean of the Graduate School of Peabody College for Teachers at Vanderbilt University. Cover photograph: '<*) It. Gel berg. Sharpshooters, Maps R.R. Donnelley Company Cartographic Services Copyright © 1004. 1001 by Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmuted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing trom the publisher. Requests tor permission to make copies of any part of the work should be mailed to: Permissions Department. Holt. Rinehart and Winston. Inc.. Kill Floor. Orlando. FL 32K87. This work is derived in part from AMERICAN HISTORY, copyright > I*186. 1982 by Harcourt Brace Jovanovieh. Inc, All rights reserved. Acknowledgments, see back matter. Printed in the United Slates of America 34567 041 97 96 95 94 Contents How to Use The Story of America xviii Using the Textbook's Features xviii Studying Primary Sources xxiii Developing Historical Imagination xxiii Writing About History xxiv To the Student xxvi Unit One Beginnings to 1770 Chapter 1 Three Discoveries of America 2 1. The First Americans 2 2. Europe Awakens 14 3. The Age of Discovery 20 4. Spain's Golden Age 27 Reading a Time Line 21 Reading Maps 32 The Columbian Exchange 36 America's Indian Heritage 10 Chapter 1 Review 38 Chapter 2 English Colonies in America 1. Why Colonists Came to America 40 2. The Settlement of Virginia 47 3. The Settlement of Massachusetts 53 4. ."A City Upon a Hill" 57 5. European Challenges to England 62 6. Later Colonial Settlements 66 A Colony Built Upon Smoke 52 Using Latitude and Longitude 46 Chapter 2 Review 70 Chapter 3 Life in Colonial America 72 1. An American Civilization 72 2. Slavery and the Economy 85 3. Americans Share New Ideas 95 4. East-West Disputes 101 Reading Graphs 78 Creating a Graphic Representation 103 Amenta's West African Heritage 81 Chapter 3 Review 106 Chapter 4 Governing the American Colonies 108 1. The English Colonial System 108 2. English Colonial Policies 111 3. France Challenges England 116 4. Taxation Without Representation 124 Washington's Escape 12 0 Recounizinq Cause and Effect 132 The American Rcmlutim 132 Chapter 4 Review 134 Unit One Review 136 Unit Two 1770-1798 Chapter 5 The Revolutionary War 138 1. The Revolution Begins 138 2. Shots Heard Round the World 143 3. "Liberty or Death" 150 4. Independence Is Declared 156 5. Americans Hold Together 164 6. The War Is Won 169 Praise to Washington 154 Heroes of the Revolution 174 Tracing Movements on a Map 146 Crossing the A tlantic 176 Chapter 5 Review 178 vi Contents Chapter 6 Creating the United States 1. Self-Government 180 2. Setting New Boundaries 185 3. Peacetime Troubles 191 4. "We, the People" 196 5. "A More Perfect Union" 220 Franklin's Advice 221 SQ3R -A Helpful Study Plan 230 The Constitution 219 Chapter 6 Review 232 Chapter 7 Governing the United States 234 1. A Government Is Formed 234 2. Financing the Nation 240 3. The Nation Is Tested 244 4. The Two-Party System 254 The Whiskey Rebellion 252 Separating Factfiom Opinion 258 Chapter 7 Review 262 Unit Two Review 264 Unit Three 1790-1840 Chapter 8 The Age of Jefferson 1. The Fall of the Federalists 266 2. Jefferson as President 272 3. The Louisiana Territory 280 4. The Threat of War 286 FEATURE: The Capital City Interpreting a Pltysical Map Chapter 8 Review Chapter 9 War and Peace, 1. War in the Northwest 295 2. The War at Sea 300 3. The War on Land 305 4. Peace and New'Boundaries 313 5. A Latin America Policy 323 A Wolf Against Sheep 304 The Star-Spangled Banner 311 Synthesiziitg Information 296 A merica's Hispanic Heritage 319 Chapter 9 Review 326 Contents vii Chapter 10 Building America, 1790-1840 1. A Diversified Economy 2. The Industrial Revolution 3. The Rise of the Cities 4. Improvements in Travel A Protective Tariff Interpreting a Special-Purpose Map Homes for Americans 358 Chapter 10 Review 360 Unit Three Review 362 Unit Four 1816-1860 Chapter 11 The Age of Jackson 364 1. The Era of Good Feelings 364 2. Sectional Conflicts 370 3. Jackson as President 382 4. Jackson and the Economy 388 5. Jackson's Indian Policy 393 FEATURES: America Grows Westward 376 The Trail ofTtan 394 Ustuff Photographs as Primary Sources 399 Chapter 11 Review 402 Chapter 12 Manifest Destiny 404 l. The Texas Question Westward Movement 3. War with Mexico 4. The Golden West 5. Free and Slave Territories A Desert in Bloom 428 Learning from Art 415 The Nation Mores West 444 Chapter 12 Review 446 Chapter 13 Slavery and Abolition 1. Cotton and Slavery 2. "Cotton Is King" 3. Abolitionism Sold Down the River Comparing Statistic Chapter 13 Review viii Contents — t Chapter 14 Reform and Romanticism 476 1. Women and Reform 477 2. Reforms in Education 484 3. Religion and Reform 490 4. The Romantic Age 495 5. Improving Society 498 Understanding Sequence 481 Chapter 14 Review 506 Unit Four Review 508 Unit Five 1850-1877 Chapter 15 Causes of the Civil War 510 l. The North and Slavery 510 2. The Struggle for Kansas 515 3. New Political Parties 523 4, A Controversial Court 525 5. Lincoln and Douglas 528 6. The Threat of Secession 532 FEATURES: A Caning in Congress 521 The Amistad Mutiny STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: 526 Comparing Maps 517 Chapter 15 Review 540 Chapter 16 The Civil War 1. The War Begins 543 2. Raising the Armies 549 3. War and the Economy 560 4. The War in the East 568 5. The War in the West 577 6. The Final Battles 581 Johnny Reb and Billy Yank 552 Soldiering in the Civil War 555 Bindinq Up the Wounds of War 5 74 Reading a Statistical Chart 558 LINKING HISTORY 8c GEOGRAPHY: Geograplty and War 586 Chapter 16 Review 588 Reconstruction 590 1. Radicals and Moderates 591 2. The Civil War Amendments " 597 3. Freedom After Slavery 601 4. Troops Leave the South 610 5. The Long Night Begins 613 Interpreting a Graph of Business Cycles 605 Reconstruction 596 Chapter 17 Review 618 Unit Five Review 620 Contents ix Unit Six 1850-1900 Chapter 18 The Last Frontier 622 1. The Battle for the Plains 623 2. Indian Wars 630 3. Mining the West 639 4. The End of the Open Range 643 The Buffalo Vanishes 635 The Richest Hill in the World 640 Reading a Climate Map 649 Gold! Gold! Gold! 654 The American Frontier 633 Chapter 18 Review 656 Chapter 19 The Rise of Industrial America 658 1. The Power of the Rails 659 2. The Communications Revolution 665 3. Regulation of Big Business 670 4. Workers and Work 678 5. The Growth of Cities 683 Root, Hog, or Die 672 Reading a Table 688 Chapter 19 Review 694 Chapter 20 National Politics and Culture, 1867-1896 696 1. Politics After the W'ar 697 2. The Age of Realism 706 3. Populism 712 4. Unemployment and Unrest 723 5. Gold Versus Silv er 726 FEATURE: The Front-Porch Campaign 729 STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: Interpreting FJectum Results 716 Chapter 20 Review 732 Unit Six Review 734 x Contents Unit Seven 1865-1914 Chapter 21 America in World Affairs, 1865-1912 1. Extending America's Influence 736 2. Policing the Western Hemisphere 744 3. The Spanish-Amcrican War 747 4. America Expands Further 761 5. R"x)scvelt and His Canal 770 Yellow Journalism 753 The One-Centavo Stamp 771 Interpreting Editorial Cartoons 775 America's Pacific Heritage 757 Chapter 21 Review 778 Chapter 22 Reformers and the Progressive Movement 780 1. The Progressive Idea 781 2. Reformers 785 3. Government Versus Big Business 796 4. A Progressive Victory 800 5. Limits of Progressivism 805 Composing Paragraphs 806 Identijying Geographic Regions 810 Chapter 22 Review 812 Unit Seven Review 814 Unit Eight 1914-1940 Chapter 23 The Great World War * 816 1. The Spark Is Lit 817 2. War on Land and Sea 822 3. America F.nters the War 828 4. 'The War at Home and Abroad 831 5. 'Hie Search for Peace 845 Torpedo Warfare 827 A nalyzing Houndary Changes 847 Chapter 23 Review 850 Contents xi Chapter 24 The Twenties 1. The Tragedy of Woodrow Wilson 2. American Reaction to the War 3. The Roaring Twenties 4. An Automobile Civilization 5. America Heads for a Crash The Lone Eagle Comparing Points of View Chapter 24 Review Chapter 25 The Great Depression and the New Deal 1. The Costs of Depression 895 2. Roosevelt Comes to Power 903 3. The New Deal 913 4. Effects of the New Deal 920 The Dust Bowl 910 The First Lady 924 Composing an Essay 914 LINKING HISTORY 8c GEOGRAPHY: Dust from the Greenhouse 930 Chapter 25 Review 932 Unit Eight Review 934 Unit Nine 1940-1963 World Warn 936 1. American Neutrality 937 2. The European War 942 3. The Pacific War 950 4. The Allies Regain Europe 959 5. The Allies Win in the Pacific 966 The TuskegeeAirmen 954 E volitating Decisions 972 Chapter 26 Review 976 Chapter 27 America in the Cold War 1. The United Nations 978 2. T ruman in the Cold War 983 3. Truman Survives His Critics 993 4. The Eisenhower Legacy 1000 5. A Youthful Cold Warrior 1014 The Stars and Stripes 1008 Analyzing Historical Interpretations 987 xii Contents The CM War 992 Political Geography: Uncle Sam's Islands 1022 Chapter 27 Review 1024 Unit Nine Review 1026 Unit Ten 1964 to the Present Chapter 28 Tlie Great Society 1028 1. The Johnson Presidency 1029 2. A Prosperous America 1032 3. A Society of Many Members 1042 4. Movements for Equal Rights 1051 Baseball Leaves Brooklyn 1048 Using the Census 1047 Chapter 28 Review 1058 Chapter 29 The Vietnam Era 1060 1. War in Vietnam 1061 2. A Year of Tragedy 1068 3. NLvon as President 1072 4. The Watergate Affair 1081 FEATURE: The Vietnam Veterans Memorial 1079 STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS: Drawing Conclusions 1066 Chapter 29 Review 1086 Chapter 30 Modem Times 1088 1. The Ford Presidency 1089 2. America's Changing Face 1092 3. Three American Challenges 1101 4. The Democrats Take a Turn 1106 5. The Republicans Triumphant 1109 6. Toward a New Century 1117 Expressing a Point of View 1113 Fatal Error: Oil on Water 1122 Chapter 30 Review 1124 Unit Ten Review 1126 Three Discoveries of America America was discovered at least three times. The first time was between 20.000 and 60.000 years ago, when people from northern Asia touched foot on American soil in what is now Alaska. A second discovery of America occurred about the year 1000, but'we know little about the Viking sailors who reached Newfoundland. The last discovery. 500 years ago. was made by a persistent Italian who sailed under the colors of Spain and claimed what he believed to be the Indies for King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella. Thus began the age of exploration and conquest of the Americas by Spain. Would Spain come to dominate the New World? Preview & Review Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 1. Understanding Issues, Events, & Ideas. Use the following words to compare early American Indians: Ice Age, historical imagination, society, culture, Stone Age, clan, generalization, environment, adobe, pueblo, Mound Builders, Five Nations, confederation, artifact, archaeologist, carbon-14 dating, anthropologist, folk tale. 1. How did the Ice Age lead Asian people to discover America? 2. Why did the first immigrants to America come in waves? 3. Give three examples of how environment influenced the customs of early American Indian societies. Thinking Critically. 1. Compare the way of life of farmers with that of hunters and wanderers. 2. You know that the peoples of North and South America spoke many different languages. Other than speaking, how could people from two different tribes communicate? The Ice Age Today Asia is separated from America by the Bering Strait, a body of water between Alaska and Siberia more than 50 miles (80 kilometers) wide. When early people first came to America from Asia, the strait was dry land. The earth was then passing through a great Ice Age, a period when the weather was much colder than at present. What in wanner times would have fallen as rain and drained back into the oceans fell as snow instead. Gradually, enormous amounts of this snow' piled up in the northern and southern regions of the earth, far more than could melt during the short summers. Vast ice fields called glaciers formed. So much w'ater was trapped in these thick glaciers that the water level of the oceans dropped sharply, exposing a land bridge between Asia and North America. Plants froze, but their seeds and spores lay dormant until warmer weather came. With each period of warmth the plants that grew from the seeds and spores spread to new areas. Eventually they spread across the land bridge into North America. The animals that fed on them followed. The bones of ancient Asian elephants, called mammoths. and of saber-toothed tigers have been found in dozens of places in the United States. Following the animals came people, the first Americans. The exact year, decade, or century when the first Americans arrived will never he known, for no historian recorded the adventures of these pioneers. Their graves arc unmarked. The ashes of their campfires have been scattered by the w inds of the ages. These were accidental discoverers, hunters following wild game or herders driving their flocks over the next hill to find greener pastures. The first American immigrants came in waves, for there were warmer periods when some of the ice melted and the water level rose. The last crossed about 10.000 years ago. At about that lime the great glaciers began to melt, and the Bering land bridge was flooded over by the rising ocean. The Great Migration What did it feel like to be among the first people to reach this great, empty land? Wc know what the first astronauts experienced when they set foot on the moon. They were aware that they were doing something no one had ever done before. We do not know exactly what the first Americans experienced. They did not know that they were exploring a new continent. Understanding the difference calls for an act of historical imagination. Hav ing a good historical imagination means being able to look at past events, keeping in mind w hat This jaw of a saber-toothed cat was found in the l.a Urea Tar Tits in Los An/jties. This and other fossils from the Pleistoscene era (between 2 million and 10,000 yean aejo) may he viewed today at the Georpe C. Pape Alnseum. How do fossils help ns understand the past? ca. 60,000 (71-10.000 b.c. | Glaciers during Ice Age —*• Migration routes e 750 1500Mi 0 750 1500 Km, 0*tht>Qi"phic Hr meet ton LEARNING FROM MAPS. The Asiatic wanderers who came to the Americas spread slowly across the lands. What physical barriers hindered their spread to the cast and west in North America? The First Americans 3 Lee Boltin, r- American Museum of Natural History This agate point was made into a weapon sharp enough to kill mammoths and bison. When the point was attached to a spear, and the spear was flung by an atlatl—a device for holding and throwing—it changed the way people Itunted. Use your historical imagination to describe two hunts: one before these weapons existed and one after. the people of the day knew, but at the same time remembering what they did not know. Once in North America, the wanderers moved slowly southward and to the east, following the life-giving game. The distances they covered were enormous. It is 15.(XX) miles (24.(K)0 kilometers) from their homeland in Asia to the southern tip of South America and 6.000 miles (9.600 kilometers) to w hat is now New England. Many thousand years passed before they had spread over all this land. As they advanced and multiplied, the first Americans gradually changed their ways of life. Some made their homes in fertile valleys, others in tropical jungles. Some settled in mountainous regions or in deserts. Each group had different problems, and each learned to see the world in different ways. As a result each society created its own culture. A society is a group of people who live in a specific geographic area and who have a common culture. The culture of a society consists of those values and behavior patterns held in common: language, government, family relationships, how they make a living, how' they educate their children, and the objects they create. Some sense of how many different cultures developed comes from the fact that the peoples of North and South America spoke between 1,000 and 2.000 languages. Early American Cultures By the 1400s there were perhaps 50 million people living in North and South America. Only about 1 or 2 million of these inhabited what is now the United States and Canada. Partly because they were so few' in number and spread over such a huge area, these people had developed a number of distinct cultures. Many cultural differences stemmed from the ways groups dealt with the basic problem of scarcity. Like all societies these groups had to make choices about how' besi to use their limited resources to meet basic needs. Some hunted and gathered wild plants. Others turned to farming. Those who planted seeds and cultivated the land were able to develop a more secure and comfortable life than those who relied on hunting and gathering. People who had mastered farming, or agriculture, could settle in one place instead of roaming in constant search of food. They built permanent houses. Their societies grew to include more members. None of the groups made much progress in developing simple machines or substituting mechanical or even animal power for their own muscle power. They had no wagons or other vehicles with wheels and no horses or oxen to help plow the land. Their tools and weapons were made of wood or stone or bone. Aside from a few copper objects and some gold and silver jewelry, they had no metals. Anthropologists call this stage of development the Stone Age. It ended with the arrival of Europeans and their technology. Point of View William Penn's biographer tells of Penn's respect for American Indians. tcFrom what Penn had read or heard or seen of Indians, he had formed a highly favorable opinion of them. 'Hies7 were quiet folk, much like typical Quakers, serious, reserved, and taciturn, qualities Penn admired. . . Hamr Emerson Wildes This table slum's bon' the colonies are oftengrouped. Although there were no formal ties between the colonics in each group, geographical and cultural factors drew them together. What were the two most common reasons for founding colonics? America. Charles II was agreeable. He owed a large sum of money to Penn's father, who had died in t670, To cancel this debt, in 1681 he gave William the region between New York and Maryland, suggesting that it be called Pennsylvania in honor of Penn's father. William Penn was strongly religious and held to high ideals. He also had a solid understanding of the value of money and how to make it. Pennsylvania was to be "a holy experiment" in Christian living and self-government Penn personally came to Pennsylvania to oversee the laying-out of Philadelphia, his city of "brotherly love." Like Roger Williams, he insisted that the Delaware Indians be paid for their land and treated fairly by the settlers. Penn was shrewd in business. To attract settlers he wrote glowing accounts of Pennsylvania's soil and climate and circulated them throughout Europe. These, along with his promises of a voice in the government and religious liberty, lured settlers from many lands. Among these were large numbers of Germans, who were popularly known as the Pennsylvania Dutch. 'Dutch" was the way English settlers pronounced the word Deutsch. which means German. Pennsylvania prospered from the start. Farmers produced large crops of wheat and other foodstuffs. To obtain a port to export their surplus, Penn in 1682 obtained a grant of land on Delaware Bay. This region, known as Delaware, became a separate colony in 1704. Georgia The last of the English colonies in America. Georgia, w as not settled until 1733. It was founded by a group of well-to-do, charitable En- FOUNDING OF THE THIRTEEN COLONIES Colony Founded Reason for Founding New England Colonies Massachusetts 1620 Religious freedom New Hampshire 1622 Profit from trade and fishing; religious freedom Connecticut 1636 Religious and political freedom; expand trade Rhode Island 1636 Religious freedom Middle Colonies New York (New Netherland) 1624 Expand trade (Dutch) Delaware (New Sweden) 1638 Expand trade (Swedish) New Jersey 1664 Investment by founders; religious and political freedom Pennsylvania 1682 Investment by founders; religious and political freedom Southern Colonies Virginia 1607 Expand trade and agriculture Maryland 1632 Investment by founders; religious and political freedom North Carolina 1663 Profit from trade and agriculture; religious freedom South Carolina 1663 Profit from trade and agriculture; religious freedom Georgia 1732 Investment; haven for debtors; buffer against Spanish America's Hispanic Heritage of Honor" shows Princess Margarita surrounded by her friends, himself stands to the left, bold inn a brush. The mirror at the back 'Hjfertr the smilinji kinij and queen. Hon' do you think the artist was able to fiat himself into the picture? "Princess Marqarita after Velazquez" was painted by Fernando Bot- ero of Colombia in 1978. Hisfijjurcs with la roc heads recall the sculptures made by early Indian artisans. ore than 300 years pass be- ifore our eyes when we see two paintings of the same Spanish princess. The first Diego Rodriquez de Silva >e&quez. In 1656 he painted Wehinas ("Maids of Honor") court of Philip IV of Spain, second portrait of Princess rita was painted in 1978 by Fernando Botero of Colombia. His painting, like the others on these pages, shows our Hispanic heritage. Botero is modern and at the same time pays homage to the American Indians whose art and architecture flourished long before the painted sails of Columbus' ships hove into view. America's Hispanic Heritage Courtesy Christie's, N.Y, "Archangel with a Gun" was painted on cotton in the 17th century by a Peruvian disciple of an artist known as the Master of Calamareha. Front Colombia comes this Quimbdya gilded pendant fashioned between 500 and 1000 AM. The medallions cover the likeness of a woman whose face we sec but whose torso is modestly covered. New Orleans Museum of Art fnm ltinn de la Cosa, a Spaniard, ft 1st nr this world map published in ISM It fbows for the first time the dads and coasts of the Americas. A Spanish-trained Indian artist made this Peruvian miniature of "Atahualpa, Last Kina of the Incas." A 7^VAU;P/\ INtft \im.Y*-Ei~ rftV, H*io rtf Ptftni C lu |(fyu .Jt MUnMr ■" r R*. .hi Ctucn flip y wric A Mcmutl a jrf" Hatlalc —y U IjmoP(M1 "U*I AtaHIUI-MA' et"k The first great native-born Puerto Ri- can painter was Jose Campeche. His "Damn a Cabatlo" ("Lady on Horse- back") shows licnv strong the Spanish influence was in 1785. America's Hispanic Heritage 321 The Thomas Gilcroase Institute The Museum of Modern Art, N.V Amelia Pelaez del Casal is a Cuban painter who studied for a time in Europe. There she was influenced by the Cubist style of Pablo Picasso of Spain and Georyes Rrasjue of France. To these influences she brouglrt the vivid colors of her Caribbean homeland, as seen in "Fishes," on the left, painted in 1943. One of Mexico's greatest artists ra Diego Rivera, best known for bis ml rals. "Women Washing Clothes mt I River amonej Zopilotes" was pantei in 1928. Rc Spa tine vasi apai de S Hid cole Cen clar ing' mot Dec Spa loni Uni of t Preview & Review igration from Europe Mjtn women walked out of factories to protest wage reductions in IHMand 1836. They were replaced by men and women recently aw from Europe. These immigrants were very poor and willing to jc any jobs they could find. The number of people coming to riia was increasing yearly. Only about 250.000 immigrants had tered the United States between the end of the Revolutionary War *ml 1820. During the next 20 years more than 700.000 crossed the tdanlic. The majority of these immigrants came from England. Ireland. Germany. Most came as families. Nearly all came to the United Stales because they were poor and hoped to earn a better living in S Europeans considered "the land of opportunity." No one rolled out the red carpet for these newcomers. Some riains opposed unlimited immigration. These nativists believed UK) much immigration would destroy American institutions, v wanted to keep the country for "native Americans." They conveniently forgot that the only real native Americans were the ,Jittns! The 1835 Animal Report for the Bible Society of Essex County, New Jersey contained this challenge to its members: u At a time when a vast foreign population is rushing in on us like a flood—when infidelity [unfaithfulness] on the one hand, in its protean [various] forms, and Romanism [Ca- tholicism] on the other, with its determined and deadly hostility to God's truth and our free institutions—are assailing those truths, and endeavoring day and night to undermine those interests which are dear to our hearts, shall we he idle The nativists were members of various Protestant churches, y were particularly hostile to Irish Catholics, w ho were entering |k country in large numbers. Disease had destroyed most of the o crop in Ireland, and thousands of Irish, facing starvation, :dto America. In 1834 a nativist mob burned a Catholic convent Boston. Similar shameful incidents occurred in other parts of country. Andrew M. Greeley, a popular contemporary writer, cely conceals his anger at the typical nativist view of the Irish dies who came to America: wit is no secret that the Irish were not especially welcomed I when they entered the United Stales. One can understand this reaction. Most earlier immigrants were, if not wealthy, at least reasonably skilled workers or artisans. They were the most ambitious and vigorous of the Europeans seeking Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 3. Understanding Issues. Events, & Ideas. Describe the growth of American cities, using the following words: immigrant, nativist, urban frontier, urban center, tenement. 1. Where did most immigrants come from between 1820 and 1840? 2. Why did nativists fear too much immigration? 3. In what sense were western cities an urban frontier? 4. What caused slums to develop in cities? Thinking Critically. 1. Imagine that you are an immigrant in Boston in 1830. Use your historical imagination to describe the kind of job you would look for and the skills that would be necessary for that job. 2. The year is 1835. You have decided you want to move to the urban frontier. What service would you most like to provide farmers? Why? The Rise of Cities The Granger Collection. New York Blood flows in the streets of the City of Brotherly Love in this 1H44 cn/irimm I of an anti-Catbolie riot in Philadelphia. Why was the mob so tbreataui a I new arrivals to America? to make new lives for themselves in a richer country. But the famine Irish Ipeople who left Ireland because disease destroyed the potato crop) were poor, uneducated, and confused. They fled not to a better life but from almost certain , death. They were dirty, undernourished, disease-ridden, and incapable of anything but the most unskilled labor. That they arrived in great numbers and tilled up whole sections of cities almost overnight did not go unnoticed by native Americans [Those already living there]. . . . If the Irish were to be accepted into American society j they must be sober, industrious, and ambitious, like the Protestant immigrants who had come before them. There, of course, was the heart of the problem. Not only were they poor. sick, dirty, and uneducated. They were also Catholic. The Irish Catholics, with their unmarried clergy, had an equally strange tendency not to send their children to public | schools, where every effort would be made to turn them into good Americans—this meant, of course, good Protestant Americans. From the nativist point of view, it was no wonder that churches were burned and that Catholics were I occasionally murdered in riots.199 'From That Most Distressful Nation The Taming of the American Irish by Aatafl M. Greeley r $ Meanwhile people continued to leave their homes in Ireland, "riserable and downtrodden. Many sang this farewell to their home- Und tt Farewell to thee. Erin mavoureen [Ireland dear |. Thy valleys I'll tread never more; This heart that now' bleeds for thy sorrows Will waste on a far distant shore. Thy green sods lie cold on parents. A cross marks the place of their rest. The wind that moans softly above them Will waft [blow| their poor child to the West.1?? mum The Irish in America by James E. Johnson City Life in America Most of the immigrants w ho came to America between 1X20 and 1X40 tenlcd in the cities of the Northeast. These were still communities "bcrc a person could easily walk from one end to the other in half | "hour—places where church steeples stood out on the skyline and ■the masts and spars of ships at the wharves towered over the roofs iif the houses, shops, and warehouses. There were no skyscrapers These chans show the toted number cf immigrants coming to the United States between 1820 and I860 and their places of origin. What are some trends in immigration during those years illustrated by the chans? The Rise of Cities 345 beyond the Mississippi. The federal government had eut costs of th; relocation wherever possible. Sometimes the Indians were supplitc with spoiled meat and other bad food. Even so. the move still cos much more than had been expected. Nevertheless. Jackson wot ahead with the Indian removal policy. More than 45.000 southern Indians were resettled. The Seminoles refused to sign a treaty of removal. Led b> their great chiefs Phillip and Osceola, the Seminoles fought. Joseph Her- nandez.. Florida's first congressional delegate and the first Hispitni; in Congress, raised an army of volunteers. Within a few shat months. Hernandez had captured all the Seminole leaders. By IS4Z the Seminole resistance, called the Second Seminole War. was over By the 1840s scarcely an Indian remained in the southern states The tribes that were removed had suffered heavy hisses. For ihi I moment the survivors were free to go their own way. but not for j long. The Log Cabin Campaign of 1840 Martin Van Huron had been secretary of state during Jackson's tint term and vice president during his second. Van Buren came f New York. He was a small, red-haired man. one of the shrew politicians of his day. He was so clever at political dealing that was frequently called "the Little Magician" or "the Red Fox." In 1836. with Jackson's approval, the new- Democratic part} nominated Van Buren for president. When the opposition, now iii- ■ ing itself the W hig party, put up three different presidential candrfl dates. Van Buren won the election easily. He got 170 electoral votes I while his closest opponent. General William Henry Harrison, it-l ccived only 73. As president. Van Buren was hurt by the economic deprewwiB that followed the Panic of 1837. Many state banks closed. Othm had shaky finances. The federal government had no safe place tt1 store tax payments and other income. At Van Buren's urging, (ofr gress established an Independent Treasury System. Thereafter. A money due the government was to be paid in gold or silver. Tb money was simply stored in government vaults until needed. In 1840 Van Buren sought rcelection. This time the Whigs united behind General Harrison. They correctly guessed that this old Into lighter would have an appeal to voters similar to that of Amk* Jackson. Their strategy was the Log Cabin Campaign. In 1828 the Democrats had ignored most issues and concei on describing the virtues of that friend of the common man and sawr of his country. Andrew Jackson. Now the Whigs sang the praise^ "Old Tippecanoe." the conqueror of Tecumseh. Harrison w"t simple man of the people, the Whigs claimed. He lived in a log cal* and always had a warm welcome for strangers. He drank that w m {addles irimmed in silver and rode with beautiful wives wearing jeweled combs in their hair. They also feared outsiders and forbade trade with Americans. Hispanics had a strict class system which they wished to keep mad. Highest were Spaniards born in Spain. Next came Creoles. Spanish horn in America. These groups held all the power of New* Spain. Mestizos. people of Spanish and Indian ancestry came next, liththc Indians last. They were treated as children by the mission- ing and abused by the foremen of mines and ranches where they worked. Revolution in New Spain Like the American colonists, the settlers of New Spain came to deeply resent the heavy hand of their government in Mexico City. %'n revolutions began to topple governments in Europe late in the IMS and early in the 1800s. the Spanish and Portuguese colonies in taiericaalsorevolted. In 1821 New Spain successfully won its independence from Spain. New Spain became the independent Republic of Mexico. But sadly in the flush of these victories, the original purpose tf ihe revolution—to free those who were oppressed by the class m—was forgotten. Most Spaniards returned to Spain, leaving the leadership of the Republic to Creoles. The struggle to organize the government took three years. Finally Mexico's republic was organized and a consti- Uionproclaimed in 1824. It strictly outlawed slavery, a change that luukkome to have important consequences when American settlers ton to stream into northern Mexico. in Northern Mexico h 1830 perhaps as many as 50.000 Mexicans, mostly mestizos, lived a the northern part of the new territory. Already living on these tads were more than 250,000 Indians. Some, such as the Hopi and .married newcomers and merged their ways of life. Others, the Lb and Apache especially, moved or did battle for their ancestral italics with the new arrivals. Life in northern Mexico was not much different than life clse- itere in Mexico. Rich landowners still controlled vast ranchos and taje herds of sheep or cattle, as well as silver or copper mines. Most worked for the landowners. The missions also owned huge s of land and large herds. Here, Indians did most of the work. There were not many large towns in northern Mexico. Ranches far apart and most settlements had only a few buildings. People ted on each other. Men headed the households. They handled The Texas Question 407 the trading and worked outside the home. Women did not usually e? out in public except to go to market or to church. Hut inside tk home the mother was in charge. She made most of the decisions, and her children helped and obeyed her. A Mexican boy or girl was expected to be respeto and hicn eciucado—to be respectful of other' and to do well the work others depended on. Before he was very old. a boy joined his father in the fields at mines, or rode beside him as he gave orders to his workers A got helped her mother go to market, bake, weave, and take care of the younger children. If the family was wealthy, servants might do many of these jobs. Quite often many members of the same family—granA parents, aunts and uncles—lived close together. A large family meats more hands to help do the work. People learned to work with othen and to do what was best for the family. They also learned that when one member of the family did something wrong, all members wert disgraced. Americans in Texas Into this setting came settlers from America. Moses Austin of Miv souri, after losing his money overnight in a financial panic, struct I out for Texas. He respected and admired the Mexicans and felt In future lay with them. He was granted a colony in 1821 in whin now Texas, but he died of pneumonia the same year. On his deathbed Moses Austin asked his son Stephen to carry out his dream of oh onizing Texas. Some Mexican leaders opposed American settlement. Othen thought settlers should be attracted to Texas, where they couldevo- tually become Mexican citizens. Trade would increase, particular!! over what came to be known as the Santa Fe Trail. The secondgr" won the argument and Stephen Austin was given a renewal of hn father's grant. He thus became an empresario—the Mexican tera used to describe business people w ho brought in settlers. Each cs- presario received 23,000 acres (9.315 hectares) of land for every-V8 families brought into Texas. Austin and his group, the "Old ihicc Hundred." joined about 6.000 Tejanos—Texans of Mexican de- scent—living near San Antonio and other small Texas towns. Ihn were loyal Sons of Mexico who were taken with the notion of colonizing Texas. Austin and Juan Sequin, the Tejano leader, beats friends at once. The families w ho followed Austin each received a grant of lust Most grew cotton on it. They prospered. By 1830 about 20JXK) Americans had come to Texas, bringing 2.000 slaves with them. Stephen Austin became a citizen of Mexico and urged that C> tholicism be the religion of the colony. For several years he was tie governor of Texas, which by then was a Mexican province, Bl whose heart was in America, had difficulty inspiring loyalty "Mexico when most of his settlers had come from America. The dship with the Tejanos aside, most Americans came to feel that was their country and that they were the real Texans. Few mbled to learn Spanish. When the Mexican government abolished the Texans found legal ways to keep their slaves. The trickle of colonists from the United States and the third- iration Tejanos in Texas gave people a feeling of independence ilnationalism. Why should they report to a foreign capital as far (as Mexico City? Hadn't they earned the land by farming anti hing as others had in the westward-moving United States? Texans see this psuntintj of Stephen F. Austin at their capitol in Austin. He is shown in his cabin in 1824. Why is Austin considers8 a he tv in Texas? What makes a person a hetv? is Wins Its Independence nment leaders in Mexico City naturally disliked the Texans' s. They tried to slop further immigration to Texas. When The Texas Question 409 Point of View did sincerely desire peace. Our army had not then penetrated far into Mexico, and I did hope, that with the two millions [dollars] then proposed, we might get peace, and avoid the slaughter, the shame, the crime, of an aggressive, unprovoked war. But now you have overrun half of Mex- ico—you have exasperated and irritated her people— . . . and boldly ask her to give up New Mexico and California: and as a bribe to her patriotism, seizing on her property, you offer three million [dollars] to pay the soldiers she has called out to repel your invasion, on condition she will give up to you at least one-third of her w hole territory. . . . What is the territory, Mr. President, which you propose to wrest from Mexico? It is consecrated to the heart of the Mexican by many a well-fought battle with his old Castilian master lagainst the Spanish in the Mexican Revolution!. His Bunker Hills, and Saratogas, and Yorklowns, are there! The Mexican can say. "There I bled for liberty! and shall I surrender that consecrated home of my affections to the Anglo-Saxon [descendants of the English] invaders? What Jo they want with it ? They have Texas already. They have possessed themselves of the territory between the Nueces and the Rio Grande. What else do they want? . . . What would be the response? . . . The Senator from Michigan says he must have this. Why. my worthy Christian bother, on what principle of justice? "1 want room!" Sir. look at this pretense [unsupported claim] of want of room. With twenty millions of people, you have about one thousand millions of acres of land, inviting settlement by every conceivable argument, bringing them down to a quarter of a dollar an acre, and allowing every man to squat *bc he pleases. But the Senator from Michigan says wc will be two hundred millions in a few years, and we want room, If I were a Mexican 1 would tell you, "Have you not room in your ow n country to bury your dead men? If you come into mine, we will greet you with bloody hands, and Icomc you to hospitable graves. ...'?? I well Add ing more territory where slavery might be established was :r concern in the North. Polk therefore swallowed his anger jabmitted the treaty to the Senate, which ratified it after heated lending of Cultures ^the treaty had been signed, more and more Americans moved Southwest. They brought their ow n language, laws, and ways nJu to ilir Congressional Globe, 29 Congress. 2nd Session Was the Mexican War fought to protect the border of the U.S.? Or was it waged to gain California and New Mexico? These famous lines have outlasted the controversy. CCl heartily accept the motto,—'That government is best which governs least,'.. , Witness the present Mexican wrars, the work of comparatively a fexv individuals using the standing government as their tool; for, in the outset, the people would not have consented to this measure.?? From Civil Disobedience, Henry David Thoreau, 1848 War with Mexico Return to the Preview & Review on page 418. of behaving. Differences in the cultures of the Americans and the Mexicans—75,000 or more in the new U.S. lands—created pr at first. For families with ties to Americans, adjusting was usually I easy. Other Mexicans did not do as well. Many lost their pro To get the prime land held by Mexicans, Americans challenged laud titles that hail been granted by Spanish or Mexican authorities ad| held for years. This started long and costly court battles. Whate the decision, hard feelings resulted. Under the treaty Mexicans w ere granted all the rights of A ican citizenship. Yet their culture, w hich blended Spanish. Merton, and Indian ways of life, often was viewed as inferior. Traditions family loyally, personal honor, and devout Catholicism were respected by the newcomers. Poor Mexican Americans suffi most. Many of these newcomers were forced to take low-paying on American ranches, railroads, or in American mines. MeT American bandits, many of them trying to recover their stolen pr erty or livestock, raided American settlements. In time, though, the two groups helped change each other's way1 of life. They borrowed ideas from each other. The Americans lea from the Mexicans how to mine the rich hills of the South Because they had no mining laws of their ow n. Americans also Mexican laws to form their own. They also learned sheep rand. The tough charms of the Mexicans were well-adapted to thrive a dry lands of the Southwest. These sheep had already changed Ik lives of some of the Indian tribes in the area. Navajo women teamed to weave their wool into beautiful, warm blankets colored with Navajo dyes and woven into traditional patterns. Seeing that they eoukJ trade their blankets for horses and other things they needed, tk Navajo decided to settle dow n and raise sheep. Now the Amcnaa I began to raise sheep too. As you will read later, American cowhandi also learned their craft from Mexican vaqueros. I he Americans brought tools, seeds, and livestock with them. They had the latest inventions and business techniques. They established a legal system that preserved the rights of the accused. Met icans adopted the best of these and many other things. Slowly a new] way of life was formed in the Southwest, a system of values and 1 behavior shared by most of the people there. You can see this way of life today thoughout the Southwest. You see it in the mu*] of Santiago and Flaco Jimenez and Laura Canales and in tkl art of Diego Rivera, Jose Clemente Orozco. Amado Pena. JoanMirc.l Carmen Lomas Garza, and Julio Gonzalez. Y'ou can also see tkl blending of cultures in the clothes the people wear, in their laws.anil in the words they use. It is a wav of life with deep roots in threjJ cultures—Indian. Mexican, and American. cm Gilcrease Museum of History and Art. Tulsa, Oklahoma forma and the Ranchcros Etreal prize that the United Slates won in the Mexican War was !province of California. In the 1840s most of the region beyond : Rocks Mountains was untouched by any other than its native But, as we have seen, the Spanish had been living in Cali- niaand New Mexico since the late 1700s. By the 1830s there were I mission settlements in a kind of broken string from San Diego to | sonoma. north of San Francisco, The landholdings of the missions lire enormous. Around the missions founded by the Spanish were clustered large uiian villages, for Father Junipcro Scrra and other priests had conned thousands of Indians to Christianity. These Indians were prac- slaves. They did all the work that supported the missions, in tended large herds of cattle and grew corn, grapes, and other liropv They also made cloth, leather goods, wine. soap, and many pfermanufactured products. The missions were so prosperous that other Mexicans demanded I the government open mission lands to settlers. In the early 1830s kdid so. Thereafter any Mexican citizen with cattle could obtain a '.rant lw free. These landholders were called rancheros. Within i tears 700 ranchos were established in California, most of them The pride of the Spanish rancheros is evident in this color lithograph titled "Hacendado y Su Mayordomo"The Landowner and His Foreman.'' The Mexican artist is Julio Michaud. Judflinji from these riders, were most rancheros wealthy people? Hmv can you tell? Preview & Review Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 4 Understanding Issues. Events, & Ideas. Contrast the settlement of Utah with that of California, using the following words: Mormons, Nauvoo, Salt Lake City. Mormon Trail, Law of Riparian Rights. Law of Prior Appropriation, prospector. Gold Rush, Forty-Niner, clipper ship, stake a claim, mining camp, Negro Hill, ghost towns. 1. Compare life in a California mission with life on a rancho. 2. How were Mormons able to move so many people westward? 3. Define two laws of water rights. 4. What were some of the means of travel used by the Forty- Niners7 Thinking Critically. You are a prospector who has struck gold in California. Write a letter persuading a relative to join you. The Golden West 425 LEARNING FROM MAPS. Tin- missions were located no more than one day's travel apart. Wiry are most near the coast? about 50.000 acres (20.000 hectares) in area. Each ranchero hadai enormous amount of land. Life on one of these great ranches was rich but simple. Pc ate enormous quantities of meat at every meal. Horses were aj plentiful that travelers merely lassoed a new one when their wq mounts became tired. Most of the hard work of caring for the I and raising crops was still done by the Indians, w ho were even w off than when they had lived outside the missions. Yet in spite of their wealth, the ranchers had few comforts conveniences. Their homes were unheated and poorly fumis Window glass was scarce. Most homes had dirt floors. People I so far apart that they had few visitors. There were no new spa The days stretched out one after another. The Mormons of Utah The signing of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo increased interest i westward expansion. During the Mexican War one of the most markable migrations of American history had taken place into t is now Utah. This was the settlement that spread out next to Sijstot sFori Stato Historical Monument keepers, and merchants who sold the miners everything from pick- lies and tents to fancy clothes and fine horses at extremely high prices. These types made far more money than the miners. Fighting ■ the mining camps—with fists, knives, and guns—was common. People from all over the United States, from Mexico and South America, from Europe, and from as far away as China and Australia ked to the gold regions. With so many people crowding into the amps, disputes of all kinds occurred. Mexican Californians were sadly treated and often prevented from prospecting. The Chinese Mil free African Americans w ere also mistreated, although none of the gold seekers were more hard working. The local Indians were driven off hy brute force, although as always they were the original Killers of the land. Nevertheless, some from these various groups found gold, and few became rich. Two African American miners, digging in a most unpromising spot, hit a deposit so rich that the site was named Negro * Kill. These two men found gold worth $80,000 in four months. Bj 1852 there were 2,000 African Americans in California, half of them forking in the mining area. Despite the problems of camp life the majority of the prospectors ind storekeepers in the mining country were decent people eager to 3d schools and churches and live at peace with one another. The oily was that most of the camps sprang up too quickly to cstab- ordcrly governments. Prospectors abandoned them when the gold out and rushed off to other strikes in other regions. The old ips became ghost towns, inhabited only by a stray cat or two or a lew hermits or vagabonds. |XJ| At the bead of the Auburn Ravine in 11152, American and Chinese miners posed for this rare picture. How mijjht the sluice that divides the miners he a symbol of a deeper division? Perhaps 1,000 of the prospectors in California were African Americans. How were they treated by the majority of the miners? Return to the Preview & Review on page 425. The Golden West 435 California Stato Library Preview & Review Political Breakups Hie controversy over slavery in the western territories once again became a major political issue. It brought about major shifts in the nation's political parties. The Kansas-Nebraska Act had been a Dem- oaalic party measure. Its passage caused that party to lose thousands of supporters in the North. The Whig party, however, was shattered implctely. Southern Whigs and their northern allies—known as [ 'Cotton" Whigs—could not remain in the same organization with ! Northern "Conscience" Whigs. Most of the southerners and "Cot- |Ion" Whigs supported the Kansas-Nebraska Act. The northern Whigs went in two directions. The huge increase of immigration in the I84(K and 1850s hurt the Whig party greatly. For various reasons about 90 percent of the new Irish citizens became Democrats. The tendency of German immigrants to vote Democratic "as almost as strong. Most of these immigrants were Catholic, while nost Whigs belonged to one or another of the Protestant churches. So the Whigs disagreed in both politics and religion w ith the new mocrats. As a result many Whigs became nativists. They favored |strict controls on the admission of foreigners into the country. They joined a new political organization, the Native American party. Many limner Democrats also joined this new party. Members of the Native rican party were often called Know-Nothings because when d about the organization, they replied. "1 know nothing." Perhaps without realizing it. the nativists were trying to make slavery issue go away by ignoring it. They wore also bucking a that could not be stemmed w ithout ruining the country. A steady of immigrants was essential if the United States was to expand, very people who joined the Native American parly benefited the work the new immigrants did. By spending their wages, the igrants stimulated the whole national economy. Fortunately most rican-born citizens realized this. The Know-Nothings won some riant local elections in the 1850s, but they never replaced either the two major political parties. The other new organization that northern Whigs and Democrats !d was the Republican party. It sprang up in many northern states diately after passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act. The Republican platform was simple: Keep slavery out of the ern territories. Dislike of slavery was not the only reason the v took this stand. Indeed, many Republicans shared the common prejudice of most northerners. But they feared that small farm- in the territories could not compete with southerners who could their slaves there. The ranks of voters swelled with newcomers from Ireland, nearly Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 3. Understanding Issues, Events, & Ideas. Explain how two new political parties formed in the 1850s. using the following words: nativist. Native American party. Know-Nothings, Republican party. 1. How did the Democratic party suffer from passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act? Why was the Whig party shattered? 2. In what ways was the political situation unsettled in 1856? 3. What were Buchanan's qualifications for the presidency? Why did the Democrats nominate him? Thinking Critically. Imagine that you arrived in America from Ireland in 1850, Write a letter to your family in Ireland, explaining why you would not join the Native American party or the Republican party. NATIVEAMERiCAHS. Milwaukee County Historical Society New Political Parties National Portrait Gallery National Portrait Gallery Why did James Buchanan scon well qualified to be president of the United States? Win was John C. Fremont something of a national hero when he ran for president? Return to the Preview & Review on page 523. all of whom joined the Democratic party. They were poor and unskilled. These Irish interpreted Republican talk about free soil and free men as threatening their jobs. While not in favor of slavery, the Irish found Democratic politics more to their liking. The Election of 1856 The political situation in 1856 was most unsettled. Neither President Pierce nor Senator Douglas could get the Democratic nomination for the presidency. Their support of the Kansas-Nebraska Act convinced party leaders that these men could not win in the northern stato Instead the Democrats chose James Buchanan of Pennsylvania. Buchanan seemed well qualified for the presidency. He had been a congressman and also a senator. He was an experienced diplomat, having been minister to both Russia and Great Britain. He hud been President Polk's secretary of slate. But the chief reason the Demo- crals picked him was that his service as minister to Britain had kept him out of the country during the bitter fight over the Kansas Nebraska Act. The Republicans nominated John C. Fremont, "the Pathfinder Unlike Buchanan, who was 64. Fremont was a relatively young nun in his early forties and something of a national hero. As his nickname indicates, he was an explorer. He had also played an important role in taking California during the Mexican War. A strong, silent type. Fremont had almost no political experience. With voters so divided, that too was a political advantage. Former president Millard Fillmore was also a candidate in 1856. He received the nomination of the Native American party and also was the candidate of the rapidly declining Whig party. The Republicans did not even attempt to campaign in the South , Fillmore got many northern votes that might otherwise have goncte Frdmont. but he did not even come close to w inning a single free slate. So the contest was between Buchanan and Fremont in lie North and between Buchanan and Fillmore in the South. Buchanam strength in both sections gave him a great advantage among uadi' cided voters and people who put sectional peace ahead of any pa- ticular issue. Buchanan proved to be much more popular than Fillmore in tk] South. He lost only Maryland. Fremont was the stronger of the rid in the North. But Buchanan won narrow victories in Illinois. Indiana. New Jersey, and his home state. Pennsylvania. These gave Buchans a majority of the electoral vote. 174 to Fremont's 117. Fillmore gained! only 8. Again the danger of the Union breaking up over slavery seemed to have been avoided. Buchanan's conservatism and his long politick experience encouraged people to believe that he would proceed cat liously and with good judgment. [*rj| Reynolds HouM.it Thomas Cole's "Home in the Woods" was painted in about 1845. family farms sprang up everywhere, especially after the Homestead Act of 1862 made land available to anyone who would settle it. After study inn this paintin/j closely, what can you say about daily lift on the frontier? order to protect producers from foreign competition, t hey rejected I the idea of nativjst support. They promised not to restrict immigration I into the country. Before the convention Senator William H. Seward of New Yorl I seemed the person most likely to get the Republican presidential I nomination. However, to win the election, the Republicans would I have to carry Pennsylvania. Indiana, and Illinois—the northern states I that Buchanan had carried in 1856. Seward was thought to be too I antislavery to persuade doubtful voters in those states. After much I political "horse-trading" the delegates nominated Abraham Lincoln I Many proslavcry radicals had threatened that the southern states would secede from the Union and se,l up an independent countryoi I their ow n if a Republican was elected president. This possibility wa" particularly alarming to many people in the Upper South, the so- called border stales of Maryland. Delaware. Kentucky, and Missouri. Should civil war break out. it would surely be fought on their soil. These people formed still a fourth party, the Constitutional Unionist party, in I860. The Constitutional Unionist's platform wa; simple: They stood for "the Constitution and the Union." In other words, they tried to ignore the controversial issues that were dividing the country. II the party had lived long enough to develop a symbel r Words by GKO. II. li<OKKR,Ksu' - k ' . MUSIC l" A CONTRABAND. \ O' Anunjtril liy J.j* }{ 0 V715 UTUAjjJ/ ki Granger Collection, New York Notice that the composer of the sheet music "Hyrnm of the Freedman" at left is identified only as "A Contra- band." It was probably a tune used to recruit soldiers. Above is Major Martin R. Delany, who was promoted riflht on the battlefield for bravery. How many African Americans fouqht for the Union? How many Hispanic Americans? |vc$ m the struggle, both sides. Union Several thousand Hispanic Americans fought admiral David Farragut was the best known. e Draft Riots benefits of the Emancipation Proclamation were slow in coming, disadvantages appeared at once. Probably it made southerners determined than ever to maintain their independence. Many northerners resented it because they feared that slaves liberated the Proclamation would flock into the North to compete with for jobs. As a result the Democratic party made large gains in 1862 Congressional elections. The War in the East Michigan Department of State Archivi For lIm* *M 2HI"*h. Infoalrv- Enlist beforo April 1st, nor urc the Government Bounty of $300 00. m "KEEP DOT OF THE DRAFT?" Government Bounty, $300; State Bounty. $10O; Town Bounty. $100. Apply to Wfl SICKELB. St J. hn. or Unit Cal., 23d Bkb Infantry Corunna Barr h INK ^ ^ ^ "Rally Round the Ring, Roys!" says this 1864 Michigan recruiting poster. And "Keep Out of the Draft!" which passed the month the poster went to press. A few months after the Proclamation went into effect. Congress passed a conscription law. Like the Confederate draft, this measure allowed men w ho were drafted to hire substitutes. They could even avoid military serv ice by paying the government $300. Poor men could not possibly raise $300. which was as much as a laborer could earn in a year. Many made a connection between the draft law and emancipation. They resented having to risk their lives in order to free slaves who could then compete with them for work Draft riots broke out in many parts of the country in the spang and summer of 1863. The worst occurred in New York City, where Irish-born workers ran w ild for four days in July. The rioters burned buildings, looted shops, and terrorized innocent local African Americans. Over a hundred African Americans in New York were mur dered. These riots should have been a warning. The war might fret the slaves, but it was not likely to produce racial harmony, either in the North or South. Fredericksburg Meanwhile the Emancipation Proclamation had little effect on the battlefields. When McClellan failed to attack the Confederates m they retreated after the Battle of Anlictam. Lincoln again removed him from command of the Army of the Potomac, choosing General Ambrose E. Burnside to succeed him. Unlike McClellan. Bumsui; was a hold, even reckless officer. He decided to push directly toward Unlike other wars all the casualties of the Civil War were Americans. Of total Union forces, more than 40 percent were casualties, and nearly 23 percent died. About 33 percent of the Confederate forces were casualties, and almost 24 percent died. Why did such high casualty rates actually favor the North? 'roads in the West b IW>2 Congress passed the Pacific Railway Act. This law granted a Barter to the Union Pacific Railroad Company to build a line west- nardfrom Nebraska. Another company, the Central Pacific Railway of California, was authorized to build a connecting line eastward from the Pacific. The government granted each company the right of way—the thin strip of land on which the tracks were actually laid. In addition n gave them large amounts of land for every mile of track built. This land could he sold and the money used for construction. Or it could xhcld in reserve and sold later when the land became more valuable. The government also lent the companies large amounts of money at km interest. Private fortunes were to be had here. The Central Pacific employed thousands of Chinese immigrants W lay ils tracks. Most of the Union Pacific workers came from Ireland. All were underpaid. Construction got under way in 1865. Building the railroad was tremendously difficult. The Central Pacific had to cross the snow-capped Sierra Nevada range. Omaha, hraska. where the Union Pacific began, had not yet been con- ted to eastern railroads. Thousands of tons of rails, crossties, anil While Chinese railroad workers watch, the Central Pacific train enters a snow shed in the Sierra Nevada. Snow sheds kept tracks clear andy/ave some protection to the wooden cars in the event of an avalanche. Why is it so appropriate that the workers pictured are Chinese Americans? - The Battle for the Plains 627 tS*i"rin fettling the Southwest ring these same years settlers poured into the Southwest—western |ms. New Mexico, Arizona, and southern California—to look for d,raise cattle, and claim land. When they arrived, they found the I occupied by Mexican Americans. These people were the de- dants of the Mexicans who found themselves in United Stales niurv after the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Rather than learn jtish, most settlers looked down on the Mexican Americans. The omers treated the old settlers like foreigners. This was unjust. Many Mexican Americans had lived on their Hung before it became United States territory. The land-hungry lers discovered that most of the land was not registered. Often i Mmply claimed the already occupied land or bought it from the itorial government. By the 1880s Mexican Americans owned but cfourth of the land they had owned in 1848. Theodore dentils, whose painting! capture much of our Spanish heritage, called this scene "Selling of the Cardinals on the Plaza." Research the layout of a typical Spanish settlement with its plaza, church, and workshops. Return to the Preview & Review on page 623. The Battle for the Plains 629 The real "bonanza kings" were John W. Mackay. James G. Fair. *C. Flood, and William S. O'Brien. All were of Irish ancestry. All had been born poor. All had come to California during the Gold Rash. In 1868-6^ these four men formed a partnership. They used fc profits of one strike to buy up other mines. Eventually they took ous metals worth over 8150 million from the rich Nevada lode. ing Camp Life never a strike was made, mining camps seemed to sprout out of the surrounding hillsides like flowers after a desert rain. The camps |"re ramshackle towns of tents and noisy saloons. The most famous i Virginia City, Nevada. It was given its name by Henry Com- stock's partner. "Old Virginia." While on a spree, "Old Virginia" tripped and fell, smashing his bottle of whiskey. Rising to his knees kshouted drunkenly. "1 baptize this town Virginia Town." Virginia City was a typical boom town, so crowded that a horse I wagon could take half an hour to cross the main street. The life miners, shopkeepers, and others in these mining towns was some- s as difficult as life on the open range. In these towns it was ult to keep the peace. Smooth-talking gamblers, gunslingers, other outlaws sidled alongside claim jumpers, shifty types who 'ized in seizing ore deposits that had been staked out by others, •camps were taken over by these outlaws, who ruled the terror- citizens at gunpoint. Such communities provided rich material American writers. Mark Twain in Roughing It and Bret Harte in 01hc Luck of Roaring Camp" told of life in California mining camps, ■harks Farrar Browne wrote this somew hat fictionalized account of IXcvada silver-mining town: l"Shooting isn't as popular in Nevada as it once was. A few I years since |ago| they used to have a dead man for breakfast I every morning. A reformed desperado [bandit 1 told me that I he supposed he had killed enough to stock a grave-yard. 'A I feeling of remorse.' he said, 'sometimes comes over me! I But I'm an altered man now. I hain't killed a man for over I two weeks! What'll you poison yourself with?* he added. ^ dealing a resonant | noisy 1 blow to the bar. '55 Compare Browne's description to the following remembrances fsome Virginia City residents. Which seems to be closer to the igeof the "Old West" you have? The men who worked in the mines . . . were la] happy-go- j lucky set of fellows, fond of good living, and not particularly interested in religious affairs. . . . As regarded deportment [behavior], everyone was a law unto himself. . . . Most of the men employed in the mhntmui Ward Hh Travel}, by Charles |-arrar Brmsne this system the cattle belonging to the ranchers who the bunks of the stream became thoroughly mixed. Each and fall, cowhands would round up all the animals to a central The cowhands would fan out across the range, each riding up yon or hill. Each would return driving all the cattle in the area 3 him. Ne the cowhands sorted each rancher's cattle from the rest by ■keeking every animal's marking, called a brand. The brand mark ■uascar made by pressing a red-hot branding iron onto the animal's He Each rancher's brand had a distinct shape, so it was easy to ■mine who owned which cattle. Those that were ready for market ■repenned up and shipped off by rail. The rest were turned loose. ■Ktoroam the range again until the next roundup. I Of course, newborn calves had not been branded. Rut calves n trailed close beside their mothers, so it was easy to tell whose ntrty they were. They were branded and sent baw ling back to Her mothers. Charles Marion Russell painted "Jerked Down." These cowhands rope a steer while scrambling to get free of its sharp hooves and horns. How does a great painter like Russell tell an entire story with his brushes and oil paints? k Cowhand ■ colorful western figure, the cowhand, was the master ot the ■drive and the roundup. Mexican Americans were the first cow- ans. These vaqueros invented almost all the tools of the cowhand's ■it,from his broad-brimmed felt hat. his cotton bandana, and his The End of the Open Range 645 v Above are "California Vaqua-os" by James Walker. Hmr did Mexican Americans influence the life of every cowhand? The Anschutz Coital) 1 rope lariat to his special western saddle. The word rodeo is the Spanish word for "roundup." A cowhand's life was a hard one. The men worked sunup to sundown and received lower wages than most factory workers. Then legs became bowed from long days in the saddle. They developed permanent squints from peering into the glaring sunlight of the tree less plains. Their faces were lined and leathery, their hands calloused from constantly handling coarse ropes. Not all cowhands were the strong, silent ty pes portrayed in the movies by white actors. Many came from poor families or from groups outside the mainstream. About one third of the men who worked cattle on the open range were either Mexican Americansor African Americans. Every item of the cow hand's clothes and equipment served a necessary function. The wide brim of his "ten-gallon hat" could he turned down to shade his eyes or drain off rainfall. His bandana could be tied over his nose anil mouth to keep out the dust raised by the pounding hooves of countless cattle. The bandana also served asa towel, a napkin, a bandage, and a handkerchief. Cowhands sometimes wore leather trousers, called chaps, over regular overalls. Chaps were fastened to a broad belt buckled at the back. Thp Point of View A cattleman gave this testimony on pasturing his livestock on the open range. Ctl have two miles of running water. That accounts for my ranch being where it is. The next water from me in one direction is 23 miles; now no man can have a ranch between these two places. I have control of the grass, the same as though I owned it.59 Testimony Before Public Laws Commision, c. 1880s ranchers. Cattle ranchers believed that sheep cropped the grass right down to the roots so that cattle could no longer find it. Many range wars broke out between cattle ranchers and sheep ranchers for control of the grasslands. Fanners also competed with ranchers for land. Longhorns trampled their crops. The farmers feared the free-roaming herds would infect their cattle with a dread disease called "Texas fever." Then came two terrible winters. In 1885-86 and in 1886-87 blizzards howled across the plains. Theodore Roosevelt, then a "gentle- man rancher" in Dakota Territory, wrote: (6 Furious gales blow down from the north, driving before them the clouds of blinding snow-dust, w rapping the mantle of death around every unsheltered being. . . .99 When the spring came in 1887. ranchers discovered that the storms had all but wiped out their herds. The boom times were over. Cattle ranchers could no longer count on the free grass of the plains. They had to fence in their herds ami feed them hay and fodder in the w inter. Cattle ranchers became cattle feeders, their work, like mining, less risky but also less adventurous. This change was important, especially to fanners on the Great Plains Demand for corn, grains, and hay soared, as did the prices paid fi them. Now economics urged Americans to find ways to farm the hard, dry soil of the plains. Farming on the Great Plains The soil of the Great Plains was fertile, but farming there prosed to be very' difficult. Still, settlers came by the thousands to claim tbeir 160 acres under the Homestead Act or to buy land from the railroads Some were the sons and daughters of farmers in states like UlinotJ and Iowa and Arkansas. Others were emigrants from Norway. Sweden. and a dozen other lands. O. F. Rolvaag wrote of several Norwegian families and the land they settled. Imagine the plains they saw as he describes them: Ct Bright, clear sky over a plain so wide that the rim of the heavens cut down on it around the horizon. . . . Bright, clear sky, to-day, to-morrow, and for all time to come. . . . And sun! And still more sun! It sets the heavens afire every morning: it grew with the day to a quivering golden light—then softened into all the shades of red and purple as evening fell. . . . Pure colour everywhere. A gust of wind, sweeping across the plain, threw into life waves of yellow and blue and green. Now and then a dead black wave would race across the scene ... a cloud's gliding shadow . . . now and then. . . . Girls, hand-sewers, earn nothing for the first month, then as unskilled workers they get SI to $1.50 a week. S3 a week, and (as skilled workers) $6 a week. . . . The sweat-shop' day is ten hours: but many take work home to get in overtime; and occasionally the shops themselves are kept open for extra work, from which the hardest and ablest workers sometimes make $14 to S16 a week. . . . The average weekly living expenses of a man and wife, with two children . . . are as follows: Rent (three or four small rooms). $2: food. fuel, and light. S4: clothing. S2; and beer and spirits, $1. . . A city ordinance enacts that rooms provided for workmen shall contain space equal to five hundred cubic feet of air for each person employed; but in the average 'sweat-shop' only about a tenth of that quantity is found. In one such place there were fifteen men and women in one room, which contained also a pile of mattresses on which some of the men sleep at night. The closets [toilets] arc disgraceful. In an adjoining room w ere piles of clothing, made and unmade, on the same table with the food of the family. Two dirt) children were playing about the floor. . . .'55 Unionization In part because large corporations had so much power over their labor force, more workers began to join unions after the Civil War This was especially true of skilled workers. In IKh9 the Knightsuf Labor was founded in Philadelphia by Uriah Stephens, a tailor. Al first it was a secret organization, with an elaborate ritual. Soon ii expanded and began to work openly to organize workers into a "great brotherhood." By 1879 the Knights claimed to have 9,000 members In that year Terence V. Powderly, a Pennsylvania machinist and onetime mayor of Scranton. Pennsylvania, became its head. Under Powderly the Knights admitted women, African Americans, immigrants, and unskilled workers. This was a radical step. Most unions would not accept these workers. Rut Isaac Myers, the leading African American labor leader of the time, told the group "American citizenship for the black man is a complete failure tf he is proscribed |barred] from the workshops of the country." After ho speech a majority of the delegates voted to admit all workers to the union. The Knights advocated the eight-hour workday and slrsi regulation of trusts. They hoped to avoid strikes, the refusal of laborers to work until their demands are met. Cooperation between 'From "Among the Poor of Chicago" b> Joseph Kirkland m The Pour in the Cities Preview & Review ■The New Immigration IAtKKJt three quarters of the workers in the Carnegie steel mills hail ton born in Europe. L ike most immigrants, including Carnegie him- stlf. they had come to America to find work. To millions of poor people in other parts of the world, industrial expansion had made h Ibc United Slates seem like the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow. ■ Mali Twain used a similar metaphor when he called this era the ■ Gilded Age. The surface was dazzling, but only base metal lay below. It was as though the country w ere an enormous magnet draw ing ■ people into it from every direction. Between 1X60 and 1900 about 14 ■ million immigrants arrived. Most settled in large cities. In 1X80, X7 ■ percent of the residents of Chicago were either immigrants or the children of immigrants. The situation was similar in New York. San Francisco, Milwaukee, Cleveland. Boston, and most other cities. Before the IXXOs most immigrants had come from western and jorthem Europe, especially from England, Ireland. Germany, and ■ tk Scandinavian countries. We have already noted that established ■ Americans frequently resented the newcomers of this "Old lrnmigra- H tion." However, people from western Europe had certain advantages H that helped them to adjust in their new homeland. British and Irish ■'Btmigrants spoke English. Many German immigrants were well ed- ■ icaied and skilled in one or another useful trade. Scandinavians were ■nperienced farmers and often came with enough money to buy land Bio the West. Except lor the Irish, most of these immigrants were Bftotestanis. as were most Americans. In the IXXOs the trend of immigration changed. Thousands of ■ Mans. Poles. Hungarians. Greeks, and Russians flocked in. People ■ sieved in the golden dream of opportunity. America was the ■ "golden door." One Jewish girl living in Russia. 13 years old at the ■ little, waited for her father already in America to send for the family. ■ When the letter arrived, she wrote: ((.So at Iasi I was going to America! Really, really going, at last! The boundaries burst. The arch of heaven soared. A million suns shone out for every star. The winds rushed in from outer space, roaring in my ears, 'America! | America !''*? [he trip to America was still a trial. But all were buoyed by hopes la better life. Anzia Ye/.ierska, a sixteen-year-old Jew ish girl from Wand, remembered: t([We traveled in] steerage [the cheapest section of the shipl I dirty bundles—foul odors—seasick humanity—but I saw and pram The Promised l.tmd by Mary Amin Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 5. Understanding Issues, Events, & Ideas. Use the following words to describe how American cities changed between 1860 and 1900: Gilded Age, Statue of Liberty, ethnic neighborhood, New Immigration, literacy test. Chinese Exclusion Act, settlement house, Hull House, cable car, electric trolley, Brooklyn Bridge. 1. How did the immigrants coming to the United States after the 1880s differ from those who had come earlier? 2. How were Chinese immigrants treated? Mexican immigrants? 3. What problems were faced by cities during their rapid growth? What were some solutions? Thinking Critically. In 1890 you arrive in New York City from Poland. Write a letter to your cousin back home, describing your new life in the United States. The Growth of Cities 683 imore lington. D.C. 119071 gjGToHr^n^ (1890) m, "'V v <si. Paul . Rochml.r^ Jy ^ Delioit 1 ®0,,al'^t> Jul Milwaukee* O r|iJ*i"od C Chicago0; To led * 0 Pitt*t>urgl ) :Colun^bus# f_____- ' Indianaool.s* oCtncirinali V 1 ^prmgfioid ■sTfwqston ^Pfovidance ^•N"w Haven *"New York |ewark iladelphia SOUTH 1 ^Sl Pool DAKOTA Mimytopolls N. 118891 "i ' YYVOMlNG (18901 °San Fiaoclsco j (I St L w Orleans Go if of Mexico 'jOO m 250 500 Km i > r® nEW * fiS / MEXICO f 11917. ' '< t A \ ' s I • More than 1,000,000 people • 300.000 to 1.000,000 people • 100,000 to 299,999 people New states (after 1888) Albers Equal-Area Projector* LEARNING FROM MAPS. The second half of the 19th century saw the growth of many of America's largest cities. Still, evat by 1900few of the largest cities arc west of the Mississippi River. Why do you think this is true? heard nothing of the foulness and ugliness around me. I floated in showers of sunshine; visions upon visions of the new world opened before me. From lips to lips flowed the golden legend of the golden country: "In America you can say what you feel—you can join your friends in open streets without fear. . . .' "In America is a home for everybody. The land is your land. . . .' 'Everybody is with everybody alike in America. . . .* 'Everybody can do what he wants with his life in America, . . .' 'Plenty for all. [.earning flows free like milk and honey."'55 After I8Kf> the immigrants' first sight of America was often the Statue of Liberty. At the base of the statue were the words written by the poet Emma Lazarus: C< Give me your tired, your poor. Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free. 'From Hungry Hearts by Anzia Yezierska \mm I laeum of the Citv The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these the homeless, tempest-tossed, to me: I I lift my lamp beside the golden door. . . .W The colossal Statue of Liberty raises the torch of freedom in New York Harbor. It was first known as "Liberty Enliflbteninsi the World." Here we see the dedication of the nuipnificent gift from France. The sculptor, F. A. Bartholdi, wished to pay tribute to the alliance of France with the American colonies duritu7 the Revolution. What docs the statue symbolize today? But although America was a vast improvement in most cases, it a hard time living up to the dreams of most immigrants. Their (experiences were not w hat they had expected. Anzia Yezierska ite: U Between the buildings that loomed like mountains, we 1 stmggled with our bundles. ... Up Broadway, under the bridge, and through the swarming streets of the ghetto [a I segregated neighborhood!, we followed Gedalyeh Mindel I [a friend], ' 1 looked about the narrow streets of squeezed-in stores and houses, ragged clothes, dirty bedding oozing out of the windows, ashcans and garbage cans cluttering the sidewalks. A vague sadness pressed down on my heart—the first doubt of America. Hungry Hearts by Anzia Yezierska The Growth of Cities Point of View For many immigrants it was sail the crowded ships to America or starve. The author of The Fitz- geralds and the Kennedys explains the Irish exodus tt As anybody who knows the history of Ireland knows, the potato failed. . . . The failure of four successive crops sentenced one out of every six peasants to death by starvation and forced more than a quarter of the Irish population to emigrate. . . . Before the Great Famine, as it came to be called, the Irish had regarded the idea of leas - ing their country as the most appalling of fates. But now, terrified and desperate in the wake of starvation and fever, they made their way out of Ireland by the tens of thousands. . . . burrowing their way onto the great "coffin ships," so named because of the great numbers who died on board. . . ." Doris Kearns Goodwin, 1987 Most immigrants were indeed poor. They had little or no education and no special skills. They knew no Hnglish. Their habits and cultures were very different from those of native-born Americans. I The majority were Roman or Greek Orthodox Catholics or Jews. , Many of these immigrants came from areas where money seldom used. People there exchanged food for cloth, a cow fora I wagon, and so on. It was difficult for such people to adjust to life in I a large industrial city. Most took the lowest-paid jobs. Whole famfo I toiled to earn enough to survive. As Ye/ierska recalled: 1 felt a strangling in my throat as 1 neared the sweatshop prison: all my nerves screwed together into iron hardness to endure the day's torture. For an instant I hesitated as 1 faced the grated window of the old dilapidated building—dirt and decay cried out from every crumbling brick. In the maw of the shop, raging around me the roar and the clatter, the clatter and the roar, the merciless grind of the pounding machines. Half maddened [crazy], half deadened. I struggled to think, to feel, to remember—what I am—who am I—why was 1 here? 1 struggled in vain—bew ildered and lost in a w hirlpool of noise. 'America—America—w here was America?' it cried in my heart.1?* The immigrants from each country or district tended to cluster together in the same city neighborhood. In 1890 a New York reporter wrote that a map of the city showing where different nationalities lived would have "more stripes than the skin of a zebra, and more colors than any rainbow." These ethnic neighborhoods were likecitro I within cities. They offered people newly arrived in the strange nc" world of America a chance to hold on to a few fragments of the world they had left. There the immigrants could find familiar foods, people who spoke their language, churches and clubs based on old- country models. Many native-born Americans resented this New Immigratioa. They insisted that the newcomers were harder to assimilate, or "Americanize" than earlier generations. Workers were disturbed to the new immigrants' w illingness to work long hours for low wager American Protestants believed the mass immigration would weakea their political and social clout. A new nativist organization, the American Protective Association, blamed the hard times of the 1890s oa immigration. Nativists charged that the new immigrants were ph>> I ically and mentally inferior. They were dangerous radicals, the nativ- ists said, who wanted to destroy American democratic institutions 'From Hungry Henris by An/i.i Ye/ierska ViHRim of the City of New York 'The Battery, Men' York" was painted about 1855 by Samuel H. Waugh. This ktail shows a shipful of immigrants arriving in Nat' York, Immigrants were fmessed at Castle Garden, at the left in the background. Why did some Americans resent the new immigration? |0ne poet expressed these fears in this excerpt. tt Wide open and unguarded stand our gates. And through them presses a wild motley throng— Men from the Volga and the Tartar steppes [Russia], Featureless figures from the Hwang Ho [China], Malayan, Scythian [Greek], Teuton [German], Celt | Irish], and Slav. Flying the Old World's poverty and scorn; These bringing with them unknown gods and rites. [ Those, tiger passions, here to stretch their claws. In street and alley what strange longues are loud, tn the 1890s the Immigration Restriction League called for a law iventing anyone who could not read and write some language from ring the country. The League knew that such a literacy test would out many immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. In pail of the world many regions did not have public school lems. Congress passed a literacy test bill in 1897. but President Grover eland vetoed it. He insisted that America should continue to be place of refuge for the world's poor and persecuted. Many "Unguarded (talcs" by Thomas Bailey Aldrich in The Works of Thomas Bailee (i. Poems, vol. II The Growth of Cities 0 Northwestern Europe (mostly Ireland, Germany, and England) 1 Central and Eastern Europe (mostly Poland, Russia, and Hungary) C Southern Europe (mostly Italy and Greece) l Asia (mostly China) I Other 1861-1880 1901-1920 10 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 Millions of immigrants Source. Historical Statistics ot the United States 5%-nr 6% S% i_ 13% 44% 29% 11% 1 1 1 " 1 1 i 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 "plovers opposed any check on immigration for less humane reasons. They knew that unlimited immigration would assure them a steady force of low-paid hut hard-working laborers. Congress did exclude one type of immigrant during this period— Ik Chinese. By 1880 there were about 75,000 Chinese immigrants in iomia. They were extremely hard-working people. Most were ddhists, a religion little understood in America, Because of language and cultural differences, the Chinese tended even more than tost immigrants to stick together. They seemed unwilling to try American ways. Older residents feared and resented them. When a ession swept the country, California workers worried that Chinese workers would steal their jobs at lower wages. In 1882 Congress responded to the demands of Californians by passing the Chinese Exclusion Act. It prohibited Chinese workers from entering United States for a period of ten years. Later the ban was ended. It was not lifted until l%5. By 1900 about 80.(KM) Mexicans had emigrated to the United tes. Increasingly they provided the labor force that developed the thwestern part of the nation. Unlike most other immigrants, these comers seldom settled in large cities. Many had to move conlin- ly from place to place. They encountered many social, economic, hid political handicaps. Yet Mexican American communities sur- edand even thrived, strengthened by their cultural traditions and unity life. Some Mexican Americans found jobs as laborers ing the Southern Pacific and Santa Fe Railroads. When the lines completed, they became section hands—men whose job it was maintain the railroad right-of-way and repair damaged tracks and Many families had to live in railroad boxcars. Other Mexican ants worked as cowhands on cattle ranches. Still others be- farm laborers. Like so many immigrants, most were poorly and oftentimes badly treated. Before 1900, most immigrants To the United States came from Sorthwcst- ertt Europe, particidarly England, Ireland, and Germany. In the last decades of the 1800s, the proportion of immigrants from this region began to decline. By the early part of the 20th century, Northwestern Europe accounted far only a small share of newcomers to America. According to the graph, from which regions did most immigrants come after 1900? The Growth of Cities 689 1900 j t t j s e ? y it is af 3f >r, a- to en i is he Cfimese Exclusion Act 1886 1889 Haymarket Hull House Square bornbing founded 1892 Homestead Strike * 1890 American Sherman Antitrust Act Federation of tabor 1887 Interstate Commerce Act 2. Between 1870 and 1900, what was the rate of I increase of the male workers as compared to the female workers? 3. Which 10-year interval saw the greatest in- I crease in the total number of workers? j t In 1900, the table shows a new age group: 16- I 19. What changes may have resulted in this new age group for workers? Using Primary Sources In the late 1800s people began arriving in America Uom eastern Europe. The following excerpt is from an essay that was submitted in a competition organized by the Committee for Immigrants in America. The essay appeared in a journal called Eigrants in America Review. As you read the rpt from "What America Means to a Russian iss," think about an immigrant's point of view I if ' Americanization." 2. The author thinks that "the virtues of American life is the best Americaniser." What do you think the author means by this statement? 3. What might the use of grammar and spelling tell you about the author of the article? 4. Think about recent immigrants to the United States. Do you think that "Americanization" is necessary? Why or why not? Unking History & Geography Immigration has been an important aspect of the development of the United States. To understand immigration, reread "The New Immigration" on pages 683-89 and on an outline map of the world, color the countries from which most of these new immigrants came. Then review "Immigration from Europe" on page 343. Mark the countries from which these earlier immigrants came in a different color. I America means for an Immigrant a fairy promised I land that came out true, a land that gives all they I need for their work, a land which gives than human I rights, a land that gives morality through her I "lunches and education through her free schools and I libraries. The longer I live in America the more I I think of the question of Americanising the immi- I limits. At first I thought that there is not such a I question as that, for the children of immigrants nat- I wally are A mericans and good A mcrieans. A meriea u a land made up of foreigners and the virtues of American life is the best Americaniscr. The first gen- tration of American immigrants can't be Americanized much for they were raised in different ways the mode of living is different. And yet how much it is vhen they love America and are such patriots. [According to the excerpt, what has America given the new immigrants? Enriching Your Study of History 1. Individual Project. Complete one of the following projects. Use historical imagination to place yourself in a telegraph office in Homestead, Pennsylvania, in 1892. Prepare a telegraph message that reports on the clash of strikers and Pinkertons. Include the views of both sides in the Homestead strike. Or using historical imagination, place yourself in the year 1890. A few months ago, on your twenty-first birthday, you moved from your parents' farm to find work in the city. Write a letter to the folks at home telling them about city life. 2. Cooperative Project. Your class will prepare a multimedia presentation on the railroad network that was built after the Civil War. Various groups will use pictures, stories, and songs to show the development and effects of railroads. Chapter 19 Review Point of View Doris Kearns Goodwin has written this description of Matthew Keany—the North End boss in Boston. John Fitzgerald goes to Keany for help after his father's death. CiFitzgcrald found the bluff and genial Keany in his usual position, behind his desk in the back room of the red brick grocery store. . . . Into this low- ceilinged room which served as his headquarters, thousands of men and women had entered over the years in search of assistance. By Kcanv's word, a man's son could be liberated from prison, a widow provided with food, an aspiring peddler issued a permit and a destitute father given a coffin to bun' his infant child. . . . [There | Fitzgerald reported all summer long in order to help the boss dispense the hundred and one favors regularly awarded in the course of a day, favors which spread the boss's influence, like a huge spider, over the entire district. . . .95 From The Fitzgeralds and the Kennedyr, 1987 York. New Jersey, and Connecticut were a cluster of states where Democrats could sometimes win. Ohio. Indiana, and Illinois made another group where elections were usually very close. In nearly every presidential election after the Civil War. the party that won the majority of the electoral votes of the "close" northern stales won the presidency. For this reason both parties usually chose presidential and vice presidential candidates from these close states. These candidates were called native sons. Their names on the ballot could increase the chances of carrying the candidates' home states and perhaps winning the election. Every president from Rutherford B. Hayes, elected in 1876. to William Howard Taft, elected in 1908, came from either Ohio. Indiana, or New York. Of the 27 men w ho were nominated for president or vice president by the Democrats and Republicans between 1876 and 1908. 19 came from these three states. Not a single southerner was nominated by the major parties for either office during the period. This shows how the Civil War continued to affect politics. Ordinary people paid a great deal of attention to politics. A much larger proportion of eligible voters actually voted than has been true in recent times. Did they do so because the campaigns were so intense and colorful? Or were the campaigns intense and colorful because the people were so interested in politics? Unfortunately, these are questions almost impossible for historians to answer! The Poor and Political Machines One reason why elections were close in northern industrial states like New' York and Ohio w as that large numbers of recent immigrants lived in them. These immigrants, as we have noted, tended to settle in the cities. They were "outsiders." poor and without much influence. Most people with wealth and social position looked down upon them. And in the northern states the wealthy and socially prominent were nearly all Republicans. This explains w hy most immigrants in the cities joined the Democratic party. Their position was somewhat like that of blacks in Ik southern stales. Each group supported the minority party of its part of the country. Northern immigrants voted Democratic, southern blacks Republican. Northern blacks, on the other hand, while definitely not part of the majority , supported the Republican party. Thcwere mindful that it was the Republican party that had abolished slavery. In most northern cities local politicians took advantage of Ik immigrants' preference for the Democratic party to build up pulitkal machines. These organizations nominated candidates for local office and turned out large numbers of loyal voters on election day. One such machine was Tammany Hall, which was run by New York Cm Democrats. "New York's New Solar System" was drawn by Joseph Keppler in 1898. Here Richard C.roker,, the head of the Tammany machine, is the sun. Atvund him revolve lesser corrupt politicians. Wiry are these figures definitely not heavenly bodies? Pictures Hie leaders of the machines, called bosses, provided many ben- to poor city dwellers. Well-to-do residents and most political mers disliked the machines. The bosses used shady and even ly illegal methods to win votes. But they certainly helped new I people, especially immigrants, to make the adjustment to city life. They helped immigrants find jobs. When neighborhood workers were i or out of work, the bosses would supply their families with food lnuhmall sums of money. The machines ran community picnics on ^holidays. They helped local youngsters who got in trouble with the In return for their help the bosses expected the people to vote |forihe machine's candidates. By controlling elections, the bosses id reward their friends or line their own pockets. For example, ipanies that wanted to operate streetcar lines or sell gas or elector lighting homes or businesses needed city permits called lists. Bosses often demanded bribes before they would have franchises issued by the local officials they controlled. They made deals with contractors who put up public buildings or did t work for the city. The bosses agreed to pay needlessly high pees for the work in return for large kickbacks, the illegal return to :m of part of the payment made to contractors. Politics for profit seemed to be the method of operation. This le politics and politicians the target of many reformers. Lincoln Politics After the War 699 Thomas Mast first drop a Tammany tiger in 1871, When this cartoon appeared in Harper's magazine, the city bosses threatened to cancel all orders of Harper Brothers' textbooks. "The Tammany Tiger" upset Boss Tweed, who controlled Tammany Hall and who had said, "As Iona as I count the votes, what air you going to do about it?" Mast asked the same question in the cartoon's subtitle, ''What Are You Going to Do About It?" On what ancient Roman practice is this cartoon based? Steffens, the leading reformer of political corruption, wrote: H There is hardly a government office from United States Senator down to alderman in any part of the country to which some business leader has not been elected. Yet politics remains corrupt and government pretty bad. Business leaders have failed in politics as they have in good citizenship. Why? Because politics is business. . . . The commercial spirit is the spirit of profit, not patriotism; of credit, not honor: of individual gain, not national prosperity: of trade, not principle. . . . We cheat our government and we let our leaders rob it. We let them persuade and bribe our power away from us. True, they pass strict laws for us. but we let them pass bad laws too. giving away public property in exchange. Our good, and often impossible, laws we allow to be used for oppression and blackmail. Ami what can we say? We break our ow n laws and rob our ow n government—the woman at the tax office, the lyncher with his rope, and the captain of industry with his bribe and his rebate. The spirit of graft and of lawlessness is the American spirit. We Americans have failed. We may be selfish and influenced by gain. . . . [But] there is pride in the character of American citizenship. This pride may be a power in the land. So this record of shame and yet of self-respect, disgraceful confession, yet a declaration of honor, is dedicated. in all good faith, to the accused—to all the citizens of all the cities in the United States.1?) The machines did both good and harm in their day. Not all of [km were associated with the Democratic party. The powerful Phil- ^Iphia machine, for example, was a Republican organization. So icre many of the machines in middle-sized cities. But most of the city machines were run by the Democrats. They were very useful ithe national Democratic party in presidential elections in close Jes like New York. 'tting on the Fence cmcly important social and economic problems were being dissed and settled after the Civil War. There were problems caused h industrial expansion and technological change. Other problems tilted from the growth of cities. Still other problems related to dal questions and to immigration. Logically, the parties should be fought their campaigns on these issues. They rarely did so. Each was afraid that a strong stand on any versial question would cost votes. It seemed politically safer make vague statements that everyone could accept, even if no one rely agreed with them. This was called sitting on the fence. Still, the issues remained, and politicians had to deal with them one way or another. For example, the need to regulate railroads other big businesses resulted in the Interstate Commerce Act lad the Sherman Antitrust Act. The Indian lands of the West were d and divided up. During these years Congress and the presi- ts struggled with high protective tariffs on imported manufactured s. They tried to solve what was known as "the money question." they attempted to reform the way government employees were ' and fired. c Tariff Issue n the United States first began to develop manufacturing about time of the War of 1812, a strong case could be made for tariffs heavily taxed foreign manufactured goods. American "infant stries" needed protection in order to compete with larger, more ient producers in Europe. After the Civil War the need for protection was much less clear, rica was rapidly becoming the greatest manufacturing nation in world. Its factories w'cre efficient. The costs of doing business : lower than in many foreign countries. Manufacturers did not, ever, want to give up the extra profits that the protective tariffs possible. the The Shame of the Cities by Lincoln Steffens Politics After the War Other farmers, especially Hispanics. African Americans, and new immigrants, had nowhere to turn. As in other occupations, they faced prejudice and discrimination. They were not welcomed in many i>fthe local granges and they had even less political clout than established white farmers. Yet though life was shockingly hard for these people, in many places their communities thrived. In the West and Southwest Mexican American communities grew, strengthened by cultural traditions. As you have read, one of the most important of those traditions was the spirit of community—everyone pitching in to help. See if you can jet a feeling for life in the Southwest through the follow ing excerpt, tten by Jovita Gonzalez about her life in Texas: U In August, down towards the Rio Grande, the rays of the sun beat vertically upon the sandy stretches of land, from which all tender vegetation has been scorched, and the white, naked land glares back at the sun: the only palpitating [moving] things discoverable between the two poles of heat are heat devils. The rattlesnakes are as deeply holed up and as quiet as in midw inter. In the thickets of brush the roadrunners. rusty lizards, mockingbirds, and all other living things pant. Whirlwinds dance across the stretches of prairie interspersed between the thickets of thorn. At six o'clock it is hotter than at midday. Seven o'clock, and then the sun. a ball of orange-pink, descends below the horizon at one stride. The change is magical. A soft cooling breeze, the pulmotor Ibreathing apparatus] of the Border lands, springs up from the south. Down in the Canada [brook between mountains], which runs by the ranch, doves coo. Out beyond, cattle are grazing and calves are frisking. In the cottonwood tree growing beside the dirt "tank" near the ranch house the redbird sings. Children shout and play. From the corrals come the voices of vaqueros Icowboys] singing and jesting. Blended with the Healings of goats and sheep are the whistles and hisses of the pastor (shepherd). The locusts complete the chorus of evening noises. Darkness subdues them: then, as the moon rises, an uncounted mob of mongrel curs [mixed- breed dogs] set up a howling and barking at it that coyotes out beyond mock. It was on a night like this that the ranch folk gathered at the Big House to shell corn. All came: Tfo Julianito, the pastor, with his brood of sunburned half-starved children ever eager for food; Alejo the fiddler. Juanito the idiot, called the Innocent, because the Lord was keeping his mind in heaven: Pedro the hunter, who had seen the world and spoke English; the vaqueros: and. on rare occasions. Tfo Populism Esteban, the mail carrier. Even the women came, for on such occasions supper was served. A big canvas was spread outside, in front of the kitchen. In the center of this canvas, ears of corn were piled in pyramids for the shellers, w ho sat about in a circle and with their bare hands shelled the grains off the cobs. It was then, under the moonlit sky. that we heard stories of witches, buried treasures, and ghosts. . . . Then the pastor told of how he had seen spirits in the shape of balls of lire floating through the air. They were souls doing penance for their past sins. As a relief to our fright. Don [a title of respect) Francisco suggested the Tio Julianito do one of his original dances to the tune of Alejo's fiddle, A place was cleared on the canvas, and that started the evening's merriment. The Silver Issue Lower freight and storage charges did not help farmers as much as the Grangers had hoped. Costs were not reduced much. So farmers tried instead to raise the prices of their produce. The best way to push up prices seemed to be by causing inflation. Farmers looked for a way to put more money in circulation so their prices would rise. One way was by coining silver money. Throughout the period before the Civil War both gold and silver had been minted into coins and used to back bank notes. But in 1873 Congress had voted to stop coining silver. That seemed a terrible mistake to those who favored inflation. Many new silver mines had been discovered. If miners could bring their silver to the United Stales mint for coining, more money would be created. With more money in circulation, prices would rise. Yet silver was a relatively scarce metal. The amount that could be mined would place a limit on the amount of new money that could be put into circulation. This would prevent "runaway" inflation, which might result if there w'as no limit on how much paper money could be printed. Farmers and silver miners joined to make a powerful political force. People began to refer to the law that had discontinued the coining of silver as the Crime of 1873. They demanded that the government once again coin all the silver brought to the mint. The result of their pressure was a political compromise. In 18'8 Congress passed a bill sponsored by Representative Richard Bland of Missouri and Senator William B. Allison of Iowa. Bland was i Democrat who believed sincerely in coining both gold and silver, 'From Among My People by Jovita Gonzalez r^.-.Av - The G Mils said Sena pure In It crea- This price otinc silve an oi e Depression of 1893 rtly after the presidential election, which Grover Cleveland won. country entered into the worst period of hard times in its history, ness activity slowed down. Unemployment increased. By the end of 1K93 more than a hundred railroads had gone bankrupt. People ded money, withdrawing their savings in gold from the banks. As usual the depression hurt African Americans, Ilispanics. and cm immigrants worst of all. Many held the lowest-paying jobs and re therefore the first to be laid off. Others barely scraping out a ing as farmers now could not sell their produce. One historian tc of "the absolute destitute condition of the colored people of the South." It w'as as bad if not worse elsewhere. The long period of deflation that began in the 1870s was an rtanl cause of this depression. Farmers and wage earners blamed the depression on "tight money." They felt the Sherman Silver Purse Act had not gone far enough. T hey demanded that the govern- ■fit coin even more money. President Cleveland believed the business decline was caused hy the uncertainty people had about the safety of their money. The emmeni should stop coining silver, he insisted, and go back to single gold standard. T his meant that only gold would be used to 'k the currency. In October 1893 he persuaded Congress to repeal Sherman Silver Purchase Act. This action angered those who favored coining silver as well as . It split the Democratic party. And it did not end the depression, ng 1894-1895. economic conditions got worse rather than better. Other people blamed the depression on the government's failure regulate business. Unsafe working conditions, child labor, low *es. and unfair pricing policies had gone on for most of the century, eminent on all levels had ignored these and other effects of strialization. liven more, they seemed to support business lead- in their pursuit of profit. These people claimed the depression of 3 was another result of the lack of government regulation of riean business. xev's Army >the depression dragged on. large numbers of unemployed men to wandering about the countryside. These people were called ps. Some thought them dangerous troublemakers, perhaps even 'utionarics who wanted to overthrow the government. In truth, ronly wanted work. Small groups of unemployed workers began making protest hes to seek government relief. This increased fear of the "tramp Preview & Review Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 4. Understanding Issues, Events, & Ideas. Using the following words, describe the key instances of labor unrest during the Depression of 1893: gold standard. Coxey's Army, Pullman Strike. 1. Why did President Cleveland want the nation to return to the gold standard? 2. How would Coxey's plan have put people to work and caused prices to rise? 3. Why did many people turn against President Cleveland after the Pullman Strike? Why was the president hurt by Governor Altgeld's criticism? Thinking Critically. Which amendment in the Bill of Rights might Jacob Coxey have used to protest his arrest in March 1894? Why? Jacob Coxey scans to be a timid, mild sort of man in this 1894 photograph. Rut appearances can be deceiving. Tim bnmv him as the leader of Coxey's Army. How successful wits he? Unemployment and Unrest 723 The Granger Collection, New York Limits of Progressivism 805 Preview & Review Restrictions on Immigration B\ the end of 1914 the Progressive Movement had accomplished main political, social, and economic reforms. Bui the progressives had prejudices and blind spots that limited their achievements. Most wre not very sympathetic to immigrants during a time of heavy immigration. Some years at the height of the progressive period, more than I million newcomers settled in the United States. In 1907 \mericans demanded that the government stem the tide of Japanese immigration. In 1907 the United Slates and Japan reached what is known as the Gentlemen's Agreement. Japan promised not to allow unskilled workers to come to the United States. Progressives who were alarmed about corruption in politics Mamed the recent immigrants. These people cast a large proportion of the voles that kept corrupt bosses in power. Social workers and many others who were trying to help the poor thought that too many immigrants were crowding into the slums. They argued that the famous American melting pot could not absorb so many people so quickly. They w'ere afraid that the character of American life would be undermined unless immigration was somehow limited. I ben Uncle Sam teems disturbed by the horde of new arrivals—"Anarchists in IChica/io" and "Socialists in Snv Tori." What reveals the artistV prejudice? Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 5. Understanding Issues. Events. & Ideas. Explain the limits of progressivism, using these words: Gentlemen's Agreement, melting pot. Niagara Movement. National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Great War. 1. Why were progressives not sympathetic to immigrants? Whai was the attitude of most progressives toward blacks? Why? 2. How did Booker T. Washington continue to work for black people? How did William E. B. Du Bois work for blacks? 3. What event slowed the pace of progressive reform? Thinking Critically. Suppose you are a speaker at the Niagara Falls meeting of 1905. What demands would you make? How would you expect the government to meet those demands? Culver Pictures Victoriano Huerta became military dictator of Mexico in 1913. President Wilson said be beaded a "government if butchers." Do you suppose such a display of medals was wont in the memory af fallen comrades or to impress those who opposed Huerta's heavy-handed rule? Revolution in Mexico Even before the war in Europe began. Wilson had to deal with an important foreign problem. This was the Mexican Revolution. This upheaval, which began in 1910, was against the dictator Porfirio Diaz who had ruled Mexico for many years and allowed foreign companies to exploit his country's resources. It was of concern to Wilson because United Slates investments in Mexico were threatened by the troubles. Also, many Mexican refugees from the lighting were crossing the border into Texas. New Mexico. Arizona, and California against U.S. wishes. Before Wilson became president, the revolution had been led by Francisco Madero. a progressive-type reformer who had forced Diaz to resign and leave Mexico. Madero became president but early in 1913 was murdered by General Victoriano Huerta. Huerta set up a military dictatorship with all powers of government held by the generals. Wilson called this "a government of butchers." He refused to recognize Huerta as the legitimate leader of the Mexicans. Many Mexicans agreed with Wilson. A new revolt broke out. led by Venustiano Carranza. Wilson was urged on by United Stales companies whose Mexican properties were in danger. He asked Huerta to order free elections and promise not to be a candidate himself. If he agreed, the United Slates would try to persuade the Carranza forces to stop fighting. Wilson meant well. But even supporters of Carranza resented Wilson's interference. Mexico's problems were none of his business, insisted both sides. If we agreed to United States interference, said an official of the Huerta government, "all the future elections for president |of Mcxicol would be submitted to the veto of any president of the United States." Then, in April 1914. some American sailors on shore leave in Tampico, Mexico, were arrested. They were soon released, but by this time Wilson was so angry at Huerta that he used the incident to try to overthrow him. He sent a naval force to occupy the city of Veracruz. Wilson did not intend to start a war. He expected his "show of force" W'ould cause the downfall of Huerta. But 19 United States sailors and 126 Mexicans were killed before Veracruz was captured. Again. Carranza joined with his enemy Huerta in speaking out against the interference of the United States in Mexican affairs. Fortunately, the ambassadors of the ABC Powers—Argentina. Brazil, and Chile—offered to mediate the dispute—that is. to act as neutral go-betweens to find a peaceful settlement. Wilson eagerly accepted their offer. The crisis ended. By summer Carranza had forced Huerta from pow'er. The United Stales then withdrew its naval force from Veracruz. Yet Wilson's troubles in Mexico were far from over. No sooner Brandeis, famous for the "Brandeis brief' in the Muller v. Oregon case, to a vacancy on the Supreme Court. Many liberals applauded the choice of Brandeis, who was Jewish. But large numbers of Americans were prejudiced against Jews and probably voted against Wilson because he appointed Brandeis. The presidential election was very close. Wilson got 277 electoral votes to Hughes's 254. Nearly everyone agreed that the president's success in keeping out of the Great War saved him from defeat. Wilson was loo intelligent to take comfort from this fact. He knew that if the Germans ever decided to sink merchant ships again | without warning. America could not stay neutral. I America Seeks Peace Without Victory I Wilson's fear of being forced into the war led him to make a strong I effort toend it by negotiation. On January 22, 1917, he made a moving I speech calling for peace without victory. If either side tried to profit I from the war by taking land or money from the other. Wilson said. I the only result would be hatred that would cause more wars. All the I stations, including the United States, must try to make a peace based I on "justice throughout the world." Unfortunately, neither the Allies nor the Central Powers would I settle for peace without victory. The cost in lives and money had I been so great after two and one-half years of war that neither side I could face the idea that all that expense had been wasted. At the I very least each intended to make the other pay the entire monetary I cost of the war. The German government already had secretly deluded to resume submarine attacks on shipping without warning. The Germans realized that unleashing their sharklike U-boats would probably cause the United States to declare war. Nevertheless, expected ihal "ruthless submarine warfare" would keep food munitions from reaching Great Britain. Then the British would ■ have to surrender. The war would be over before the United Stales I could raise and train an army and get its soldiers across the Atlantic I io France. [Less than two weeks after Wilson's "peace without victory" speech, an American merchant ship was sunk by a U-boat. Wilson j then broke diplomatic relations with Germany. He ordered the Gcr- Iman ambassador out of the United States and recalled his own am- issador from Germany. Late in February the president learned that German Foreign lelations Secretary Arthur Zimmermann was trying to make an al- fnce with Mexico. Zimmermann had sent a telegram to the German ibassador in Mexico with the following instructions: UWe intend to begin unrestricted submarine warfare on the first of February. We shall endeavor in spite of this to keep the United Stales neutral. In the event of not succeeding, America Enters the War Courtesy of the Museum of New Mexico Octaviano Larrazola was one of the thousands of Mexican Americans who eatne north for wartime jobs. Larra- zola became the first Hispanic American governor of New Mexico and later represented New Mexico in the U.S. Senate. to escape the disorder resulting from the Mexican Revolution. Even more came after the Great World War began. Most settled in the Southwest. Mexican American leaders worked hard to involve the new immigrants in American life. When New Mexico and Arizona became slates in 1912, many Mexican Americans voted in their first United States election. In 1916 Octaviano Larrazolo was elected governor of New Mexico, the first Hispanic American governor. In 1928 he became the first Hispanic American in the United States Senate. Besides working in the cotton fields of Texas and Arizona and on farms in Colorado and California, the Mexican Americans became railroad laborers, construction workers, and miners. Some settled in the northern cities, attracted by jobs in war plants. The jobs were mostly low paid and unskilled. Nevertheless, these workers could earn much more than they could by farming. By the end of the war there were communities of Mexican-born families in St. Louis. Chr cago, Detroit, and several other northern cities. Many Mexican Americans served in the armed forces. Propaganda and the Great War From the beginning most Americans enthusiastically supported America's involvement in the war. But Wilson realized that other Americans opposed that involvement. So the government attempted to gain the cooperation of all Americans in the war effort. A week after war was declared, Wilson created the Committee on Pubk Information, headed by George Creel. The CPI used propaganda to influence people's opinions about the war. For example, it circulated millions of leaflets praising America's official war aims and criticizing the German government. These releases portrayed the Germans as bloodthirsty Huns willing to do anything to conquer the world. They even hinted that there were German spies in every office, factory, labor union, and university. And perhaps more importantly, they implied that an; disagreement with the American war effort was unpatriotic. Using propaganda also sold war bonds to raise money to pay for the war. convinced young men to join the armed forces, and even helped convert some doubters. Churches and religious groups, colleges. women's organizations, and civic groups joined in the government's efforts to "sell the war to the American people." The Treatment of Protesters The government's propaganda campaign failed to convince everyewe of the rightness of United States actions. Despite the urgings ofunuo leaders like Samuel Gompcrs, some workers were unwilling top) along with the government's labor policies. Radicals in the blw t c t w il si rt a -= Point of View Not all immigrants were as frightened of America as most Americans were of them. In 0 America, an Italian journalist wrote these lines. {(Americans followed the leaders they chose, not those given to them by God or imposed by screaming and violent crowds. The leaders they freely chose, most of them anyway, who looked to me like Roman senators or Renaissance princes, were born on small (arms, the sons of humble people. 'Hiis free and easy flow' of a whole nation toward the future seemed the enviable secret of America, a country where it was still possible to hope. But was that all there was, was it real or a creation of my imagina- tion??) Luigi Barzini, 1977 "holiday" on the construction of battleships. They also agreed to maintain a fixed ratio, or balance, on all major warships The United States and Great Britain were to have no more than 525,000 tons of such vessels. Japan's limit was 315,000 tons, France and Italy's 175.000 each. In another agreement all nine nations promised to uphold the principle of the Open Door in China. This was the policy which assured all nations equal trade rights with an independent China. President Harding insisted that the Washington Conference treaties did not commit the United States "to any kind of alliance, entanglement, or involvement." This was true enough. The treaties were backed only by the good will of the nations that signed them. This satisfied most Americans. They wanted peace without the responsibility for maintaining it. They could accept the treaties and still believe that they could remain isolated in the old way from foreign "entanglements." The Postwar Reaction Isolation was an aspect of a larger postwar reaction in the United States. The Great War had been a Great Mistake, most people now thought. Millions of lives had been lost. Billions of dollars had been wasted. And for what purpose? The world had certainly not been made safe for democracy, as Wilson had promised. In 1919 most Americans seemed more worried about making the United States safe for themselves. Many seriously believed that a communist revolution might break out in the United States at am moment. They were mindful that a tiny group of communists had taken over all of Russia in 1917. Now there were perhaps seventy thousand communists (called Reds) in the United States. Communists wanted workers to raise the red flag of revolution, take up arms, and destroy the capitalist system. At the same time anarchists, who wanted all governments violently abolished, stirred up workers. But most workers were simply trying to keep their jobs. Going from war to peace had been difficult for American industry Without contracts for war supplies, many plants shut down temporarily or slowed down their operations. Hundreds of thousands of wage earners were thrown out of work. Soldiers returning to civilian life found it almost impossible to get jobs. Many of the workers found their jobs had been filled by African Americans who had moved from the South during the war tor work in factories. This added fuel to racial tensions that erupted in situations like the 1919 Chicago Race Riot. As a result a wave of strikes spread over the land. At one time or another during 1919. 4 million w orkers were on strike. Seattle was paralyzed. In Boston even the police walked off their jobs. Strikes by police were unheard of at that time. With the streets of Boston Despite these efforts, little progress was made in ending discrim* Station in America. America's postwar mood was also reflected in new immigration Iws. In 1921 Congress reacted to the isolationism of the times by uling steps to control the entry of foreigners into the United States. This made some sense at the time. The frontier had disappeared. In limachine age the nation no longer needed to import large numbers of unskilled laborers. The Emergency Quota Act limited the number of immigrants by nationality, reducing the number of newcomers from astern and southern Europe. A still stiffer quota law. the National Origins Act, was passed in 1924. Beginning in 1929. a total of only 1150,000 immigrants a year could enter the United States. In practice the number of actual immigrants fell below 100.000 every year from [ 1931 to 194ft. The Sacco-Vanzetti Case Such xenophobia—the fear of foreigners—led to the Sacco-Vanzetti case. In April 1920 two men in Massachusetts killed a paymaster and lguard during a daring daylight robbery of a shoe factory. Shortly thereafter, Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti were charged w ith the crime, and in 1921 they were convicted of murder. Sacco and Vanzetti were anarchists who believed that government was unnec- ewary and should be violently overthrown. They were also Italian immigrants. Their trial was a travesty of justice. There was little real evidence against them. Much of what w-as presented at the trial had n manufactured by the prosecution. In addition, the judge seemed udiced against the two. especially in his comments outside the room. Prominent people all over the world praised the dignity Sacco luid Vanzetti showed throughout the trial. The noted lawyer Felix [Frankfurter helped found the American Civil Liberties Union to fight |ltthe two men. Other defenders of justice, including the novelist hn Dos Bassos and the poet Edna St. Vincent Millay, joined [worldwide protests that for years kept Sacco and Vanzetti alive ough efforts to obtain a new trial. Vanzetti's dignified words are I remembered: | tt You see me before you, not trembling. J never commit a crime in my life. ... I am so convinced to be right that if you could execute me two times, and if 1 could be reborn two other times, 1 would live again and do what I have done already.?? In August 1927 Sacco and Vanzetti were electrocuted. Historians kw suspect that at least Sacco was guilty, but the truth and shame ifthe incident remain: at the time Sacco and Vanzetti paid with their he" for being radicals and foreigners as much as for any crime. Whitney Museum of American Art Were Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti guilty of robbery and hilling a pay master! Or war they simply guilty of being foreigners at a time when xenophobia—fear of foreign- ers—swept Ameriea in the 1920s? Those who believed they were innocent may have hung Ben Shahn's lithograph, "The Passion of Sacco and Vanzetti," in their living rooms in protest against the death sentence. American Reaction to the War 865 Thonuu Hart Benton depicts the dark side of prohibition in "The Bootlep- pees," painted in 1V27. Planes, trains, and fast cars brinp the customers to Iniy illepal liquor. Reynolda House, Museum of American An, Winston Salem, N.C Prohibition I During the Progressive Era there had been strong popular support for prohibiting the manufacture, transportation, and sale of alcoholic beverages. This temperance movement, like the one in the 1840s. was led by American religious groups w ho saw liquor as the devil's tool. By 1914 prohibition w as in force in more than a quarter of the states, known as the dry states. Most of the dry states were in the South and rural areas, where many of the people were members of fundamentalist Protestant religious groups. The outburst of moral and religious concern caused by the war gave energy to a national prohibition movement. Some saw it as an attack on the German custom of drinking beer: others as an attacL on the drinking habits of European Catholics. What tipped the scales was a very effective campaign to protect young servicemen from the sale of alcohol on or near army bases. This fit closely with the prohibitionist charge that drinking was a cause of poverty and social disorder. As a result, in 1919 the Eighteenth Amendment was ratified This amendment was enforced by the Volstead Act, which went into effect in January 1920. making the entire nation dry. People who favored prohibition pointed to the sharp decline in arrests for drunkenness and to the lower number of deaths from alcoholism in the 1920s. Fewer workers spent their hard-earned dollars on drink. However, prohibition was impossible to enforce, even with the tough Volstead Act. Private individuals bought liquor smuggled by bootleggers or drank gin from teacups in "speakeasies"- secret bars or clubs. Crime statistics soared in the 1920s. Most of the liquor was sold Bom National Portrait Gallery on the 103rd ballot, the exhausted delegates nominated John W. vis. a conservative lawyer from West Virginia. The deadlock between Smith and McAdoo reflected the basic isions within the Democratic party and within the nation itself. Smith was a Catholic. Many people were prejudiced against Catholics and would not vote for a Catholic for president. Some even feared that such a person would be a servant of the Pope rather than a irvant of the American people. Many rural people disliked Smith because he had been raised on the sidewalks of New York." Yet the nation was becoming more aid more urban. By the 1920s farmers no longer made up the majority iif the population. Many farmers resented this fact. In Smith's candidacy they saw a symbol of the shift from a rural to an urban nation. In addition to Coolidge and Davis. Senator Robert La Follette ^Wisconsin ran for president in 1924. La Follette had been a leading essive before the Great War. He found both the major parties too conservative for his taste after the war. He therefore formed a " Progressive party. La Follette campaigned on a platform calling |ior government ownership of railroads, protection of the right of ers to bargain collectively, aid for farmers, and other reforms. The great issue before the American people," La Follette believed, s "the control of government and industry by private monopoly." At left is a portrait of Warrcti G. Hit nhnil by Alarjjaret Lindsay Williams. Riflht is Calvin Cootidpe, nicknamed "Silent Cal" because be was a man of Jew words. Once, at a White House dinner, a lady bet Coolidpe that she could coax at least three words from him. "You lose," he replied. Howard ('.handler Christy painted Grace Goodhue Coolidpe, the popular first lady, with her collie, Rob Roy. America Heads For a Crash 885 tlftBwtmann Mewsphotos The Election of 1928 President Coolidge played down the problems of farmers and workers in the "sick" industries. He believed the future was bright. In his 11928 State of the Union message he said: U No Congress has met with a more pleasing prospect than that which appears at the present time.W Most people agreed with Coolidge. Americans were enjoying the greatest period of prosperity in their history. Most w ere earning more money and working shorter hours than ever before. They had cars, radios, and household gadgets. Life was easy. It seemed likely to tecomc easier still. The Republican parly naturally took the credit for the good times. In the 1928 presidential campaign. Herbert Hoover, the secretary iifcommcrcc. received the Republican nomination. The Democratic idate was Alfred E. Smith. Smith had a record of solid accom- hment as governor of New York. He could not be denied the ination. But his Catholic religion and his "big city" background him in rural areas. Hoover won the election with 21 million votes to Smith's 15 ion. The electoral vote was 444 to 87. Smith even lost his own e of New York as well as several Democratic states in the once id South. The main cause of Smith's defeat was the prosperity . A majority of the American people had come to believe that Herbert Hoover, candidate for president in 1928, says "hello" to Elisabeth, New Jersey, where a large and enthusiastic crowd greets hint. What made hint so popular at the time? America Heads For a Crash Index (1923=100) •The Consumer Price Index is a measure of the change in average prices paid by consumers for specified goods and services. Source: Historical Statistics of the United States The Consumer Price Index, or CPI, is a statistic that tells economists how much a typical American can afford. What happened to the CPI durint] the Great Depression? Why? The weakest and poorest suffered most. Many married women lost their jobs because employers thought they did not need to work Unemployment was far higher among African Americans. Hispanics, and other groups than among whites. In the southwestern states thousands of Mexican-born farm laborers and their children born in the United States were gathered up by federal authorities and shipped back to Mexico when they were unable to find work. Officials excused this cruel policy by arguing that there was not enough relief money to care for them. Many Mexican-born workers who had mu lost their jobs were also shipped back. In this case the excuse was that they were holding down jobs that United States citizens needed. The term "depression" describes the mood of the people as well as the state of the economy. Until the middle of the 1930s there was no system of unemployment insurance and no national welfare assistance program to help the unemployed and their families. People in desperate need had no sure place they could turn to. One sufferer recalled: (C My first real memories come about '31. It was simply a gut issue then: eating or not eating, living or not living. My father was a coal miner, outside a small town in Illinois. When the mine temporarily closed down in the early Thirties, my dad had to hunt for work elsewhere. He went around the state, he'd paint barns, anything. . . Great efforts were made to assist the jobless. State and city governments and private charities raised money to feed the poor and provide them with a little cash for their other needs. Special "charity drives," many led by churches and religious groups, were conducted 'From Hurd Times: An Oral History of the Great Depression by Studs Terkel The Dust Bowl Alexandre Hague. Drouth Sttmken Ana, 1934. oil on canvas. Deltas Museum of An. Dallas Art Association Purchase. 'W: - Nature had seemed to smile upon the young nation in the 1830s. In the 1930s nature seemed particularly cruel. As times got harder, weather and even the land seemed to turn against the poor. Perhaps the hardest hit were the farmers of the high plains—the states from Texas and Oklahoma to South and North Dakota. This region rarely gets much rain. In the early 1930s almost none fell. By 1934 the drought had become so bad that winds picked up powder-dry topsoil and blew it across the plains in dense, black clouds. The region came to be known as the Dust Bowl. It was impossible to grow anything on this shifting land. Broke and discouraged, many Oklahoma farm families loaded seemed almost overwhelming—no job, little food, no home. Yet man) hoped and prayed that they could hold on to what they had and that belter days were ahead. A woman wrote: Phi la.. Pa. November 26. 1934 I Honorable Franklin D. Roosevelt Washington, D.C. Dear Mr. President: 1 am forced to write to you because we find ourselves in a very serious condition. For the last three or four years we have had depression and suffered with my family and little children severely. . . . There has been unemployment in my house for more than three years. You can imagine that 1 and my family have suffered from lack of water supply in my house for more than two years. Last winter I did not have coal and the pipes burst in my house and therefore could not make heat in the house. Now w inter is here again and we are suffering of cold, no water in the house, and we are facing to be forced out of the house, because I have no money to move or pay so much money as they want when after making settlement I am mother of little children, am intellectual and cultural capital oi' the nation. And it remained so throughout the depression. Ambitious young blacks from other states moved there, believing Harlem was the best place to develop their talents. However, the Great Depression took much of the glitter from this revival of confidence. It struck African Americans with cruel force, as it did Hispanic Americans. As always in hard times, these workers were "the last hired and the first fired." By 1932 more than 30 percent of all black and Hispanic workers were unemployed. Still, most African Americans voted the Republican ticket in 1932. In Chicago, for example. Hoover got 76 percent of the black vote. In Cincinnati he got 71 percent. But in 1936 most blacks in Chicago and Cincinnati voted for Roosevelt. Black Support of the New Deal Today it is hard to understand w hy African Americans and Hispanic Americans found Roosevelt and the New' Deal so attractive. Many of the most important New Deal programs did little or nothing to help them. Most of the NRA industrial codes permitted employers to pay lower wages to black and Hispanic workers than to whites. New Deal farm policy badly hurt black tenant farmers and sharecroppers in the South. The AAA payments went to land owners. They were paid for taking tobacco land out of production. The tenants and sharecroppers who had farmed these acres lost their jobs and often their homes as well. It did nothing to help Hispanic farmers in the Southwest. Unemployed blacks and Hispanics in all parts of the country rarely got a full share of federal relief money or jobs. The social security program did not discriminate directly against African Americans or Hispanics. However, it left out farm laborers and household workers. The millions of blacks and Hispanics who did work of this kind received no share of the new pension and unemployment benefits. Yet African Americans and Hispanic Americans liked the New Deal. Many became enthusiastic admirers of Franklin Roosevelt. Thousands of black and Hispanic parents in the 1930s named babies after the president. The reasons for such strong feelings are best understood by keeping in mind how white society treated these groups at that lime. This is another example of the need to use historical imagination. For example, the Civilian Conservation Corps camps in the South w'ere segregated. If black youths had not been sent to separate camps when they joined the CCC, the program could not have functioned in the southern states. More important, the program almost certainly would not have been created by Congress. Blacks realized this. Most blacks therefore accepted the segregation of the camps as a lesser evil than being w ithout work. Most African Americans and Hispanic Americans thought the main point was that they were included in New Deal programs and that some effort to treat them fairly was being made by important officials. Because so many of the unemployed and poor were black or Hispanic. WPA and the federal relief programs were particularly important to them. President Roosevelt ordered stale relief officials twt to "discriminate , . . because of race or religion or politics" in distributing government aid. This order was not always obeyed, but Harry Hopkins and other key WPA officials tried hard to enforce it. With the approval of Roosevelt. Harold L. Ickes. the secretary of the interior, appointed Clark Foreman to his staff. Ickes instructed Foreman to seek out qualified blacks and try to get them jobs in the Interior Department and other government bureaus. Foreman also served as a kind of watchdog, checking on cases of racial discrimination in various New Deal programs. Among distinguished African Americans whose government service began in New Deal agencies were Robert Weaver, who became the first head of the Department of Housing and Urban Development in the 1960s, and William Hastic. later a federal judge. These appointees made up what became known as Roosevelt's Black Cabinet. One of the most prominent members of the Black Cabinet was Mary McLeod Bethune. She was the 15th child of former slaves. Some of her brothers mid sisters had been sold away from her parents before the Civil War. Mary McLeod was fiercely independent. After completing her education in South Carolina, she taught at several schools for blacks in the South. In IX9X she married Albortus Bethune. also a teacher. She founded a school of her own in Florida during the Progressive Era. In 1956 Mary McLeod Bethune was put in charge of the Office of Minority Affairs in the National Youth Administration. As with male black officials, her role was broader than her title indicated. She always had access to President Roosevelt. During the New' Deal period, she later recalled, she conferred with him privately about six or seven times a year. In a way their relationship points up the strengths and weak- sses of Roosevelt's way of dealing w ith his black supporters. His Intentions were good, but he was unwilling to take the political risk. ice Mary Bethune asked him to act quickly on some important matter. He refused. "Mrs. Bethune. if we must do that now. we'll hurt our progress," he said. "Wc must do this thing stride by stride." Mary McLeod Bethune worked strongly for equal rights for rican Americans and other groups. She served as president of the ialional Association of Colored Women. She was a vice president f the two most important organizations in the United States that 'urked lor racial equality—the NAACP and the Urban League. Yet he was not offended by Roosevelt's attitude. Indeed, she admired him enormously. Her reaction tells us a great deal about racial affi- les and the problems faced by minorities at that time. Mary McLeod Bethune shows quiet dipnity in this portrait by Betsy Groves Rryneau. What did Roosevelt think of Mary Bethune? Effects of the New Deal 923 Movies pictured the wives and sweethearts of servicemen working at these jobs while their loved ones fought against the Germans and the Japanese. It was all so new and exciting for many. One woman, who was only 18 at the time, recalled her experience as a machinist in an airplane engine plant: t< I was very unsophisticated at the time, but I was very zealous, probably overzealous. I remember some of the older guys who had been there for years used to say, 'Hey kid. don't be in such a hurry!' But I'd get into the thing and geared up for it and I'd just keep plugging away, measuring and grinding, measuring and grinding, and they'd say, 'Hey kid. take it easy.' . . ,*M The wartime labor shortage cemented the gains that organized labor had made under the New Deal. A National War Labor Board was established in 1942 to regulate wages and prevent labor disputes. Farmers experienced boom times. The demand for food to feed American and Allied troops was enormous. Farm income more than doubled during the war. Farmers who had suffered during the 1920s and 1930s were soon able to pay off their mortgages, improve their property, and put aside savings too. During the war Congress adopted the withholding system of payroll deductions for collecting income taxes. Employers withheld a percentage of their workers' pay and sent the money directly to the treasury. The withholding system made paying taxes a little less painful. It also supplied the government with a steady flow of funds and made evading taxes almost impossible. High taxes on personal incomes (up to 94 percent) and on the profits of corporations helped persuade Americans that no one was benefiting too much from the war while soldiers were risking their lives overseas. To boost the morale of those in uniform. Congress passed the Serviceman's Readjustment Act of 1944. This G.I. Bill of Rights made low-cost loans available to veterans who wished to buy houses or start new businesses. It also provided money for expenses such as tuition and books for those who wished to resume their education after the war. Suspicion of Japanese Americans World War II had great popular support. Almost no one questioned the decision to fight the Axis powers. Assured of the solid backing of the people, the Roosevelt administration adopted a relaxed attitude toward freedom of speech in wartime. There was little persecution of German Americans as had occurred during the Great World War. The one blot on the Roosevelt record of civil liberties was the 'From Americans Remember the Home Front: An Oral History by Roy Hoopcs The Pacific War Along with most Japanese Americans, these two generations of the Machida family, tagged for evacuation frotn their home in Hayward, California, would he interned until the war ended—even though many were US. citizens. Read some of the accounts by these victims on this page and the next. treatmcnl of Japanese Americans. About 112.000 lived on the West Coast. They were forced to move to internment camps in barren sections of the country. The government was afraid that some were disloyal and would try to interfere with the war effort and help Japan. Others were placed in the camps for their own protection. The white population of the American West had always been suspicious of the Chinese and Japanese who settled there. Partly this was the typical dislike of immigrants with different customs. Parth it was a matter of racial prejudice. The suspicion was greatly increased by the sneak Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Many people were convinced that unless everyone of Japanese origin was cleared out of the Pacific Coast region, the Japanese would soon be bornbing San Francisco. There was absolutely no evidence that the Japanese Americans were less loyal than other Americans. Most of them had been born in the United States. Immigration from Japan had been ended by the so-called Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907. Nevertheless, all were forced to sell their homes and property and leave for the camps. One woman, a college student in Seattle. Washington, at the time of her internment, described a relocation camp: C< Camp Minidoka was located in the south-central part of Idaho, north of the Snake River. It was a semidesert region. When we arrived I could see nothing but flat prairies, clumps of greasewood shrubs, and jack rabbits. And. of Point of View course, hundreds and hundreds of barracks, to house 10.000 of us. Our home was one room in a large army-type barracks, measuring about 20 by 25 feet (6 by 7.5 meters]. The only furnishings were an iron pot-belly stove and cots. Our first day in camp we were given a rousing welcome by a dust storm. We fell as if we were standing in a gigantic sand-mixing machine as the gale lifted the loose earth up into the sky, hiding everything. Sand filled our moulhs and nostrils and stung our faces and hands like a thousand darling needles. . . . Idaho summer si/zled on the average of 100 degrees [43 degrees Celsius]. For the first few weeks I lay on my cot from morning to night, not daring to do more than go to the mess hall three times a day. , . . Winter in Minidoka was as intense an experience as summer had been. . . Another victim of the internment remembered his confusion over what was happening to him and his family. cc I remember the pain of being labeled a 'dirty Jap' and a 'dangerous enemy.' For me. a Los Angeles teenager of 17. it was a time when my entire value system was thrown out of kilter. If we. good Christians and loyal American citizens, could be stripped of out civil rights, it seemed that all of the values and ideals 1 held most dear would need to be reexamined. . . .:99 After the war many Americans regretted their treatment of Japanese Americans. In 1948 Congress passed an act to help those interned to recover part of the losses. Court decisions in the 1980s further awarded retribution to the families sent to the camps. African Americans and Hispanic Americans in Wartime African Americans also had a difficult time during the war. About I million enlisted or were drafted. Black servicemen were expected to risk their lives for the country, Still they were kept in segregated units and frequently treated with disrespect by both officers and [enlisted men. Yet by comparison with their treatment during earlier [wars, there was some improvement. More black officers were com- |missioned. A number of blacks became pilots in the air force. As during the Great World War. the labor shortage benefited Roosevelt's biographer writes of the decision to intern Japanese Americans. tcDuring January the climate of opinion in California turned harshly toward fear, suspicion, intolerance. Clamor arose for mass evacuation and other drastic action. The causes of the change have long been studied and defy easy explanation. Partly it was the endless Japanese advance in the Pacific, combined with a spate of false alarms . . . of attacks on the coast, stories of secret broadcasting equipment, flashing signals, strange lights and the like. . . . But the main ingredient that fired and fueled the demand for "cleaning out the Japanese" was starkly obvious. The old racism— economic, social, and pathological—toward the Japanese on the West Coast simmered a few weeks after Pearl Harbor and then burst into flames. 95 James MacGregor Burns, 1970 From Sisei Daughter by Monica Stone 3rum ''Point of View: A Sony Part of Our History" by Daniel Kuzuhara, from The Chicago Tribune. August 26. I9HI The Pacific War 957 Gordon Coster.Life Magazine c Time Warner, Inc. Asa Philip Randolph was a writer and editor of the Messenger. He had planned a march on Washington in 1941 to demand jobs for blacks in defense industries. Roosevelt persuaded him not to protest because it would disrupt the war effort. After reading further and using historical imagination, determine which man you think had the stronger argument. Return to the Preview & Review on page 950, black workers. Thousands got a chance to learn new skills and therefore earn higher wages. Yet racial discrimination did not end. For this reason, early in 1941 a black leader. A. Philip Randolph, decided to organize a march on Washington to protest the way blacks were being treated. President Roosevelt feared that such a march would split public opinion at a time when national unity was essential. To persuade Randolph to cancel the march, he issued an executive order prohibiting racial discrimination in defense plants. This rule was enforced by a Fair Employment Practices Committee. Randolph then called oft the march. This did not mean that African Americans were satisfied with their treatment after 1941. Many whites resented the concessions Roosevelt had made. There was a good deal of racial trouble in the armed services and in industrial plants throughout the war years. In 1943 it erupted in riots involving attacks on blacks in New York City and Detroit. More and more African Americans were demanding their rights as members of a democratic society. It was clear that when the war ended, demands by blacks for fair treatment were sure to increase. The situation for Hispanic Americans was similar. Almost 400.000 of them served in the armed forces during the war. A higher percentage saw combat duty overseas than any other ethnic minority. They also received more military medals. Yet like black soldiers and sailors. Hispanic Americans suffered discrimination. On the other hand, for many it was their first chance to experience life outside their neighborhoods. When they returned home. Hispanic Americans were determined to fight for a better life. The war brought many new opportunities for Hispanic Americans on the home front despite a vicious riot against them in Los Angeles in 1943. Hispanic American women gained jobs in many industries, especially in the West and Southwest. In July 1942 the United Slates and Mexico signed a treaty that allowed hraceros, Mexican farm workers, to enter temporarily and work in the United States. Their efforts helped keep up vital food production during the war. A Move Toward Religious Toleration The war had an important effect on religion in America. .American society moved toward religious pluralism, or the acceptance of different religions. People from all denominations found themselves supporting the war. The open hatred for Jews led by Adolf Hitler and his Nazi followers shocked all Americans. People of various faiths sang God Bless America as they united in the struggle to win against their common enemy. Hy the end of the war the various religions had grown more tolerant of each other. f^Jj Preview & Review Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 5. Understanding Issues, Events, & Ideas. Use the following words to discuss the Kennedy years: New Frontier, Cuba, Central Intelligence Agency, Bay of Pigs, Peace Corps, Alliance for Progress, Berlin Wall, Cuban Missile Crisis, "hot line," Camelot, 1. What were Nixon's strengths and weaknesses as a candidate for president in 1960? What were Kennedy's strengths and weaknesses? 2. Why did President Kennedy hesitate to allow the CIA to carry out its invasion of Cuba? What happened to his prestige after the invasion failed? 3. Why did Khrushchev build the Berlin Wall? 4. What provoked the Cuban Missile Crisis? What was Kennedy's response? What was Khrushchev's response? Thinking Critically. 1. Nixon and Kennedy were the first presidential candidates to hold a televised debate. Suppose you were a member of the studio audience. List five topics that you would have liked to hear the candidates debate. 2. Imagine that you had been able to interview President Kennedy. What three questions would you have wanted to ask him? The Election of 1960 In i960 the Republicans nominated Richard M. Nixon for president. Nixon was Eisenhower's vice president. Before that he had been a congressman and a senator from California. In Congress Nixon had been a leading communist-hunter. Long before most people took the charges against Alger Hiss seriously, Nixon was convinced of Hiss' guilt. He worked closely with Senator McCarthy in his search for traitors in the government. He was almost as reckless in his charges as McCarthy. While running for vice president in 1952, for example. Nixon claimed that Adlai Stevenson was "soft on communism." Nixon was a clever politician, but victory was more important to him than fair play. He was an intelligent and hard-working legislator. He sympathized with the civil rights movement, and he had strongly supported President Truman's foreign policy. While vice president he had toned down his talk about traitors in the government. He tried to act more like a statesman. This "new Nixon ' persuaded Eisenhower and other Republican leaders to back him for president. Still, many people did not trust Nixon. Nixon tried hard to explain his controversial reputation. "I believe in battle." he said. "It's always been there, wherever I go." He wrote that his life had been a series of crises. In each one. he claimed, he had triumphed by being "cool and calm" and working hard. But he may have appeared quarrelsome along the way, he admitted. The Democratic candidate for president in 1960 was Senator John F. Kennedy of Massachusetts. Kennedy was young, handsome, intelligent, and rich. He was a war hero, seriously injured in a rescue mission in the Pacific. He was a Pulitzer prize-winning author and a shrewd politician. And he was an excellent campaigner. Kennedy appealed to liberals because he seemed imaginative and forward looking. Many conservatives supported him too because his policies were moderate. Kennedy's major handicap was his Catholic religion. Al Smith's crushing defeat by Herbert Hoover in 1928 suggested that the anti- Catholic prejudices of voters in normally Democratic stales might be difficult to overcome. During the campaign Kennedy argued that Eisenhower had been too cautious and conservative. The economy was not growing rapidly enough. The nation needed new ideas. He called his program the New Frontier. He would open up new fields for development by being imaginative and vigorous. Nixon, on the other hand, defended Eisenhower's record and promised to follow the same lines. In the election the popular vote was extremely close. Kennedy won by only 1014 Authority to private companies. He wanted to cut back or eliminate 2 many other long-established functions of the federal government. v> . 8 In his acceptance speech at the Republican National Convention. §■ Goldwater frightened many of his listeners when he said: ? U Extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice. And ... ? moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue.!''' Most voters found Goldwater's ideas too extreme. Johnson defeated him easily. The Democrats increased their majorities in Congress as well. Johnson then proposed what he called the Great Society program. With typical energy he sent Congress 63 messages calling for legislation in a single year. He slated his vision of the Great Society: U The Great Society is a place where every child can find knowledge to enrich his mind and to enlarge his talents. It is a place where leisure is a welcome chance to build and reflect, not a feared cause of boredom and restlessness. It is a place where the city of man serves not only the needs of the body and the demands of commerce but the desire for beauty and the hunger for community. It is a place where man can renew contact with nature. It is a place which honors creation for its own sake and for what it adds to the understanding of the race. It is a place where men are more concerned with the quality of their goals than the quantity of their goods. But most of all. the Great Society is not a safe harbor, a resting place, a final objective, a finished work. It is a challenge constantly renewed, beckoning us toward a destiny where the meaning of our lives matches the marvelous products of our labor. I 'Frum History of U.S. Political Parties by Arthur SI. Schlesinger Congress approved nearly everything Johnson asked for. It crested Medicare, providing health insurance for people over 65. It (supplied huge grants to improve elementary and secondary education. The Immigration Act of 1965 abolished the system of favoring immigrants from the nations of northern and western Europe. Future admission to the United States was to be based on the skills and ■ abilities of the newcomers, regardless of nationality. There was also a Housing Act to help pay the rent of poor people land a Highway Safety Act. Another civil rights measure, the Voting I Rights Act, was passed. This law appointed new federal officials I called registrars in districts where local white officials were refusing I to allow African Americans to register to vote. These federal officials I made sure there were no problems or irregularities in voter registra- 1 Don in those districts. Within a year and a half a million southerners I were added to the voter lists. |sq| Senator Barry Goldwater became the chief spokesman for the conservative wing of the Republican part's. In the early 1060s bis firm stand against communism earned him national prominence. His widely read 1060 book The Conscience of a Conservative was a statement of Iris views on American foreign policy and the use of force against communism. Hon1 did Goldwater's ideas differ fivm Johnson's? Return to the Preview & Review on page 1029. The Johnson Presidency' 1031 Cambodian refugees leave Phnom Pehn in their 1975 exodus after the city fell to the Khmer Rouge. Some of these refugees eventually reached the United States, setting out on boats that were not seaworthy. Report on the "boat people" who reached America. Preview & Review Use these questions to guide your reading. Answer the questions after completing Section 2. Understanding Issues, Events, & Ideas. Use the following words to describe immigration and social changes in American society from the 1960s to the 1990s: National Farm Workers Association, barrios, Black Power, Equal Rights Amendment, 1. For what reasons did immigrants come from Korea and Vietnam after 1965? 2. By whom and why was the NFWA formed? 3. How were the Puerto Rican immigrants similar to the European immigrants before World War I? 4. How did older African American leaders respond to the race riots of the 1960s? 5. What were some of the problems faced by Indians on reservations in the 1980s? 6. How did the status of women improve in the 1970s and '80s? Thinking Critically, Imagine that you are a member of the United Farm Workers during the great huelga against the California grape growers. Write a newspaper editorial explaining why you are striking, what you hope to achieve by the strike, and why you support Cesar Chavez as your leader. Immigration and Social Change The composition of the population of America at the time of the Bicentennial was changing rapidly because of the passage of the Immigration Act of 1965. Europeans no longer accounted for the majority of new immigrants. In their place were people from Mexico, the Caribbean. Central and South America, and Asia. Under the old regulations, the entire continent of Asia was allowed only 20,000 immigrants to America in a 40-year period. In the single year 1973, almost 120,000 Asians entered this country. The tensions left over from the Korean War and the stem policies of the South Korean government led thousands of South Koreans to migrate to the United States. Most of them settled in California and Hawaii, but considerable numbers came to New York and other eastern cities. Still larger numbers of Filipinos moved to the United States. When the islands became independent after World War II, immigration slowed to a trickle. After the 1965 immigration act, it soared again. Many Filipino immigrants were skilled workers and professional people dissatisfied with prospects in their homeland. After the Vietnam War, large numbers of South Vietnamese who had worked with the Americans during the war came to the United States to escape persecution by the victorious communists. The United States government helped these refugees settle in this country. The growth of the Asian American population has been dramatic. Although Asian Americans currently make up only about 3 percent of the population, experts expect their numbers to approach 10 million by the year 2000. about ten times as many as in 1970. Why arc people attracted to the United States? Studs Turkel. who has interviewed hundreds of recent immigrants, observed: k<1"S |I"JJUH ti New immigrants are trying all over again to integrate themselves into the system. They have the same hunger. . . . The Vietnamese boat people [who fled Vietnam after the communist takeover in 1975] express it as well as anyone. They don't know if they're gonna land, if the boat's gonna sink. They don't know what's gonna happen to 'em. but they've a hunch they might make it to the U.S. as the 'freedom place.' There is the plain hard fact of hunger. In order to eat, a person will endure tremendous hardship. Mexican Americans Increase Their Numbers During the 1980s. the Hispanic population of the United States grew by 40 percent, more than four times as fast as the rest of the population. Census experts estimate that by the year 2025. Hispanic Americans may constitute as much as 20 percent of the nation's population. By far the largest group among the new immigrants has come from Mexico. When the United States entered World War II. the demand for labor in the Southwest soared. The United States and Mexico signed an agreement allowing Mexicans to work temporarily in this country. These workers were called braceros, a name that comes from the Spanish word for "arm." Between 1942 and 1964. almost 5 million braceros came to the United Stales under the program. They came north to harvest crops, and most of them returned to Mexico when the harvest season ended. But each year, many stayed rather than return to Mexico. Many of the Mexicans who settled found the United States a true land of opportunity. Some obtained farms of their own. Others found good jobs in manufacturing. Their success caused thousands of other Mexicans to want to come to the United States. After the 1965 immigration law put a limit on the number of newcomers from the Western Hemisphere, many Mexicans entered the United States illegally. Throughout the postwar years. Mexican-born workers harvested most of the crops grown in the Southwest. Cesar Chavez emerged as their leader. Chavez had grown up in the migrant camps of California. He founded the National Farm Workers Association (NFWA). a labor union. The NFWA worked hard to improve wages and the poor conditions in migrant camps. Most workers received less than half the minimum wage, which at the time (1965) was SI per hour. Their camps were usually no more than rough cabins, often without running water. To attract attention to these problems. Chavez called for a great hnelga, or strike, against the California grape growers. The strikers won a great deal of public sympathy. Chavez's 'From American Dreams: Los! anil FoamI by Studs Terke) Proudly displaying bis drawing of the flag of his country, this Chinese American boy celebrates democracy with his parents. Below is Cesar Chavez, whose fasts for the National Farm Workers drew worldwide attention. America's Changing Face 1093 personal dedication was almost as important in winning support as was the public's realization of the plight of the poorly paid workers. Eventually the grape growers recognized the union and settled the strike. Chavez inspired migrant workers with a sense of their own worth. "We . . . stood tall outside the vineyards where we had stooped for years," the grape pickers stated proudly. Conaress. Other Hispanic Newcomers Another major group of Hispanic immigrants came from Puerto Rico. Because Puerto Rico was a commonwealth of the United States. Puerto Ricans were already American citizens. Immigration laws did not apply to them. Hundreds of thousands of Puerto Ricans settled in New York City, which soon had a larger Puerto Rican population than San Juan, the capital of Puerto Rico. In many ways the Puerto Ricans were like the European immigrants of the years before World War 1. Most of them were poor farm laborers unaccustomed to city life. Few could speak English. In New York they were crowded into barrios, or Hispanic neighborhoods, in neglected pockets of the city. Yet many Puerto Ricans did very well for themselves. Herman 'f rom "l am Joaquin'* by Corky Gon/jilc2 n Vo So; Joaquin ] am Joaquin zr a a . . . Y en todos los terrenos fertiles And in all the fertile farmlands. JO o los llanos aiidos. the barren plains. c to los pueblos roonianeros the mountain villages. ffl alidades ahumadas smoke-smeared cities (b empezamos a AVANZAK. we stari to MOVE. y La Raza! La Ra/a! c 3 Mejicano! Mejicano' cn ro Espanol! Espanol! Latino! Latino! 8 Hispano! Hispano! Chicano! Chicano! o lo que me llame yo. or whatever 1 call myself. yo parezco lo mismo. 1 look the same yo siento to mismo 1 feel the same yo lloro 1 cry y and canto lo mismo sing the same Yo soy cl bulto dc mi gente y 1 am the masses of my people and yo renuncio ser absorbida. I refuse to be absorbed. Yo soy Joaquin 1 am Joaquin Las desigualdadcs son grandes The odds are great *s pero mi espiritu es firnte hut my spirit is strong. e mi fe impenetrable my faith unbreakable - mi sangre pura. my Wood is pure. , Soy principe Azteca y Cristo eristiano 1 am A/tee Prince and Christian Christ w V YO PERDURARE! 1 WILL ENDURE!1 1094 Badillo came lo New York from Puerto Rico in the early 1940s. when he was eleven. He worked washing dishes and setting up pins in a bowling alley. Later he earned a college degree and a law degree. In 197(1 he was elected to Congress. Since I960, more than 2 million people from other Latin American nations have immigrated to the United States. After the Cuban revolutionary leader Fidel Castro made an alliance with the Soviet Union, many Cubans were admitted to the United Stales under laws that allowed refugees from communist countries to come. About half of them settled in southern Florida. For the next 20 years. Castro made it almost impossible for Cubans to leave their country. In 1980. however, he changed his mind. When he did. more than 100.0(H) Cubans flocked to the United Slates. F.vcn more Hispanic people have immigrated from Central and South America. As the graph on this page shows. Hispanic Americans have not shared equally in America's wealth. The average Hispanic American has fewer years of schooling, and the average Hispanic family has a liwer-than-average income. Yet great variations exist within the Hispanic American population. Cuban Americans have reached levels dose to non-Hispanic Americans in average years of schooling and borage family income. Puerto Rican Americans, on the other hand, have a poverty rate that is nearly four times that of non-Hispanics. This smiling girl is a marcher in New York City's Puerto Rican Day Parade. She is holding the flag of Puerto Rico. Do you think Puerto Rico should become the 51st state? Explain. The label Hispanic American encompasses people from numy different backgrounds. This graph shows certain characteristics of the largest groups of Hispanic Americans. Compare the data on the graph. 'Then state a comparison of the four Hispanic American groups. How do these groups compare to non-Hispanic Americans? America's Changing Face 1095 Jason Laure Photo Researchers The election was close. Carter won in the electoral college by 297 votes to 240, He carried the northern industrial slates and the South. A major reason lor his victory was the support he received from Mexican Americans, particularly in south Texas, and from African Americans. Almost 95 out of every 100 African American voters cast their ballots for Carter. The election of Carter, who publicly affirmed his religious convictions. also represented a change that had developed in American society since World War II. He symbolized the reawakening of an American religious spirit, especially among conservative Protestants. Despite radical movements and unprecedented scientific breakthroughs. the tide of popular religion had continued to rise. Many people—including political candidates and even Catholic priests— described experiences something like a traditionally Protestant ■■rebirth." These ■'born again" Americans spread the experience, publicly and privately. Some born-again Protestant ministers made effective use of radio and television to attract converts and raise money. The Reverend Jimmy Swaggart, for example, was said to have more than 2 million followers. (In the 1980s. however, some of the most popular of these preachers would be convicted of misusing money they had collected. Others would be exposed for committing scandalous personal behavior. By 1990. the movement would experience a decline.) Carter at Home In office Carter stressed an informal style. He tried to make himself more available to ordinary people than most recent presidents. Instead of riding to the White House in a limousine after his inauguration. he and his wife and small daughter walked down Pennsylvania Avenue at the end of the inaugural parade, waving and smiling to the crowd. He appeared on television wearing a cardigan sweater instead of a suit coat, lie had a "call in" program in which he answered questions phoned in by citizens. As time passed, however. Carter often displayed a kind of pee- vishness—he seemed almost arrogant and acted in a haughty manner, especially in dealing with Congress. And though he was a good orator, he often spoke to the people about things they could not feel or understand. Carter claimed there was "a growing malaise of the American spirit." By this French word he meant a vague uneasiness. ;t discomfort that would be difficult to treat. This pessimism could Hardly console troubled Americans who were hoping that the economy would improve and that foreign tensions would ease. Carter also stressed that with citizenship came certain obligations, such as obeying the law and striving for the common good. How bright the future would be depended in large part on how actively each American worked toward creating a just and prosperous society. The Carters appear at one of the inaugural balls celebrating the return of the Democrats to the White House. Report to your classmates on the most recent evaluations of the Carter presidency. Predict for whom the woman registering to vote below cast her ballot: Carter or Ford? The Democrats Take a Turn 1107 Eve Arnold Magnum Photos Source: St*ti9ticmt Abstract of the United States; United Slates Jmmiymiion end Source World Almanac. Nut urn Its at ion Service, World Atman**:. M*W 1821-1830 1831-1840 1841-1850 1851-1860 1861-1870 1871-1880 1881-1890 1891-1900 1901-1910 1911-1920 1921-1930 1931-1940 1941-1950 1951-1960 1961-1970 1971-1980 1981-1990 0 123456789 Millions of immigrants As the graphs on this page indicate, the United States has a rich and varied racial and cultural heritage. This rich heritage is due in large part to immigration. Prior to World War II the majority of immigrants to the United States came from Europe. The Immigration Act of 1965, however, made it easier for non-Europeans to enter the United States. As a result, people from Central and South America, the Caribbean, and Asia now make up the majority of new immigrants. Statistical Profiles 1137 