a conservative version could be ratified, since mum northerners were increas-
ingly worried about the number of immigrants who were again entering the country.
As a result, the final amendment left loopholes that eventual!) allowed southern
states to disfranchise African-Americans. The amendment was ratified in March
1870. in part with the votes of the four southern states that had not completer! the
process of Reconstruction and thus were also required to endorse this amendment
before being readmitted to Congress.
Proponents of women’s suffrage were gravely disappointed when Congress re-
fused to prohibit voting discrimination on the basis of sex as well as race. The Wom-
en's Loyal league, led by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, had
pressed for first the Fourteenth and then the Fifteenth Amendment to recognize
women’s public role. But even most Radicals, contending that black rights hat! tolw
assured first, were unwilling to back women’s suffrage. The Fifteenth Amendment
ruptured the feminist movement. While disappointed that women were not included
in its provisions. Lucy Stone and the American Woman Suffrage Association urged
ratification. Anthonv and Stanton, on the other hand, broke with their former allies
among the Radicals, denounced the amendment, and organized the National Woman
Suffrage Association to work for passage of a new amendment giving women the
ballot. This division continued to hamper the women's rights movement in thr
future.
The Crant Administration
Grant lacked the moral commitment to make Reconstruction succeed. He was ill stl
ease with the political process and lacked trustworthy advisers. 1 Limited by his undis-fl
tinguished career In-fore 1861. he had an abiding fear of failure. Cruut’s siinpk’.l
taciturn style, while superb for commanding armies, did not serve him as well is I
politics, and his well-known resolution withered when he was uncertain of his gml I
A series of scandals wracked Grant's presidency, so much so that ''Gruntisnv
soon became a cotie word in American politic s for corruption, cronyism, and venalih I
Although Grant did not profit personally, he remained loyal to his friends and iIk-1
played little zeal to mot out corruption. His relatives were implicated in a schemetol
comer the gold market, while his private secretary escaped conviction for stcalin
federal whiskey revenues only because Grant interceded on his liehalf Meanwhile |
his secretary of war, w ho was selling Indian trading post contracts, resigned to avt
impeachment James W. Grimes, one of the party's founders, denounced the Repuli
lican party under Grant as “the most corrupt and debauched political party that 1
ever existed.”
Nor was Congress immune from the lowered tone of public life. In such i
climate ruthless state machines. led by men who favored the status quo, camel
dominate the party. Office and power liecame ends in themselves, and party lea
worked in close cooperation with northern industrial interests.
At the same time, the Radicals who had spearheaded the movement for a rig
oils program of Reconstruction were passing from the scene. Thaddeus Stevens i
in August 1868, shortly after Johnson’s impeachment trial. Benjamin Wade
George Julian were defeated, and Charles Sumner, who feuded with the Gr
admin
of his
caJs st
errnne
strietii
300 es
A
becam
These
denoui
meat, i
Repuli
New V
constn
to had
despite
the Na\
Grant svv
porting a
of corrup
an- Seen
RoIm-soh
cased of s
ing of nav
William \
was force
[lost tradi
private sci
tom right
Wliiskcv I
sonullv iuv
his adtnini
to disinis
vvTongdoin

v
PART 4
THE UNITED STATES IN
AN INDUSTRIAL AGE
The Statue of Liberty lias now stood watch over New York harlior for more than u
hundred vears. 1 .nuking back today, most Americans view the stream of tired, hud-
dled masses who passed beneath Liberty’s torch as a part of the continuing stream of
immigrants stretching back to the English Pilgrims, the French fur traders along tin-
St Uiwrence. and the Spanish friars of Old California. But the immigrants arriving ti
Ellis Island were different from the great majority of those who traveled to America
in an earlier age. Innovations in transportation, communications, and industry cre-
ated an international network that for the first time made possible voluntary migra-
tion on a massive scale.
Before 1820 most new arrivals in North and South America hardly came volurr
tank Perhaps 7.8 million Africans were brought to the Americas during those wan
virtually all as slaves That number was four to five times the number of Etiropeam I
who came during the same period. In contrast, between 1820 and 1920 nearly 'JO I
million free immigrants arrived from Europe.
Nor was this new flood directed only toward America. At least as many Europe- I
ans left tlicir homelands for other regions ot Europe or the world. While millions of I
immigrants were taking trains across the American plains in search of jobs and home-1
steads, millions more from eastern Europe followed the Trans-Siberian Haifa..-. I
(completed in 1905) into Asiatic Russia. The Canadian prairie provinces of Manitohi I
and Saskatchewan competed for homesteaders with Montana and the Dakotas. Ami I
when cowboy's liegan driving American steers to railheads for shipment east, gauchns I
in western Argentina were rounding up cattle to be shipped to Buenos Aires. Before I
1900 two out of three emigrating Italians booked passage not for the United States I
but for Brazil and Argentina.
This broad movement could not have taken place!
without a global network of communication, markets, and!
transportation. Some effects of the industrial transform.!-1
tion had been felt well before the end of the nineteenth!
century. Indeed, the Civil War was fought, partly, because l|
of the conflicting ways in which the North and the Soutii|
evolved. Bv ISfiO the northern economy had begun to tir I
banize. with textile mills clustered in factors towns along!
New England rivers and nudwestem railroads making;I
commercial markets possible for grain and dairy products I
The South remained overwhelmingly rural, but New En-I

untftran
sources
Migration
chains
660 THE UNITED STATES IN AN INDUSTRIAL ACE
debts. And it separated owners or stockholders from the actual running of die com-
pany, which permitted profession^ managers to operate complex businesses with
greater efficiency. So overwhelming were these advantages that even before the turn
of the century, corporations were making two-thirds of all manufactured products in
the United States.
A Ptml of laihor
Last, but hardly least important for the success of the new industrial order, w'as a
pool of labor. All industrializing nations required workers. In the United States de-
mand was so great that the native-born could not fill it. In 1860 it took about 4.3
million workers to run all the factories, mills, and shops in the United States. By 1900
there were approximately 20 million industrial workers in America.
Europe was a primary recruiting ground. In the late nineteenth century poverty,
oppression, and mechanization pushed many Europeans from farms into cities and
finally off the continent entirely. Meanwhile, economic opportunity pulled them to
America. The Labor Contract I .aw. repealed in 1885. allowed employers to recruit
laborers abroad, pay their passage, and then deduct the cost from their wages. Indus-
trialists were aggressive recruiters, advertising in newspapers, distributing pam-
phlets. and sending agents to Europe. When iron workers arrived in the United
States from Sweden in the 1880s, they often knew only three words of English:
“Charlie—Deere—Moline” (Charlie was the president of the John Deere Plow
Company in Moline, Illinois).
A wave of immigrants flooded American shores. More than 8 million people
arrived between 1870 and 1890, another 14 million by 1914. As mechanized agricul-
ture and religious persecution took hold in eastern and southern Europe, those
regions replaced northern and western Europe as the chief sources of immigration
Most new arrivals settled in industrial cities, hoping to return home with fatter
purses. Often unskilled, many of them peasants, they worked in factories and mines
or on construction and road gangs. In at least 21 major industries two out of every
three employees were new immigrants from eastern and southern Europe or \f-
riran-American migrants from the South.
To get those jobs, immigrants relied on well-defined networks ol friends am)
relatives. Small, family-based chains of migration channeled Italians and other immi-
grants into American jobs. So did a new breed of labor brokers, who also served as a
funnel to the new world. Tough and savvy immigrants themselves, they met newcom-
ers at the dink with contracts for jobs. For their trouble they took a healthy cut of the
immigrants' wages and overcharged them for goods. Among Italians they wen-
known as "pailmiles," among Mexicans "enganchistas." Tliev existed among most
immigrant groups, including earlier arrivals like the Chinese. By the end of tin
nineteenth century padrones controlled two-thirds of the- labor in New York.
Following such well-worn patlis tended to concentrate immigrants within cer-
tain industries or at specific jobs. Poles, Slavs, and Italians filled the mines of Penn-
sylvania. Creeks the textile mills ol New England. Chinese tin- mines and sweatshops
of California. Bussian and Polish Jews, skilled tailors and seamstresses in the old
country, went into the needle trades of New York. But whatever they did. hard-
pressed immigrants were willing to accept less pax ami put in more hours than thosr
Gas company employee in Chieago, 1891
THE RISE OF A NEW INDUSTRIAL ORDER fifil
Management.
1920
occmnoNAi. distribution, isso and 1920
Mwwn I HSU and 1920, iiiaiiagciiif.-iit ami industrial work—white- anil blue-col lur workers—
grew at the expense of farm work.
ibis replaced. ‘'Immigrants work for almost nothing,” complained one native-born
Umrvr, "and seem to Ik- able to live on wind—something which I cannot do."
A massive migration of rural Americans—some II million I>etween 1865 anil
1920 provided a second home-grown source of labor. Driven from the farm hv
machines and had times or just following dreams of a new life, tltcv moved first to
mull and then perhaps to larger cities. Unlike most immigrants, they spoke the
language and understood American wavs. Many could read and write English. In iron
ami steel cities as well as coal mining towns, some commanded better industrial jobs
itr served as supervisors. Others found jobs in re-tail stores or olliees and slowly
tillered the new urban middle class of white-collar workers. Most, however, lacked
Hu- skills for high-paying work.
African-Americans continued to work the cotton fields of the South, hut a small
number, nearly .100,000, moved to northern cities between 1870 and 1910. like tin-
new immigrants, they sought to escape discrimination and find jobs. They. too. relied
on networks ol relatives and friends. But unlike many immigrants, few blacks re-
turned home. More often they staved in the industrial cities and brought their fami-
tcs.oiu- hv one. They failed to evade discrimination but did find employment. They
tmullv worked in low-paying jobs as day laborers and janitors or laundresses and
imiestic servants. Bv 1890 only 7 percent of all black men worked in industry.
Yet another source of lulHirers came from south of the border. Like European
igrants and American migrants, Mexicans came in search of jobs, mainly in
agriculture but also in industry. Family networks were critical. One man alone was
nsihlc for bringing some 27 families to California. "Come! come! come over." a
VIpvu an recalled Ix-ing told hv friends. “It is goixl here." Mexicans heljHil to build
Domestic
st turves
662
THE UNITED STATES IN AN INDUSTRIAL AGE
Pioneering
Inink lines
the transcontinental railroad and worked the crops from Texas to California. Alter
the turn of the century, a small number turned north for factory jobs in Chicago and
other midwestem industrial cities.
RAILROADS: AMERICA’S FIRST BIG BUSINESS
At the center of the new industrial systems were the railroads, helping to spread
communications, efficiently moving freight, reinventing time. Railroads also stimu-
lated economic growth, simply because they required so many resources to build
They devoured mountains of coal, wood, felt, glass, rubber, and brass. By the 1880s.
three fourths of all the steel made in the United States went into rails. By lowering
transportation costs railroads allowed manufacturers to reduce prices and attract
more buyers. To control their far-flung operations, thev pioneered new techniques of
management, soon adapted by other businesses.
In time the railroad became a cultural symbol of American might, energy, and
foresight. The poet Wall Whitman called the locomotive the "emblem ol motion and
power- pulse of the continent." Those who drove them, like the six-foot, four-inch
John Luther "Casey” Jones (who really did operate the Cannonball Express between
Memphis and Canton. Illinois), became folk heroes. Everyone along the New York to
Chicago route knew that the New York Central and the Pennsylvania were making
the run in 27 hours. Whole towns turned out to greet an incoming train, and the most
impressive new building in anv towu was likely to be the railroad depot.
A Managerial Revolution
To the men who ran them, railroads provided a challenge in organization and fi-
nance. With operations extending over hundreds of miles, railroad lines had to con-
struct and maintain engines, cars, tracks, shops, terminals, stations, and other facili-
ties, including telegraph lines. In the 1850s. one of the largest industrial enterprises
in America, the Pepperell textile mills of Maine, employed about 800 workers. By the
early 1880s the Pennsylvania Railroad had nearly 50.000 people on its payroll. Each
day managers had to make countless decisions. From setting schedules and rates to
determining costs and profits, everything required a level of coordination unknown
in earlier businesses.
Railroads thus found themselves forced to develop new systems of manage-
ment. The so-called "trunk lines" were innovators. Scores of early companies had
serviced local networks of cities and communities, often with less than 50 miles of
track. During the 1850s four great trunk lines emerged east of the Mississippi to
connect the shorter branch, or "feeder," lines. By the outbreak of the Civil War.
these four great trunk lines, all under a single management, furnished railroads that
linked the eastern seaboard with the Great I -ikes and western rivers. After the war
the South and West organized their own trunk lines, largely with funds from Europe
and the North.
Simply keeping track of the money was a challenge. Conductors, station agents,
freight agents, and hundreds of other employees were involved in paying out or
collecting cash. To supervise and account for the funds, the Baltimore and Ohio
THE RISK OK A NEW INDUSTRIAL ORDER H77
tines from which workers could not van. Work itself wus thus separated from the
planning of work and labor managed as yet anotlier part of an integrated system.
Worker Control
Fur all (lie high ideals of Taylorism, ordinary workers refused to surrender their
dignits and perform ;ls simple cogs. In a variety of wavs, they struggled to maintain
control. Many European immigrants, accustomed to celebrating numerous saints'
holidays, continued to take those days oil. regardless of factory work rules. The
breek Orthodox church had more than SO festivals a year, while Polish weddings
lasted as long as live days.
When the pressure of six-day weeks became too stifling, workers took an unaii-
thnnzcd“blue Monday” olT. Or they limited their own output, working self-imi>osed
stints and pressing others to slow down. Often they simply walked off the job, took
another "greenhorn" opening in another industry, or packet! up and moved to a new
cits Come spring and warm weather, the turnover in factories rose significantly, just
»it decreased in tins tall. At the turn ol the century. factories reported turnover rates
ut more than 1011 percent a year.
It was more than a matter of survival and self-respect. Workers regarded them-	Worker
wives as citizens of a democratic republic As such, they e\|>ected to earn a "compc- rftfceas
Mite"—enough money to support and educate their families and enough time to
Lr|> informed of current allairs. Yet most workers received low wages. Before 1900.
an unskilled laborer could expeel between $1.25 and $1.50 for 10 hours of work, a
skilled one perhaps twice that amount It took about $f>()0 to make ends meet, but
must manufacturing workers made under $500 a sear. Native-boni whites tended to
ram more than immigrants, those who spoke English more IImn those who did not.
two more than women. ;uid all others more than African-Americans and Asians.
682 THE UNITED STATES IN AN INDUSTRIAL ACE
resisted unionization during die nineteenth century In fact, workers often regarded
such collective activities as alien, subversive, and un-American.
The Limits of Industrial Systems
As managers sought to increase their control over the workplace, workers often
found themselves at the mercy of the new industrial order. Few could count ok
full-time employment, even in boom times. One in three workers was out of work for
Types of at least three or four months a year, Changes in markets and weather brought sea-
unemployment sonal unemployment. New machines that replaced human skills led to structural m
technological unemployment. And regular tailspins in the economy -on average tmr
every five or six years—brought cyclical unemployment. In such hard times the
industrial system was driven to its limits, anti workers bore* the hnuit. Managers sp.il
up work to increase productivity, insisted on longer hours, laid off hundreds, anil !
slashed wages.
When a worker's pay dropped and anger and frustration rose, when a motlur
worked all night to make ends meet and fell asleep during the day while earing fix
In this painting by Robert Koehler, entitled The Strike, lulior confronts management in astnkr
that may soon turn bloody, tine striker reaches for a stone as an anxious mother ami In*:
children look on. Barelv visible in the background is the smoke-enshrouded factory. In ISV-
the year of Koehler's painting, a record 61 < MX X) workers were out of jobs as a result of stale,
lockouts, ami shutdowns.
TIIF. IUSF OF A NKW INDUSTRIAL ORDER 683
her children, when food prices suddenly jumped—violence might erupt. “A mob of
LOW people, with women in the lead, marched through the Jewish quarter of Wil-
liamsburg last evening,” wrote the New York Times in 1902, “and wrecked half a
dozen butcher shops. Vleu and women who were seen coming out of the shops with
meat and chickens in their hands were attacked. In the throng of women leaders of
the moh there were many who carried liottles of kerosene oil.”
Strikes and More Strikes
Workers' strikes served more often than mobs as an outlet for protest. Most strikes
broke out spontaneously, organized by informal leaders in a factory. Malvina Four-
tune mid her brother Henry Fourtime it was them who started the strike," confessed
u company informer in Chicopee. Massachusetts. “They go from house to house and
tells the people to keep up the strike." Nor were strikes limited to the vears of
depression. Thousands of rallies and strikes were staged on behalf of the eight-hour
workday in good times as well as bad, bv union and nonunion workers alike.
In 1877 Americans received an early view of labor troubles to come. When the
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad cut wages bv 20 percent, a crew in Martinsburg, West
Virginia, seized the local depot and refused to let trains move. The spontaneous
strike spread east and then west to California as other rail workers walked off the job
in sympathy. Soon two-thirds of the nation's tracks were shut down. When strike-
breakers came in, rail yard after rail yard went up in flames. I an al jvilice. state
tnilitia. and federal troops, sometimes fighting pitched battles with mobs supporting
strikers, finally restored order after 12 day’s. The first nationwide strike in American
history left 1(M) people dead and Sill million worth of railroad property in rubble.
"Tins may be the beginning of a great civil war in this country, between labor and
capital.'' read one newspaper editorial. In the face of violence, middle- and upper-
diss Americans began to fear the “Sampson-like strength” of lalx>r.
Strikes became epidemic in the late nineteenth century. Between 1880 and
19UU, some 6.6 million workers staged more than 23,000 strikes. In 1886 one of the
ms most violent episodes occurred. It started innocently enough, at a rally at Hay-
market Square in Chicago. Anarchists were protesting the brutality of police who had
earlier killed two workers during a lockout at the McCormick I iarvester Company.
Tlu crowd—around 3000—was disappointingly small. The speeches were long-
nimled. the audiences placid and bored. As rain drenched the gathering, police
moved into the square and ordered everyone to disperse. Moments later a bomb
etpkxled, instantly killing one officer and mortally wounding six others. When police
opened fire, the crowd fired back. Seventy policemen were injured. At least four
Chilians wen- killed and uncounted numbers hurt.
Great
liiiilriHitl
Strike
Hmjmarket
Si/uare riot
Management Strikes Back
'natives charged that organized lalxir had encouraged the violence and anarchy
olihr Haymarket Massacre.” Even though the bomb thrower was never identified,
the warts found eight anarchists guilty of conspiracy to murder. Four were hanged,
one committed suicide, and three were pardoned later by Governor John P. Altgeld.
Even ordinary citizens called for action against radicals in laborers' clothing. Cities
yd their |>uliee forces and states built more National Guard armories on the
irs of working-class neighborhoods.
(>92 THE UNITED STATES IN AN INDUSTRIAL ACE
continued at 20-vear intervals for the rest of the century. Improved diet and sanita-
tion. aided by Louis Pasteur's discovery that bacteria cause infection anil disease
reduced deaths. Meanwhile the use of inachinen cut tin1 need for farm workers. In
1896 it took one man in a wheat field to do the work IS men had done just 60 years
earlier. In short, the European countryside had more people and lesser jobs to offer.
Surplus farm ssorkers liecatne a ragtag army of migrants. Pushed from the land
bv machines, they ssere pulled bv machines into the industrial cities ol Europe and
America. The prospect of better pay and lesser hours lured especially the younger
generation. In America, young farm women spearheaded the migration. Mechaniza-
tion and the rise of commercial agriculture made them less valuable in the fields,
while mass-produced goods from mail-order houses reduced the need for them .tl
home.
Those svho stayed watched nervously a-s their future rushed to the city. Some
New England villages virtually disappeared. Frightened and envious, rural Ameri-
cans echoed Thomas Jefferson's viesv of cities as “ulcers on the body politic Boob
warned would-be migrants of the dangers of the city Wit 11 sensational titles like Tlw
Spider and the I'hj; or. Tricks, Traps, and Pitfalls of City life by One Who Knotn
(1873), their splashy accounts probably seduced us mans breathless readers as tins
repelled By 1910 a third of all American city dwellers had come from the county-
side.
The "new"	Another quarter came from overseas. A tidal wave of immigrants began to hit
immigration American shores in the mid-X880s. Earlier immigrants had come from northern and
western Europe. The English. Scotch. Dutch, and French arrived iu the eighteenth
IMMIGRATION AND POPULATION. I860-1920
Between ISfiO and 1920. iinmigratioii increased dnimaticalh as the sources of immigrant)
shifted from northern F.uropc to southeastern Europe. Despite fears to the contrary tir
proportion of newcomers as a percentage of population increases did not show nearly the saint-
jump.
' Includes immigrants from Poland. Russia. Italy and other Baltic and
East European countries
16
14
1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 180
Population Increase
I Total Immigration
THF RISE OF AN URBAN ORDER fi93
cvntnrv; the Germans. Scandinavians, and Irish in the mid-nineteenth century. Be-
ginning in the INSOs "new" immigrants from southern and eastern Europe appeared.
Soinc were fleeing religions and political persecution. Russian Jews escaped bv the
Ini' of thousands alter the assassination of Czar Alexander II in 1881 rekindled
anti Semitic pogroms, or riots Others left to evade famine or diseases like cholera,
which swept across southern Italy in 1887. But most came for the same reasons as
migrants from the countryside—a job, more money, a fresh start.
Coming to America
Ambitious, hard)', anti resourceful, immigrants found themselves tested every step of
theivav to America. Uprooted from old ways and old friends, most left their families
behind. The price of one-way passage in HM)4 was altont $50, usually too expensive to
bring relatives, at least at first. Wayfarers often stole across heavily guarded borders.
Tliev traveled for weeks to reach a jiort like la' Havre in France or Bremen in
Germany. At dockside, shipping lines vaccinated, disinfected, and examined them to
ensure against their being returned at company expense. By 1907. some 40,000
emigrants had been rejected at Liverpool alone.
It tiM>k from one to two weeks to cross the Atlantic aboard steam-power ships.
Immigrants spent most of the time below decks in cramped, lilthy compartments
calk'd "steerage." One passenger described the journey as “a kind of hell that
rteaiiM-s a man of his sins Ix-fore coining to the land of Columbus.” Most immigrants
Inn led at New York's Castle Garden or the newer facility on nearby Ellis Island,
■pemtl in 1892. They had to pass another medical examination, have their names
recorded by customs officials, and pav an entry tax. For entrants with medical or
other problems, there were detention centers, including a notorious one for Asian
immigrants at Angel Island in San Francisco Bay . No wonder the immigrant's arrival
■B. in the words of the hero of Abraham Caban’s novel. The Rise of David Levinsky
1917'. "like a second birth to Inin."
Immigrants came in staggering numbers—more than fi million between 1877
«ilS90. some.30 million 1>\ 1920. In 1907 alone, 1.2 million landed. At the turn of
tlmvntun immigrants made up nearly 15 petrent of the population. Most newcom-
ers were young, between the ages of 15 and 40. They usually came from farms and
tiny hainlcts. Few spoke English or had skills or much education. Unlike earlier
jmvnls, who were mostly Protestant, these new immigrants worshiped mainly in
Catholic. Creek, or Hussian Orthodox churches and Jewish synagogues. Almost two-
lliiriLs were men. A large number came solely to make money for buying land or
darting businesses hack home. Some changed their minds and sent for relatives, lint
mees were common enough to lie labeled “birds of passage."
jews were an exception. Between 1880 and 1914. a third of eastern Europe’s
y left. They made up one-tenth ol all immigration to the United States. Almost all
fcmxl and brought their families, often one by one. They had few choices. As one
Jruixh immigrant wrote of his Russian homeland. "Am 1 not despised? Am I not
niged to leas e? . . . Do I not rise daily with the fear lest the hungry mob attack me?"
Immigrant
profile
The Shape of the City
h Benjamin Franklin's day, it took an hour to walk from one end of Boston to the
tflirr Only Philadelphia spilled into suburbs. Oxer the years these ‘ walking cities'"



V.
!'■*
Bv tin- 1890s. European immigrants were arriving al tin* new receiving center im Ellis Mud I
in New York harbor (left). Asian immigrants came through Angel Island in San Francisco iir f
i riglit i. On lM>th coasts, physical examinations, like the eve ins|vcctiom shown, became partri
standard screening practices as immigration policies stilTenod. Tin- rapid rise in immigratml
ignited nativist fears that immigrants were taking over tiie country In the 187(1* carton,
immigrants literally gobble up Uncle Sam.	I
developed ringed patterns of settlement. Merchants, professionals, and the tippr
classes lived near their shops and offices in the eitv center. As one walked ouhvtni
the income and status of the residents gradually declined.
Patterns of	Clitics of the late nineteenth century still exhibited this ringed pattern, evcrjtj
Settlement that industrialization had reversed the order and increased urban sprawl. -Vs tit
middle and upper classes moved out of an ever more industrial core, tlu* ptxir. son*
immigrants blacks, and lower-class laborerx filled tfie inner void. They took oven*
factories and brovvnstones, shanties and eellars. Thev crammed themselves into dark
tenements. Bv sheer weight of numbers they transformer! these areas into the slum
of the eentral city.
Curled around the slums was the "/.one of emergenc e." an income-graded Inal
of those on their way up. It contained second-generation city dwellers, factory
ers. skilled laborers, and professional mechanics. They lived in progressively betln
tenements and neater row houses. Poverty no longer imprisoned them, but tlx*I
could still slip back in hard times.
R94

700 THE UNITED STATES IN AN INDUSTRIAL ACE
how the city was governed). As immigrants and rural newcomers flocked to factories
and tenements, the structures of urban government strained to adjust to the new
conditions.
Boss Rule
"Why must there Ise a boss,” journalist Lincoln Steffens asked Boss Kicliard Cnoker
of New York, "when we've got a mayor—and a city council?” "That's why," Croker
broke in. "It's because we’ve got a mayor and a council and judges—and—a hun-
dred other men to deal with." The boss was right. He and his system furnished cities
with tire centralization, authority, and services they sorely needed.
Bosses ruled through the political machine. Often, like New York's Tammany
Hall, machines dated back to the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries as
fraternal and charitable organizations. Over tin* years they became centers ol politi-
cal power. To maintain power, they shifted their concern from the welfare of tire
propertyless to the voting habits of immigrants. In New York the machine was Dem-
ocratic: in Philadelphia, Republican. Some were less centralized, as in Chicago; some
less ethnically mixed, like Detroit. Machines could even be found in rural areas lift
Duval County, Texas, where the Spanish-speaking Anglo boss Archie ParT molded j
powerful alliance with Mexican-American landowners. But wherever they uppeaml
machines lx>th served and exploited the community.
Tin- bass as	In an age of enterprise, the political machine operated like a corporation. Like a
'entrepreneur corporate executive, the boss looked on jwilitics as a profession and treated it as,i
business. His office might lx- a saloon, a funeral home, or, as with George Washing-
ton Plnnkitt, a shoeshine stand. His managers were party activists, ordered hv a
corporate-like chain of command. Local committeemen reported to district captains,
captains to district leaders, district leaders to the boss or bosses who directed the
machine. Like a business entrepreneur, the boss sought to harmonize the coinpeti
tion or destroy it. His tools were power and money: his workers, the party hacks: lu>
consumers, the voting public.
The stex-k and trade of the machine was simple: a Christmas turkey, a loader
coal for the winter, flowers for the sic k, legal assistance and help with the uuthoritia
As one Boston ward leader put it, ”1 think that there's got to lie in every wad
somebody that any bloke can come to—no matter what he's clone and get help
Help, you understand, nunc of your late and justice, but help." Bosses sponsored fun
loo—ball teams, glee clubs, balls and barbecues with bands placing and drink flaw-
ing. William Devery organized a joyride up the* Hudson River for 10,000 ol his New
York constituents, complete with nursing bottles for the tiny ones. “You can't do
nothin’ with the- people unless you do somethin' for 'em,” he concluded.
A crude	This crude welfare system not only won votes for machine-sponsored candf
welfare dates-, it also served as a form of public philanthropy. Private charities proved unaUr
system to cope with the crush of urban despair. By helping people, bosses also offered a path
for advancement to the underprivileged and a method of Americanization for the
foreign-bom. To the unskilled, the boss doled out jobs in public construction. Kn
bright, ambitious young men, he had places in city offices or in the party. Tin*
represented the firsl steps into the middle class. Help came in more basic fornn-
English-language classes, guidance at the polls, speedy naturalization. Foreign^
were !x-ing turned Into voting citizens.
It was those votes lx>sses really wanted. They went to great lengths to get tin
William Tweed, whose ring controlled New York in the 1860s and 1870s. streamlined
This stereotyped depiction of Hie ''party' Fkiss" as a larger-than-life thug has him handing out
"yciii] privilege” and "immunity from arrest." among other gifts. (,'artoons like this one could
hr [kmvHhI weapons. The political cartoons of Thomas Nast, which appeared in the New 1'ork
Tinwi, especially angered Boss William Tweed, llis supporters might not liave been able to
real hut they surely could understand pictures. Tweed offered Nast $100,000 to ''study art" in
Europe. Nast refused the bribe.
I the process of naturalization. Ills ward leaders tilled out applications for citizenship,
I then hail judges up for reflection sign them—up to 1000 a day. Every day 1000 new
I Americans bet aine new supporters of Boss Tweed. "Little Boh" Davies of Jersev City
I mobilized the “graveyard vote." lie drew names from tombstones to pad lists of
I registered voters and hired "rc[>eaterx” to vote under the phony names. Democratic-
I boss Hinkv Dink” Kenna of Chicago's First Ward liked to get his fraudulent names
I from the local insane asylum. He joked that its inmates were more astute than
1 Republican voters.
I When reformers introduced the Australian (secret) ballot in tbe late 1880s to
I prevent fraud, bosses pulled the "Tasmanian dodge" by premarking election tickets.
I Foiling that, they dumped whole ballot boxes into the river or drove unpersuaded
I inters hum the [Kills with hired thugs. At a time when only men could vote, the most
I™ Wsumc election-dav terrorists were women. There was Euchre Kate Bums, the
champion female heavyweight brick hurler of New York; Battle Annie, the ferocious
indt-r nl tlie Battle Row Ladies Social and Athletic Club; anil I lell-Cat Maggie, who
filed her front teeth to points and wore long nails of brass. When she went tearing
(bough [Kills, nails clawing and teeth Hashing, even the brave lied.
I Rewards, Costs, and Accomplishments
11 Why did bosses go to such lengths? Some simply loved the game of politics. More
I often hisses loved money. Their ability to get it was limited only by their ingenuity or
I iW occasional success of an outraged reformer. The record for brassiness must goto
THE BISE OF AN URBAN ORDER
Buss William
Tweeil






702 THE EXITED STATES IX AX INDUSTRIAL AGE
Natwisl
restrictions
of millions of dollars. His masterpiece ol graft was a chunky three-story courthouse in
lower Manhattan originally budgeted at $250,000. When Tweed was through, thecitv
had spent more than SI3 million—and the building was still not finished. End
wooden window, worth $12.50, cost the city $8000. For carpeting valuer I at $13,1X10
the hill came to $350,000. The New York Times estimated that 05 percent of the total
went back to the Tweed Ring. Tweed died in prison, but with such profits to l>
made, it is no wonder that Ixisscs rivaled the pharaohs of Egypt ;ls builders.
In their fashion bosses played a vital role in the industrial cits Rising from the
bottom ranks, tliev guided immigrants into American life and heljred some ol the
underprivileged up from poverty. Tliev changed the urban landscape with a massive
construction program And they modernized city government !>v uniting it and null-
ing it perform. Choosing the aldermen, mnnieipa! judges, mayors, and administrative
officials, bosses exerted new control that allowed them to provide the contracts ami
franchises needed to run cities. Such accomplishments implanted the notion tlut
government could he called on to help the needy. The welfare state, still decade
away, had some ol its seeds sown here.
The toll was often outrageous Inflated taxes, extorted revenue, unpunished vuv
and crime were onlv the obvious costs. A woman whose family enjoyed PlunJdtti
Christmas turkcv might be widowed by an accident to her husband in a sweatshop
kept open by timely bribes. Filthy buildings might claim her children, as corrupt
inspectors ignored serious violations. Buying votes and selling favors, bosses turn'd
democracy into a petty business -as much a "hit.si ness." said Plunkitt. “as tin* gro-
cery. or drv-goods or the drug business." Yet they were the forerunners of the ne*
breed of full-time, professional politicians who would soon govern the cities and tk
nation as well.
The Social Conscience of the City
Urban blight and the condition of the poor inspired social as well as politic al activism
especially within churches. Not all of the social activism was positive, Some minister
told their middle-class flocks that poverty resulted from weak character and sin. Tie
popular Congregationalist minister Josiali Strong simplv concluded the eitv yvas 3
menace to society " Along yyith anxious economists and social workers, he blamed
everything from political corruption to high unemployment on immigrants and urge:
restrictions on their entry.
In the ISSOs and 1890s, when hard times sharpened anxieties, nativist organiza-
tions like the* American Protective Association and the Immigration Restriction
League attacked Catholics and other non-Protestant newcomers. Already the victim*
of racial prejudice, the Chinese were an easy target. In 1882 Congress enacted tb
Chinese Exclusion Act. It banned the entry of Chinese lalxirers, an ini|>ortaut step m
restricting immigration. In 1897 the first hill re<|iiiring literacy tests to reduce immi-
gration passed Congress, but President Crover Cleveland vetoed it.
Other clergy took their missions to tin- slums to bridge the gap lietyveen tbr
middle class and the poor. They became the social conscience of the city Begmniig
in 1870 Dwight Lyman Moody, a 300-pound former shoe salesman, joined gospd
singer and organist Ira David Sankev to win armies of lowly converts with revivals
Boston. Chicago, and other cities. Evangelists helped to found American branches ul
the British Young Men's Christian Association ami the Salvation Army. B\ the emh>
the century the Salvation Army had grown to 700 corps staffed by some 3000 officers
Tliev ministered to the needy with food, music, shelter, and simple camaraderie
The Sawdust Trail, painted In tk*orge Bel*
I kws in 1916, depicts one of the revival
jiwtmgs of William Ashley (' Billy ) Sun-
day in Philadelphia. Sunday. a hard-drmk-
I mi; professional hasehnll player turned
I evangelist, Itegan his religious revivals in
I the 1890s and dress thousands. I lore, Sun-
I ihiy leans down fmrn the platform to shake
[ the hand of an admirer. In the foreground.
I aswxjiiiug woman, overcome with a sense
I oilier sins, is carried away.
I
1
i
s
f
n
i-
A small group of ministers rejected tin* old ethos that |>ersonal ^nill explained The Sorial
sin and that soeiety would be jierl’eeteil on Is as individual sinners were converted. Cos/iel
Instead, they spread a new "Social Cospel" that focused on improving the conditions
of society in order to reach individuals. In Applied Christianity (1SS6). the iuiluential
Washington Chidden preached that the church must be responsible for correcting
social injustices in the political and economic order, including dangerous working
conditions and unfair labor practices. Houses of worship, such as William Kni Ilford's
SL George’s Episcopal Church in New York, became centers of social activity, with
boss' t ilths, gymnasiums, libraries, glee clubs, and industrial training programs.
The Social Settlement Movement
e
%
i\
II
af
>1
s.
e.
I I him h -sponsored programs often repelled the immigrant poor. who saw them as
■My disguised missionary efforts. Immigrants and other shun dwellers wen- more
I inceptive to a I wild new experiment called die settlement house. It was imported
I 6nm Great Britain, which had begun to grapple with the problems of the industrial
E earlier in tin1 century. The American settlement house first appeared on the
i*r East Side of New York in 1886. Situated in the worst slums, these early	The
munitv centers were ran bv middle-class women and men to help the poor and settlement
r——.................................


i
704 THE UNITED STATES IN AN INDUSTRIAL ACE
Americanisa-
tion anti tlw
immigrant
heritage
famous being June Addams' i lull House in Chicago In ISOS the Catholic cltnrri-
sjMmsored its lies! settlement house in New York, and in 1900 Bronson 1 louse
opened its doors to the Latino community in Los Angeles.
High purposes inspired settlement workers. Leaving comfortable middle-clas
homes, thev moved into the settlement houses. Tliev dedicated themselves (like thr
"early Christians." said one) to service and sacrifice. They sought to teach immigrant!
American ways and to create a community spirit that would foster "right living
through social relations." Like political bosses, thev furnished help, from day uurviT-
ies to English-language and eooking classes to playgrounds and libraries. Armed with
statistics and personal experiences, thev also lobbied for social legislation to imprint-
bousing, women's working conditions, and public schools.
Settlement workers never lost sight of practicality or the humanity of tlnii
clients. Immigrants wen* to l*e made American, whether in dress, hygiene, nutrition
language, or manners. But they were* also encouraged to preserve their heritages
through festivals, parades, and museums. II the blight of the cities were to hr cmlnl
decency, tolerance, and vv holesomeness would go a long way. "The delicious sensi-
lion to he found in a swimming pool." Jane Addams wrote, would doubtless outvvrijli
the temptation "to play craps in a foul and Stuffy alley.”
CITY' LIFE
Urban social
stratification
Settlement workers and other reformers gave Americans a look at the underside d
the city7. A grand view of life at the top was available to anyone who strolled along
Nob Hill in San Francisco, the North Shore of Lake Michigan near Chicago, or tin
Main Line outside Philadelphia. Every city had fashionable avenues where mum
roomed mansions housed the very rich. This urban elite comprised harelv 1 pem-ni
ol the population Imt owned a fourth of all wealth. Often inheriting their fortunes
tliev vacationed in summer “cottages" like the Breakers. Thev walled themselves oil
f rom the rest of the world, threw lavish parties for their ovvti, and tried to heal h.id
the intrusions of newly monied financiers mid industrialists. Even froutier cities lit’
Denver contained urban elites, though their ranks tended to In- more ojh'ii tint
those of older eastern cities.
Between the top and the Ixittoin stretched the vast and ill-defined middle nl
urban society—educated professionals, white-collar clerks and salespeople, simp-
keepers, corporate managers and executives, public employees, and their families
This new urban middle class, like the modern eilv. was the product of industrializa-
tion ami the rise ol big business. Thev made up nearlv a third of the population ami
owned about hall the nation's wealth. With more money and more leisure time, their
power anti influence grew.
City lile reflected the stratified nature of American society. No longer vu-rr
dress and manners enough to distinguish one class from another, in the iuipcrsonil
eilv of the late nineteenth century. class distinctions continued to he based on vvealtli
and income. Such differences fount! new expression in where people lived, what tin-.
I Knight, which organizations they joined, and how they spent their time.
The Immigrant in the City
When they put into port, the first tiling immigrants were likely to see was a dtv-
THE Kisp: ok \\ URBAN ORDER
705
perhaps Boston, New York, or later. Galveston, Texas. Enough of them traveled
inland so that by tlie turn of the century three-qnarters of the residents of Minnesota
anti Wisconsin and nearly two-thirds of Utah had at least one foreign-horn parent.*
Must immigrants, worn hv the physical and financial exhaustion of their journey,
settled in cities. Even Italians. Slavs, and Greeks whose families had fanned for
generations looked to cities for opportunity.
Immigrants usnallv clustered together on the basis of their villages or provinces,
reflecting Old World habits and prejudices. In America Greeks from Athens still
umsidered Spartans ignorant and belligerent; Spartans found Athenians bloodless
and decadent. Sometimes it seemed that only mutual mistrust of Sicilians united
northern Italians with those from the central provinces. New York contained no
little Italy" lint distinct groups of Italians—southerners in the Mulbenrv Bend
district, northerners west of Broadway and oil 69th Street.
Cities developed a wcll-dclined mosaic of ethnic communities, hut these neigh-
borhoods were in constant flux. As many as half the residents moved every 10 years,
often because they got better pav ing jobs or bad more family members working.
Remit arriv als from ttalv. Russia, and the Balkans replaced earlier ones from Ireland
ami Germany. Though one nationality usually dominated a neighborhood, there was
aknvs a sprinkling of others. Despite (topular perceptions, no other immigrants lived
lib the Chinese in urban ghettos of just one ethnic group. Racial prejudice forced
the Chinese together, and local ordinances kept them from buying their way out.
Ethnic communities furnished a rich mix of old and new. They served as havens
from the strangeness of American society and springboards to a new life. From the
Moment they stepped off the boat, newcomers felt pressed to learn English, don
American clothes, and drop their "greenhorn" ways. Yet in their neighborhoods they
also found comrades who spoke their language and theaters that performed national
phis and music. Familiar foods from restaurants like the German Ludlow's or the
111,iliai i Mamma Leone's competed with American fare whose consumption was a sign
d status and acceptance. The Jewish Daily Fortran! and scores of other foreign-
hnguuge newspapers reported events from the homeland but also gav e eager readers
profiles of local leaders, advice on voting, and tips on adjusting to America. Organiza-
tions like the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society, the Polish National Alliance, and the
Society ior the Protection ol Italian Immigrants furnished fellowship and assistance,
usually in the newcomers’ own languages. They also fostered assimilation by sponsor-
in'buschull teams, insurance programs, libraries, and English classes.
Sometimes immigrants combined the old and new in creative adaptations. Rai-
mis developed a pidgin dialeet called ltulglish. It permitted them to communicate
quickly with Americans and to absorb American customs. So the Fourth of July
become "II Forte Gelato" (literally "The Great Freeze”), a pluv on the sound of the
jwrLv. Thanksgiving was known as Dr Fr sta elrllc Calliiw" ("Ghickens Dav"). Other
Biiugnint groups invented similar idioms, like Chuco, a dialect tliat developed
Cluing border Mexicans in Fl Paso.
Houses of worship were always at the center ol immigrant lile. Tlicv often
alert'd to the practices of indii idual towns or provinces. Occasionally tiny changed
tbirways under the cultural pressure of American life. Where the Irish dominated
H i American Catholic church other immigrants formed new churches with priests
ptuniunts serving ns iiiLvsi(jn:ini‘s in Kunipi- ,nnl (Imil Britain especially swelled Utah’s population with
■MWTls
Filmic
iicighborhtHMh
HcligUm
706 Tin: UNITED STATES LN AN INDUSTRIAL AGE


Assimilation

The home ox
haveti mill
status symbol
from their boinelunds. Eastern European Jews began to break the old law against I
sitting next to their wives and daughters in synagogues. The Orthodox churches of I
Armenians. Syrians, Romanians, and Serbians gradually lost their national identifies- I
tions.
The backgrounds and cultural values of inunigrants often influenced the jolts I
they took. Because Chinese men did not feel washing or ironing was I wheat h them, I
more than 7500 of them could be found in San Francisco laundries by I HSO. Sewing I
ladies' garments seemed unmanly to many native-born Americans but not to Russian I
and Italian tailors. Slavs tended to be physically robust and valued steady income I
over education. They pulled their children out of school, sent them to work, aw! I
worked themselves in the mines for better pax than in factories.
On the whole, immigrants married later and had more children than the native I
horn. Greeks and eastern European Jews prearranged marriages according to trail- I
tion. They imported “picture brides," betrothed bv mail and often from the same I
village as prospective husbands. After marriage men ruled the household, Iml women I
managed it. Although child-rearing practices varied, immigrants resisted the relative I
permissiveness of American parents. Youngsters were expected to contribute like I
little adults to the welfare of the family.
Caught between past and present, immigrants clung to tradition and assimilated I
slowly. Their children adjusted more quickly. They soon spoke English like native*, I
married whomever they pleased, and worked their way out of old neighborhoods l! I
was not easy. Children faced heartrending clashes with parents and rejection from I
peers. Sara Smolinsky. the immigrant heroine of Anz.ia Yesderska’s novel Bread Git- I
ers 11925). battled her father for independence, only to discover that 1 can't live in I
the old world and I 'm yet too green lor the new, I don't lielong to those who gave mi1 I
birth or to those with whom l was educated."
The Urban Middle-Class Home
By the turn of the century just over a third of middle-class urbanites owned then I
homes. Often two or three stories in height, made of brick or brownstone, llicv I
suburban houses stood within easy reach of new streetcars that could whisk residents I
to downtown business and shopping districts. Yet the middle-class home was more I
than a residence. Distant enough to escape the tumult of crowded cities, it served as I
a haven to protect and nurture the family. (For the role of home and family in dir I
emerging urban culture, see Generations of the Republic, pages 722-725. The I
middle-class home was also a measure of social standing. Set on its < >vvn lot ami filled I
with plush furniture, heavy drapes, antiques, and curios, it signaled status and refine- I
ment.
The top floor of bigger homes contained a modest ballroom that doubled as < I
family mom: in smaller homes it became a sewing room or a guest room for boarder* I
On the story below wen* the lx*dnx>ms and on the bottom floor, the living mom I
dining motu. pantry, and kitchen. The most notable innovation of the household vws I
the bathroom—usual)} only one—so that bedrooms still included old-fashioned I
wash-stands. But new central heat gave bathers the luxury of no longer having In I
break tlimugh the ice that once covered washbowls on wintrv mornings.
More than any other room, the kitchen blended tradition and progress. A "our-1
Processed f.xid hiix-is for tin cans, ca, 1880
I
I
v
I
r
(
n
s
\v
1
T
s*
!e
di
in
re
le
k<
be
mi
Oi
lat
tli.
Cli:
ela
lie
oil
R»
a ,S
710 TUI. UMTKD STATES I\ AN INDUSTRIAL \c;E
African-
Americans
Immigrant
cducutum
scum, library. art gallerv. bookshop, and orchestra. In (lie beckoning cities of (lie late
nineteent 1 i-centurv. Americans sought to realize their dreams of success.
Education in an Urban Industrial World
For those at the IkiUoui ami in the middle, public education was one key to success
The campaign for public education, one of the most important in American history,
began in the Jacksonian era. It did not have a serious impact until after the Civil War.
as industrial cities liegan to mushroom. \s late as IS70 half tin- children in the
country received no formal education at all. and one American in five could not read
Between 1S7(I and 1900, an educational awakening occurred. As more and more
businesses required better educated workers, attendance in public schools more than
doubled, while the length of the school term rose from 132 to 144 (lavs. Illiteracy fell
by half. At the tom of the century, nearly all the states outside the South had enacted
compulsory education laws. Almost three of even' four school-age children were
enrolled. Is veil so, file average American adult still attended school lor only about
live years, and less than 10 percent of those eligible ever went to high school
The average school dav started early, but hv noon most girls were released
under the assumption that they needed less formal education than boys. Curricula
stressed the fundamentals of reading, writing, and arithmetic. Courses in manual
training, science, and physical education were added ;ls the demand lor technical
knowledge grew and opportunities to exercise shrank. Students learned by rote
sitting in silent study with bands clasped or standing erect while they repeated
phrases and sums. In the classroom teachers possessed absolute control, "Don’t stop
to think." harked a Chicago teacher to a class of terrified youngsters in the 1890s
"tell ine what you know!”
A rigid social philosophy underlay the harsh routine. In an age of industrializa-
tion, massive immigration, and rapid change, the schools taught conformity and
values as much as facts and figures. Teachers acted as drillmasters. shaping their
charges for the sake of soeietv. "Teachers and Ixxiks are Ix-tter security than liund-
cufis and policemen.” wrote a New Jersey college professor in 1879. In McCuffaj\
Hinder, a standard textliook used in grammar schools throughout the nineteenth
century, students learned not only how to read but also how to behave. Hard work.
Christian ethics, and obedience to authority would lead boss to heroic command,
girls to blissful motherhood, and society to harmonious progress.
African-American students had to deal with the s|X'cial problems of discriinuu-
tion and segregation. As deconstruction faded, so did the impressive start made in
black education. Vet the\ were socager to learn dial by the end of the century ueaih
half of all African Americans could read. It was a remarkable achievement, lor hmkI
of tlie first generation of former slaves had been illiterate.
For nearly 100 years after the Civil War. the doctrine of "separate but equal
upheld by the Supreme Court in Flessy r. Ferguson (189b), kept black and whit
students apart but scarcely equal. B\- 1882 public schools in a ball dozen southern
states were segregated by law. the rest by practice. Underfunded and ill-equipped,
serving dirt-poor families whose every member had to w'ork. all-block schools (Inn
only alxm! a third of the South’s black children. The others simply could not In-
spared from home or field.
Like African-Americans, immigrants saw education as a wax of getting ahead
Some educators saw it as a means of Americanizing newcomers. "Education will
THE RISE OF W URBAN ORDER
711
solve every problem ol our national life, including that of assimilating our foreign
dement," declared a New York principal Few public schools paid special attention
tuimmigrants. Educators assumed that immigrant and native-born children would
learn the same lessons and turn out the same way. Only toward the end of the
'eenturv. as immigration mounted, did eastern cities begin to offer night classes in
FjigUsli and chics for foreigners.
When public education proved inadequate or failed to address their needs,
immigrants established their own schools. Catholics, for example, started an ela!ai-
rily expansion ol their paroc hial schools in 1884. Public or private, the education ot
immigrants served the same purpose: teaching fundamentals while promoting citi-
anship through wholesome values. Wrote one priest of a Creek Catholic church;
Tim first step in civilization is to acquire good habits, anil where can they acquire
linn? On the streets? In the saloons'?"
School was the place, ami by the 1880s educational reforms were already pro-
moting good habits" and marketable skills A number ol reforms came from innova-
tive schools in Germany. Opened first in St. I amis in 1873. American versions of
Bodergartens put four- to six-vear-olds m orderly classrooms while parents went
df to work. "Normal' or teacher-training schools multiplied. Bv 1000 almost one
leudicr in five had a professional degree. Science am! manual training supplemented
unre conventional subjects. Such vocational studies supplied industry with better
educated workers and also helped to control them bv reducing union influence over
iipjiirnticcsliip.
College Years
Increasingly colleges served die urban industrial socictv, not bv controlling mass
kbits but bv providing leaders and managers. Earlv in the nineteenth century, most
Americans hud regarded higher learning as unmanly and irrelevant. The few who
wight it often preferred the superior universities of Europe to those in the United
Status As American society became more organized, mechimized, and complex, the
Mul for professional, technical, and literary skills brought greater respect lor college
itli teat inn. The Morrill Act of 1862 generated a dozen new state colleges ami turn er-
otics. eight mechanical and agricultural colleges, and six black colleges.
Private philanthropy added more. In 1873 railroad mogul Johns Hopkins be-
mwirtbed ST million to found the Baltimore university that bore his name. |ohu D.
tlwkiTciler reestablished the University of Chicago (1890), while railroad baron
Irbirnl Stanford endowed Stanford University 1891) with $24 million. The number
uf colleges and universities nearly doubled lie tween 187(1 and 1910 as enrollments
mlli'il to a third ol a million.
The “college man" enjoyed new respect as universities flourished. Small-town
Iny and girls admired him and children s novels like Frank MrrriucB at Yah■ cole-
Wiiteil his exploits. No longer depicted as a wastrel or bookworm, he was now in-
formed and virile. The upper middle class bad a new ideal— the educated rogue in a
rtliM turtleneck sweater.
\ practical impulse inspired the founding of several black colleges. In the late
cutii century, lew institutions mixed races. Most refused the rare African-
an applicant Church groups ami private foundations, such us the fVulmdv
Slater funds (supported bv white philanthropists Irom the North), underwrote
k colleges after Reconstruction. By 1900, a total of 700 black students were
724
Tin: UNITED STATES IN AN INDUSTRIAL ACE
pressed Victorian marriage is al best over-
drawn.
Middle-class weddings were lavish al-
lairs. with printed invitations for the larger
ones. Gifts were displayed on the dav of the
marriage (note the illustration below) and
enviously inspected hv the guests. Around
1870, when the cost of photography
dropped, wedding portraits became popu-
lar. Taken well after the ceremony, thev
usually commemorated the bride alone.
Also by die 1870s. a growing railroad net-
work helped spawn a new institution—the
honeymoon resort. Hotels at Saratoga and
Niagara Falls, New York, greeted new cou-
ples with hand music ami offered special
honeymoon suites to make memorable the
interlude between courtship and married
life.
The gritty realities that confronted
urban working classes made anv talk of fam-
ily "havens" or elalx>ntte weddings some-
what fanciful. Most families moved fre-
quently in search of work and lived in
cramped quarters. To supplement family
incomes as many as 30 jiereent took in
boarders, usually unmarried men and
women between the ages of 20 and 35. (In
some cities, nearly half the immigrants who
arrived toward the end of the century had
Ixjarders in their homes,) In such house-
holds mothers took responsibility for child
rearing. They often worked outside the
home as well to help support the family'.
The consequence of such pressures could
he grim. Gertrude Moselle, a black journal-
ist in New York, warned working mothers
against the practice of drugging their chil-
dren or locking them in closets to keep
them out of mischief when mothers were
absent.
In the "family economies" of the work-
ing classes, kev decisions—over whether
and whom to marry, over work and educa-
tion, over when to leave home—tended to
be made on the basis of collective rather
than individual needs. Though boys wen-
more likely to work outside the home than
girls, daughters in immigrant families went
to work at an early age so sons could con-
tinue their education. It was customary for
one daughter to remain unmarried so she
could care for younger siblings or aged par-
ents. Young men and women generally
worked for seven years In-fore marrying and
often did not establish their own house-
holds until their early Unities.
The Chinese were an exception. The
ban on the immigration of Chinese laborers
in the 1880s (see page 702) had frozen the
sex ratio of Chinese communities into a cu-
rious imbalance. Since most (Chinese iniini
grants had been single men, dispro|)ort inn-
ately male enclaves shaped Chinese urban
life, with high rates of prostitution, large
numbers of gangs and secret societies, and
low birth totals. When the San Francisco
earthquake and fire destroyed birth records
in 1906, resourceful Chinese immigrants
created "paper sons” (and less often “paper
daughters") by forging American birth cer-
tificates and claiming their China-bom cliil-
THF RISE OF AN URBAN ORDER
dren as American citizens. If all the claims
l» natural-lwm citizenship were true, even
Chinese woman in San Francisco would
have bad to give birth to 800 children.
The bonds of family and kinship were
equally strong among African-Americans.
The vast majority lived in the southern
countryside. Strong black families had ex-
isted in slavery, despite restrictions on visit-
ation for slave couples belonging to differ-
ent masters and constant threats ol
separation by sale. The strength of such at-
tachments became clear after the Civil War.
Thousands of former slaves wandered the
South in search of spouses, siblings, and
children separated by sale or war. As late as
1900, so many ex-slaves were seeking rela-
tives tliat one Virginia newspaper created a
special section—"Do Yon Know Them?"—
to satisfy the demand for information. .And
it was often through family networks that
the great black migrations to northern cities
in the 1890s and chiring World War I moved
(see page 893).
Beginning in the 1880s, in both niral
and urban settings. American mortality
rates gradually began to drop. (There were
not aide exceptions among African-Ameri-
cans; see page 9-19.) In cities, purer water,
better access to medical cart*, pasteurized
milk, and—by the early twentieth century—
improvements in sewage systems ac-
counted for the decline. As a result ol the
drop in mortality, the population grew
steadily older, Bv 1900 about 6.5 percent of
all Americans were 00 or older, compared
to 4 percent in 1860. Still, since few mem-
bers of society reached old age. no fixed
policy' toward retirement existed in most
businesses. Voluntary retirement did in-
crease. In 1920 some 60 percent of men 65
and older continued to work, down from
the 75 percent who had worked in 1870.
The growth ol the factory system helped to
account lor the drop by accelerating retire-
ment among workers who could not keep
up the demanding pace. Those who contin-
ued to work often found themselves moved
from assembly lines to lower-paying janito-
rial jobs.
Poverty among the aged increased. As
late as 1922 no state had enacted a work-
able old-age pension sy stem, despite recog-
nition (dating from around 1910) that old
age was becoming a social problem. By
1930 one elderly American in four was de-
pendent on some form of assistance. Most
relied on savings or help from families, but
many found themselves in asylums and
state poorhouses, the majority of whose
populations were 65 or older. Sncietv still
held that individuals were responsible for
themselves.
In their declining years this generation
saw America assuming its characteristic
twentieth-century shape, in which the
urban middle classes achieved a dominant
social position. Births were becoming less
frequent, and the population was steadily
growing older and more diverse. Modem
America was coming of age with the passing
of this generation.
20
The
Exodusten
Agrarian Domains:
The South and the West
rv lie news spread across the South (hiring the late 1870s Sometimes it
! was merely rumors, passed hy word of month in the cotton fields. Per-
haps a man came around with a handbill, telling about cheap land to be
___________ had. Or a letter might come from friends or relatives and l>e read aloud
at church. The news spread in different ways, bill in the end, the talk always spelled
Kamos.
Few block fanners had I teen to Kansas themselves. But more than a few knr'
that Old John Brown had lived there before coming east to launch Ins raid on Harp-
ers Fern. Black folks, it seemed, might be able to live more freelv in Kansas. You
can buy land at from a dollar and a half to two dollars an acre." wrote one settler to
his friend in Louisiana, also noting another distinct advantage, "They do not kill
Negroes here for voting.” The Colored Citizen, a newspaper in Topeka, received jo
many inquiries that it printed advice on how to travel and where to settle, conclud-
ing, “COME WEST. COME TO KANSAS.” liven more enticing were tin
chmmoliths—colored promotional handbills showing “freedman’s homes” "itli
floor-length French windows, living rooms with voting children playing the pianu
black mothers directing a host of servants in the kitchen, and fathers hauling home
turkevs and deer from the lush prairies.
In 1878 such prospects excited hundreds of black families already stretched lo
their limits bv economic hardship and jailitical violence. With Rutherford I laves jj
president. Reconstruction ended, and southern governments "redeemed” by consrr
vative white southerners, the future in the South seemed uncertain. Heim Adams
founder of the Negro Union Co-operative Aid Association in Louisiana, sent IVI
memliers ofliis organization across tin' South to study the plight of ordinary Mae la.
Bv LS77 he had concluded that migration out of the South was the best solution. Bis
there were individuals aplenty who needed no committee to come to that conclusion.
“Colored people are looked ujxm bv tile white people with disdain and sc. ms
black farmer from Texas complained. ”1 liave sufferetl the hukes and scums lug
enough down South here,”
St. I amis learned of these rumblings in the first raw days of March 1S79 a
steamers from downriver began unloading Ereedmen in large immlu rs. Some a
with lielongings ami monev: others had little more than the clothes on their Ins.'
While the weather was still cold, they sought shelter beneath tarpaulins along d»
72(i
728 Till UNITED STATES IN AN INDUSTK1AL AGE
Relathms
between the
South, West,
and Northeast
river levee, built (ires bv the shore, and got out Irving pans to cook their meals while
their children jumped rope nearby. Bv the end of April more than 6000 had arrived,
bv the end of 1879. more than 20.000. When the crowds overwhelmed the wharves
and temporary shelters, tin- city's black churches banded together to house the ‘refu-
gees." feed them, and help them continue toward Kansas. The news that rail passage
would not lx- free, as many rumors had it. did not shake their hopes. “Wc's like de
chilun ob Israel when dev was led from out o’ bondage bv Moses,” one explained,
referring to the exodus from Egvpt. "Dis is our Bed Sea. right hyah in St. Louis,
a tween home an’ Kansas, an’ if we sticks togeter an’ keeps up our faith we’ll git l<>
Kansas and lx- out o' bondage for slmah. ” So the '‘Exodnsters,'* as tliev Irecamr
known, pressed onward.
Adjusting to the new land was often not any easier for black emigrants than for
white Both northerners and southerners were accustomed to country where lumber
was plentiful for building houses and for cooking. The Exodusters were not prepared
for the harsh Kansas winters either. “Kansas has the roughest wind you ever run
across in tjour life." commented one; another was dismayed to find that cotton did
not flourish in prairie soil. "Iff were back home I might get in a crop of cotton; Imt
I cannot make enough here." Those who did manage to settle on farms became tin
targets of ranchers whose herds grazed the prairies. One settler from Nieodemus. an
early black colouv. wrote the governor, begging him to "please get rede nl the late!
we are so rounded with the hured [herders) do not care for us."
In the end. more black emigrants settled in growing towns like Topeka, Lincoln,
and Kansas Citx Men might get jobs as hired hands, while the women took join
doing laundry. With luck, couples made $350 a war. saved a bit for a home, and put
down roots Bill Sims, an emigrant who settled in Ottawa, Kansas, put down roots
litcrallv -working at tree husbandry for a living. When his wife died, he promised
her on her deathbed that he would educate their two daughters. By the 1930s, when
he was in his nineties, he could boast that his oldest hail been the "first colored girl In
ever graduate” from Ottawa University: his other daughter had become a school-
teacher. Anil on the courthouse grounds at the center of town, the trees he had
planted years Ix-fore were still standing.
Sims and the host of Exodusters who poured into Kansas were part of a human
flood westward. The flood hail many sources—the played-out farms of New England
and the South, crowded cities, and all of Enro]x\ in 1879. as African-Americans
traveled up the Mississippi to St. Louis, KKK) white emigrants arrived in Kansas even
week. S|x-cial trains brought settlers to the plains, all eager to start anew. During tin
1870s, Nebraska’s population increased from 123,000 to more than 450,000; diariiig
the 1880s the number of Kansans jumped from a million to a million and a hall. "We
have plentv of room for all creation,” boasted a newspaper in Olathe, Kansas.
Yet the spirit of boosterism could not mask serious strains in the rapidls expand-
ing nation, especiallv in the South anil West. The boom economies of cotton, cattle
and grain all depended on urban markets. The market for cotton lav with the textile
mills of New England (and, increasingly, the "New South"), while the demand for
beef and western grains came from metropolitan centers. Especially during hard
times, w esterners and southerners saw themselves us the victims of a colonial eco-
nomic system, in which their fortunes were controlled bv the industries of the North-
east or neglected by an indifferent government in Washington. But these self-styled
victims themselves exploited bodi people and the land. Whether lix-king the former
slaves into new forms of economic bondage or liberating land from the Indians and
AGRARIAN DOMAINS THE SOUTH AND THE WEST 751
tribes became dependent nn the government, And white settlers who coveted the
twniiAfs of reservation lands were <|iiick to violate treats terms. Bailrvtad barons like
Cdlis P. Huntington and Jay Could ignored Apache rights as they ran tracks across
Hie reservation. In a spirit that mingled good intentions and unbridled greed, Con-
gress adopted the Dawes Severalty Act of IS-ST to end reservation policy ami bring
ontv-mimadic Indians into white society as fanners and small landowners.
In practice, the Dawes Act was more destructive than any blow struck by the
iron'because it weakened the communal structure upon which Indian tribal life was
liiisttl. hinds held in common would now 1m- allotted to individuals: lfi<) acres to the
he.ttlof.i family and SO acres to single adults or orphans. But as John Wesley Pmvell
had warned, small homestead farms in the West would not support a family —white
or Indian -unless they were irrigated. And most Indians of tile region had no experi-
ence with farming, managing money, or other white wavs. The sponsors of the
Dawes Act, knowing that whites might swindle Indians out ol their private holdings,
arranged for the government to hold title to the lam! for 25 years, hut that did not
stop unscrupulous speculators from "leasing” lands. Furthermore, all reservation
lands not allocated to Indians were opened to non-Indian homesteaders.
Against such a bleak future, main Indians sought solace iu dreams of (lie past.
In 1890 a religious revival spread when word came from the Nevada desert that a
humble Paiute named Woxoka had received revelations from the Great Spirit.
Woroka told the pilgrims that God wanted them "to be good and love one another,
and not light, or steal, or lie." With that message God also sent a dance. Wovoka
preached that if his followers adopted his message and mystical rituals, the dead
Indians Would come buck, whites would he driven out of the land, and game would
be thick again. \s the rituals spread, alarmed settlers called the strange shullling and
chanting the Ghost Dance.” The army moved to stop the proceedings among the
Sinuv. for fear of another uprising. The great Sitting Bull hinisell was killed in one
suflle while the Seventh Gavaliv. Custers old unit, set out to track down other
members of the tribe. At Wounded Knee the cavalry fell upon one band ami with
devastating machine-gun fire killed at least 200 men, women, and children.
W ounded Knee w its a last symbolic act of violence against an independent In-
dian way of life. After I SHO the real battle wits over assimilation, not extinction. The
astern of markets, rail and freight networks, and extractive industries was linking the
Far West with the rest of tin- nation, replacing free-roaming bison with herded cattle
Bid sheep, nomadic tribes with prairie sodhusters, and sacred hunting grounds like
the Sioux s Pa Safin with gold fields. Reformers used a combination ol education,
citizenship, and allotments to draw Indians from their communal lives into white
society Most Indians were equally determined to preserve their tribal ways and a
sense of themselves as a separate people.
Hispanic Lunds
The coming of the railroad in the ISSHs and 1590s brought similar wrenching
changes to the Southwest, but w ith an added complexity. As new markets and indus-
tries sprang up. the new settlers who {mured in came not mils from the east hut from
the south across the Mexican border. Indians like the Navajo and the Apache faced
(he host ili t\ not oulv of Anglos but aLso of I lispanos, those settlers of Spanish descent
dm alreath lived in the region. Indeed, before the Mexican War. the Hispanic
governors of northern Mexico had offered bounties for Apache ami Navajo scalps.
The Dawes
Art
Won lit In!
Knee
752 THE EXITED STATES IN AN 1NDESTK1AL ACE
Western cities attracted ethnically diverse populations. This chili stand in San Antonio served
the city's large Hispanic population.
The Hispanos soon discovered that, like the Indians, they had either to embrace
or resist the Anglos who flocked to the region. Many Hispanic women elto.se Anglo
husbands. One enterprising saloon keeper, Gertnidis Barcolo. grew wealthy serving
thirsty Anglos. The elite, or Hints, often aligner! themselves with Anglos against their
countryfolk in order to protect their status anti property. Others, including Juan Jew-
Juan Jose Herrera, determined to resist the newcomers. Herrera was a New Mexican organizer
Hrrrtra ami for the knights of l-dxtr. When Anglo cattle ranchers Itcgan forcing Hispanos off
ilu- \\ hill■ their lamLs around Las Vegas, he assembled a band of masked night riders known as
( ups | .,s Ciorras Blancas i the White Caps). In 1889 and 1890 as main as 700 White Caps
burned Anglo fences, haystacks. anti occasionally even hams and houses. Ilcrrerrd'
followers also set thousands of railroad ties afire when the Atchison. Topeka and
Santa Fe Hailroad refused to raise the low wages they paid llispuno workers.
The new Anglos themselves frequently resorted to violence against Hispanos.
With more subtlety, western lawyers and politicians used legal tactics to deprive
llispuno residents of some 80 percent of their land titles. Thomas Catron, a particn-
larK ambitious New Mexico lawyer, contested titles so aggressively that lie amassed
holdings ol some 3 million acres (an area as large as Delaware and Rhode Island
combined). Even so. in New Mexico and California, Hispanics played a significant
role in public life so long as they remained a majority. (Herrera and his allies man-
aged to defeat Catron when lie ran for Congress in 1892.)
But when the railroads came so did white settlers, as well as increasing numben
of Mexican laliorers from south of the border. Many ol them settled in the growing
cities along the rail lines: El Paso. Albuquerque. Tucson. Phoenix, and Lais Angelrs.
The\ lived in segregated barrios, Spanish towns, wdiere their cultural traditions per-
sisted. But b\ the late nineteenth century, most Hispanics. whether they lived in
urban barrios or on rural farms ami ranches, had been excluded from positions ot
jxilitical power. Mexican immigrants worked mostly as contract and seasonal lalxirers
for railroads and large farms. Just as the southern economy depended on African
American labor. the Southwest grew on the labor ol Mexicans.
AGRARIAN’ DOMAINS; THE SOUTH AND THE WEST
755
Union Pacific Corporation fell the right to construct
the section from Omaha westward. But the real
money in this and other ventures lav not so much in
the revenues from passengers and freight, hut from
generous loans and gifts of federal and state lands.
For every mile of track completed, the rail compa-
nies received twenty sections of limd in the states
along the route and forts sections per mile in the
territories. (One section equaled 64(H) acres or 10
square miles ) By the time the Central and Union
Pacific railroads were completed, they had received
some 45 million acres. Fraudulent stock practices,
corrupt accounting, and wholesale bribery (with the
complicity of the vice president and at least two
members of Congress) enabled the promoters to
earn large profits.
General Grenville Dodge, an army engineer on
leave to the Union Pacific, recognized that the im-
mense labor force needed to build the railroad might
be recruited cheaply from the mass of Irish and
other European immigrants, lie drove his workers
with ruthless arms discipline, completing as much as
10 milt's of track in a single day. Charles Crocker had
no similar source of cheap lalror in California for the
Central Pacific, since the gold rush era had passed.
Worse vet. hr faced the formidable task of forging a
mute through the Sierra Nevadas. When Iris partner
Lebml Stanton! suggested imported Chinese lalair.
Crocker dismissed him with a laugh—at first But it
wit some lO.tKHI (Chinese laborers ("the Asiatic { Joti-
tingent of the Grand Army of CiviUzatRm,” one ob-
server dubbed them) who accomplished the daunt-
ing task Willi wheelbarrows, picks, shovels, and
baskets they advanced eastward, building trestles
like the one at Secret town (right) and dripping away
at the Sierras' looming granite walls. On the worst
stretches they averaged only eight inches a dav.
Once Chinese creyvs had broken into the Hat
country of the desert basin, the two railroads raced
to claim as much federal land as possible. I .aher
bosses pushed their men svith blatant appeals to
racism. In the resulting scramble, both sides
passed each other, laving more than 2(H) miles of
parallel track Indore the government ordered them
to join at Promontory Point, Utah, in the spring of
1SIS9 The headlong rush had involved waste and the
cutting of comers: many sections of the first track

dr
V
AGRARIAN DOMAINS: THE SOUTH AND THE WEST 757
Ctar.t Williamson painted tins herd on the long drive north from Texas. Cowboys normally
wirkei! in pairs, opposite each other, as shown here: the chuck wagon can !>e seen at the rear
(a(hr train So strenuous was the work that each cowboy brought with him about eight horses,
»tli.it fresh mounts would always be available.
, ((cognized that the nearby Chisholm Trail would bring the cattle herds anti the
biingn anti thirsts eow|>okes who drove them to Abilene. When the railroad came
thmugli in 1S72 the boom began in earnest. Area farmers now had far wider access to
distant markets. And towns like Wichita offered farmers anti cowhands alike an
escape front the isolation that was their common lot. In the five years after 1 869 the
town's population grew from 300 to 2500 people.
Towns like Wichita thrived, ol course, on the business of ranchers, whose long-
I tarn steers were driven to market beginning in 1866. Mexican ranchers had intro-
| fed not only the cattle hut also the basic techniques for their management with a
I minimum of cost ;uul labor. The ranchers allowed their herds to roam the range
freely, identified only by a distinctive mark or brand. Each spring the cowboys
iwiikIimI up the herds, branded the calves, and selected the steers to send to market.
Anglo-Americans who came to Texas readily adopted the Mexican equipment: the
Iinii^i mustangs and broncos (horses suited to managing the mean longhorns), the
brawling iron for marking the herds, the corral for holding cattle, and the lariat for
poping. So too the cowboys donned the distinctive Mexican outfits—chaps, spurs,
ml a broad-brimmed hat.
When the early routes to Sedalia, Missouri, proved unfriendly, a more direct
Kutr through easier country' along the Chisholm Trail, running from San Antonio to
Mm and Ellsworth, made the cattle drive practical. But the railroads that carried
j"!i east also brought farmers determined to close the open ranges of western
Mexican
ranching
techniques'
S+4 Tin united states l\ v\ industkiae ace
WOMAN SI (TRAGI’:
Western states were tin• first to grant women the right to vote. .Sparsely populated and riKirr
egalitarian than tin* rest of* the nation, the West was used to women participating lulls in
.settlement anti work. Other sections of the country, notably the Midwest, granted women
partial suffrage that ineluded toting for seliool (rounds and taxes. Suffragists encountered tin'
most intractable resistance in the South, where rigid codes of social conduct elevated wmnrn
syinliolically hut shackled them practically.
CONTROLLING THE MASSES
The drive for social justice reflected the optimistic, tolerant impulses of prngressiv-
ism: the pursuit of social “welfare,” its paternalistic instincts. But more than a few
progressives feared they were losing their country to aliens, ethnics, and cit\ lowlifes. J
To maintiiin control they sometimes went beyond their basic strategy ol education
and sought restrictive laws to control the masses. In doing so, the progressive custn I
dians of culture sometimes allied themselves with more traditional evangelical Prot-
estants.
To such mu-asv reformers, chaos and sin flourished in the cities: races jostlin''
uneasily: strange Old World cultures clashing with "all-American” customs; lung
Chinese pigtails or Jewish sideloeks lending a discordant air to city crowds; saloons
and dance halls luring youngsters ami impoverishing laborers; prostitutes walking tlu1
streets: vulgar amusement parks pandering to the uneducated. The city challenged
middle-class reformers to convert this riot of diverse customs and ways into a more I
uniform society conceived in their own image.
Stemming the Tide
A rising tide of nonwhite and ethnic Americans, many of them mov ing to cities. |
aggravated the fears of many progressive reformers and native-born whites. During
tlie 1890s, segregation laws had already begun to restrict the opportunities c»f hlaeks
in the South; after 1900, even the rhetoric of reform was used to support while
supremacy. Southern progressives won office by promising to disfranchise blacks, in
order to break the power of corrupt political machines that controlled the black vote I
THE PHOCHKSSIVK ERA Vlo
Hindi :ls northern machines marshaled the immigrant vote. But the South was hardly
thronh region in which discrimination flourished. Asians. latinos, and Indians laced
similar curbs in the West, as did the new arrivals from southern and eastern Europe
in the North. The rising tide of immigration especially chilled native-born hearts.
Including those of reformers anxious over the changing complexion of the country.
A new science called “eugenics” lent respectability to ideas popular among
"older stfK-k” middle-class Americans that the newcomers were biologically inferior.
Kugenicists Itelieved that heredity determined everything and advocated selective
breeding for human improvement. B\ 1914 more magazine articles disc ussed eugen-
ics than slums, tenements, and living standards combined. Upper-crust New Yorker
and amateur zoologist Madison Circuit helped to popularize the notion that the
lesser breeds" threatened to "niongrelizc" America. In The Passing of the Great
Hun UJlfii he warned that “race suicide- threatened the United States. Mixing with
"inferior" immigrants "gives us a race reverting to the more ancient, generalized and
kwer type."
Fur some old-line Americans, assimilation was not only undesirable—it was
Impossible. "What can you expect of the Americanism of a man whose breath always
recks of garlic?” sneered a member of the Daughters of the American Revolution.
\fiddle-class urban reformers, despairing over the link between immigrants and
political machines, reduced immigrant voting power by increasing residency require-
ments. In mam states onh native-lmm and fully naturalized citizens could vote.
Enlightened reformers such as Jane Addams stressed the "gifts” immigrants
hnntglit to their adopted culture: folk rituals, dances, music, and handicrafts. With
pgructcristk' paternalism, these reformers hoped to “Americanize" the foreign-bom
the tenn was newlx coined). E'ducatiou was one key. Peter Roberts, a progressive
educator, developed a lesson plan lor the Young Men’s Christian Association that
might immigrants to dress, tip. buy groceries, and vote. In Milwaukee factories.
English was taught so immigrant workers could reatl safety signs Rut some lessons
wvre far from practical. In 1916 burly, men who labored by day could he found
ifeblh in Cleveland schools copying ”1 am a yellow bird. I can sing. I can fix ."
More intolerant reformers sought to restrict immigration. I iere. too. they em-
I pined the progressive method of organization, investigation, education, and Iegisla-
I fan. Active since the 1590s. tin- Immigration Restriction League pressed Congress
1m 1907 to require a literacy test for admission into the United States. Instead the
Senate ap]X)inted the Dillingham Commission to studv the matter Despite evidence
I iht m> correlation existed lietween the new immigrants and feeblemindedness,
liTiiiu'. epilepsy, or tuberculosis, the commission's 42-volume report concluded that
I unlimited immigration created unmanageable social problems. The commission en-
I farted a literacy test to stem the title. To the delight of many ethnic groups, Presi-
V drills Taft and Wilson vetoed it in 1913 and 1915. Congress nonetheless overrode
I Wilson's second veto in 1917.
I The Curse of Demon Rum
ITmI closely to concern over immigrants was an attack on saloons. Part of a broader
■Made to clean up cities, the antisaloon campaign also drew strength from the
I century-old drive to temper the consumption of alcohol and from the gathering force
■uf utgauized women. Women made up a disproportionate number of alcohol reform-
I try In some ways, the tem[KTanee movement reflected their growing impulse to
Futurities
Americaniza-
tion
literacy test
I'UK UNITKU STATES AND THE OLD WORLD ORDER 875
I bimseifrmlv lo maintaining an "open door” of equal commercial access to China ami
I to protecting the Philippines, "our heel of Achilles."
The kev lay in offsetting Russian ami |apanese ambitions to dominate the re-
I jpuit. When japan launched an attack on Russian holdings in the Chinese province ot
I .Manchuria in 1904. Hexisevelt privately' cheered the audacious Japanese. "a great
HtRiliwd nation." But he worried that an unchecked Japan might threaten American
I inlm-sts in China and the Philippines. So he offered lo mediate. Both sides agreed to
I nuvt .it the U.S, Naval Base near Portsmouth, Maine. "1 am having my hair turned
I pu\ bv dealing with the Russian and Japanese peace negotiators." the president
I complained to his son.
Roosevelt s skillful intercession produced the Treats of Portsmouth in August
I 1905. which recognized the Japanese victors, the first ever ol an Asian power over a
I European country. I.ipan received Port Arthur, the southern half of Sakhalin Island.
I and. ill effect, control of Korea Japan promised to leave Manchuria as part of China
■	(ttnd China open to all foreign trade. T hrough the Treats of Portsmouth the United
■	States maintained the open door in China and the balance of power in Asia. Never
I before had an American president pluved a kev role in a dispute not directly involving
I tin United State's Pur his ellorts Roosevelt received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1908.
Tlie Japanese' government signed the peace treaty , but not without resentment
■Mimig die-hard nationalists Anger surfaced iu a protest lodged. of all places, against
I lh'San Francisco school lioartl. Rising Japanese immigration let! San Francisco
IkWI authorities lo place the city’s 93 Asian students in a separate school. In Japan
Bnfofiis talked of war over the insult to national honor Rooseve lt, fuming at those-
ffettfcnial fools in California." suiumone-d the- mayor <if San Francisco anil seven
I tdiiml board members to the- White- House. In exchange for an enel to the segrega*
Vtkm Older Roosevelt offere-e! to arrange a mutual restriction of immigration between
■ jjpanand the United Slates. In 1907 all sides accepted his “gentlemen's agreement."
During llm San Francises) sehool crisis, wild minors Hew that the Japanese were
I brut mi taking Hawaii, or (lie Philippines, or even the Panama Canal. In ease- Japan
Hlriuiv other nation thought of upsetting the- Pacific balance. Roosevelt estuee-ive-d of
I ignuitl ge-stun-ol American might. lie would send 16 gleaming white battleships on
■ eworld tour "Bv (ie-orge, isn't it magnificent!" he- crowed, as the “Great White
Iifk-ef steamed out of Hampton Roads, Virginia, on a bright summers day in 1907.
■ TV fleet made- its most conspicuous stop in Japan. Some Europeans predicted
ruled disaster. Instead, cheering crowds turned out in Tokyo and Yokohama, where
group of Japanese schoolchildren stooel stiffly at dockside and sung "The' Star-
KSptUgk'd Banner' in English. The' show of force heralded a new age- of American
B iuLv.il might hut had an unintended consequence I hut haunted Americans for ele-
Blades it spurn'd Japanese admirals to expand the-ir navy. The delicate balance- e>f
Bonin in Asia was tilting toward Japan.
Roosevelt's policies toward Japan reflected two of his central beliefs: American
Bfcirrrsts were global, and armed conflict between gri'at powers should lie1 avoided
rl When Germany and France nearly drew swords over the North African colony of
I Uomceo in 1905, Roosevelt arranged a conference that peacefully resolved the dis-
Itpte In the' summer <>l 1908 he sent American delegates to a meeting of 44 nations
Ijitlie- Hague- in the- Netherlands to set limited rule's for war. They outlawed poison
|£#lml held hack from banning aerial balloons, battleships, airplanes, anti snbtna-
limev
Treaty of
Portsmouth
Gentlemen's
agreement
Great White
Fieri
H82 rat: UNITED STATES IN AN INDUSTRIAL AC I
THE COURSE OE WAR IN EUROPE, 1914-1917
Wlirn Wnrltl War I erupted lietwpen the Central anil Allied Powers in 1914, lew countries in
Europe remained neutral. Tile armies of the Central Powers penetrated as far west as Frame
and as far east as Russia, but by 1917 the European war had settled into a hideous standoff
air mi; the deadly line of trenches on the western front.
throughout the crisis. Early in August, as Germany marched on France and Russia,
Ellen Wilson died. For an instant the president seemed near collapse. Personal grief
mixed with contempt as he watched Europe disembowel itself "The more I read
alwint the conflict across the seas,” Wilson wrote a friend, "the more open it seems to
me to utter condemnation.”
Wilson slowly came to see the calamity as an opportunity for a new world order
Neutral America would lead warring nations to "a peace without victory." Selfish I
nationalism would give way to cooperative internationalism; Christian charity mid
fellowship would replace power polities. Progressive faith in reason and gradual
change would triumph over violent conflict. Every thing hinged on American neutral
itv. Only if the country stood above the fray could America achieve a higher peace.
Americans must remain “neutral in fact as well as in name, impartial in thought .o j
well as action." declared Wilson in 1914.
Neutrality would be difficult, but impartiality was impossible. Nearly 9 million 1
Americans of German and Austrian descent naturally sympathized with the Central i
Powers. The almost 5-million Irish-Americans shared those sentiments on the
grounds of England's centuries-old domination of Ireland, But the bonds of lan-
guage. culture, and history bed most Americans to Great Britain. Wilson hiiusclTliad
long admired British institutions. Even he could not escape feeling tugged toward
the Allies. And gratitude for French aid during the American Revolution still BvhL ;
Will'll the first American division marched through Paris years later, its commander
I
Tin constraints of war brought
rvRiiiH'ii than ever into tlu- juli
These wimuti work on a
alum line muiiiifiutiiring bill-
. Tin' novelty of till- situation
ms evident from the fashionable
jt-hrelnl high-button slnx-s that
(wear—ill-suited to the cnmlt-
t in an armaments plant
EarlGonipers ol the American Federation ol Labor (AFL), the nation's largest union,
resented lalxiron Wilson's National Defense Council and later on the War Dilior
uni Memltership in the AFI. increased from 2.7 million memliers in 1916 to
4 million in 1919. On Armistice Das Oompers eomplained that lalmr had set
tarliiesc all the gains it needed What rights had been won, Goinpers justifiablv
•cl, would end with peace.
Hie war brought as mans us a million more svomeu into the labor force Most
'Suimg and single. Sometimes thev took over jobs once held lis men as railroad
terms-rx, drill press operators, and electric lift truck drivers. The presvar trend
Muni higher paving jobs temporarily intensified, though svoinen usually earned less
fan the men thev replaced. More and more women worked in offices, schools,
toils. and telephone exchanges. Some of the most spectacular gains in defense
[government work evaporated after the war ils old prejudices took hold anew.
1'luii the country demobilized, tens of thousands of women lost jobs ;ls arm) nurses,
nse workers, and wartime administrators. Agencies such as the Women's Service
rfion of the Railroad Administration, which fought sexual harassment and discrim-
ilion, simplv went out of business, while organized labor remained hostile.
ILreal Migrations
Kir work sparked massive internal migrations of labor to meet shortages as the
ting choked olf immigration from abroad and the draft depleted maii|xiwer at
mi. Factor) ovv-ners scoured the country fora fresh labor supply. Industrial cities,
mutter how small, soon swelled with newcomers. Between 1917 and 1929. some
HOIK) Mexicans crossed the border inlet Texas. California, New Mexico, and Ari-
Sonie Mexicaii-Amerieans left segregated barrios ol western cities for northern
plants. Most worked on farms and ranches, freed from military7 service bv the
meat grant<*d all agricultural labor.
Northern labor agents fanned out across the South to recruit voting Macks.
can-An lericuu newspapers like the Chicago Defender summoned them north to
anti of Hope." I Ivegyou, my brother, to leav e the benighted land,” urged one
Women
workers


$94 THE UNITED STATES IN AN INDUSTRIAL AGE
litice riots
('.nmmittiT <m
Public
Information
editor. (id nut of the South.’ Over the war wars more than 400.000 moved In the
I morning industrial centers of the North. The number of African-An lericans in l In-
cago more than douhled In Cleveland it <|uudni|iled. Towns like Hattiesburg Mu
slssippi. were decimated bv the drain. Finallv. under pressure from southern jmliti-
eians, the U.S, Employment Service suspended its program to assist blacks moving
north.
Largely unskilled and semiskilled, black workers took factory jobs in the slid
mills of PennsvIvania. the war plants of Massachusetts, and the brickyards ol
Jersey. Mostly rural backgrounds left them unprepared for life in the eitv The new
arrivals, noted one magazine, were often "crowded into dark rooms. . . shivering
with the cold from which they do not know how to protect themselves.” The I'rfua
League and other voluntary organizations tried to meet the housing shortage, hut llw
basic problems high rents and low wages—remained unresolved.
\V. K. II. Du Bois and other African-American leaders urged their followers to
"forget our special grievances and close our ranks shoulder to shoulder with ouriwu
white fellow citizens. ” So they did. deferring dreams of equality ami material grin
until the war was over. In France, where 200.000 blacks served, only 42.000 w*
combat. Four regiments ol the all-black 93rd Division, brigaded with the Frrix-ti
army, w ere among the first Americans in the trenches and among the most deooniirc
units in the U.S Army. Three of the regiments later received the Croix de Cucm-far!
heroism.
At home the war aggravated racial tensions. Southern lynching parties mur-
dered 3$ blacks in 1917 and 5$ in 191$. In 1919, alter the war ended, more tlian7#
were hung, some still in uniform. Housing shortages and job competition helpoli#
spark race riots across the North. In almost every city blacks, stirred bv war rhetoric
of freedom and democracy', showed new militancy bv fighting back. In niirl-1917
some 49 blacks and 9 whiles died when East St. Dmis erupted in racial viukw.
During the bloody' "nil summer” of 1919 race wars broke out in Washington, DC.
Omaha, Nebraska, and New York City. In July a two-week reign of racial terror !*ga
ill Chicago after w hites stoned a black who bad drilled into their section ol a vnpts
gated beach. Thousands of African-Americans were burned out of their homes aP
hundreds injured. Thirty-eight people were killed—15 whites and 23 blacks.
Propaganda and Civil Liberties
"Once lead this [X'ople into war,” President Wilson said before American entry into
the conflict, “and they'll forget there ever was such a tiling as tolerance.' Yuicnu#
diil succumb to a mill less hysteria during World War I. but they had help lutemc
prewar opjiositiou to \mcrican entry coupled with wartime fears over public .ip.ill'
led the president to create the Committee on Public Information (CPI1, lie-ailedk
George Creel, a California newspaperman. Surrounding himself with old muckian
such as Ida Tnrlnll and Has Stannard Baker. Creel launched what he called ,i 'i£tr
for the minds of men. for the conquest of their convictions. ” The CPI mm
sioned colorful war posters, including James Flagg's famous "I Want You lor tin
Army .” distributed 75 million pamphlets, issued fiOOO press releases, and s|><m.sani
war expositions attended bv 10 million people in two dozen cities.
Initially committed to a simple "faith in the fact,” tlx- CPI soon devclops!in
tlie most powerful propaganda mill the nation had ever known. An army of "Fan
Minute Men," 75,000 last-talking orators, invaded movie theaters, lodge laL
schools, and churches to keep patriotism at "white heat" with four minutes ofd
THE NEW ERA 933
once. Defenders of tradition followed a cherished older faith, associated with niral
i lift* and valuing neighborlincss, small communities, and comfortable sameness.
Modernism ami tniditionalism had stood side by uneasy side for decades. In the
1920s the emergence of a mass society sharpened awareness of the differences-—and
the dangers—each saw in the other. As modernism transformed the country. tradi-
tional culture hardened. Traditionalists looked on change with suspicion and diversity
wtli dismay. It urban cosmopolitans could be patronizing about the "rubes" and
“hayseeds" from the country, country folk could be mean-spirited and intolerant in
I return. They could draw support Irani their allies—niral migrants to cities and an
I embattled Protestant elite. All were determined to defend the older faiths against the
I modem age.
Nativism anti Immigration Restriction
In May 1920 Nicola Sacco ami Bartolomeo Vanzetti, two Italian aliens and admitted
I anarchists, were indicted for a shoe company robbery and murder in South Brain-
I tree. Massachusetts. Most of the evidence linking them to the crime was circumstan-
tial In July 1921, after a jury found them guilts'. Judge Webster Thayer sentenced
I them to death. For the next sis years they appealed the decision. Each time Thayer
I denied their motions, even when a Bhode Island gang member confessed to the
I crime.
Thi’ trial became one of the most celebrated of the decade. Critics charged that
| Sacco and Vanzetti were innocent and convicted only for being foreign-bom radicals.
(Whatever the merits of the charges, the two never received a fair hearing. Testimony
I often focused on their radical lielicfs. draft evasion, and foreign birth. |udge Thavcr
him self had called them "anarchist bastards” in private. For protesters around the
I world, Sacco and Vanzetti were symbols of bigotry and prejudice. Following their
I August 1927 execution 50,000 marchers wearing red armbands marched in the fu-
neral procession tor eight miles to bid them a final farewell.
By then, nativism- a rahid hostility to foreigners—had produced the most re-
strictin' immigration laws in American history. In the aftermath of World War I
immigration was running close to I million a year, almost as high as prewar levels.
Must immigrants came from eastern and southern Europe and from Mexico. The
majority were Catholics and Jews. With just over half the American population Prot-
esting, white, and of native-born parents, alarmists like novelist Kenneth Heberts
worried that unrestricted immigration would produce “a hybrid race of people as
worthless and futile as the good-lor-nothing mongrels of Central America and South-
nistem Europe." Appreciating the heneiits of a shrunken labor pool, the American
Federation of Labor supported restriction too.
In the Southwest, Mexicans ami Mexican-Americans became a target of con-
ivm. The Spanish had inhabited the region for nearly UK) years, producing a rich
blend that mixed Old World and Indian cultures. Hv the turn of the twentieth cen-
tutv approximately 309.00(1 Mexican-Americans lived in the United States. In the
(Jawing decade Mexicans lleeing poverty' and a revolution in 1910 almost doubled
lilt- Latino population ol Texas and New Mexico. In Arizona it more than doubled; in
(.lllibmia it quadrupled. During World War l. labor shortages led authorities to relax
immigration laws, and in the 1920s American farmers opened a campaign to attract
I Mexiciui farm workers.
Thousands of single young men. known as solos, also crossed the binder into El
Paso or Laredo, Texas, to catch trains heading north lor Detroit, Kansas City, and

Sacco mill
Vanzetti
Mexican-
Americans
THE PERILS OF DEMOCRACY
National
Griffins nets
Eighteenth
Amendment
934
other industrial cities. Bv the end of the 1920s. most large cities had thriving commu-
nities of Mexicans called Inirrios. There Spanish-speaking newcomers settled into an
immigrant life of family and festivals, churchgoing, hard work, and slow adaptation.
Like other immigrants, many returned home, hut others Brought their families, bit
by small bit. The census of 1930 listed nearly 1.5 million Mexicans living in the
United States, not including an untold number who had entered the country illegally
In response to the Hood of immigrants. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massa-
chusetts and Senator Hiram Johnson of California sponsored emergency legislation
that established an annual limit on immigration in 1921. A (junta set the number of
entrants at 350.000 a year and parceled them out on the basis of 3 percent of eadi
nationality living in the United States as of 1910. Asian immigration was banned
entirely. In 1924 a new National Origins Act cut the quota to 150.000, pushed tin-
base y ear back to 1S90 (before the bulk of southern and eastern Europeans arrived ,
and made the restrictions permanent. To control the How of illegal aliens. Congrev
also created the Border Patrol. Its 430 agents, stationed along the boundaries with
Canada and Mexico, were scarcely enough to make anything other than a symbolic
statement ol restrictionist sentiment.
The National Origins Act fixed the pattern of immigration for the next four
decades. Immigration from southern and eastern Europe was reduced to a trickle,
while the steady flow ol northern and western Europeans continued. In Congress
support for restriction was especially strong among rural mcmliers who saw it as u
matter of rucc and religion and also of beliefs and loyalties. "On the one side,"
declared a representative from Kansas during the debate, "is beer, bolshevism, inuis-
similating settlements and perhaps many flags—on the other is constitutional gov
eminent; one Hag, stars and stripes." The great movement of Europeans to America,
a migration of classes and nationalities that had I wen unimpeded for 300 years, rami'
largely to an end.
Tlu* “Noble Kxperiinent”
In the same years tliat Sacco and Vanzetti were appealing their case, the "noble
experiment" of Prohibition was under way. The Eighteenth Amendment, banning
the sale, manufacture, importation, and transportation of liquor, took effect in Janu-
ary 1920. For nearly a hundred years reformers had tried to reduce the consumption
of alcohol. Progressive temperance arguments stressed efficiency, public health, and
the corrupting influence of the saloon. During World War I the need to feed starving
war victims prompted the conservation of grains for food. Meanwhile hysterical pa-
triots questioned the loyalties of brewers with German names and Americans who
drank beer and ale.
Prohibition was not total: private citizens could still keep liquor in their homes
and serve drinks to their friends. They simply could not make, sell, transport, or I
import any "intoxicating beverage” (defined as one containing 0.5 percent alcohol
The act permitted the use of existing stocks of liquor for religious and meciiciual I
purposes. It also allowed the manufacture of industrial alcohol, but only if rendered
poisonous.
Prohibition never stamped out liquor, but it did reduce consumption (as much
as half by some accounts). Despite the availability of "moonshine” and hard rider, ]
drinking declined in rural areas. Cities recorded fewer deaths from alcohol and fewer
arrests for drunkenness, From the stiut, however, enforcement was underfunded ami
understaffed. The Justice* Department's Prohibition Bureau consisted of 1.500
i
i
t
I
<
t
a
r
s
tl
(1
c
II
o
C
ci
CRASH AND DEPRESSION 971
For protection people wore gauze masks, swabbed their nostrils with Vaseline,
md covered their windows with paraflin-soaked rags. Nothing worked. Tiny partic les
ul dust covered everything—bedspreads, dinner plates, bread dough. Food
mindied to the bite. An epidemic of respiratory infections and a new disease, "dust
paeuinonia," broke out among farm families in the plains states. Fish died from lack
n(oxygen in dust-coated risers. As far east as Memphis people covered their faces
»ith handkerchiefs to filter the air they breathed. Yellow grit from Nebraska col-
lected on the window sills of the White 1 louse.
All told, some 3.5 million plains people abandoned their farms. Landowners or
corporations forced as many off their land as nature, Large-scale commercial farming
*:« slowly spreading into the heartland of America. Huge “factories in the field,"
commercial farms advanced east across the Great Plains from California, where 10
percent of the farms grew more than .50 percent of the crops. As in industrial Amer-
ica, the strategy was to consolidate and mechanize, increase production, cut labor
rests, and raise profits. As farms grew in size, so did the number of tenants. In most
Dust Bowl counties people owned less than hall the land they farmed. American
agriculture was turning from a way of life into an industry. American fanners were
becoming common laborers. Sighed one agricultural spokesman: “We are not larm-
m. We are producing a product to sell."
In the 1920s there had been a net migration of 6 million Americans, most of
them young or black, from larins to towns and cities. During the Depression the
trend rev ersed itself. By 1935 the largest number of people in American history—33
million were living on fanns. By contrast, the Great Plains contained the only states
that suffered a net loss of residents during the decade. These '‘exodusters" joined a
Swing migration of rural refugees. No one knows how many became migrants, but
idk’f offices around the country did repirt a change in the typical migrant family. No
longer black or brown, it was white and native-born, typically a young married couple
■illi one child. They were leaving a farm or town on the Great Plains or in the South
md heading west.
Most did not travel far, perhaps to the next county. Long-distance migrants—
manv from Oklahoma, Arizona, and Texas—usually set their sights on California
Handbills and advertisements promised jobs picking fruit and harvesting vegetables,
[film were like the Joad family in John Steinbeck's classic The Crapes of Wrath
(1939), the migrants drove west along Houte 66 through Arizona and New Mexico,
their lielongings piled high atop rickety jalopies, heading for their Promised Land.
More than 350,000 Oklahomans landed in California during the decade. So
many arrived that "Okie" came to mean any' Dust Bowler, even though most of
Oklahoma lay outside the Dust Bowl. The population of California increased by 1.1
million. It was the largest jump ol any state. The poor were only a small minority of
aw arrivals, hut enough came to make local citizens edgy. Bv the middle of the
irade the Los Angeles police had begun forming "hum blockades" to keep migrants
ail Negroes and Okies upstairs." read one sign in a San Joaquin Valley theater.
Nine-lorn whites had never encountered such discrimination before.
Onlv one in two or three migrants actually lound work. The labor surplus al-
Wwl growers to set their own terms. A migrant family could exjvect to earn about
450 a year, less than hall the subsistence level. Those that did not work formed
lied enclaves called “little Oklahomas." The worst were located in the fertile
al Valley. There at the end ol the decade relief officials discovered a family of
Exodtuters
972
THE PERILS OK DEMOCRACY
Cesar Chatt-z
William Gtopper specialized iu social realism. nil art style prominent in mam American paint-
ings of [lit* 1930s. In Migration one of thousands of farm families from the Great Plains heath
west with its belongings Tile desperation of the family's flight is underscored by the flat
landscape, the brown tones and henl figures, and the ominous sk\.
10 living in a 1921 Ford. The mother suffered from tulxTculosis and pellagra. When
told to go. she responded vacantly. I wonder where.”
Mexicait-Ameritans ami African-Americans
The (Tavez family lost their fann in the North Gila River valley of Arizona in I934.
The family had owned the small homestead near Yuma for two generations, hut the
Depression pushed them out Gesar. harelv six years old at the time, remembered
only images of his family's departure: a '"giant tractor leveling the corral: the lovsnl
his room and bed: the fatnilv piling into a Chevy for the joumev west; his father
promising earnest!) to hm another Arizona plot someday.
The elder Chavez could nev er keep his promise. Instead he and his famih linil
on the road, "following the crops” in California. Like the Joads, the Chavez famih
roamed the West Coast looking lor work. In eight years Cesar went to 37 schools
The whole famih was forced to sell their labor to unscrupulous "enganchistas " or
contractors, for less than SIR a week. The father joined the strikers in the Imperial
Valiev in the mid- 1930s hut they were crushed. "We were trapp'd.” recalled Ccsai
"Some people pul this out o! tlieir minds and forget it. I don't." Thirtv years later li<
founded the United Farm Workers of America, the first union of migratory worker*
iu the country.
The Cliavez.es resembled the Joads iu every wav hut one: thev were Mevkaii-
Americans. Tlie Joads had found a few sympathetic store owners on their wav west
When the Chavezcs entered a roadside restaurant, a voting waitress greeted them
CRASH AND DEPRESSION 973
wldK We don't serve Mexicans here. Get out." In an America still strictly scgro-
ated. she never thought twice alxmt refusing service to Americans who were brown
or black. "White trade only" read the sign out front. "Even' time we thought of it. it
hurt us." remembered Cesar.
A deep ambivalence had always characterized American attitudes toward Med-
ians, hut the Great Depression turned most communities coldly ugainst them. Cities
like Los Angeles feared the burden of their relief and found it cheajxvr to ship them
lurk In Mexico. Some migrants left voluntarily. Others were driven out l>\ frustrated
officials or angry neighlmrs. Beginning in 1931 the federal government launched a
sries of deportations, or "repatriations,” of Mexicans back to Mexico. These in-
cluded their Ameriean-lxim children (who by law were citizens of the United States).
During the decade the latino population of the Southwest declined bv 500.01)0.
Inucih like Chicago, the Mexican communitv shrank almost bv ball. Staving often
turned out to be as difficult as leaving. The average income of Mexiean-Ameriean
families in the Rio C ramie valley of Texas was $506 a year. The sum represented the
uimbiiied income of parents and children. Fewer than 2 Mexiean-Ameriean children
in HI completed live years of school.
Hard times were nothing new lor African-Americans. Opined one black man:
"The Negro was horn in depression. It onlv became official when it hit the white
un Sinking agricultural prices and widespread discrimination had spurred a great
African-American migration from the Deep South on the eve of World War I It
1111(11x1 through the 1920s, when more than 800.000 moved to northern cities.
When the Depression struck, black unemployment skyrocketed. Bv 1932 il
bed 50 percent. or twice the national level. Unemployed whites demanded that
Hoiks lx- fired from their jobs as garbage collectors, street cleaners, elevator opera-
tors. and bellhops. A white clerk from Florida, no different from millions ol Amni-
ons. reasoned that "a nigger hasn’t got no right to have a job when there are white
nen who can do the work ami are out of work." Bv 1933 several cities reported
between 25 and 40 percent ol their black residents with no support but relief pav -
IStruts. Even skilled blacks who retained their jobs had their wages cut In half.
Ilcrtinlmg to one studv of Harlem in 1935.
African-Americans made do as thev had lor vears. As one attested. "Our wives
I rotilil an to the store and get a hag of beans or a sack of Hour and a piece of fat meat.
I awl they could cook this. And we could eat it. . . . Now you lake the white fella, he
cuukln't do this.” Migration from the rural South dropped hy half. As late as 1940
I ibne of four African-Americans lived in rural areas: vet conditions there were just as
rad as in cities. Fortv percent ol all black workers in the United States were farm
Uniters nr tenants. In 19:14 one study estimated the average income for black cotton
farmers at under $200 a year.
The Depression inllumed racial prejudice. Dust has been blown from the shot-
|<iiu, tlie whip, and the noose.” reported Tin• New Republic in 1931, "and Ku Klux
Ulan practices were being resumed in the certainty that dead men not only tell no
I tab hut create vacancies." Lynch mgs tripled between 1932 and 1933. In 1932 the
I Wane Court ordered a retrial in the most celebrated racial case ol the decade. A
I awr earlier nine black teenagers had been accused of raping two white women on a
I tain bound for Scottsboro. Alabama. Within weeks all-white juries had sentenced
I tglit of them to death. The convictions rested on the testimony of the women, one of
Ikhii later admitted the Ixivs had lieen framed. Appeals kepi the case alive for
Rciuitrialion
Scoftx/mni
hojx


'/*£ v j * ‘? i‘C	r •
ts	>?*>■ '■ r t
■ '
■V.*
/f
q*
V7 f f f
linns Hi!mk's Ihmif lii'litf Station is :t grim portrait of tla- failing relief efforts of private
rlmritics flip painting depicts the humiliation and degradation of applying for relief \ crowd
uf broken men and women sits anxiously as a hurls administrator interrogates a frail relief
ippliisuit.
I lure expert e need make this office a compound hell, lie nonetheless felt duty-hound
I to accept his party's renomiuation lor the presidency. Ilis ordeal soon turned into a
■ tr,i»i< ami humiliating rejection.
The Failure of Relief


By tlir winter of 1931-1932 the story vvas the same everywhere: too little money: too
1 mum destitute. Once-mighty private charity had dwindled to (5 percent ol all reliel
I funds. Iu 1932 Hull House, the model ol progressive benevolence, stood flooded
with a "sea of miserysaid social critic Edmund Wilson. New York C lily employees
I Ulieen donating I percent of their salaries to feed the needy since 1930: vet New
I Yorkers were starving to death. The lied Cross Furnished free vegetable seeds when
Be city council of Midland. Texas, gave land to the unemployed because there was
I wit enough money to supply free food. "It was like using a peashooter to stop a
Kdiinoeeros." wrote one historian.
Ethnic charities made similar efforts to stave oil disaster. Meviean-Americans
I ml Puerto Ricans turned to inutiialistns, traditional societies that provided members
I *ttli social support, life insurance, and sickness benefits. Btit the stress of the l)e-
I Mission Imuki iiptcd most tuntnaUsias, In San Francisco, the Chinese Six Compa-
Iaft -i private organization, offered food and clothing to needy Chinese-,Americans.
I jjioih Billikopf of the Feileration of Jewish Charities warned, private efforts were
I hlntg. Tlie government would lx* "compelled. In the eniel events ahead of us, to
I into the situation and bring relief on a large scale."
I An estimated 30 milliou needy people quickly depleted city resources In 1930
B|r Emergency Work Bureau of New York Cits provided temporary jobs, or "work
973
Private
charity
City sen ires
1006 THE PERILS OF DEMOCRACY
Mexican-
Amerlcmu
hulittm
Play in 1933 to persuade white merchants to hire black clerks. After picketeis
blocked storefronts, hundreds of African-Americans got jobs with Harlem retailers
and utility companies. Racial tension over employment and housing continued to mn
high, and in 1935 Harlem exploded in the only race riot of the decade.
Discrimination persisted under the New Deal. Government efforts to promote
"grassroots democracy" often gave control of federal programs to local governments,
where prejudice reigned. Relief payments to black clients in Atlanta, Georgia, aver-
aged $19.29 a month; whites received $32.66. When local farm committees derided
to red re acreage under the AAA, black sharecroppers and tenants were often tin-
ones put out of production. New Deal showplaces like the TYA’s model town nf
Norris, Tennessee, and the subsistence homestead village of Arthurdale, West Vir-
ginia, were closet! entirely to African-Americans. Officials feared integration woukl
promote trouble in these communal paradises.
African-Americans did benefit from the New Deal, but more as dispossessed
citizens than as a disadvantaged race. The federally run WPA hired blacks for almost
20 percent of its jobs, even though they comprised less than 10 percent of the
population. The minimum WPA wage of $12 a week was twice what many of them
had earned before. Public Works Administrator lekes established the first quota
system for hiring blacks (based on their percentage of the local work force). Bv 1941
the number of African-Americans working for the government exceeded their per
ventage of the population.
Training programs, including Mary McLeod Bcthune's enormously successful
Office of Minority Affairs, helped to cut black illiteracy by almost a third during the
decade. Life expectancy jumped from 49 to 55 years for black women and from 47 to
52 years for black men. (Among whites it rose from 63 to 67 for women and from fid
to 62 for men.) Countless African-Americans shared the sentiments of a Washington
cab driver who explained that lie had voted for Roosevelt and the Democrats because
they “favor the little man, and I’ve been a little man all my life."
The nearly 1 million Mexican-Americans in the United States received littk
assistance from the New Deal. Latino culture sometimes frustrated relief efforts
The Mexican folk tradition of self-help inhibited some from seeking aid. while others
remained unfamiliar with claim procedures. Still others failed to meet residency
requirements. Low voter turnout and a high proportion of aliens among Mexican
Americans reduced their political clout. Uneducated and unskilled, they often toiled
as migrant farm workers outside the reach of many New Deal programs, including
Social Security.
Throughout the Southwest and California, the Civilian Conservation Corps and
the Works Progress Administration did help with jobs on the land and in construc-
tion. On Capitol Hill Dennis Chavez of New Mexico, the only Latino in the Senate
succeeded in channeling relief and other federal funds into Spanish-speaking com-
munities. During the decade Latinos, like African-Americans, were mired in powrtv
hut developed enough faith in Roosevelt to switch to the Democratic party.
After decades of neglect Indians found themselves the subjects of new federal
interest. Indian families on reservations rarely earned more than $100 a year. Their
infant mortality rate was the highest in the country: their life expectancy the shortest
their education—usually no more than five years—the lowest. Their rate* of unem-
ployment was three times the national average. The Dawes Severalty Act of 1587 had
sought to make Indians independent landowners, but poverty forced many to sell
their federal allotments to white fanners and ranchers. By the 1930s Indian land-
holding had shnmk from 13S million to 48 million acres, most of it desert.
I la San Antonio. Texas, Mexican-American pecan shelters worked a 54-hour week for only $3.
In lifts they struck for lietter wages and working conditions. Here, Emma Tcuayucu. one of
&rir leaders, addresses a group of striking workers.
I kaled tin- United Mine Workers (UMW) since 1919. lie voter! for Hoover in 1932.
Ita) pnnnptK called on Boosevelt at tin White House ill 1933 Wlien tin lieu
president offered nothing hut consolation lor the sagging UMW, lewis returned to
Itatual fields with a message he had somehow divined: “The president wants you to
jun a union. Within a year the UMW had 400.000 inemlters. liaising his sights.
Lnvis called for the creation of a Steel Workers’ Organizing Committee (SWOC!) ami
fertile admission of the United Auto Workers into the AFL. AFL leaders accepted
Ilia proposals, only to ignore them.
At the annual AFL convention in Atlantic City in 1935, 1 z-wis demanded u
jnuniihnent to the "imliistri.d organization of" mass production workers.” The dele-
Silfv mostly from craft unions, voted down the proposal. "I was seduced. I am
■raged and I am ready to rend mv seducers limb from limb,” Iz-wis growled. Near
I the end of the convention lie made good on his threat. As lie passed "Big Bill"
I Hutcheson of the carpenters union, angry words passed between the two. Lewis
Etpnn and with a single punch sent Hutcheson sprawling in a bloody heap.
Tlit* blow signaled the determination of industrial unions to break the A FI ,’s
Bbmination of organized lalior, Three weeks later, on November 10, 1935. Lewis anti
I the heads of seven other AFL unions announced the formation of the Committee for
I Industrial Organization (CIO). Charging the CIO with “dual organization ' and "fo-
I parting insurrection," the AFL suspended the rogue unions in 1936. The CIO, later
J udimti ned tin-( ongress ol Industrial Organizations, turned to tin Unskilled
i CIO representatives concentrated on the mighty steel industry , which had clung
Hfetbe'open” or nonunion shop since the great strike ol 1919. In other industries, the
Bank and file did not wait. Emboldened by the recent passage of the Wagner Act. a
■ jimp nl nibbcr workers at three companies in .Akron. Ohio, simple sat down oil the
Bpjim early 1936. The new strategy worked at two of the companies. Since the
Congress of
huluitrial
Organisation*
Sit-down
strikes
1052 Till IT.MILS Ol' DEMOCRACY
were just us likely to recommend rules restricting mothers fnmi work. Only labor
shortages prevented tile acceptance ol such niles. The war inspired a change in
economic roles for women without fomenting a revolution in attitudes about gender
That would come later.
A QUESTION OF RIGHTS
Roosevelt, who had been an assistant secretary of the naw during W orld W ar I ilni
not want the new conflict to repeat the excesses of tin* old. lie condemned tin
assaults on civil lilrcrties committed during the Great War: the raids on dissident
groups, the mobs menacing immigrants, the patriotic appeals to spv on one’s neigh-
bors. Furthermore, most Americans were horrified by Japanese and Nazi atrocities
against people of occupied lands. They found distasteful 1 litler’s talk about a "muster
race.”
Even so, the tensions arising out of conflicts over race, ethnic background, uml
class differences could not simph be swept away by the coming of war. In a sixictv in
which immigration laws discriminated against Asians b\ race, the war with Japan
made life difficult for local Asian-Americans ol all backgrounds. Black workers still
faced discrimination—in shipyard and airplane factories as much as thev had in
peacetime industries. During the war Roosevelt used the federal governments
power to minimi/.c social tensions; but often enough the administration moved slow Is
nr was a part oi the problem.
Little Italy
Aliens from enemy countries fared far bi tter in World War II than in World War I
Bv 1941 immigration restriction hail greatly reduced the numbers ol foreigners win
had not set In-come citizens. About 600,(MX) Italian aliens and 5 million It.iluti-
Americans lived in tbe United States. Whether aliens or citizens, all had struggled
during the Depression. Most still lived in Italian neighborhoods centered around
churches. Internal organizations, and clubs. Some had been proud ol Mussolini .mil
supported i'liscLwio. "Mussolini was a hero," recalled one Italian-American "asu-
perhero. ll<- made us feel special,” especially with anti-Italian prejudices su strong
Those attitudes changed abruptly after Pearl I larUir. During the war, It^tlriuv-Ameri-
cans iiiiquestioningly pledged their loyalties to the United States.
At first the government treated Italians without citizenship (along with japam-w
and Germans) as "aliens of enemy nationality ." Thev could not travel without per-
mission. enter strategic areas, or possess shortwave radios, guns, or maps Hv 1942
few Americans believed that German- or Italian-Aiuericans posed any kind of eiau- I
ger. Eager to keep the sup[>ort ol Italian voters in the 1942 congressional election*. I
Roosevelt chose (ailuinhus Day. 1942. to lilt restrictions on Italian aliens. The S'-gie-
gation ol Italian-Americans ended. Henceforth they would maintain their ctluui
unity as a matter of choice, not necessity.
VVIERICA S RISK TO CI.OItAl.ISM
1053
Concentration Camps
Hu 127.000 Japanese living in tin- United States, whether aliens or citizens, did not
nuke similar tolerance, Ironically tensions were least high in I lawaii, wliere the war
with japan had begun, Local newspapers there expressed confidence in the loyalty of
)a|Kui< s< Americans, who in any case were crucial to the success of Hawaii's econ-
omv. (h-nerul Delos Emmons, the military governor of the islands, rebuffed anxious
proposals from Washington to evacuate as many as 20,<M>0 "dangerous" Japanese. I le
branded a Justice Department report warning of widespread sabotage to lx* "so
fantastic it hardly needs refuting."
The situation was quite different on the mainland, wliere Japanese-Americans
KUiuincd largely separated from the mainstream of American life, often because
state laws and local custom threw up complex harriers. In the western states where
(lies were concentrated around urban areas, most Japanese could not vote, own land,
m lisr in decent ncighlsorhoods. Approximately -47.000 Japanese aliens, known as
"tssei." were ineligible lor citizenship under American law. Only their children could
become'citizens. Despite such restrictions, some Japanese achieved success in small
businesses like landscaping, while many others worked on or owned forms that sup-
plied fruits and vegetables to growing cities.
West Coast |x»titicians pressed the Roosevelt administration to evacuate the
{Spinesc from their communities. It <lid not seem to matter that about S0.000 were
VmrriCttn citizens, trailed "Nisei." and that no evidence indicated that they posed any
threat "A Jap’s a Jap. , ." commented General |olm De Witt, commander of West
Oust defenses. It makes iio difference whether he is an American citizen or not. ’
lun’SjHjnse. the War Department in February 1942 drew up Executive Order 90fi(S,
ubirii allowed the exclusion of am person from designated militaiy areas. Under De
Witt’s authority, the order was applied only on the West Coast against Japanese-
taicricans. Rs late Ftrlmian Roosevelt had agreed that Ixjth Issei and Nisei would
le evacuated. Rut where would they go? When some 9000 moved on their own
Btiatiw. politicians front other states complained loudly. The army began to ship
ihe entire Japanese community to "assembly centers.”
Sudden removal imposed numerous hardships. Most Nisei incurred heavy fi-
j (uncial losses as thev sold property' at lar below market value. Their distress became
a windfall for people who had long resented their economic coivi|x;titioii. 'We've
I been charged with wanting to get rid of the Japs for scllisil reasons." admitted the
Brower-Shipper Vegetable Association. "We might as well be honest. We do. It’s a
ipstion of whether the white man lives on the Pacific Coast or the brown man.”
Quit* the Japanese reached the assembly centers at racetracks, fairgrounds, and
fhnil.ir ■mporan locations they encountered other indignities. The army had not
prepared the sites to offer basic sanitation, comfort, or privacy. “We lived in a horse
tililr remembered one young girl. "We tilled nnr cheesecloth with straw—for our
mltress." The authorities at least had the decency to keep families together
Most Japanese were interned in 10 camps in remote areas of seven western
dates. Notions that the camps might liecome self-sufficient communities proved
fruitful thinking. Even resourceful farmers could not raise IimkI in arid desert soil. No
WII of humane intent could change the reality—these were concentration cutups.
InhTiHVN were held in wire-enclosed compounds hv armed guards. Teinjxtrary tar-
Ltsci
Internment
camps
Hie Iik-iik lamIscape n( tin- internment camp ;il Mun/anur. (laliforaia, was typical nf tin*ramp
sites to which tin- government sent Japanese- Americans. In such a harsh (-nviruiinietit the
Japanese li.ul nn real opportunity to create productive farm communities as government tilli*
cials had promised.
papered I tarrocks housed families or small groups in single rooms. Each nnitn Inula
few cots, some blankets, and a single light bulb. That was home.
Some Japanese within the camps protested, especially when government ofli
cials circulated a loyalty questionnaire that asked Nisei citizens if they would In-
willing to serve in tin- armed forces. “What do they take us for? Saps?" asked Dunks
Osltima, a camp prisoner. "First, they change my army status to 4-C [enemy alien]
because of niv ancestry, run me out of town, and now they want me to volunteer for
a suicide squad so I could get killed lor this damn democracy. That's going some, lor
sheer brass! Yet thousands of Nisei did enlist and many distinguished thenisekvs in
combat.
Other Japanese-Americans challenged the government through the legal sw-
Kinvnuil.su tern. Fred Koremutsu in California and Cordon Rirabavaslii in Washington State
find were arrested when they refused to report for relocation. “As an Ameriean citizen, 1
lltmbatjashi wanted to uphold the principles of the- Constitution." recalled Hirahayashi. But tin-
Supreme t onrt let stand militarv policies aimed s|H-cificaIlv at Japanese-Anu-ric.in-
The majority opinion stated that “residents having ethnic affiliations with an imailin';
enemv niav In- a greater source of danger than those of different ancestry." even
though the army had never demonstrated that any danger existed. And in Kim-maha
i. United States (1944). the* Court upheld the government's relocation program asa
AMERICA'S RISE TO GLOBALISM 1055
wartime necessity. Three justices dissented, criticizing relocation as the "legalization
of racism."
Concentration camps in America did not perpetuate the horror of Nazi death
ramps. Imt they were [milt on racism ami fear. Worse, thev violated the traditions of
mil rights and liberties for which Americans believed tliev were righting.
Minorities on the Job

Minority leaders saw the irony of fighting a war for freedom in a country in which
mil rights were still limited. "A jiin crow army cannot fight for a free world." the
VAACP declared. The Pittsburgh Courier, a major black newspaper, advocated the
‘Double \ "victory over our enemies at home and victory over our enemies on
I llie battlefields abroad." Such ideas ol racial justice had been the driving force in the
life of A. Philip Randolph. long an advocate* of greater black militancy. Randolph had
demonstrated fiis gifts as an organizer and leader of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car
Porters the most powerful black labor organization. He was determined to break
down the wall of discrimination that kept black workers out of jobs in defense i ruins-
I tiirs and segregated in government agencies, unions, and the armed forces. “The
idministration leaders in Washington will never give the Negro justice," Randolph
IjrpiPil, “until they see masses—ten, twenty, fifty thousand Negroes on the White
liaise lawn. In 19-1J lie began to organize a march on Washington.
Bv using executive orders. President Roosevelt could have granted almost all til
I Randolph's demands aimt'd at ending segregation in the government, defense indus-
irirs. unions, and the armed forces. Although the president had never been a stalwart
■ opponent of racial discrimination, under pressure from Randolph, he issued Execu-
Bkr Order SS02 in June. The order forbid discrimination by race in luring either
I jwemment or defense industry workers. To carry out the policy, it established the
■ Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC). In some ways creating the FEPC
I to the boldest step toward racial justice taken since Reconstruction. Even so. (he
law agency lmd only limited success in breaking down barriers against blacks and
I ppatiics. It was one tiling to ban discrimination, quite another to enforce that ban
In a society still deeply divided by racial prejudice.
Economic conditions often reinforced social attitudes, as Mexican workers dis-
■eovered. During the Depression pressure mounted to reverse the (low of Mexican
■ inmligration, since workers from south of the border competed for jobs with unein-
■ ployed white Americans. As government budgets were strained during hard times.
I local .mtlioritics found it cheaper simplv to deport Mexicans, even some who were
■My citizens, rather than provide the relief to which they were entitled.
The war reversed that pattern. Efforts by the' FEPC opened industrial jobs in
■California's shipyards and aircraft factories, which had previously refused to hire
lll.Mn nits. Thousands migrated from Texas, where job discrimination was most se-
■w, to California, where war work created new opportunities. Labor shortages led
■fe southwestern states to join with the Mexican government under the hracem
■Mgnnti to recruit Mexican labor under specially arranged contracts.
la Texas, by contrast, antagonism to braceros ran so deep that the Mexican
Hpimment tried to prevent workers from going tfiere. With support from labor
B«tmi\ officials in the oil and mining industries routinely blocked Hispanic* from
Bariung programs and job advancement. The FEPC !>egaii to investigate this dis-
A. Philip
liinulotph
FEPC
Hispanic war
workers
105fi TIIK I'KRILS Ol DKNIOCKACY
During World War II many \l
rican-Americans took a more milk
taut attitude toward their right*
like this protestor. I lies openly ob-
jected when Imsinesses refused to
promote qualified workers. The
sign points to the irony dial Af-
rican-Americans were fighting fora
country svhich would not let them
drive milk wagons.
crimination. Inti it was I docket! by officials in tin- Slate Department, who I eared dial
relations with other Latin American nations might suffer if such cases of widespread
discrimination wore pithliei/eti. Not until late 1943 was the FEPC able to proceed
Black Americans experienced similar frustrations. Early wartime prosperity
bypassed them almost entirely. In 1911 ball a million blacks were still unemployed,
while another 2 million worked at marginal, low-paying jobs. More than half ol all
defense jobs were closed to minorities. For example, yvith 100,000 skillet! and high-
paying jobs in tlie aircraft industry, blacks held about 200 janitorial positions. Tin-
federal agenev charged with placing workers honored local employment practim.
Generally that meant "whites only." The OfBce of Production Management refined
to introduce antidiscrimination clauses into defense contracts. Unions segregated
black workers or excluded them entirely . One person wrote to the president xvitb a
telling complaint: Hitler has not done anything to the colored people —it’s people
right here in tlie United States who are keeping us out of work and keeping us
down." Discrimination in housing, restaurants, transportation, and hotels added to
the sense of grievance.
Jobs for	Eventually the combination of labor shortages, pressures from black leaders,
African-	and initiative from government agencies opened the door to more skilled jobs and
Aiiu-rinm s	higher pas. The federal government increased its employment of blacks from fit),(NO
to more than 200.1XM). Beginning in 19-43 the United States Employment Serein-
rejected requests with racial stipulations. The National lailwr Relations Board an-
nounced it would no longer certify unions that barred minorities. Faced yvith .i
dwindling lulx>r pool. many employers finally opened their doors. By 1944 blacks
who accounted for almost 1(1 percent of the population, held S percent of the joU
AMERICA'S RISE TO Cl.ORAI.ISM 1057
Tin wage gup narrowed so that Mack men (and white women) earned ultout R5
prnvut as rniicli as white males. The lure of industrial jobs drew some -100.000
[witks from southern farms where they bad eked out livings in sharecropping and
tnunt fanning. About half went to the West Coast, half to the Northeast and Upper
■durst.
At War with Jim Crow
ju)idis< riiiiinatiou rellected the Jim Crow segregation system that denied minorities
dnir rights. At the beginning of World War II three-quarters of the 12 million black
Americans lived in the South. Hispanic Americans, whose population exceeded a
million, were concentrated in a In-lt along the United States-Mexican Ixirder. When
jolis for minorities opened in war centers, hlaeks and Hispanics became increasingly
iirlwn In cities, too. they encountered deepK entrenched systems of segregation that
ilrnietl them basic rights to decent housing, jobs, and political participation. Compe-
tition with whites for housing and the use of public- facilities like parks, beaches, and
spoliation produced explosive racial tensions.
To ease crowding the government funded new housing. In Detroit, federal
unities had picked a site for minority housing along the edge of a Polish neigh-
nxl. One suc h project, named in honor of the black abolitionist Sojourner Truth,
link'd 20<l units for blac k families. When the first of them tried to move in, they
heed an angry mob of whites. Drcal officials had to send several hundred National
Guardsmen to protect the newcomers from menacing Ku Kluv Klan mt-mlrers. Ten-
ins increased with the approaching hot summer, and riots broke out in June 1943,
I« white mobs Ireat up African-Americans riding public trolleys or patronizing movie
theaters, and black protesters looted white stores. Six thousand soldiers from nearby
kw-'finally imposed u troubled calm, but not la-fore the riot had claimed the lives of
*4hl.x'kand 9 white residents. Although wartime labor shortages gradualh improved
[trsituation for African-Americans in Detroit, local officials blamed the NAACP and
militant" Negro press for stirring up trouble.
Detroit was not the onb raeialb divided citv. Hispanics in soutlieni California
reel similar indignities. By 19-13 overt Anglo hostility had come to lix-ns on the
inns, or “zoot suiters.” These young Hispanic- men and bovs bad adopted the
isli fashions of Harlem hipsters: greased hair, swept hack into a ducktail; broad-
—nwuldered, long-waisted suit coats; baggy pants, pegged at the ankles, polished off
pith a swashbuckling keychain. Tlie Los Angeles city council passed an ordinance
Ijakingil a crime even to wear a zoot suit. For most "zooters" this style was u modest
E1' m of rebellion-, fora few it was a badge of criminal behavior; for white servicemen
nus a target for racism.
In June 1943 taunting turned to violence. Sailors from the local navy base in-
— jk-il Hispanic- neighborhoods in search of zooters who had allegedly attacked serv-
icn. The self-appointed vigilantes grabbed innocent victims, tore their clothes,
tlicir hair, and lx-al them. When Hispanics retaliated, the police arrested them,
ing the actions of white servicemen. Irresponsible newspaper coverage made
rs worse. "ZOOTERS THREATEN L A. POLICE," charged one Hearst
r. \ citizens committee created at the urging of California Governor Earl War-
rejected Hearst *s inflammatory accusations. Underlying Hispanic anger were the
i realities of fllthv housing, unemployment, disease, and white racism. All that
rldt-tl up to a level ol poverty that wartime prosperity eased but in no way resolved.
Detroit riots
Zoot suit riots
GOLD WAR AMERICA 1093
manufacturing. The combined demands of work and family forced many women into
W-pining part-time and unskilled jobs. About 75 percent of women worked at
female-only jobs. In fact, gender segregation in the workplace was worse in 1950
than in 1900 anil more complete than segregation by race.
Equally important, cultural attitudes pushed women back toward more tradi-
tional roles. War employment had given many women their first taste of economic
independence. As peace came, almost 75 percent ol the working women in one
survey indicated that the) IiojhhI to continue their jobs. But as the troops came
home, male social scientists stressed how important it was for women to accept
"mon' than the wife's usual responsibility for her marriage” and oiler “lavish—and
undemanding affection" to returning fils. One marriage counselor urged women
tu let their husbands know "you are tired of living alone, that you want him now to
take charge.”
For minorities, the end of the war brought a return of an old labor practice, "last
lured, first fired." At the height of the war more than 200,000 blacks and llispanic-s
had found jobs in shipbuilding. Bv 1940 that number had dwindled to less than
10,000 The in!lux of Mexican laborers under the bracero program temporarily
halted. In the South, where the large majority' of blacks lived, wartime labor short-
ages had liecome surpluses. Returning black and Hispanic veterans discovered that
for them conditions at home had hardly improved.
Those workers who were not union members bail no way to protest being laitl
nil. hut organized labor was determined to preserve tin- gains made during the war.
reconversion brought an abrupt decline in hours ami overtime, unions demanded
pa\- increases of up to 30 percent to make up for lost wages. When management
bilked, strike's spread across the nation. Autoworkers walked oil the job in the full of
194-5 steelworkers in January 1946; miners in April. In 1946 some 5 million workers
stniik a rate triple that of any previous year. Antiuninn sentiment soared.
Most lalx>r-management confrontations came eventually to the White House.
Thrrc negotiators settled on wage increases ranging between IS and 22 percent. The
crisis peaked in May 1916 with a national rail strike, which temporarily paralyzed the
nation's transportation network. An outraged President Truman asked, "What decent
tini'rican would pull a rail strike at a time like this?" Truman threatened to seize flic
railroads, requesting from Congress Hie power to draft striking workers into the
military The strike was settled Indore the threat was carried out, but Truman’s action
ilartlcd liberals and conservatives alike. Few jx-oplc approved the idea oi using the
draft to punish political foes. I .abor leaders, for their part, became convinced they no
longer hud a friend at the White I louse.
The New Deal at Bay
Inflation, shortages, and labor unrest created uncertainty in tin- political arena us
wll In September 19(5 Harry Truman hail Ixildlv claimed his intention to extend
tlie New Deal into the postwar era. He called for legislation to guarantee full cm
yment. subsidized public bousing, national health insurance, anil a peacetime
imion of the Fair Employment Practices Commission to fight job discrimination,
instead of promoting bis liberal agenda, he found himself lighting a conservative
krklash. lailxjr unrest was just one source of his troubles. The combination of
eased demand for consumer gixxls temporarily in short supply triggered a sharp
nidation For two years prices rose as much as 15 percent annually. Consumers
Maim'd the White House for not doing more to manage the economy.
Minority
Workers
1120 THE UNITED STATES IN \ Nl'CLEAH AGE
Migration of
Afriran-
Aimrncans
ami Hixpaitics
to cities
Suburbs amI
social cla ss
governments lacked tin- tax hast- to finance publie services. A vicious cycle ensued
that proved inosl damaging to Hie urban poor, vvlio bad lew means of escape*.
Mill'll ol the while population that moved to the suburbs was replaced la
African-Americans and Mispanies. They were part of larger migrations, especially "t
millions of southern black families leaving the South to search for work in urban
centers. The majority headed for die Northeast and Upper Midwest. While central
cities lost 3.6 million whites they gained 4.5 million blacks. Indeed, hv 1960 hall ol all
black Americans were living in central cities. African-Americans and llispanics were
also drawn to California, in 1940 only 1.8 percent of California’s population was
black. Hv 1950 that percentage increased to 4.3 (and to 8 by 1970). \s of 1945. only
Mexico Cite had a larger Hispanic population than I ass Angeles. And by the 1960s
the 3 million Hispanic Californians made up 16 percent of die population. Although
most came from rural Mexico, 85 percent eventually settled in cities.
When earlier waves of European immigrants had |maired into cities, they were
absorlied by the expanding urban economy During the 1950s the (light of jobs and
middle-class taxpayers to the suburbs made it difficult for blacks and llispanics In
follow die same path. In the cities fewer jobs awaited them, while declining school
systems made it harder for newcomers to acculturate. In the worst areas of the dliey
unemployment rose to more than 40 percent.
Bv contrast, the suburbs remained beyond reach of most minorities. Since fen
black or Hispanic families could afford the cost of suburban living, they accounted
for less than 5 percent of the population there. The few black suburbs that existed
dated from before the war and had little in common with the newer white "hedmom
communities.'’ Black suburbanites were poorer, held lower status jobs, lived in more
ramshackle housing, and had less education than blacks in the cities. Those who
could afford the suburbs discovered (bat most real estate agents refused to show
them houses: bankers would not provide mortgages Vim I mam communities adopted
either restrictive covenants or zoning regulations that kept "undesirable" residents
out W illiam Myers finally managed in 1957 to buy a house from a white family in
I eviltown, Pennsy lvania, blit the developer did not sell directly to African-Americans
until I960.
THE CULTURE OF SUBURBIA
Suburban home ownership was popularly associated with the broad middle classes:
l laisc workers who held white- or blue-collar jobs and made enough income to alTud
the housing. Unlike mam urban neighborhoods, where immigrant parents or grand-
parents might be liv ing on the same block or even in the same apartment single-
familv dwellers often left their relatives and in-laws behind. As a result, ethnic life-
styles were less pronounced in the suburbs. The restrictive immigration (xilicies ol
the 1920s hail also erodeil ethnicity by reducing tile number of newly arrived for-
eign-born Americans.
Class distinctions were more pronounced between suburban communities than
within them. The upper middle class clustered in older developments, often cra-
tered around countrv clubs. Working-class suburbs sprouted on the outskirts of large
manufacturing centers, where blue-collar families eagerly escaped the city to own
their own homes. Within these suburbs, where differences of class ami ethnicity
THE SI in KUAN ERA 1121
Whites
O
»V
*1
II
*-s:
tlTtl
tnd-
,gU-
|(e
s of
fnr-
tlliUl
cen-
large
own
nieitv


l \GE ANNl AL REGIONAL MIGRATION. I04T—10H0
■ this period. African-Americans wen* moving in significant numbers to urlutn centers in the
Imtlicast, tlie Midwest, and the Far West. Whites were being drawn to the increasingly
Jpmilied economy of the South as well as to the new industries stimulated In the war in the
West. By the 1970s the trend In-eame known as the "Sunbelt" phenomenon. |S.hiu c Frank
Mints mul IJnmm Tin■ Chmiainf’ \inrhnm humiw Dix/rilm/litti i\ess York Russell Sage Foim
i. I»87|. p. 106.]
UBEHAI.ISM AM) BEYO\l) Ili7
carp they once gave for free. Increases wiped out the benefits many of the elderly
ami poor received, so that in manv cases actual medical expenses remained constant.
What was saved in hospital bills went for more cosdv drugs, dental work, and doctors'
fees not covered under Medicare or Medicaid.
Ten da\s alter signing the Medicare bill. Johnson signed the Omnibus Housing
Act. designed to subsidize rents for poor families unable to find adequate public
housing. Four days later came the Voting Rights Act. Within two weeks Congress
approved creation of a new cabinet-level Department of Housing and Urban Devel-
opment (HUD). To bead it. Johnson named Robert Weaver, a former president of
die NAACP. And in the tradition of the New DeaL wliich had patronized the arts
under the WPA. Johnson created the National Foundation of the Arts and Humani-
ties. Colleges and their students received support for scholarships and loans, re-
search equipment, and libraries.
The Great Society also reformed immigration policy. In 1924 the National Ori-
gins Act (page 934) enshrined the racism of the era. It restricted immigration to
15(1,(100 a war. almost all from northern Furope. The Immigration Act of 1965
abolished the national origins system. Now. 170.0tJ0 people a year would be admitted
mt an equitable basis. Racial provisions restricting Asian immigration were elimi-
nated, although new limits were placed on immigration from the Western Hemi-
sphere.
Nor did Johnson, in his efforts to outdo the New Deal, slight the environment.
Bv the mid-1960s many Americans had become increasingly concerned about the
.arid smog from factories anti automobiles: lakes and rivers polluted by detergents,
pesticides, and industrial wastes; anti the disappearance of wildlife. In 1964 Congress
•ftd alreutlt passed the National Wilderness Preservation Svstein Act to set aside 9.1
million acres of wilderness as "forever wild." Lath Bird Johnson, the president's wife,
cuiipaignrd to eliminate the garish billboards and jimkvards along main ol tbe na-
tion's roads. Congress first established pollution standards for interstate waterways
J a sear later provided funds for sewage treatment anti water purification. Lcgisla-
tioii also tightened standards on air pollution. The programs for the environment,
file other Great Soviets measures, often ran afoul of entrenched interests. Mining.
I ollfe-grazing. and lumliering representatives lobbied to continue using the public
I domain for their own benefit. But despite such opposition, new standards did result
in,i gradual improvement in water and air quality in many areas.
For all he had done. Johnson wanted more. In 1966 he pushed through bills to
raise the minimum wage, improve auto safety, aid mass transit, and develop ‘‘model
cities But in time opposition mounted. "Doesn’t matter what kind of majority you
cnine in witli.” Johnson had predicted early on. “You've got just one year when they
treat von right, and before they start worrying about themselves." Some legislators
rieiI that thev had given the executive branch too much power. Yet as late as 1968
sbusiiii pushed major legislation through Congress to ban discrimination in housing
(Fair Housing Act), to build public housing, to protect consumers from unfair credit
notices (Truth-in-Lending Act), and to protect scenic rivers and expand the na-
txiiLtl park system.
Historians have difficulty measuring the Great Society’s impact. It produced
Hat* legislation and more reforms than the New Deal. It also carried a higher price
Ug than anyone had predicted. Economic statistics suggested that general prosperity ,
ini'li rated by the tax cut bill, did more to fight poverty' than all the OEO programs.
Housing
Immigration
The
environment
Evaluating
tin- Gnat
Society
1220 THE t'NITED STATES IN A NICLEAH AGE
Puerto Rico
Sfcxicuit-
Americans
These groups resented much that the civil rights movement hail done to oxer-
come racial inequalities. To arid to that resentment, the civil rights movement in-
spired other minorities to demand greater equality for themselves. Just as the mil
rights campaign gave way to black power militancy, so too other minority activ ists
adopted increasingly disruptive tactics to press their causes. Their new. more asser-
tive visibility was crucial to Nixon's attempt to form his own comiterruajorfty.
Hispanic Activism
Outside the southwestern states, southeastern Florida, and New York City few Amer-
icans before the 19fi<Is and 1970s had much contact with the nation’s Hispanic popu-
lation. The major immigration from Mexico and Puerto Rico !>cgan onlv after World
War II and, in die case of Cubans, after the 1959 revolution that brought Castro tu
power. Historical, cultural, ethnic, and geographic differences among the three
major Hispanic groups made it diibeult to develop a common |H>litical agenda Still
some activists did seek greater Hispanic unity.
The acquisition of Puerto Rico in 1S9S gave the United States control over .id
island [Kipulation of one million people, whose diverse mixture of classes and rates
resulted from the intermarriage of African, Indian, and Spanish peoples. Their politi-
cal status remained uncertain until 19-17, when the island acquired a new constitu-
tion. Puerto Rico became neither a state nor an independent nation, but a common-
wealth Island people were defined as U.S. citizens subject to the draft, free hum
federal income taxes, and ineligible for benclits under federal social service pro-
grams.
After World War 11 a weak island economy and the lure of prosperity on tin
mainland brought more than a million Puerto Ricans into New York City. As cithern
of the United States, they could move freely to the mainland and back home again
That dual consciousness discouraged many from establishing deep roots stateside.
Equally important, the newcomers were startled to discover that, whatever llictr
status at home, on the- mainland they were subject to racial discrimination and nrosl
often segregated into urban slums. In 1964 approximately hall of all recent immi-
grants lived below the jxivorty level, according to the Puerto Rican Forum. Their
unemployment was three times greater than for whites and 50 percent higher than
for blacks. Light-skinned migrants escaped those conditions by blending into the
middle class as "l-atin Americans.” The Puerto Rican community thereby lost some
ol the leadership it needed to assert its political rights.
Still, a shared island orientation preserved a strong group identity. By the 1960s,
the urban barrios gainer! greater political consciousness as groups like ” Vspira
adopted the strategies of civil rights activists and organizations like the Black ami
Puerto Rican Caucus created links with other minority groups. The Cubans who
arrived in the United States after 1959 -some 3-50.000 over tin- course of the de-
cade forged fewer ties with other Hispanics. Most settled around Miami. An tin-
usually large number came from Cuba's professional, business, and government class
and were racially while and politically conservative.
Mexican-Ainericans. on the* other hand, constituted the largest segment of tin-
Hispanic* population. Until the 1940s most were fanners and farm laborers in Texas
New Mexico, and California. But during the 1950s. the process of mechanization had
affected them, just as it had southern blac ks. Uv 1969 about 85 percent of Mcvk.in-
Atnericans had settled in cities. With urbanization came a slow improvement of tin-
Till'. VIETNAM ERA
1221

d
l-
ss
I range and quality of jobs they held. A hotly of skilled workers, middle-class prufes-
I denials, and entrepreneurs emerged.
In I960, frustrated by years of neglect by major parties, Hispanic political lead
I its from the region formed the Mexican-American Political Association. MAPA de-
I dared its intent to U* "proudly Mexican American, npetdy political. ;ual necessarily
I Bpartisan. By 1964 four Mexican-Americans had been elected to Congress, blit the
I ^growing activism across the nation altered traditional Hispanic upprpackyai-to politics.
I Younger Mexican-Americans began to call themselves Chicanos. IH-196iLGesar Cha-
in-/, gained national attention In his efforts to organize migrant laborers into the
I United Farm Workers. He led them in Im Huelga—The Strike—which they sup-
I ported with a national boycott of California lettuce and grapes. Corky Gonzales, a
I Denser social worker, established La Cmsadu Para Justieia (Cnisade for Justice) to
I siip]3ort strikes by Chicano high school students, protest police hnitality, and oppose
I tk Vietnam War. The more militant Iteies Tijerina and his supporters in New Mex-
I im occupied the Kit Carson National Forest to dramatize disputes over old Spanish
I land titles.
By the late 1960s Mexican-Americans had clearly established an ethnic eon-
I -jcitmsncss and a movement. Like blacks. Chicanos saw themselves as a people whose
lltulture had been taken from them. Their heritage hail been rejected, their labor
■	csploited, and their opport units for advancement denied. The new ethnic militancy
■	kd to the formation of La liaza Vnula (The Race United). This third-party inove-
I ment sought to gain power in communities in which Chicanos were a majority and to
l&tmct concessions from the Democrats and Republicans. The more militant “Brown
■	Berets" adopted the paramilitary tactics and radical rhetoric of the Black Panthers.
CrtarCliavez mobilized the largely Hispanic migrant workers into the United Farm Workers
Baiun. I lis demands for recognition of the union hv California growers led to a bitter strike in
I9W> In 1969 a call lor hovcotls against grajx's and lettuce gained < .'have/, and the union
national attention. In July 1970. alter five years of Conflict, the growers agreed to recognize the
amun
129S
THK l AITI Il STATES IN A NUCLEAR ACE
Tlir nru
Latinos
In a nation where more than half the jxipulation changed addresses between
1985 and 1990 and where immigration during the decade reached new highs, diver-
sity and change remain hallmarks of American society Inevitably , the debate over
equal participation will continue.
The New Immigration
During the 1980s, more than 7 million immigrants mitered the country legally
more than in any decade in American history except 1901-1910. Adding another
3flO,(XH) to 300,(KM) illegal immigrants each year, the total was even greater than the
•S.8 million arriving in the first decade of the century.
Latin-American immigrants accounted for as much as 40 percent of the yearly
influx. ;ls the\ had since the 1900s. But now, in addition to Mexicans, Cubans, ami
Puerto Ricans, the laitino imputation included communities of Dominicans and Cen-
tral Americans. The greatest number moved to the sunbelt states of Florida. Texas,
and California, as well as to llliuois and New York. Like immigrants at the turn of the
century', established Hispanic families provider! housing for newer immigrants, who
HISPANIC AND ASIAN POPULATIONS
Hispanic* and Asians have been the twro fastest-growing population groups in the United
Stales over the [vast several decades Demographers preiliel that Hispanies will sum rihpLirr
African-Americans as the nation's single largest minority group. Throughout tin* 1980* Ixrtli
Asians ami Hispanies were especially drawn to die climate and job opportunities in (lalifomia
PERCENT Of
TOTAL POPULATION
30-40%
20-30%
! ■ 10-20%
___1 0-10%
J urma s%
A Over 1.000.000
A Over 4.000.000
PERCENT or
total population
031 9,6'*
■ 4-8'*
I I •**
□ Under 2%
□	Over 100,000
■	Over 1,000,000
h HAWAII
□
ML) O
A N ATION STILL DIMM HI .I
1299
were often single. The newcomers ho|x*d to save money from their weekly paychecks
to send to relatives in Mexico or Central America. However, in an economy increas-
ingly divided between skilled jobs in the service sectors and low-paying unskilled
jobs. Latinos lagged behind Anglos and blacks in education. Often, the lack of ade-
quate English-language skills discouraged academic success.
Once the Immigration Act of 1965 eliminated the national origins quota system,
immigration increased heavily from Asia. By 1990 about 7.3 million Asian-Americans
lived in the United States. Like earlier immigrants from Europe, those from the
Pacific rim came in waves. Some, like the Vietnamese "boat people" of the late*
1970s. were driven from their homes by economic or political turmoil: others were
drawn to reunite families or realize greater opportunities in the Western Hemi-
sphere. “My brother-in-law left his wife in Taiwan and came here as a student to get
aPh.D. in engineering," explained Subi Lin Felipe. "After he received his degree, he
Hut a job in San Jose. Then lie brought in a sister and his wife, who brought over one
of tier brothers and me. And my brother’s wife then came.”
Professional Asian-Indians emigrated in search of better jobs in the United
States Doctors and nurses constituted a large percentage of the early Korean immi-
grants. But letters home to relatives and other nationals soon attracted a more di-
verse population, which concentrated in small businesses. Bv the mid-1980s Indians
owned more than 50 percent of the nonchain motels in the United States, and
Koreans often replaced Jews and Italians as owners of small inner-citv delicatessens
and produce stores.
The presence of other Asian-Americans and an international atmosphere drew
mam Asians to New York City , but climate made Hawaii and California particularly
popular destinations. In 1977 alone some 40,000 Filipinos, many eager to escape
from the corrupt regime of dictator Ferdinand Marcos, migrated to Honolulu. Of
re than 800.000 koreun-Americans about a quarter lived around i/>s Angeles in
19911 So. too, the 1.4 million Japanese-Americans settled primarily in California and
Hawaii. Bv contrast, the federal government attempted to disperse nearly half a
"ion Vietnamese las well as Cambodians and Laotians) who lied after the Anieri-
tiui withdrawal from Southeast Asia.
Hie new immigrants achieved success while facing subtle forms of discrimina-
tion. "Many Asian Americans hoping to climb the coqxirate ladder face an arduous
ent," reported the Wall Street Journal in 1985. “Ironically, the same companies
that pursue them for technical jobs often shun them when filling managerial ami
•cutive positions." Hurd work has overcome some, though by no means all. of
these prejudices. Many immigrant families have brought business and educational
-lienee to America, as well as a powerful work ethic. One survey indicated that
It* the average American student spent 19.6 hours a week on academic work, the
rage Japatirsc-Aincrican spent 32.6 hours anti Chinese-American, 40.4. Some
tian gronjis earn more than other ethnic groups, as well as full-time American wage
uers. Japanese-American wages are 10 percent above whites and 50 percent
r than African-American and Hispanic wages.
Such success has led the media often to stereotvpe Asians as a “model minority"
America; vet the experience of Asian imnrigrants remains widely diverse, enconi-
Jng high-income Filipino-American doctors and low-income agricultural labor-
Japanese-Americans who are pior and elderlv as well as those who are younger,
rdly mobile technicians. Ethnic tensions, made worse by job losses and an
rican trade deficit with Asian countries, gave rise to scattered acts of violence. In
ports of Texas and lonisiana the Ku Klux Klan joined with angry shrimp fisher-
The fastest
growing
minority
13(H) THE UNITED STATES IN A NUCLEAR ACE
By (hr mid 1980s Asian-Americans
had become the fastest-growing
group in America. This area of Ian
Angeles, where many Vietnamese
refugees settled, has become known
as Little Saigon.
men to harass newly arrived Vietnamese shrimpers. During the 15)92 Ixjs Angeles
riots. Korean slurps were often the targets of looters and arsonists.
The African-
American
middle claw
The Bakkc
decision
The Court
moves rtg/tf
Equality Still Denied
By the 1980s the African-American community had seemingly split in two. A signifi-
cant minority had successfully lived the American dream. Almost three times more
black Americans held public office in the 1970s and 1980s than in the 1960s. The\
made substantial strides in the professions, management, sports, and entertainment
The earnings of black households rose faster limn those for whites in the 1970s and
1980s, although they remained 20 percent lower.
But the surge of African-Americans into middle-class occupations tended to
disguise the persistence of poverty tied to race. In I he 1970s and 1980s. more young
families were counted among the nation's poor. Those families were increasingly
headed by single women. More than 40 percent of all black families (versus 12
percent for whites) were headed by women, and the number was growing. To make
matters worse, the largest numbers of black families were concentrated in urban
areas hard hit by tin* recessionary economy. Black unemployment, particularly severe
among teenagers and young adults, was twice the national average. More shocking
still, the infant mortality rate for African-Americans was double the white average
and worse than that for some Third World nations. African-Americans made tip
nearly one-third of all AIDS eases. Homicide was the leading cause of death for black
males between 15 and 34 and in that group about 20 percent had prison records
These were the crudest realities of poverty.
To what degree should the political system address such prejudices? During the
1980s and earls 1990s a conservative, hands-off approach prevailed. The Supreme
Court ruled, in Bakkc i Regentst of the University of California (1978' that setting
fixed quotas was illegal Allan Bakke, a while man, had been rejected by the medical
school at the University of California at Davis, even though he had higher grades
than most of the minority applicants admitted under a quota system. The Court
ordered Bakke admitted. On the other hand, a concurring opinion acknowledged
that race could be a factor in admissions programs in order to secure a more diverse
student laxly. Appointments to the court by Reagan and Bush led to increasing!!
narrow inteqsretations of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. A series of decisions during the