America About the Authors Andrew Cayton, Ph.D. Andrew ('avton is Professor of History at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio. Born in Cincinnati, Ohio, he is the grandson of a high school history teacher. Dr. Cayton received his B.A. with high honors from the University ofVirginia and his M.A. and Ph.D. from Brown University. Dr. Cayton is an early American historian, whose specialization is political and social history. I Ic is the author of The Frontier Republic: Ideology and Polities in the Ohio Country, I7N0-IR25 and coauthor of The Midwest and the Nation: Rethinking the History of an American Region. Dr. Cayton received the 1993 Outstanding Teacher Award from the Ohio Academy of History and the 1992 Distinguished liducator Award from the College of Arts and Sciences at Miami University. He lives in Hamilton, Ohio, with his wife, Mary Kupiec Cayton, and daughters, Elizabeth and Hannah. Elisabeth Israels Perry, Ph.D. Elisabeth Israels Perry serves as the Director of the Graduate Program in Women's History at Sarah Lawrence College, in Bronxville, New York. She previously taught U.S. women's history at Vanderbilt University, in Nashville, Tennessee. She received her B.A. and Ph.D. in history from the University .of California at Los Angeles. Dr. Perry's period of specialization is the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Her greatest scholarly interests are women's history and reform movements. She is the author of Belle Moskowhz: Feminine Politics and the Exercise of Power in the Age of Alfred E. Smith. She is the coeditor of The Challenge of Feminist Biography: Writing the Lives of Modem American Women. Dr. Perry has received major grants from Eulbright, the National Endowment for the Humanities, and the American Council of Learned Societies. She has directed three NEH Summer Seminars for secondary school history and literature teachers. Allan M. Winkler, Ph.D. Allan M. Winkler chairs the Department of History at Miami University of Ohio. He received his B.A. from Harvard University, his MjC from Columbia University, and his Ph.D. from Yale University. Dr. Winkler's specialization is twentieth-century social and political history. He is the author of eight books, including The Politics of Propaganda: The Office of War Information. 1942-1945: Modern America: The United States from the Second World Wrtr to the Present; The Recent Past: Readings on America Since World War II; and Home Front U.S.A.: America During World War FI. His most recent book, published in 1993, is Life Under a Clotuh American Anxiety About the Atom. Dr. Winkler began his teaching career in the Peace Corps in the Philippines, where he worked at the elementary and secondary level as well as at the college level. He has taught at Yale University and the University of Oregon, and has also held the Bicentennial Chair in American Studies in Helsinki, Finland and the lohn Adams Chair in American Civilization in Amsterdam, in the Netherlands. A Division of Paramount Publishing Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 ©Copyright 1995 by Prentice-Hall, Inc., A Paramount Communications Company. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permission in writing from the publisher. Printed in the United States of America 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 02 01 00 99 98 97 96 95 94 Prologue: Bridging Past and Present Unit [T Origins of a New Society to 1783 Chapter 1 Three Cultures Collide, Before and After the 1400s 1 The Native American World Historian's Toolbox: Using Artifacts 2 The European World 3 The World of the West Africans 4 The Atlantic World Is Born Chapter Review Chapter 2 European Settlement and Native American Resistance, 1519-1689 1 Spanish and Native American Interaction 2 A Colony in the Chesapeake Bay Area History Might Not Have Happened This Way: The Decision to Use Enslaved Africans for Labor 3 Europeans and Native Americans in the Northeast Historian's Toolbox: Using Time Lines T7 4 King Philip's War: A Turning Point in History The Lasting Impact of King Philip's War Chapter Review American Album: First Encounters Chapter 3 The Maturing of Colonial Societies, 1689-1754 1 An Empire and Its Colonies Historian's Toolbox: Interpreting an Economic Activity Map 2 Life in Colonial America 3 African Americans in the Colonies 4 Emerging Tensions Time & Place: A Geographic Perspective Two Settlement Patterns in the Colonies Chapter Review Chapter 4 The American Revolution, 1754-1783 1 The French and Indian War Challenges Colonial Thinking 2 The Issues That Led to the War for Independence Historian's Toolbox: Expressing Problems Clearly 3 The Ideas That Led to the War for Independence 4 The War for Independence Chapter Review Unit Balancing Liberty and Order, 1781-1830 12* Chapter 5 The Constitution of the United States, 1781-1789 Government by tire States History Might Not Have Happened This Way: The Decision to Reject the Articles of Confederation 134 The Constitutional Convention 136 Historian's Toolbox: Identifying Central Issues 143 Ratifying the Constitution The New Government Chapter Review Chapter 6 The Origins of American Politics, 1789-1820 1 Liberty Versus Order in the 1790s Historian's Toolbox: Making Comparisons If 2 The Election of 1800: A Turning Point in History The Lasting Impact of the Election of 1800 3 The Jefferson Administration Time & Place: A Geographic Perspective Moving the East to the West Native American Politics War, Panic, and Uneasy Compromise Chapter Review Chapter 7 Life in the New Nation, 1783-1830 1 Migrating Multitudes Historian's Toolbox: Using Population Density Maps 2 The Spirit of Improvement 3 Shifting Social Relationships 4 The Democratization of American Religion Chapter Review American Album: After the Revolution An Emerging New Nation, 1800-1860 Chapter 8 The Market Revolution, 1815-1845 1 Changing Households and New Markets 2 The Northern Section 3 The Southern Section 4 The Second American Party System Historian's Toolbox: Determining Relevance 5 The Age of Jackson History Might Not Have Happened This Way: The Decision to Move Native Americans West Chapter Review American Album: Engines of Change Chapter 9 Religion and Reform, 1815-1860 1 Middle-Class Reform Historian's Toolbox: Formulating Questions 2 The Antislavery Movement Time & Place: A Geographic Perspective Routes to Freedom TJ 3 Women in the Public Sphere: A Turning Point in History The Lasting Impact of Women in Public Life 4 Reform Efforts Highlight Cultural Divisions Chapter Review Chapter 10 Beyond the Mississippi, 1800-1860 1 The Native Americans of the Plains 2 Hispanic North America 3 Trails to the W'est Historian's Toolbox: Analyzing Tombstones 4 Conquest of a Continent Chapter Review viii k 4 Unit Division and Uneasy Reunion, 1848-1877 Chapter 11 The Coming of the Civil War, 1848-1861 296 1 Two Nations? 298 2 New Political Parties 303 Historian's Toolbox: Analyzing Political Speeches 310 3 The System Fails 311 History Might Not Have Happened This Way: The Dred Scott Decision 316 4 A Nation Divided Against Itself 318 Chapter Review 322 Chapter 12 The Civil War, 1861-1865 324 1 The First Two Years of the Civil War 326 2 War Brings Change 333 Historian's Toolbox: Using Letters as Primary Sources 340 TJ 3 Turning Point: The Siege of Vicksburg 341 The Lasting Impact of the Siege of Vicksburg 346 4 A New Birth of Freedom 348 Time 8c Place: A Geographic Perspective Valley of War 352 Chapter Review 354 American Album: Life at War 356 Chapter 13 Reconstruction, 1863-1877 1 The Meaning of Freedom 2 Three Plans for Reconstruction 3 Reconstruction in the South Historian's Toolbox: How Maps Show Change Over Time 4 The Retreat from Reconstruction in the North Chapter Review Expansion: Rewards and Costs, 1860-1920 Chapter 14 i Chapter 15 Chapter 16 Chapter 17 The Expansion or American Industry, 1865-1900 A Technological Revolution Historian's Toolbox: Using Cross-Sectional Maps The Growth of Big Business Industrialization and Workers The Great Strikes: A Turning Point in History The Lasting Impact of the Great Strikes Chapter Review Looking to the West, 1860-1900 Moving West The Conquest of the Native Americans Modernization, Mining, and Ranching Time & Place: A Geographic Perspective The End of the Open Range Populism Historian's Toolbox: Drawing Conclusions Frontier Myths Chapter Review Politics, Immigration, and Urban Life, 1877-1920 Politics in the Gilded Age People on the Move The Challenge of the Cities Historian's Toolbox: Reading Tables and Analyzing Statistics Ideas for Reform Chapter Review Cultural and Social Transformations, 1870-1915 The Expansion of Education Recreation for the Masses The World of Jim Crow Historian's Toolbox: Reading a Political Cartoon The Woman Question History Might Not Have Happened This Way: 'I*he Decision to Rule Against Women's Suffrage Chapter Review American Album: The Growth of Sports x Unit Hie United States on the Brink of Change, 1890-1920 492 Chapter 18 Becoming a World Power, 1890-1913 1 The Pressure to Expand 2 Foreign Entanglements, War, and Annexations Historian's Toolbox: Using a Time Zone Map 3 A Forceful Diplomacy Time & Place: A Geographic Perspective The Building of the Panama Canal A The People's Response to Imperialism Chapter Review Chapter 19 The Era of Progressive Reform, 1890-1920 1 The Origins of Progressivism 2 Progressivism: Its Legislative Impact History Might Not Have Happened This Way: The Decision to Lock the Doors at the Triangle Shirtwaist Company 3 Progressivism: Its Impact on National Politics Historian's Toolbox: Testing Conclusions TJ4 Suffrage at Last: A Turning Point in History The Lasting Impact of the Nineteenth Amendment Chapter Review Chapter 20 The World War I Era, 1914-1920 1 The Road to War Historian's Toolbox: Identifying Alternatives 2 The United States Declares War 3 Americans on the European Front 4 On the Home Front 5 Global Peacemaker Chapter Review American Album: From Field to Factory xi 7 Boom Times to Hard Times, 1919-1938 576 Chapter 21 A Stormy Era, 1919-1929 578 1 Postwar Adjustments 580 History Might Not Have Happened This Way: The Decision to Restrict Immigration 584 2 Social and Political Developments 586 3 New Manners, New Morals 591 Historian's Toolbox: Analyzing Advertisements 595 4 Creating a Shared Culture 596 5 Stemming the Tide of Change 600 Chapter Review 604 American Album: The Jazz Age 606 Chapter 22 Crash and Depression, 1929-1933 608 1 The Economy in the Late 1920s 610 2 The Stock Market Crash 614 l ime 8( Place: A Geographic Perspective The Black Blizzards 618 3 Social Effects of the Depression 620 Historian's Toolbox: Distinguishing False from Accurate Images 625 4 Surviving the Great Depression 626 If 5 The Election of 1932: A Turning Point in History 629 The Lasting Impact of the Election of 1932 634 Chapter Review 636 Chapter 23 The New Deal, 1933-1938 638 1 Forging a New Deal 640 2 The New Deal's Critics 647 Historian's Toolbox: Distinguishing Fact from Opinion 652 3 Enduring Legacies of the New Deal 653 Chapter Review 658 Hot and Cold War, 1939-1960 Chapter 24 World War II, 1939-1945 1 Prelude to War 2 The Military Struggle 3 Americans on the Battle Fronts Historian's Toolbox; Examining Photographs Tf4 Dropping the Atomic Bomb: A Turning Point in History The Lasting impact of the Atomic Bomb 4 Chapter Review Chapter 25 World War II at Home, 1941-1945 1 The Shift to Wartime Production 2 Daily Life on the Home Front 3 Women and the War Historian's Toolbox; Identifying Assumptions 4 The Struggle for Justice at Home Chapter Review American Album: Bringing the War Home Oon't lit That Shadow Tauch Thin Chapter 26 The Cold War and American Society, 1945-1960 1 Origins of the Cold War Historian's Toolbox: Recognizing Cause and Effect 2 Containment 3 The Cold War in Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America 4 The Cold War in the United States Chapter Review Chapter 27 The Postwar Years at Home, 1945-1960 1 The Postwar Economy Historian's Toolbox: Evaluating Magazine Advertisements 2 The Mood of the 1950s l ime & Place: A Geographic Perspective The Suburban Explosion Domestic Politics and Policy The Continuing Struggle for Equality 760 History' Might Not Have Happened This Way: The Decision to Integrate Major League Baseball Chapter Review xu Unit 9 The Upheaval off the Sixties, 1960-1975 Chapter 28 Chapter 29 Chapter 30 Chapter 31 The Kennedy and Johnson Years, 1960-1968 The New Frontier Historian's Toolbox: Exploring Oral History Thf Great Society History Might Not Have Happened This Way: Kennedy's Decision to Send an American to the Moon Foreign Policy in the 1960s Chapter Review The Civil Rights Movement, 1960-1968 Leaders and Strategies Historian's Toolbox: Using Autobiography and Biography Nonviolent Confrontation: A Turning Point in History The lasting Impact of Nonviolent Confrontation The Political Response The Challenge of Black Power Chapter Review Continuing Social Revolution, 1960-1975 The Women's Movement Historian's Toolbox: Recognizing Bias Ethnic Minorities Seek Equality Native American Struggles Environmental and Consumer Movements Time & Place: A Geographic Perspective After Silent Spring Chapter Review The Vietnam War and American Society, 1960-1975 The War in the 1960s The Brutality of the War Student Protest Historian's Toolbox: Checking Consistency The Counterculture The End of the War Chapter Review American Album: Personal Legacy Republican Revival and Decline, 1968-Present Chapter 32 The Nixon Years, 1968-1974 878 771 1968: A Turning Point in History 880 The Lasting Impact of the Year 1968 884 2 The Nixon Administration 886 3 Nixons Foreign Policy 892 4 The Watergate Scandal 897 Historian's Toolbox: Analyzing Presidential Records 903 Chapter Review 904 Chapter 33 The Post-Watergate Period, 1974-1980 906 1 The Ford Administration 908 2 The Carter Transition 913 3 Carter's Foreign Policy 917 Historian's Toolbox: Recognizing Ideologies 922 4 Carter's Domestic Problems 923 History Might Not Have Happened This Way: The Decision to Reveal the Effects of Agent Orange 928 Chapter Review 930 Chapter 34 High Tide of the Conservative Movement, 1980-1992 932 1 The Conservative Revolution 934 2 Republican Policies at Home 939 Historian's Toolbox: Demonstrating Reasoned Judgment 944 3 The Halting Pace of Reform 945 Time & Place: A Geographic Perspective The AIDS/HIV Pandemic 950 4 The United States in a New World 952 Chapter Review 956 Chapter 35 The Promise of Change, 1992-Present 958 1 The Clinton Administration 960 2 The United States and the World in the 1990s 966 3 American Society in the 1990s 972 Historian's Toolbox: Predicting Consequences 977 Chapter Review 978 American Album: The Information Age 980 Epilogue: A Nation Looks Ahead 982 Reform Movements People in the United States have frequently taken action in grass-roots movements to right perceived wrongs and to secure improvements in the quality of life. Values A variety of religious, ethical, and moral beliefs have propelled and guided the quest of Americans for a just and ordered society. Economics Americans have searched for new and better ways to make a living and have struggled to define government's role in this pursuit. Technology Americans' ability to develop new skills and tools and to increase their knowledge of the physical world has greatly affected the way they live and work, and has led to a high standard of living. Environment The geography and available resources of the continent have affected the actions of Americans. Similarly, the actions of Americans have affected the environment and physical landscape. Unity and Conflict Americans have developed unique political systems and laws that affirm a shared commitment to certain goals, such as individual rights and equality. Nevertheless, groups with differing views on how to achieve these goals have sometimes clashed. American Culture American Democracy The concepts of democratic representation, equality under the law, and freedom from discrimination have been gradually broadened to include previously excluded groups. I n every period of their history, Americans gave special expression to their views in forms such as art, literature, films, music, manners, and morals. Diversity The United States throughout its history has been made up of a gathering of many peoples from throughout the world. Americans have both benefited from and encountered problems with this diversity. The United States and the World America's relationships with other countries have been influenced at different times by a sense of mission, by values, and by self- interest. Prologue s The Native American World "Flourishing variety"—this phrase sums up the world of the Native Americans in the 1400s. America was a land of contrasting societies long before these native societies collided with those of the Europeans and Africans. Key Concepts • North and South America have been populated for tens of thousands of years. • By the 1400s, North America was inhabited by many diverse cultural groups who adapted their way of life to fit the many variations in the land and climate that they encountered. ■ Among Native Americans, families served social, religious, and political functions. Age-old Native American trade routes crisscrossed North America bv the 1400s. Native American artists in what is now Gallatin County, Kentucky, sculpted in stone the spare, crisp lines and curves of this face. Key Terms, People, and Places kinship network, clan, division of labor, oral tradition efore the cultures of North and South America collided with the cultures of the Europeans and Africans, the American land, bright with dozens of thriving societies, had remained without mass migrations from other continents for tens of thou* sands of years. The people who lived in the Americas during this period of isolation, and Americans descended from them, are today generally referred to as Native Americans. This section examines the patterns of early Native American life that would later profoundly affect the interaction among Native Americans, Europeans, and Africans—the three Atlantic cultures. The Ancient Roots of Native American Culture No one knows exactly when people first came to the Americas. Among many other ancient traces, they left fingerprints in mud in New Mexico that hardened 28,000 years ago, baskets in Pennsylvania that may be 19,000 years old, and weapons in Alaska that may have been chipped from stone 12,000 years ago. Archaeologists theorize that the first Americans may have arrived even earlier than this evidence suggests—as much as 40,000 years ago, at a time when the level of the world's oceans was low and migrating people could actually walk from Asia to what is now Alaska over a "land bridge." Some archaeologists further theorize that separate waves of migrants came across the land bridge from Asia at different times and dispersed as they moved southward from Alaska. Settling into different regions, from the Arctic Circle to the southernmost tip of South America, these separate groups developed distinct languages and customs. By the late 1400s, when the encounter among the Atlantic cultures began, some eight to ten million people may have lived in what is now the United States. Some scholars contest these figures, claiming that as tew as 700,000 to 800,000 Native Americans lived in the continental United States before contact across the Atlantic began. The map on page 16 shows that whatever the size of this population, it included a dazzling variety of distinct groups. Native Americans Adapted to Land and Climate The North American environment varies drastically from region to region, from the surf- swept beaches of the West Coast, through the windy plains of the Midwest, to the rocky, temperate coast of New England. Since the people r ■------------------------- For the most part, English-speaking settlements continued to hug the Atlantic and the deep rivers that empty into it, as shown on the map on page 77. Most commerce took place on water; it was simply too expensive and too difficult to carry crops and goods long distances over land. Even water traffic on rivers, however, was blocked at the waterfalls and rapids of the Fall Line, where the inland hills meet the coastal plain. Roads were little more than footpaths or rutted trails. It was not until the middle of the 1700s that settlers began to move more than a hundred miles into the interior in great numbers. Until then, the Atlantic Ocean remained so vital to travel that there was generally more contact between Boston and London than between Boston and Virginia. Staple Crops in the Southern Colonies In the Southern Colonies—Virginia, Maryland, South Carolina, North Carolina, and Georgia— the economy was based on growing crops that were in constant demand. Such crops are called staples. In Virginia and North Carolina, the staple crop was tobacco; in the warm and wet coastal regions of South Carolina and Georgia, it was rice. In the early 1730s, these two colonies were exporting 16.8 million pounds of rice per year; by 1770, the number was 76.9 million. Meanwhile, the number of pounds of tobacco exported per year by Virginia, Maryland, and Delaware rose from 32 million in 1700 to 83.8 million in 1770. Throughout the Southern Colonies, enslaved Africans supplied most of the labor on tobacco and rice plantations. Virginia planters began to purchase large numbers of Africans in the mid-1600s. In 1650, Africans in Virginia numbered only about 500, which accounted for 3 percent of the colony's population. By 1700, enslaved Africans totaled 16,000, or 28 percent of the colony. About 1750, the Figure was 40 percent. In South Carolina, Africans outnumbered Europeans throughout the 1700s. In 1730, for example, 60 percent of South Carolina's population was of African heritage. To produce staple crops, planters needed huge amounts of land and labor but very little else. As a result, the Southern Colonies remained a region of plantations strung out along rivers and coastlines. Except for the cities of Charles Town (Charleston), South Carolina, and Williamsburg, Virginia, the South had few towns and only a small group of people who could be called merchants. A Mixture in the Middle Colonies From Maryland north to New York, the economy of the Middle Colonies was a mixture of farming and commerce. The length of the Delaware and I ludson rivers and the tributaries that fed them allowed colonists to move into the interior and establish farms on rich, fertile soil. There they specialized in growing grains, including wheat, barley, and rye. This kind of farming was very profitable. Eastern Pennsylvania, full of such farms, was called "the best poor man's country in the world." But commerce was just as important as agriculture in the Middle Colonies. New York and Philadelphia were already among the largest cities in North America. Home to growing numbers of merchants, traders, and arti- sans—craftspeople such as printers, bakers, and furniture makers—the streets of these cities teemed with people in the business of buying and selling goods. In these ports, ships arrived regularly from all over the Atlantic World, carrying immigrants as well as merchandise. Philadelphia became the The lawmaking assemblies of the colonies—like the Virginia House of Burgesses shown here—continued the English tradition of strong local authority. ——-- major port of entry lor Germans and Scots-Irish people coming to North America as indentured servants. (Scots-lrish were Scots who had settled in northern Ireland.) The populations of both the colony of New York and the colony of Pennsylvania were ethnically diverse. They included English, Dutch, French, Scots, Irish, Scots-lrish. Germans, Swedes, Portuguese, Welsh, Africans, and Native Americans. No wonder a traveler in the late 1750s despaired of ever discovering "any precise or determinate character" in the population of New York—it was made up of "different nations, different languages, and different reli- gions." In contrast, most of the residents of Massachusetts were still of English descent, and almost everyone in the South was either of African or of English descent. Agriculture and Trade in New England In the 1700s, the New England Colonies were a region of small, relatively self-sufficient farms and of towns dependent on long-distance trade. Unlike the merchants of Philadelphia and New York, those in Boston, Salem, and Newport, Rhode Wand, did not rely heavily on local crops for their commerce. Instead, they had long since developed a business of carrying crops and goods from one place to another—a "carrying track*." They might haul china, books, and doth from England to the West Indies in the Caribbean Sea; transport sugar back to New England, where it was usually distilled into rum; trade ram and firearms for slaves in West Africa; and then carry slaves to the West Indies tor more sugar. This trade between three points in the Atlantic World—the Americas, Europe, and Africa—was called the triangular trade. Geography and History; Interpreting Maps English settlements in North America in the 1700s generally clung to the Eastern seaboard and its rivers. In this narrow band, however, lived a wide variety of ethnic groups. Which was the largest group after the English ? The diverse economies of the Southern, Middle, and New England colonies might lead to the expectation of vast differences in culture. Americans from South Carolina to New England had much in common, however, as the next section shows. Key Terms, People, and Places 1. Define (a) mercantilism, (b) balance of trade. (c)salutary neglect, (d) Eall Line, (e) triangular trade. Key Concepts t Describe three ways in which England tried to control its colonies with the Navigation Act. 1. Give four reasons why the British were able to neglect their colonies in the 1700s. 4. Describe the economies of the Southern Colonies, the Middle Colonies, and the New England Colonies. Critical Thinking 5. Predicting Consequences How might the growtE of the American colonies have been affected if the British had strictly enforced the Navigation Art of 1660? Emerging Tensions In the mid- 1700s, some colonial Americans began to look westward lor more territory, while others challenged the social and political order in a "great awakening" of religious feeling. As a result, new tensions pulled at the fabric of colonial society. Key Concepts • During the mid- 1750s, British settlers moved beyond the confines of the thirteen colonies. ■ As British settlers migrated west, tension increased among Native Americans, the French, and the British, as all competed for the same territory. • A religious movement called the Great Awakening indirectly challenged the fundamental colonial belief in inequality. Key Terms, People, and Places Great Awakening; forks of the Ohio River y the mid-l700s, the British colonics in North America were economic successes. Colonial settlers, with the forced cooperation of enslaved African Americans, had transformed the Atlantic colonies into a world of prosperous farms, towns, and plantations. The success of the colonies came with a price, however. The growth of the colonies, both in population and territory, created new problems and revived old ones. Western Expansion Though it may be hard to believe, by the mid-1700s British colonists felt crowded, especially in New England. According to English custom, fathers tried to provide their sons with land; New Englanders now found it increasingly difficult to do so. Since maintaining a family required about 45 acres and since Americans were having many children, there was simply not enough accessible and fertile land to go around. This apparent shortage of land worried many Americans, and appeared to be increasing tensions between parents and children. Why should sons labor for a household that could give them very little in return? In addition, as writers such as Benjamin Franklin feared, a land shortage would make it more difficult for American men to secure their independence by owning private property. Could the colonies survive if they remained cramped along the Atlantic Ocean? For many colonists, the answer was clearly no. By the middle of the 1700s, European settlers were moving into the interior of North America. Scots-Irish and Germans settled central Pennsylvania and the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia. Farther to the north, people were spreading into the Mohawk River valley in New York and the Connecticut River valley in what is now Vermont. They were migrating in search of land on which they could stake their independence and maintain their households. Two fortes created tensk in the 1700s: westward pu of European < tiers and an e to rediscover the meaning of Christianit Native American and French Reaction lust ahead of the English migrants were Native Americans, including the Delaware and the Shawnee. They were moving west, too. Though heavily involved in trade with the Europeans, they preferred forest life to farm life. By the mid-1700s, disease and war over trade had taken a toll on Native American cultures; the Iroquois, for example, were no longer as strong militarily as they had been in the 1600s. Native Americans nonetheless Hundreds of thousands of enslaved African Americans settled in the West with their owners. This sketch by Louis Miller shows a group on the march from Virginia to Tennessee. marriages. Migration, too, often pulled African American families apart. A husband or wife might be sold to another slaveholder at a great distance or forced to migrate with another master to a far-away state or territory. North of the Ohio River, slavers' was technically illegal, in accordance with the Northwest Ordinance of 1787. But laws called black codes kept African Americans there under the authority of white Americans. Indentured servitude, too, was used as a means to exploit African American labor without resorting to enslavement. More powerful than the willingness to exploit African Americans, however, was the prejudice that led new settlers to try to keep African Americans out of their territories and states altogether. Many Americans of European descent living in Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois did not want African Americans in their states, not only because of bias, but because of their fear that African Americans would take up land and take away jobs. As a result, stiff requirements for African American settlers kept the African American population north of the Ohio River very small. In Illinois, for example, one requirement for taking up residence called for African Americans to post a $1,000 security bond unless they owned land. The migration into the trans-Appalachian region has been called a repopulation or resettlement. Why? ■X\"l ■ A. .A, ,U vt. viXOV*., — Native American Migration and Adjustment Native Americans, too, were migrating during this period. In most cases, their movements were involuntary. The map on page 191 shows how the treaties signed by Native Americans gradually transferred their land to the United States government. The loss of their homelands forced Native Americans to undertake long and perilous journeys to new areas west of the Mississippi River. No matter where Native Americans lived, their numbers continued to decline. As had been true for three hundred years, the main cause was disease transmitted by contacts with Europeans. Epidemics regularly devastated villages both cast and west of the Mississippi River. Most whites were hostile to Native Americans. But a handful of missionaries and government officials worked to convert them to Christianity and educate them in European ways. Congress even appropriated $20,000 in 1793 to teach Native Americans how to read and write and how to grow crops. However well-intentioned, these efforts required Native Americans to renounce their cultures and become like Americans of European descent in their daily lives as well as in their religion. Many Native Americans, under the leadership of men like Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa. actively resisted European cultural as well as military dominance. A major exception were tlie Cherokee who lived in eastern Tennessee, western North Carolina, and northern Georgia. Under the leadership of men of mixed Native American and European American heritage, such as John Ross, the Cherokee adopted a policy of accommodation. Thev devised legal and political systems that blended Cherokee and European traditions and in 1827 declared themselves an independent nation. Meanwhile, many Cherokee adopted the notion of private property and became farmers and artisans. The 15,000 Cherokee owned 22,000 cattle, 1,300 enslaved African Americans, 31 mills for grinding flour, 10 sawmills, 8 cotton gins, and 18 schools. They also published their own newspaper using an alphabet invented by one of their Native American Land Transfer Before 1850 Nitive American land cessions Land ceded before 1784 Q Land ceded 1784-1819 Bund Med 1820-1834 ceded 1835-1350 pyj Reservations established uJ by 1850 Sew Mexico I'erriLorj ) OCtAN ® Geography and History: Interpreting Maps A map can only hint at the hardship and turmoil that being forced to move meant to Native Americans, for instance, the Seminole people fought valiantly against United States troops well into the 1840s to avoid being removed from their homeland. Some remain there too today. Where is the Seminole homeland? leaders, Sequoya. Cultural accommodation by the Cherokee did not make white Americans less hungry for Cherokee land, however, a problem that soon would lead to trouble. QTurmoil and change—not only for Native American society, but for American society as a vhok—was inevitable. In less than half a century, Americans had conquered and settled the region from western Florida to southern Wisconsin. In 1775 the future United States had been a series of British colonies hugging the Atlantic Coast and the rivers of eastern North America. By 1830 the nation was a dynamic and aggressive land filled with millions of young, restless, and ambitious people, many of whom were sure they could change their world tor the better. f imi.i ■■mu Mi Key Terms, People, and Places 1 Define (a) Adams-Onts Treaty, (b) black codes. 2. Identify persister. Key Concepts , 2. How was Free Frank's life typical of American life in the new nation? How was it not typical of the lives of enslaved African Americans? A What area did Americans settle in the early 1800s? 5. What was the main cause of the great increase in the United States population before 1830? 6. How did the Cherokee react to continued American expansion and population growth? Critical Thinking 7. Determining Relevance Would a young population he more inclined to migrate than an older population? Explain your thinking. Reform Efforts Highlight Cultural Divisions Not all Americans embraced the crusades of northern middle-class reformers. Working- class people and southerners, in particular, resented interfering reformers who I told them how to live their lives. Key Concepts • More concerned with economic survival than social reform, working- class people resented reformers' efforts to impose values with which they did not necessarily agree. * The growing cultural differences between North and South intensified southerners' angry reactions to the criticisms of reformers. tTTE'TloV BWinj jjw MW" wn* TCI MJOUTIM P&tSc. were 't Reformers often met with sentiments such as the one expressed in the poster above. Key Terms, People, and Places Samuel F. B. Morse he northern middle-class reformers believed passionately in the causes they supported. Other Americans, however, did not always welcome either the morality they advocated or the kind of reforms they proposed. In fact, many working-class people and southerners viewed reformers as meddlers and moralists who had no business interfering in the lives of others. The way these working people and southerners responded to the reform movements of the pre-Civil War era reveals the cultural divisions that existed during this time, particularly the growing division between North and South. Working-Class Culture The Market Revolution of the early 1800s created a growing population of industrial workers in the United States, many of whom moved from farms to cities to find factory jobs. At the same time, a dramatic increase in immigration between 1830 and 1860 resulted in a more culturally diverse national population. The graph at right shows this huge increase in immigration Although some of the new immigrant) arrived from Scandinavia and England, most came from Ireland and Germany. Because the system of slave labor in the South limited economic opportunities in that region, the great majority of these immigrants settled in the North. Forced out of their homeland by the disastrous potato famine of the mid 1840s. Irish immigrants tended to settle in northeastern cities and take manual labor jobs in factories or on canals or railroads. German immigrants, on the other hand—many of whom had fled political oppression after the failure of the Europe® revolutions of 1848—bought farmland in the Midwest or settled in northern cities such a New York, Philadelphia, Cincinnati, Chicago, and Milwaukee. Religious differences immediately created tension between middle-class reformers and working-class immigrants. Nearly all of the Irish immigrants and many of the German immigrants were Roman Catholic. Reformer) strongly disapproved of the Catholic religion. They believed that the emphasis Catholicism placed on ritual and the authority of the Pope and bishops made it impossible for individual) to think for themselves and to find their own salvation. Some even suspected that Catholics were part of a conspiracy led by the Pope to rule the world. As inventor and painter Samud F. B. Morse wrote in 1834: "Popery [Calh"i cisnt | does not acknowledge the right of the people to govern; but claims for itself the supreme right to govern all people and all rulers by divine right." Immigration to the United States, 1821-1860 ZZ3 Interpreting Graphs " Seeking to escape famine and revolution in Europe, several million immigrants came to the United Suits in the 1840s and 18S0s. changing the character of the United States population in the process. HMi nation sent the largest number of immigrants to the United States in the period from 1846 to 1855? For their part, working-class immigrants found lhat the evangelical Protestant version of duriner-building and self-improvement were uinecessary luxuries. They were much more concerned with putting food on the table and fcetpinga roof over their heads than with debating issues of morality. Author 1 lerman Melville anmmarized this attitude when he wrote in his !mi Main' Dick: T n this world, sin that pays its way can | 1 trove! freely, and without a passport; | vkteas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at I ^frontiers. Whether immigrant or native born, working- class people valued different things than most middle -class reformers. Because they had so lit- lkpower in their working lives, working people muted to do as they pleased in their leisure time. Alcohol often played an important role in their social lives. Men drank in taverns that were the center of neighborhood society. Women bought beer to enjoy with neighbors on the tops of tenements. The idea that drinking alcohol was an inherently immoral act was a strange mt in their shew, and they resented temperance idivists who preached to them about its evils. Organized sports played an increasingly rtant role in working-class lives in the 1840s and 1850s. People who spent much of their lives working in poor-paying, unsatisfying jobs took pleasure in boxing matches, horse races, and newly emerging team sports such as basebalL Gambling and drinking were sometimes part of the fun. Most middle-class reformers were dismayed by these activities. They denounced them as examples of idle behavior and moral weakness and wondered whether working people had the character necessary to become good citizens. In the end, what many middle-class reformers wanted, particularly evangelical reformers, was for working-class people to become like them. They sought an end to drinking and gambling, a celebration of hard work, and a form of religion that encouraged self-improvement rather than devotion to tradition. Reformers hoped that public schools, together with laws that restricted drinking, gambling, and sporting, would transform working-class men and women into the middle-class idea of model citizens. What working people wanted, on the other hand, was to be left alone to live their lives as they wished. North Versus South The tension the reform movements of the 1830s and 1840s sometimes stirred between :'ornia militarily, it had conquered them omitallv. By loosening the regulations cling trade with American merchants, the L:"t) government ensured that the commer- tics of its northern provinces would he with United States, rather than with its own mer- ~ts. More important, stronger commercial ties encouraged some Americans to seek new WpommitiM in Mexico's northern territories. Texas Wins Independence Nowhere was the influx of Americans into wotican territory more apparent in the 1820s pun in Texas. Stephen Austin, carrying out the bLin begun hy his lather, Moses, received per- Emission from the Mexican government to Hound .1 colony of about 300 settlers in east jlftuv Austin, twenty-nine years old and a ofthe Missouri territorial legislature, the first organized group of American set- into Texas in 1822. By 1824, some 2,000 rjgrants were living in Austin's colony, icn Americans first started moving into i now eastern Texas, the new Mexican merit adopted a liberal colonization pol- ■.Thc Mexican Colonization Law of 1824 ed American immigrants cheap land, the protection of the Mexican government, and a -war tax exemption if they settled in Texas. Soon other agents were arranging contracts ikndreds of Americans to settle in Texas. By about 7,000 Americans lived there, more twice the number of Mexicans in the tetri - ; Worried that they were losing Texas gh immigration, Mexico passed a law in .prohibiting any more Americans from j there, fiquallv important, they out- the importation of enslaved people. Still, s continued to (low across the border. ^Americans tn the 1820s and 1830s Wed to Texas following reports of fertile ^br growing crops. Today, many Mexicans ipt to immigrate to the United States. Do 'two groups of people share similar rea- ltor wanting to settle in a new land? Tension Erupts Into War By 1835 more than 30,000 Americans and 3,000 enslaved African Americans lived in Texas. As their numbers swelled, these Americans demanded more political freedom. In particular, they wanted slavery to be guaranteed under Mexican law. They were divided between those led by Stephen Austin, who preferred to work within the Mexican system, and those led by a hot-tempered lawyer from Alabama named William Travis, who wanted to fight for independence. Events in Mexico City soon helped Travis's supporters gain the upper hand. When the vain and ambitious General Antonio Lopez dc Santa Anna declared himself dictator of Mexico, supporters of an independent Texas became even more determined to break away. American settlers united in the cause of independence, and in March 1836, they formally declared the founding of the Republic of Texas. OSanta Anna responded to this defiance of Mexican authority by leading an army of several thousand men north to subdue the rebellion. T he Mexican leader won early victories at the Alamo, a fortress built on the ruins of a Spanish mission in San Antonio, and at Goliad. At the Alamo, fewer than 200 Texans defended an abandoned Spanish mission for twelve days while inflicting heavy casualties on 4,000 Mexican troops. Before his death, Travis sent this plea for help "to the People of Texas and all the Americans in the World": Fellow citizens & compatriots, I tint besieged by a thousand or more of the Mexicans under Santa Anna.... I call on you in the name of Liberty, of patriotism & everything dear to the American character to come to our aid, with all dispatch. ... If this call is neglected, I am determined to sustain myself ns long as possible & die like a soldier who never forgets what is due tn his own honor or that of his country. Bowing to his father's dying wish, Stephen Austin established the first colony of American settlers in Texas in 1822. Pie Rise of the Know Nothings I Slavery and disillusionment with politics were not the only issues that brought down the Whigs. The equally powerful issue of nativism also played a part in the end of the party. This was a movement to ensure that people born in the United States, who considered themselves 'natives,'' received better treatment than imrni- ftanu. Between 1846 and 1854, dose to three million Europeans arrived in the United States. Many middle-class evangelical Protestants were • particularly disturbed by the Catholic immigrants among them, most of whom had come hum Ireland and Germany. Dislike of Catholics followed a pattern. Many of the same people who objected to slavery in the South also objected to Catholicism. They knew that the Catholic religion was organized into a hierarchy reaching from churchgoers through priests, bishops, and cardinals, up to the Pope, whose word was law. Protestants believed that thishierarchv did not allow for individual free choice. They worried that "Papal Power"—the power of the Pope—would interfere with the rights of citizens in a democracy. Fear about immigrants led in 1849 to the formation of a secret nativist society called the Older of the Star-Spangled Banner. Within a lew years, its membership totaled around a million. The order insisted on complete secrecy bra its members, who used passwords and special handshakes. They always replied to I questions about the organization with the jnswer'T know nothing." In 1854 nativisLs went public by forming a political organization, the American party. It pledged to work against Irish Catholic candidates and for laws requiring a longer wait before immigrants could become otuens through the process of naturalization. Because it was closely associated with the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, the American part)1 came to be called the Know Nothings. Know Nothings claimed that they were committed to "the great work of Americanizing Americans." Strongly opposed to Catholicism, iky called on every American and naturalized protestant citizen throughout the Union, to use his utmost exertions to aid the cause by organizing and freeing the country from that monster [Catholicism] which has long since made its appearance in our midst and is only waiting for the hour to approach to plant its flag of tyranny, persecution, and oppression among us. The Know Nothings did very well in local elections in northern states. Their main supporters were middle-class Americans worried about the moral impact of immigration, and Protestant working men who were fearful of losing jobs to Irish and German immigrants. The Know Nothings called themselves "Native Americans"—by which they meant Americans born in the United States— and whipped up fears against immigrants. The term know-nothingism also was used later, during the 1900s, to describe a political attitude that included fear of foreigners. What evidence can you offer that this attitude can still be found in the United States today? The Kansas-Nebraska Act As if the growing turmoil among the parties was not promising enough trouble for the nation, a Democratic politician again raised the dangerous issue of slavery in the territories. This man, Senator Stephen Douglas of Illinois, had two conflicting ambitions. First, he wanted Chicago to benefit from the development of the West. The sooner the territories of Kansas and Nebraska became states, the sooner railroads —.................. "" Using Historical Evidence This drawing appeared in the April 1890 edition of a journal called The Woman Inventor. What does it suggest about women's contributions to the industrial growth of the late 1800s? Think of a modern convenience lhat you rely on, \NTiat benefits does this item bring to your life? Are there any drawbacks associated with this item? Improving Transportation Systems As the Civil War ended, steam-powered ships still provided much of the nation's transportation. During the mid-1800s, however, improvements in railroad travel created interconnecting links on land. Shrewd industrialists seized upon the opportunities offered by these links to make money and stimulate industrial growth. The Railroads Before the Civil War, most of the nation's thirty thousand miles of track were in short, unconnected lines, almost all of them east of the Mississippi River. Because no system of standard signals existed and brakes were unreliable, train travel was dangerous. Moreover, track width, or gauge, varied among railroad lines. Goods and passengers had to be moved to different cars on different lines, resulting in costly delays and inconvenience. Matters improved after the Civil War. The most spectacular development came on May 10, 1869. On that day, entrepreneur Leland Stanford drove the golden spike that completed the first transcontinental railroad. The project had begun in 1862, when the absence of southern legislators during the Civil War enabled Congress to agree on a route across the continent. Prior to the war, sectional differences over location of the route had prevented such agreement. Government involvement was vital, for only with federal funding could the massive project be completed. Thus, the government granted huge loans and land grants to two companies. One, the Union Pacific, began work in Omaha, Nebraska, and built toward the West. The other, the Central Pacific, headed east out of Sacramento, California. Immigrants built the transcontinental line using their bare hands. Irish men on the Union Pacific line hand-dug and -graded rail linn across the Great Plains at the rate of up tn six miles a day. Testimony to the backbreaking nature of this work was the railroad saying that there was "an Irishman buried under every tie.' Chinese workers shipped in from across the Pacific Ocean by the Central Pacific Railroad chiseled, plowed, and dynamited their way through the rock, ice, and snow of the Sierra Nevada range. Despite deplorable working conditions, they set the one-day record lot track laid—an amazing ten miles. Q Finally, after seven years of grueling labor, the two crews approached one another in wha is now Utah. At a place called Promonton- Point, Stanford raised his hammer to drive the final golden spike while a telegraph opera Mr beside the track tapped out a message to cniwk throughout the country: "Almost ready note Hats off. Prayer is being offered_Done!' Problems and Solutions on the RailroMb Even after such improvements, train travel remained inconvenient for many. Cornelia Adair, an Englishwoman visiting the United States in 1874, recalled the following details about her journey: We were obliged to wait all Friday, the afternoon and evening, at Cheyenne [Wyoming). The Kansas-Pacific Railway has quarreled with the Union-Pacific, and makes the diabolical arrangement that people must get up at two in the night to go from Cheyenne to Denver [Colorado), and then no sleeping ear. In addition to their inconvenience andbd of comfort, the railroads aroused thedistnut and fear of many. One story of the early nil- road days raged against the dangers of tnm travel, reporting Industrialization and Workers Children workers such as these labored long hours under hazardous conditions in the late 1800s. For millions of men, women, and children, industrialization was a blessing and a curse. It gave them jobs—but at what cost? Key Concepts • Industrial growth depended on the labor of millions of workers. • Men, women, and children, both native born and immigrant, met the great demand for labor. • Harsh working conditions inflicted physical and emotional harm. Key Terms, People, and Places piecework atural resources, inventive minds, risk-taking industrialists—all played central roles in the nation's industrial expansion following the Civil War. This expansion would not have been possible, however, without a growing work force that labored long hours for low wages. The Growing Work Force Fourteen million people arrived in the United States from abroad between 1860 and 1900. Most came in the hope of finding work in the booming industrial centers of the United States. The government often encouraged these job-seekers by sending recruiting agents abroad. As described in Chapter 16, however, their reception in the United Slates and its workplaces was not always warm. In a population shift almost as dramatic as this immigration, some eight or nine million native-born Americans fled poor economic conditions on the nation's farms to move to its cities during the late 1800s. (See graph at right.) Factory work, in spite of its low pay and long hours, lured most of them. Until the end of the century, few African Americans took part in this internal migration. Although some moved into cities in the South, the better job opportunities there were dosed to them. A Hard Life for the Factory Laborer For those who labored in the factorio, work was a family affair. Every family member worked in some way. Because wages were low. no one person could earn enough to sustain a household. Children often left school al the age of twelve or thirteen to work. Girls sometimes took factory jobs so that their brothers could stay in school. If a mother could not make some money working at home, she might also take a factory job, leaving babies with older siblings or neighbors. If an adult breadwinner became ill, died, or could not find or keepi job, children as young as six or seven had to bring in cash or go hungry. Shifts in Nonagricultural and Agricultural Labor Force, 1860-1900 % Nonagricultural swiften' % Agricultural worker* •Mining, construction, manufacturing only Source HntorKdJ Statistics of the United Srati H Interpreting Graphs In the late 1800s, more and more Americans found jobs in industry. What was the effect of the development on agricultural employment? Bilge reception center for steerage passengers on Ellis Island in New York i (arbor, near where litSlatue of Liberty had been erected in 1886. Ike statue, a gift of France, celebrated "Liberty Brightening the World." It became a world olofthe United States as a place of refuge liadhopc O Ellis Island Receives European Immigrants Information about the number and origins the nation's immigrants is not exact. For "pie, officials often misidentified their tries of origin. Also, about a third of all 'grants were "birds of passage"—usually .single men who worked for a number of lbs or years and then returned home. Until 7 Mexican immigrants were not counted, ..Brians estimate, however, that about 10 'jon immigrants, mostly northern Euro- sfrom countries such as England and Ger$ arrived between 1865 and 1890. In the p the pattern of immigration shifted dra- i!ly, and most immigrants came from the Tries of southern and eastern Europe and Slddk East. Between 1890 and 1920 about '"million Italians, Greeks, Slavs, Eastern Euro- land Russian Jews, and Armenians arrived. Swing in America Before the 1880s, deci- iaboui whom to allow into the country -deft to the states. Then, in 1891, the fed- y! government created the Office of the ■indent of Immigration to determine : was "fit" for life in the United States and : was not. The next year laws required all immigrants to undergo physical examina- ,and applicants could be denied admission dical grounds. Those found to have cont illnesses such as tuberculosis faced "line or even deportation. Those with ;ma, an eye disease that was common ^immigrants, were automatically sent ' to the country they had just left. Fiorello idia, who later became mayor of New Gty, worked as an interpreter at Ellis t was harrowing to see families sepa- ' be remembered in the book The Making ~tnt Sometimes, if it was a young child tvftn suffered from trachoma, one of the parents had to return to the native country until the rejected member of the family. When they learned their fate, they were stunned, lhey... had no homes to return to. After their physicals, immigrants showed their documents to officials and then collected their baggage. If they had the address of a friend or relative, they took a ferry, boat, or train to find them. Those who were on their own had a harder time. Crooks hung around ports with fake offers of lodgings and jobs, stealing money and baggage from the unwary. These recent arrivals on Ellis Island contemplate a bewildering yet promising future in their new homeland. Where the Immigrants Settled Immigrants often settled near their ports of entry. A significant number of immigrants did move inland. mmmm Chinese immigrants brought distinctive styles and customs to the United States. Traditional dress and shops helped them feel at home—but also set them apart from other Americans, who often had little tolerance for differences. however, often seeking communities established by previous settlers front their homelands. In this way, large settlements of Poles and Italians formed in Buffalo, Cleveland, Detroit, and Milwaukee. Chicago—a port, railroad hub, and center for the garment, grain, lumber, and livestock industries—attracted a diverse group of immigrants. Some immigrants continued on to the mining towns of the West. Only 2 percent went to the South, primarily because the area did not offer newcomers enough jobs or land. Louisiana recruited Italian farm laborers, however, and Florida also sought foreign-born agricultural workers. Once settled, immigrants looked for work. There were never enough jobs, and employ- ers—often immigrants themselves—took advantage of the "greenhorns." They paid them less than other workers and paid women less than men. Men tailors, for example, working 14 hours a day, 6 days a week, earned S6 to S10 a week. Women seamstresses, doing the same work, earned half that amount. Women domestic servants earned S4 to S10 a month, working 16 hours or more a day and more than 6 days a week. How does the treatment of men and women immigrant workers in the nineteenth century compare to the way men and women in the workplace are treated in the United States today? From Asia to the United States Most of the immigrants who entered the United States on the West Coast came from Asia. These people, whose cultures differed greatly from those of both Americans and Europeans, faced a unique set of challenges. In the 1800s, railroad companies recruited about a quarter of a million Chinese workers. | Like the indentured servants of the colonial era, the Chinese had to work for their companies until they had paid the cost of their passage and upkeep. Americans called these workers "coolies," a corruption of the Chinese word for "unskilled laborer." Many Chinese paid their debts, settled down, and began to work in other fields, including mining, farming, fishing, fat- I tory work, food preparation, and laundering. But the group as a whole had difficulty freeing itself from ethnic stereotypes, o While people ridiculed Chinese dress and their custom of wearing long pony tails, or queues. Many Americans condemned them for what they saw as the squalor of crowded Chinese neighborhoods—conveniently disregarding the discrimination and exploitation thal helped create such conditions. Because the Chinese accepted low wages, unions worked to keep them from conungto j the United States. Using pseudoscientific evidence, anti-Asian movements fostered racist altitudes. One newspaper's remarks from 187® ] were typical: T/ic Mongoloid [ Asian j blood is depraved and debased blood. The Mongoloid type of humanity is an inferior me—inferior in organic structure, in vital force or physical energy, and in the consti- Urioml conditions of development. On tojwiai all anthropologists and ethnologists are agreed. In reality, some scientists of the time agreed with such incorrect views and many did not. ■wttheless, Congress responded to popular demand by passing the Chinese Exclusion Act io 1882. The act prohibited Chinese laborers tram entering the country. It was renewed in IWland 1902, and then made permanent. The actwas not repealed until 1943. The act did not prevent entry by those who had previously established residence or •ho had family already living in the United states. In 1910 the government built a deten- ttncenter on Angel Island in San Francisco hr,where immigrants' claims of prior residence or relationship to citizens received y examination. * Two hundred thousand Japanese had tttivedon the West Coast by 1920, many via Hawaii, which the United States annexed in 1198. Most Japanese settled in the Los Angeles na.ind soon they were producing much of jeuthern California's fruits and vegetables. . The success of Japanese immigrants aroused me jealousy of some who gave them the jkrogatory nickname "The Yellow Peril." In 15California's political leaders urged, and years later won, restrictions on Japanese iigration. This was accomplished when 1 Theodore Roosevelt made a so-called jjntleman's agreement with Japanese officials, who agreed to limit Japanese emigration. In Blithe California legislature passed an Alien Law, which banned noncitizen Asians fen owning farmland. : From South to North In 1902 Congress passed the Ncwlands aal Reclamation Act to stimulate the irri- n of southwestern lands. Over the next de, irrigation turned millions of acres of Viewpoints On Cultural Ties Many people held opinions on how immigrants could best adjust to their new lives in the United States. Some thought they should give up their own language and customs as quickly as possible; others thought they should hold on to their heritage. Do you think that immigrant children or their parents had an easier time adjusting to their new lives? Why ? On Breaking Cultural Ties "We wanted to be Americans so quickly that we were embarrassed if our parents couldn't speak English. My father was reading a Polish paper. And somebody was supposed to come to the house. I remember sticking it under something. We were that ashamed of being foreign." Louise Nagy, a Polish immigrant, 1913 On Preserving Cultural Ties "We ate the same dishes, spoke the same language, told the same stories, indulged in the same pleasures [as in Syria],.. .To me the colony [neighborhood] was a habitat so much like the one I had left behind in Syria that its home atmosphere enabled me to maintain a firm hold on life in the face of the many difficulties which confronted me in those days." Abraham Ribahny, on his neighborhood in New York, 1893 desert into fertile farmland in Texas, Arizona, and California. The new farmland meant new jobs. About 5 percent of Mexico's population, fleeing poverty and debt, entered the United States through El Paso, Texas. The 1909 Mexican Revolution increased the flow. Later, when the Immigration Restriction Act of 1921 limited immigration front Europe and Asia, labor shortages made Mexicans more needed than ever. By 1925 Los Angeles had the largest Spanish-speaking population in any North American city outside of Mexico. Facts and figures tell only a part of the story of immigration in the United States. The drama behind the figures is best revealed in the accounts of ordinary people, whose lives and experiences reflect the struggles and triumphs of living day to day in a new land. Treasured items from home, such as this stuffed bear and set of spoons, helped provide a link between an immigrant's old and new lives. Sadie Frowne, Polish Immigrant Young Sadie Frowne lived an unremarkable life in her native Poland. Her mother kept a grocer's shop and worked in the fields with her husband. Sadie, too, worked hard, scrubbing floors and washing dishes, even as a six year old. When Sadie was ten, however, her father died, shattering the fragile structure of the family's livelihood. Unable to earn enough to buy food, Sadie and her mother looked to the United States, where they hoped to build a new life. Sadie's aunt, k who already lived in New York City, encouraged them and took up a collection among her friends to pay for their passage t to the United States. Sadie was thirteen years old when she and her mother set out on their immigration journey. The FrowTies' crossing, which took place in 1898. lasted twelve days. There were hundreds of other people packed in with us, men, women and children, and almost all of them were sick.... We thought we should die, hut at hut the voyage was over, anti we came up and srrw the beautiful bay' and the hig woman with the spikes on her head and the lamp that is lighted at night in her hand. Once in the United States, Sadie found a job as a live-in servant. Her mother found employment as a garment worker. Tragedy struck again, however, when Sadie's mother ' contracted a fatal case of tuberculosis, a disease then raging through the crowded neighborhoods of New York City. Now orphaned, the need to work was more urgent than ever. Sadie managed to get a new job as a skirt- maker earning $4 for a six-day week. With this income, she found a room that she shared with another young woman for SU50 a week. By keeping her weekly expenses down. Sadie was now able to set aside a dollar a week for "clothing and pleasure" and another dollar for savings. She went to school at night to lean) English. She also worked to improve her sewing skills, found a better job, and moved to a meet place in Brooklyn. With constant work, sacrifice, and determination, Sadie was living out the dream of millions of immigrants. It was a dream of simple comforts, modest prosperity, and the chance for a better life. Q A Japanese Picture Bride Tameji Eto tame id the United States from Japan in 1904. Alter working as a farmhand, he became a foreman for the Pacific Coast Railroad Company am) then leased land for his own farm. Having achieved some security, Tameii began to think of settling down and starting! family. Because few Japanese women had emigrated to the United States, Tameji's thought) turned to lake, the sister of one of his school friends back in Japan. He wrote her family to ask permission to mam' her. Nineteen-year-old Take had no memory of Tameji, but her parents insisted that she accept his proposal. Because such arranged marriages were typical among the Japaneses that time, 'Jake accepted her fate. Clutching Tameji's photograph, her only means of identifying her future husband, she sailed forthe United Slates. On board ship. Take met other "picturt brides," women whose marriages had been j I arranged through the exchange ot photograph across the Pacific Ocean. Like* her companion!, i Take spent the voyage trying to adapt to strange foods and wondering about her future. After her arrival and a ten-day quarantine lor an eye infection, lake finally met TamdL Luckily, he looked like his picture, "straightami tall with lots of hair," and he also seemed kind Together they set out for the frontier townnf | Grand Arroyo, (California. jbfTerms, People, and Places Bdentify Angel Island. I b| Concepts II Why were so many people "on the move" in the late Hunetcenth century? 11 Wiv did so many people want to come to the United H States' 4. How did most immigrants travel to the United States, and where did they enter the country? 5. Where did the "new" immigrants come from? Critical Thinking 6. Recognizing Bias For what reasons do you think Asians were treated more harshly than immigrants from Europe? These Japanese picture brides looked with both hope and apprehension to life in a new land with new husbands they had never met. As part of their traditional dress, many Japanese wore a type of footwear called geta, shown below. After some difficult years, the form did well. While caring for her children, Take cooked for a farm crew of forty to fifty men. Finally, after fifteen years of hard work, the Etos felt they could afford a journey back to fapau to see their parents. The Etos found their success on the American frontier. Opportunities there were greater for many immigrant groups, who faced discrimination in urban areas. Still, most immigrants found homes in one of the nation's large cities. Their impact on urban life in the United States was profound. Take took up the challenge of daily chores Bite frontier and the repeated cultivation nec- | essarv to farm their semiarid land. "It was not tsy,' she later told one of her eight children, hi if wits my future as well as [Tameji's], j anti l mated to be a part of it. Father mer demanded 1 work so hard. I did it I kitt" if was necessary and I wanted to. • Hie F.to's hard work paid off, and by 1919 ly had enough money to buy their own farm. Btseofthc Alien Land Law, however, they dishuvland under the name of a white friend. ■ $ Ideas for Reform The crusade against alcohol was one example of ideas for reform in the late 1800s. The Hood of newcomers added colorful diversity to the nation's cities in the late 1800s but, at the same time, contributed to a host of problems. Shocked by social, economic, and political conditions in the cities, religious and social groups pushed programs for change. Key Concepts • One reform movement sought to limit immigration into the United States. • Some reformers sought to control the behavior of the nation's immigrant class and city dwellers. • Other reforms focused on helping the needy by providing charity and social services. Key Terms, People, and Places social gospel movement; Jane Addams, F.llen Gates Starr, Hull House n 1890 New York City had as many Italians as Naples, Italy; as many Germans as Hamburg, Germany; twice as many Irish as Dublin, Ireland; and twice as many Jews as Warsaw. Poland. In other cities around the country, immigrant populations were also large. Added to these numbers were many Americans drawn to the cities from the countryside. The steady stream of people to the cities brought serious urban problems that needed solutions. many immigrants. Others objected to the habits of certain immigrants. These groups hoped to accomplish change by adopting reforms intended to "control" undesirablt social behaviors. They believed that by enacting strict controls, the cities' problems uf inadequate housing, pollution, crime, and corruption could be solved. Reformers who were interested in this approach pursued their goals in two ways: by seeking limits on immigration and by trying to outlaw certain behaviors. In these wan, reformers hoped to return the nation to what they believed was a past of purity and virtue. Nativism In the 1880s, nativism, the movement to restrict immigration that first began in the 1850s, reappeared. The movement's first success came with the passage in 1882 of the Chinese Exclusion Act. Nativist leanings, however, were not restricted to anti-Asian feelings purser nmsELF in m num Ruinous Labor and Business Conpmwi Controlling Immigration and Behavior Some reform groups felt that the problems of the cities stemmed from the presence of so This 1885 brochure reflects the concern that employ ers would hire immigrants, who would wort for lower wages, instead of native-born Amenois --------------------------- ^ Ill the Midwest, the American Protective oriation called for the teaching of only ican culture and the English language in Is and for tighter rules on citizenship and oyment of all "aliens." Nativists across the try fanned public hysteria about the threat that foreigners presented to the country. Nativists won another victory in 1885 when (/ingress repealed the contract labor law, which had allowed the recruitment of workers from abroad after the Civil War. Kven after the fo'srepeal, the practice continued illegally. During periods of labor unrest, companies often brought in foreign workers to replace 1 big employees. These actions served to eantiforeign feelings among workers. Upper-class nativism found expression in tbt Immigration Restriction League, organized jl 1894 by some recent graduates of Harvard tge. Republican senator Henry Cabot jive the League a voice in Congress. The League hoped to exclude "unfit" immi- pnts by forcing them to pass literacy tests. Its nin targets for exclusion were the so-called W immigrants from southern and eastern .whose cultures differed significantly the members of the League. 1931 ition Along with nativism, the temper- movement saw a revival. Three organiza- dominated the movement in the late tilth century—the Prohibition party l, the Woman's Christian Temperance n (1874), and the Anti-Saloon League All of these prohibition groups drinking on the grounds that it led to le personal tragedies. Prohibition groups also opposed drinking use of what they saw as the links between as, immigrants, and political bosses, am men often used saloons as "social where they could pick up information jobs as well as socialize. To prohibition- however, saloons formed the center of a live movement to take over the United 'Foreign control or conquest is rapidly | us un-Christian, with immorality :td in power," wrote Prohibition party a A. A. Hopkins in 1908. Had foreign- used "armies and fleets," Hopkins cried, they could not have achieved greater control. Such views won many followers. Purity Crusaders As urban populations grew, vice—whether in the form of drugs, gambling, or prosti- tution—became big business. Vice was not unique to the cities, but large urban populations made vice highly visible and very profitable. Then as now, many residents fought to rid their communities of illegal and immoral activities. "Purity crusaders" led the way. In 1873 Anthony Comstock founded the New York Society for the Suppression of Vice. The following year he won passage of a law that prohibited sending through the United States mails materials deemed obscene, including those that described methods to prevent unwanted pregnancy. The Comstock Law, as it came to be known, slowed the distribution of information about birth control for decades. Other purity crusaders attacked political machines on the grounds that machine- controlled police forces actually profited from vice. Police were known to demand payment from gamblers and prostitutes, for example, in return for ignoring illegal activities. Periodically, purity forces joined with other reformers, campaigned on an antivice platform, and threw machine candidates out of office. Usually the machines returned to power in later elections, however, by ridiculing the superior tone of many purists and by arguing that morals were personal issues. Using Historical Evidence The caption on this Judge cartoon reads "Unde Sam is a man of strong features." What does the cartoon suggest about the artist's view of immigration? The Expansion off Education Education was a lofty goal that was out of reach for most nineteenth-century Americans. As the century came to a dose, however, more and more Americans, including women and minorities, gained the opportunity to learn and grow. Key Concepts • Opportunities for public education expanded after the Civil War. • Opportunities for higher education also expanded in the late 1800s. • The wider availability of higher education had a powerful impact on women and African Americans. Key Terms, People, and Places Booker T. Washington, W.E.B. Du Bois Beginning in the late 1800s, a growing number of Americans sought the benefits of education. mericans had long understood that a democratic society functioned best wheii its citizens could read and write and communicate effectively. By the late 1800s, however, an education had became more than just a worthy goal. For a growing number of Americans, it was a necessary first step toward economic and social success. In recognition of this fact and in response to public demand, educational opportunities expanded. Public Schools Gain More Students By die time of the Civil War, more than half of the nation's white children were receiving some kind of formal education. A high school diploma was still the exception, however: even in 1870, only 2 percent of all seventeen-year- olds graduated from high school. Only a tiny elite went on to college. Because most children had to help their families earn a living, many left school at an early age. The vast majority of American children had to make do with the basic skills acquired during a few school years, each of which lasted just a few months. As the United States became more industrialized and urbanized in the postwar era, young people began to realize that they needed more than basic skills to advance in life. Parents began pressuring local governments to increase school funding and lengthen the school year. At the same time, reformers pressured state governments to limit child labor. By 1900, thirty-two states had passed compulsory school laws that required children eight to fourteen years old to attend school. Although unevenly enforced, these laws had a powerful effect. In 1870 overall school enrollment was less than 50 percent of all American children—including fewer than 1 in 10 African Americans. Fewer than 72,000 went to the nation's high schools. By 1910 enrollment was nearly 60 percent, and more than 1,000,000 students were studying in the nation's high schools Immigrants and Public Education Immigrants especially treasured American public education. In the mid-1890s, the Russian immigrant father of author Mary Antin was proud to send his children to a Boston public sell convinced "there was no surer way to their advancement and happiness." Adults attended school at night to learn English and civics to qualify' tor citizcnship.O In teaching American standards of cleanliness, thrift, patriotism, and hard work, public schools promoted assimilation of immigrants into the American way of life. In playing games like baseball or basketball or cooking tradi tional American foods in home economi classes, immigrant children became Americanized and began to forget their native cultures. Some parents resisted Americanization. Many Greek Orthodox and Eastern European Jewish parents sent their children to relr schools to learn about their cultural herit in their native languages. Polish parents it Chicago in the early 1900s sent their children Uneven Support for Schools Though maand local government support for ition was expanding, not everyone ited equally. Compared to white Is, schools for African Americans less money—sometimes half as puth. Writing of her upbringing in m, North Carolina, in the 1910s, dvilrights activist Pauli Murray rememhei rividlv the contrast between "what we had a vhst the white children had." loman Catholic schools where they lamed about Polish history and religion in Polish hut studied American history, [botoeeping, and algebra in English. Immigrants also made their own con- stations 10 American culture. As they ed customs and habits from their lands, they enriched their new country. Thus, immigrants and Americans each benefited from exposure to one another, Interpreting Graphs The expansion of education meant more students in classrooms, such as this one in Nebraska in 1895. It also meant jobs for women, who filled many teaching posts. Wow does the change in the nation's literacy rate reflect the growth of education between 1870 and 1920? Higher Education Expands Between 1880 and 1900, more than 230 new American colleges and universities opened, and college enrollment more than doubled. Wealthy capitalists often endowed institutions of higher learning. For example, in 1885 I .eland Stanford, the entrepreneur who had helped build the transcontinental railroad, and his wife, Jane l.athrop Stanford, founded Stanford University. John D. Rockefeller made donations to the University of Chicago that eventually totaled S40 million. After the Civil War, middle-class women called for greater educational opportunities. In response, educators and philanthropists established private women's colleges with high Wegot the greasy, torn, dog-eared fcwfo: they got the new ones. They lad field day in the city park; we had it on i furrowed stubby hillside. They got wide mention in the newspaper, we got a para- pupil at the bottom_We came to know that whatever we had was always inferior. African Americans were not the only group jrcdvc a separate but unequal education. For .beginning in the 1890s, Mexican Amer- □a in pans of the Southwest were shuttled off Is separate from and less well funded those for white children. Many Asians in ia were sent to separate schools. And by only a small percentage of Native Ameri- childiai were receiving any kind of formal ing.Q I do today's students learn about the role Knc cultures in American life? Flow arc Pons different from what students in the late 1800s? l heritage—had played a bigger role in conviction than had any evidence against Appeals went on for years, but the origi- decision stood. In 1927, the two men were uted The Sacco and Vanzetti case divided the ry and provoked an international outcry, tthought they were innocent. Others felt t, regardless of the pair's guilt or innocence, ■had not been fairly tried. The two men, aed to the end, went to their deaths corn- only by the thought that their fate would wider discussion of important issues. A who visited Vanzetti two days before his n reported him as saying, his rs our career and our triumph. Sever in our full life could tve hope to A'sirfi work for tolerance, for justice, for nun's understanding of man as we now do kaeddmt. ed Isolationism vdNativism ttilitv to foreign people and ideas in 1920s found expression in a renewed isola- The League of Nations was, as President G. Harding said, "as dead as slavery" As concerns about the security and safety of fan countries, many Americans decided would have to deal with them alone, itivism, a movement to limit immigrants! appeared in the 1800s. Not surprised revived after the war. Nativists now I that people from foreign countries 'never be fully loyal to the United States. When immigration swelled after the war. Congress reacted. In 1921, it limited annual immigration to 350,000 and set up quotas for certain nationalities. In 1924 it passed a law slashing immigration to 164,000. In addition to excluding Asians entirely, the law set quotas for each country at 2 percent of the total number of that country's immigrants living in the United States in 1890, The goal was to reduce immigration from southern and eastern Europe, for few immigrants from those countries had arrived in the United States before 1890. Nativists had long regarded these immigrants as undesirable, in part because of such cultural characteristics as their Catholic religion. (See Chapter 16.) As Washington congressman Albert Johnson declared in 1927, The United States is our land.... We intend to maintain it so. The day of unalloyed [pure] welcome to all peoples, the day of indiscriminate acceptance of all races, has definitely ended. Distrust of people and things "un-Ameri- can," like the concerns over strikes and the spread of communism, contributed to a political climate that was hostile to reformers in the postwar years. But while the nation held firm against the invasion of ideas and people from abroad, individuals within the country were transforming the nation's political and social landscape. This song, written in the 1920s, expressed the anti-immigration sentiment of the era. Terms, People, and Places l Prime (a) communist, (b) general strike. Concepts ), How did the difficult postwar economic adjustments ctthe United States affect workers? iWbflwere the Bolsheviks? 1 Mat was the red scare? 5. Who were Sacco and Vanzetti, and why are they remembered? 6. Why did Congress restrict immigration in the 1920s? Critical Thinking 7. Expressing Problems Clearly Summarize the obstacles facing those who wished to reintroduce reforms in the postwar United States. wight not have History Happened This Way Key Decisions and Decision Makers The decision to Restrict Immigration Time Frame: 1917-1924 Place: Key People: Situation- Washington, PC. Members of United States Congress When some citizens strongly expressed their fear that new immigrants were threatening American character and institutions. Congress debated whether or not to control who would be allowed to enter the United States The new immigrants crowded into the cities. Some people blamed the growth of urban slums, the political corruption of cities, and other problems on the new immigrants. Others feared that they would take jobs awav from "Americans." The new immigrants, argued some, carat from the most unstable parts of Europe—the places where the war had started and communism had been born. If newcomers did not already carry dangerous political ideas, mint believed they were certainty vulnerable to these ideas. Furthermore, a number of respecitd scholars spread false notions that southern and eastern Europeans were interior to other white people. Congress has debated immigration policy every year since its first meeting in 1790. During World War 1 and in the years immediately after, the debate heated up. Congress faced strong pressure from the public to create an immigration policy that would severely restrict the numbers of newcomers from abroad. Background to the Decision Until the mid 1800s, most immigrants coming to the United States quickly blended in with old, established residents. Most of these inunigrants to the United States came from western and northern Europe. They were culturally similar in many ways to the native-born descendants of America's first white settlers. The "New" Immigrants Between 1880 and 1920 more than 23 million people left Europe to come to the l Inited States. These "new" immigrants, as they were called, came from southern and eastern European countries such as Italy, Poland, and Russia. Their unfamiliar clothing, customs, and languages seemed "foreign" to many. Their religions were Catholicism, Orthodox Christianity, or ludaism—not Protestantism like most of the old immigrants. Many did not read or write any language, and few spoke English. In Favor of Immigration Not everyone opposed "mi- gration. To many, the United States was a "golden (loci' that all who wished to better themselves could enter. Should immigration to the United States be restricted? Immigrants are too "dif- ferent." or PEOPLE pie all over the world. Others believed that the Tyand illiteracy of the new "ants showed a lack of ity, not a lack of ability, pointed to the thousands ^grants in the past who ributed greatly to the a of the country. Chooses ^Migration Restriction Is 1924 the debate in Congress was not about open ration, but about restricting immigration from parts of Europe. Non-European immigration was ■'yrestricted. In 1882 Congress had banned Chinese ition. A 1908 agreement with the Japanese gov- aHad halted Japanese immigration. 9k crisis created by World War 1 gave immigration .'"rii a push forward. The fear of foreigners 'because of the communist revolution in Russia, of terrorism also made many citizens nervous. In Congress passed a series of laws restricting immi- 3! The new laws barred political radicals and bles," including those who could not read. After the war, immigration from war-torn Europe to rise again. Fears rose that the cities would fill with desperate, foreign radicals. In response. Congress new immigration laws in both 1921 and 1924. immigration acts established a quota system based 1 origins. The cartoon at left comments on the iff, which set quotas at 3 percent of each country's nts living in the United States in 1910. ion Laws Since 1924 decision to enact restrictive immigration laws in and 1924 reflected an American fear of diversity in Bh. Since then, Congress has continued to debate ton. In the 1950s and 1960s, Americans closely their views on immigration and diversity, in because of the African American struggle for Congress recognized that the immigration SSK I,nmi<r"U Imtmgrants Immigrant, are creating corrupt bring slums. democracy. radical ideas. are inferior. The U.8. represents gration bring ^ hope to peo- is an - would be Open imml- Immigrants Hestriction American tradition. needed talent to U.S. discriminatory. With opportunity, immigrants would contribute to America. laws written in the 1920s discriminated against immigrants from most parts of the world. It passed new legislation in 1952, which greatly changed the quotas for each country. For the first time, individuals from any country in the world could enter the United States. In 1965 a new immigration act eliminated quotas altogether. Immigration policy continues to be debated in Congress, The debate focuses on jobs, the country's ability to absorb new immigrants, and to what extent the United States should be a refuge for people seeking freedom. After twenty-five years, the Immigration Act of 1990 was passed. This law favors immigrants who are close relatives of American citizens and those who have skills that are in short supply. The new law also excludes some individuals: for example, criminals and drug abusers. No provisions of the current law, however, limit the entry of immigrants based on national origin. 1. What caused many Americans to change their attitudes about immigration after 1880? 2. How did World War I and its aftermath create a mood favorable to immigration restriction? Critical Thinking 3. Predicting Consequences How do you think the immigration acts of 1921 and 1924 affected the way that people from eastern and southern Europe viewed the United States? Serving in Government Also in 1935, the New Deal's National Youth Administration made her 1 consultant to its advisor;' council. This work KMuallv earned her an appointment to the post of director of the Division of Negro Affairs. In her government posts, Bcthune encour- jged programs that aided African Americans. She also sought a share of New Deal posts for rican Americans. "The White man has been thinking for us too long," she said, expressing her belief that African American officeholders would be more sensitive to African American seems. She forged a united stand among black officeholders by organizing a Federal Council on Negro Affairs in August 1936. This unofficial group, known as the black cabinet, met weekly to hammer out priorities and to increase African American support for the New Deal. At a time when no governmental commitment to the improvement of the lives of African 'cans existed, Bethune helped create one. "pient in 1935 of the NAACP's most presti- giousaward, the Spingarn Medal, and twelve far)'degrees, Bethune reached an extraordi- mv level of influence for women and for African means. Speaking about Bethune, Roosevelt ouaremarked, "1 believe in her because she s her feet on the ground; not only on the [round but deep down in the plowed soil." Ihe End of the Honeymoon | The zeal and energy with which New Deal* attacked the Depression pleased most itbservers, But when the new programs failed to brag about significant economic improve- t, criticism began to mount. Many worried at the increasing power that New Deal 3 were giving to the federal government, er President Hoover warned against "a ontrolled or state-directed social or ecosystem. ... That is not liberalism; it is y," he said. Other criticisms of the New are discussed in Section 2. In 1935 the Supreme Court declared the URA unconstitutional because it gave the Presi- 11st law-making growers and regulated local, I tatrthan interstate, commerce. The following year, the Court ruled that the tax that funded AAA subsidies to farmers was also unconstitutional. The New Deal's most important programs had crumbled. It was time to reassess. A Second New Deal Meanwhile, most of the public remained behind Roosevelt. The midterm elections of 1934 showed stunning nationwide support for FDR's administration. In 1935 he launched a new, even bolder burst of legislative activity. Some have called this period the Second New Deal. In part, it was a response to his various critics. The Second New Deal included more social welfare benefits, stricter controls over business, stronger support for unions, and higher taxes on the rich. New and Expanded Agencies New agencies attacked joblessness even more aggressively than before. The Works Progress Administration (WPA), an agency set up in 1935 and tasting eight years, provided work for more than eight million citizens. The WPA constructed or improved more than 20,000 playgrounds, schools, hospitals, and airfields, and supported the creative work of many artists and writers (see Section 3).© The Second New Deal responded to the worsening plight of agricultural workers. The original AAA had ignored many of the farm workers who did not own land. In the Southwest, for example, Mexican American farm workers struggled to survive. Many were forced to return to Mexico; others tried to form unions, inspiring fierce resistance from farmer associations. Ln the South, landlords had pocketed AAA subsidies, taken land out of production, and left tenants and sharecroppers to shift for themselves. In May 1935 Rexford Tugwell set up a Resettlement Administration that loaned money to owners of small farms and helped resettle tenants and sharecroppers on productive land. In 1937 a Farm Security Administration (FSA) replaced Tugwell's agency. It loaned more than SI billion to farmers and set up camps for migrant workers. New Labor Legislation Labor unions had liked the N1RA provision—known as 7a—that Viewpoints On the Integration of the Military Discussion about desegregating the armed forces during World War II aroused strong feelings on both sides. Below are two opposing viewpoints What arguments does each side use to support its viewpoint? Against Integration "In this hour of national crisis, it is much more important that we have the full-hearted co-operation of the thirty million white southern Americans than that we satisfy the Natrona/ Association for the Advancement of Colored People— If they be forced to serve with Negroes, they will cease to volunteer; and when drafted, they will not serve with that enthusiasm and high morale that has always characterized the soldiers and sailors of the southern states. " W. R. Poage, Texas state representative, 1941 For Integration *Though I have found no Negroes who want to see the United Nations lose this war, I have found many who, before the war ends, want to see the stuffing knocked out of white supremacy.... If freedom and equality are not vouchsafed [granted] the peoples of color, the war for democracy will not be won.... We demand the abolition of segregation and discrimination in... lall] branches of national defense." A. Philip Randolph, "Why Should We March?" November 1942 rules. An army program begun in January 1945 allowed 20,000 volunteers—including over 4,500 African Americans—to train for infantry duty. From March until the end of the war in Furope, African Americans fought alongside whites in these volunteer combat units. In 1944 the navy organized twenty-five supply ships with integrated crews. The marines finally invited African Americans to enlist in the corps in 1945. Nearly 350,000 Mexican Americans served in the military during World War II, most enlisting in the army. Mexican American soldiers made up a quarter of the combat troops defending Bataan in the Philippines shortly after Read Harbor. They faced Erwin Rommel in North Africa and played a major role in the D-Day invasion of 1944. Guy Gabaldun, who had been raised by a Japanese American family in Los Angeles, earned the Silver Star for his actions in the Battle of Saipan, an island in the Mananas in the western Pacific. Using his language skills, he persuaded more than a thousand Japanese soldiers to surrender to the Allies. By the end of the war, seventeen Mexican Americans had earned the Congressional Medal of Honor. Though Native Americans were denied the right to vote in three states, they were still eligible for the draft, and eventually 25,000 served in the army and other branches of the military. Ira I layes, a Pima from Arizona, was one of three survivors at Mount Suribachi on lwo lima Some Navahos worked as code talkers in the marines, using their unique language as a means of transmitting messages by radio and phone. While tens of thousands of Japanese Americans were interned in camps in the United States (see Chapter 25, Section 4), otherssenni the opportunity offered them to fight The 442nd Regimental Combat Team eventuallv fought in Italy under General Mark Clark and then moved into France. There, they took almost ten thousand casualties and became the most decorated unit in the war. Key Terms, People, and Places 1. Define (a) GI,(b)WAG Key Concepts 2. What does the profile of Charles Rigaud reveal about the soldiers who fought in the war? 3. Describe the roles that women played during World War II. 4. What contributions did African Americans make id the military during World War II? Critical Thinking 5. Checking Consistency Were the goals the United States was fighting for in World War II consistent with its treatment of women and minorities? Explaa why you answered yes or no. W WicU8AM ^ 'issSs® Using Historical Evidence This man is protesting outside a Chicago milk company in 1941. How does the injustice the man is protesting conflict with the issues being fought for abroad during World War II? of Sleeping Car Porters, a labor union with a largely African American membership—proposed a massive march on Washington in early 1941 to demand an end to discrimination in all areas of American society. Worried about the possibility of violence in the nation's capital, Roosevelt tried to talk Randolph out of the march. Randolph agreed only when, on June 25, 1941, the President signed Executive Order 8802, which opened jobs and job training programs in defense plants to all Americans regardless of race. The order also created the Fair Employment Practices Committee (FF.PC) to hear complaints about job discrimination in defense industries as well as in the government. While the FEPC was only moderately successful, it did highlight the issue of discrimination, and it opened the way for employers to fill their job openings by hiring African Americans. Meanwhile, African Americans were beginning to take direct action to promote equality. The Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), committed to using nonviolent techniques to end racism, was founded in Chicago in 1942. In May 1942 CORE organized its first sit-in at a restaurant called the lack Spratt Coffee House. Groups of CORE members, each including at least one African American, filled the restaurant's counter and booths and refused to leave until everyone was served. They succeeded in ending lack Spratt's discriminatory policies, and the sit-in technique quickly spread to CORE groups in other cities. These efforts paved the way for later civil rights activity but could not head off major race riots during the summer of 1943. Thirty-four people died in Detroit on June 16, and New York City was the scene of another riot on August 1 and 2. Q in what ways did the war speed up, and in what ways did it retard, the movement toward equal rights for African Americans? Mexican Americans and Braceros During World War II Like African Americans, Mexicans working in the United States and Mexican American citizens faced discrimination during the war. At the same time, the war did bring new employment opportunities for Mexican American! Planning for future needs, the Labor Department's Office of Education established vocational schools in a number of southwestern cities and provided training for rural Ameri- cans—including Mexican Americans—that eased the transition to war work. Mexican Americans made major gains on the industrial front during World War 11.Br 1944, 17,000 were employed in the Los Angela shipyards, where none had worked three yean before. Mexican Americans also found jobs in shipyards and aircraft factories elsewhere in California and in Washington, Texas, and New Mexico. Some headed for oilier war production centers in places such as Detroit, Chicago, Kansas City, and New York. The Bracero Program On the agricultural front, a shortage of farm laborers led the United States to seek help from Mexico. In 1942 an agreement between the two nations provided for transportation, food, shelter, and medical care for thousands of braceros (Span- ish for ''workers''), Mexican farm laborers brought to work in the United States. Itetwwn 1942 and 1947, more than 200,000 braceros participated in the program. When their contracts expired, however, they were quickly transported back to Mexico. Despite their vital contributions to the war effort, Mexicans and Mexican America® continued to suffer discrimination. Braceros endured miserable working conditions, and employers sometimes withheld their wages. Industrial workers occasionally received low I wages for the same work done by people of ether ethnic backgrounds. Crowded cities often bred racial tensions. In Los Angeles, where many Mexican Americans lived, those tensions erupted in a bloody race riot in mid-1943. loot Suit Riots Los Angeles was a popular I city for sailors on leave from nearby military bases. In April and May 1943, street fighting broke out between sailors and residents of I Mexican descent. Many Mexican American men wore a popular style of clothing known as : the^oot suit," which had baggy pants and a tag jacket. Gangs of sailors roamed the streets looking for men wearing such suits, whom they attacked and humiliated. Although one Spanish newspaper, La Opinion, encouraged the victims not to respond with more violence, some Mexican American youths took revenge on the site when they had the chance. The fighting turned into a full-scale riot during the first weeks of |une 1943. Local news- pipers usually blamed Mexican Americans for lie violence. Police often arrested the victims tither than the sailors who had initiated the attacks. Finally', army and navy officials inter- fflied by restricting soldiers' off-duty access to :losAngeles. By mid-June the riots had subsided. Native Americans and the War at Home Despite their history of oppression by the "led States government, Native Americans ;:ved patriotically during World War II. I thousands enlisted in the armed forces or fl sipatedto urban centers to work in defense | (bits. Government propaganda held up these I fetive Americans as models of loyal service. I Nearly fifty thousand Native Americans ■waked in war industries around the country, ^trtwo thousand Navaho helped build a psupply depot in New Mexico. Iroquois in aluminum plants and mining opera- in New York state. Other Native Ameri- constructed airplanes on the West Coast ad made lanks and ships in other war produc- petmers. I Thousands of Native Americans who left ■rations to take military or industrial jobs had to adapt quickly to white culture. At the end of the war. Native Americans wrho had served abroad or worked in industrial centers in the United States were less likely to return home. For some Native Americans, the cultural transition brought a sense of alienation and rootlessness that left lasting scars. Mexican American "zoot suit- ers" were the target of attacks in 1943, but they themselves were often blamed by police for the violence. The Japanese American Internment Japanese Americans suffered the worst discrimination during the war. In late 1941, they comprised a tiny minority' in the United States. Numbering but 127,000—or one tenth of one percent of the entire population—they were concentrated on the West Coast, where prejudice against them had been festering for decades. About two thirds of the Japanese Americans bad been born in the United States and were therefore American citizens, but their citizenship mattered little in the heat of war. Q Anti-Japanese sentiment grew stronger after Japan attacked Pearl Harbor. Rumors of sabotage on the West Coast spread quickly. One report that reached President Roosevelt's desk, while noting that the Japanese Americans there were almost all loyal citizens, went on to say that "there are still Japanese in the United States who will tie dynamite around their waist and make a human bornb out of themselves." The report also suggested that "dams could be blown and half of California could actually die of thirst." ar Viewpoints On the Internment of Japanese Americans The forced internment of Japanese Americans produced strong feelings on both sides of the issue. Two views are given below. How does each of these viewpoints address the issue of constitutional rights? For Internment "It is a fact that the Japanese navy has been reconnoitering [investigating] the Pacific Coast.... ft is [a] fact that communication takes place between the enemy at sea and enemy agents on land. The Pacific Coast is officially a combat tone some part of it may at any moment be a battlefield. Nobody's const/tuf/ona/ rights include the right to reside and do business on a battlefield." Waiter Lippmann, American columnist, February 12,1942 Against Internment "Racial discrimination in any form and in any degree has no justifiable part whatever in our democratic way of life.... All residents of this nation are kin in some way by blood or culture to a foreign land. Yet they are primarily and necessarily a part of... the United States [and are]... entitled to all rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution.' Supreme Court Justice Frank Murphy's dissenting opinion, Korematsu v. United States, 1944 The press capitalized on people's fears. Headlines such as "Jap Boat Flashes Message Ashore" and "Japanese Here Sent Vital Data to Tokyo" gave newspaper readers the feeling that Japanese spies were everywhere. Time and Life magazines told readers how to tell the Chinese, who were allies, from the lapanese, who were enemies: "The Chinese expression is likely to be more placid, kindly, open; the Japanese more positive, dogmatic, arrogant." Q As a result of these tears and prejudices, the government decided to remove all Japanese from the West Coast. On February 19. 1942, President Roosevelt signed Executive Order 906f> authorizing the secretary of war to establish military zones and to remove "any or all persons" from such zones. The War Relocation Authority (WRA) was created to move 110,000 lapanese Americans—citizens and noncitizens alike—to ten internment camps in remote areas across the country. The relocation process took place hastily, and Japanese Americans had little time to secure their property before they left for the camps. Many lost their businesses, homes, and other property. Henry Murakami, a resident of California, remembers losing the $55,000 worth of fishing nets that had been his livelihood: When we were sent to Fort Lincoln [in Bismarck, North Dakota] linked the ITU men about my nets. They said, "Don't worry. Everything is going to be taken care of." Rut I never saw the nets again, nor my brand-new 1941 Plymouth, nor our furniture. It all just disappeared. I lost everything. Japanese Americans had no idea where thev were going when they hoarded the buses for the internment camps. Monica Sone, who lived ill Seattle before the war, imagined her camp would be "out somewhere deep in a snowbound forest, an American Siberia. I saw myself plunging chest deep in the snow, hunting for small game to keep us alive." She and her familv packed winter clothes, only to end up in Cany Minidoka, on the sun-baked prairie ofcentril Idaho. The average summer temperature there was 110 degrees. All of the internment camps were located in desolate areas. They consisted of wooden bat- racks covered with tar paper and were protected by barbed wire and armed guards. Rooms inside the barracks had only cots, blankets, and a light bulb. Toilet, bathing, and dining facilities were communal. Despite these injustices, more than 17,000 Japanese Americans served in the armed fbrres About 1,200 of the lapanese Americans who volunteered for service did so from relocation centers. Many more volunteers came from Hawaii, where no internment had taken place The 442nd Regimental Combat Team, composed entirely of lapanese Americans, won more medals for bravery than any other unit in United States history. Although the vast majority of Japanese Americans abided by the policy of internment, a few did challenge it in the courts. Four cases : eventually reached the Supreme Court, which I a each case upheld the constitutionality of the wartime relocation. In one case, California resident Fred Toyosaburo Korematsu was confided of violating Executive Order 9066 because he failed to report loan assembly center for relocation. The Supreme Court ruled in fomnatsu v. United States (1944) that cltorematsu was not excluded from the Military Area because of hostility to him or his we," but that "the military urgency' of the situation demanded that all citizens of Japanese ancestry be segregated from the West Coast temporarily." The dissenting opinion, how- r"er. labeled the policy "an obvious racial Crimination." Finally, early in 1945, all [apanese Americans were allowed to leave the camps. Some were able to return to their homes and resume Stir lives. Others, finding that their property lad been seized, had no place to go. It was not util 1988 that the United States government llflk responsibility' for this gross violation of mil liberties, At that time Congress passed and fmidrnt Ronald Reagan signed a law awarding Oihsurviving Japanese American internee a ttt-frte payment of $20,000. These monetary itions could not undo the damage that been done decades earlier, but the law at acknowledged the injustice. Using Historical Evidence Tags with family identification numbers were attached to each piece of luggage and each family member at assembly centers for Japanese Americans. Permitted to take only a few possessions with them, many tried to sell their belongings but were forced to abandon what they could not carry or sell. How do you think each person in this photo is feeling about the situabon ? try Terms, People, and Places I. Define la) "Double V" campaign, (b) bracero, | it * internment camp. ^Identify A. Philip Randolph. I by Concepts 5. What strategies did African Americans use in their I struggle for equal rights during World War II? 4 What were the major effects of World War II on the ■ Ikes of Mexican Americans? I i What impact did World War II have on the lives of I Native Americans? 6. What fears and prejudices led to the internment of Japanese Americans during World War n? Critical Thinking 7. Recognizing Cause and Effect Although some German Americans and Italian Americans were relocated from the West Coast during the war, this action was on a much smaller scale than the internment of Japanese Americans. What do you think caused the harsher treatment of Japanese Americans? The morning of the first day of the boycott. King prowled the streets of Montgomery anx- tousl • to see how many African Americans luld participate. Here are excerpts from his account of that morning: During the rush hours the sidewalks were crowded with laborers and domestic workers, many of them well past mullle aye, trudging patiently to their jobs mid home again, sometimes as much as twelve miles. They knew why they walked, mid the knowledge was evident in the way they carried themselves. And as I watched them I knew that there is nothing more majestic than the determined courage of mdh uluals willing to suffer and sacrifice for their freedom and dignity'. Over the next year, fifty thousand African uricans in Montgomery walked, rode bicy- dec or joined car pools to avoid the city buses, tepite losing money, the bus company refused change its policies. Finally, the Supreme Smart ruled that bus segregation, like school tion, was unconstitutional. The Montgomery bus boycott produced a generation of leaders in the African Amer- it community, particularly Martin Luther |r. In addition, it introduced nonviolent rat as a means of achieving equality for ity groups in the United States. Other Voices of Protest 0Mexican Americans also demanded equal 'ts after World War II. A court case in Texas ring a funeral home that refused to bury a Mexican American war casualty led to the soldier's burial in Arlington National Cemetery in Washing~ ton, D.C Groups like the Community Service Organization and the Asociacidn Nacional Mexico* Americana found that peaceful protest could slowly bring about some of the results Mexican Americans desired. Native Americans faced discrimination unique to their situation. The federal government managed the reservations where most Native Americans lived. In 1953, however, the government adopted a new approach, known as "termination," which sought to eliminate Native American reservations altogether. The administration used its termination policy to promote assimilation of Native Americans into the mainstream of American life. Such assimilation did more harm than good. A 1954 Seminole petition to President Eisenhower eloquently stated the Native Americans' pride in their heritage: We are not White Men but Indians, do not wish to become White Men but wish to remain Indians, and have an outlook on all things different from the outlook of the White Man. In time the federal government discarded the termination policy. Vet the problems of the Native Americans remained: poverty, discrimination, and little real political representation. For Native Americans, the civil rights advances of the 1950s were mere tokens of the real gains that were needed. This young protester was part of a 1958 Tuscarora picket in New York. The Native Americans were attempting to block a state power project on their reservation. terms, People, and Places V Define termination policy. 2.Identify (a) Jackie Robinson, (b) Thurgood Marshall, (c) Martin Luther King, Jr. Concepts 11(a) For what reasoas did the civil rights movement I accelerate after World War II? (b) What avenues of protest did civil rights activists use in their struggle? 4. What was the principle behind the Supreme Court's ruling in Brown v. Board of Education? 5. How did Mexican Americans and Native Americans assert their rights in the 1950s? Critical Thinking 6. Determining Relevance Why did Eisenhower feel bound to respond to the use of the National Guard to prevent school integration in Little Rock? Immigration from Selected Regions, 1960-1970 1961 Source. Historical Statistics of the United States 1965 Year 1966 1967 1969 Interpreting Graphs What general trends in immigration during the 1960s are shown by the graph ? How did the Immigration Act of 1965 contribute to these trends? and universities. It offered grants to artists through a new National Endowment for the Arts and to scholars through a similar National Endowment for the Humanities. This was the first assistance for such groups since the Works Progress Administration of the New Deal. The Great Society also reformed the restrictive immigration policy that had been in place since 1924. The Immigration Act of 1965 eliminated the quotas that had discriminated against all immigrants from areas outside northern and western Europe. It now had a much more flexible limit of 170,000 people from the Eastern Hemisphere and 120,000 from the Western Hemisphere. Family members of United States citizens were exempted from the quotas, as were political refugees. Ln the 1960s approximately 350,000 immigrants entered the United States each year; in the 1970s the number rose to more than 400,000 a year. © Supreme Court Support The Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren supported the actions of lohnson's Great Society in the 1960s. The 1954 Brown v. Board of Education decision outlawing school segregation signaled that the Warren Court was prepared to play an active role in politics. As the Johnson administration made good on its promise to promote civil rights, the Court backed up this program. It upheld all measures aimed at guaranteeing African American rights and demonstrated that discrimination would no longer be tolerated. The Supreme Court handed down several decisions protecting the rights of persons accused of crimes. In the Gideon v. Wain- weight case in 1963, the Court ruled that suspects in criminal cases who could not afford a lawyer had the right to free legal aid. In Escobedo v. Illinois, 1964, the justices said that accused individuals had to be given access to an attorney while being questioned. In 1966 the Court ruled, in Miranda v. Arizona, that a suspect must be warned of his or her rights before being questioned. Police must now read all suspects a Miranda warning, which informs accused persons that they have the right to remain silent and that anything they do say may be used against them in court. In 1965 the Court struck down a Connecticut law that prohibited the use of birth control devices and prevented doctors from sharing information about contraceptives, even with married couples. Griswold v. Connecticut held that such a law violated a couple's right to privacy. Although the Constitution does not explicitly mention a right to privacy, the Court ruled that such a right was implied because without it, the rights that are specifically guaranteed would be meaningless. In Baker v. Carr, 1962, the Court declared that congressional districts had to be apportioned on the basis of "one person, one vote." This prevented the party in power from gerrymandering electoral districts—drawing the lines that established the districts in unfair ways to give themselves more votes. In another area, the Court ruled that religious prayer in public schools was unconstitutional Ethnic Minorities Seek Equality I Inspired by the civil rights movement. Latinos 1 <nd Asian Americans launched their own [movements to overcome racial discrimination. [ Each group faced different obstacles in its struggles for equal treatment. Key Concepts • Latinos used tactics from the civil rights movement to overcome discrimination. • Education and cultural pride were the major goals of the Latino movement. •The United Harm Workers, led by Cesar Chavez, sought better conditions for Mexican American farm workers. •Asian Americans faced racial discrimination, particularly during World W'ar II and the cold war. ■ Asian Americans made economic and political gains in the 1960s and 1970s. Key Terms, People, and Places I latino, Anglo, barrio, migratory farm workers. United Farm Workers, Japanese American Citizens league; Cesar Chdvez he United States is home to many ethnic and racial groups. Throughout the country's history, each group has I freed different kinds of pre judice and discrimination. Latinos and Asian Americans have lived in the United States for many years. Yet | both have had to fight for equality in main- Hieam American society. The Latino Population Spanish-speaking Americans, or Latinos, I come from many places, although they share the ne language and some elements of culture. I Bui whether they come from Puerto Rico, Cuba, xico, or other parts of the Americas, Latinos [often have been seen as outsiders and denied equal opportunities in many aspects of life, including employment, education, and housing. In the 1960s and early 1970s, more and more people arrived from Central America and South America. Between 1970 and 1980, census figures for people "of Spanish origin" rose from 9 million to 14.6 million. Different groups tended to settle in certain areas. Americans of Cuban descent concentrated in Florida, Puerto Rican in the Northeast, and Mexican in the West and Southwest As their population grew, Latinos throughout the country found and expressed a new pride in their heritage.O Mexican American Protests Mexican Americans, often known as Chicanos, always have been the mast numerous Latinos in the United States. In the 1960s, they began to organize against discrimination in education, jobs, and the legal system, leading to el Movimiento Chicano—the Chicano movement Cultural Identity Activists began encouraging pride in Mexican American culture and its dual heritage from Spain and the ancient cultures of Mexico. In 1967 Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales, a Denver activist, wrote a long poem that raised Mexican Americans' self-awareness nationwide. Yo Soy Joaquin ("l am Joaquin") expresses the importance of cultural identity in Mexican history and the modern world. It begins: I am Joaquin lost in a world of confusion caught up in the whirl of a gringo |white] society, confused by the rules, scorned by attitudes, suppressed by manipulation and destroyed by modern society. Nationwide boycotts made the United Farm Workers' symbol, the eagle, well known. Gonzales emphasized that Anglos— English-speaking, non-Latinos—had undermined Mexican Americans' control over their lives. Gonzales said that Anglos had done this through economic pressure and through institutions such as the schools, the Roman Catholic church, and the media. Education Many Chicanos wanted changes in education. Schools in the barrios, or Latino neighborhoods, were crowded and run-down, with high dropout rates. In March 1968, ten thousand Mexican American students walked out of five such Los Angeles high schools to protest their unequal treatment. Students in Colorado, Texas, and other parts of California followed their example. Students demanded better courses and facilities and latino teachers and counselors. As leader of the United Farm Workers, Cesar Chavez once said the "truest act of courage... is to sacrifice ourselves for others in a totally nonviolent struggle for justice." Cesar Chavez Cesar Chavez 11927-1993), founder of the United Farm Workers, became a hero to md- lions of Americans, both Latino and Anglo. He was born in Yuma, Arizona, where his family had farmed for three generations. During the Great Depression, they lost their adobe farmhouse because they could not afford the taxes. Moving to California, they became migratory farm workers, who make a living moving from farm to farm to provide the labor needed to plant, cultivate, and harvest crops. Chavez later remembered how his family fostered a powerful sense of independence: I don't want to suggest we were that radical, but I know we were probably one of the strikingest families in California, the first ones to leave the fields if anyone shouted "Huclga!"—• which is Spanish for "Strike!" As he grew up among farm workers, Chivez gradually came to believe that unions were a way to resist employers' economic power. Migratory farm workers were some of the most exploited workers in the country, spending long hours doing backbreaking work for little pay. In the 1960s Chavez began to organize Mexican field hands into what became the United Farm Workers (UFW). He and a group of loyal followers went from door to door and field to field. By 1965 the union had 1,700 members. © The UFW's first target was the grape growers of California. Chavez, like Martin Luther King, Jr., believed in nonviolent action. In 1967, when growers refused to grant more pay, better working conditions, and union recognition, Chavez organized a successful nationwide consumer boycott of grapes picked on nonunion farms. Later boycotts of lettuce and other crops also won consumer support. Chivez's efforts created many angry enemies and even brought him death threats. He responded by saying: It's not me who counts, it's the Movement. And I think that in terms of stopping the Movement—this one or other movements by poor people around the country—the possibility is very remote.... The tide for change now has gone too far. In 1975 California passed a measure that required collective bargaining between growers and union representatives. Workers now had a legal basis to ask for better working conditions. Chivez's efforts not only made him a national hero but also brought migratory farm workers into the broader movement for civil rights. Other Latino Protests Mexican Americans had other heroes too. Some formed organizations that took a militant approach, while others used political action. Brown Berets In East Los Angeles, David Sanchez and other young Mexican Americans formed a community action group that took A mural in Los Angeles illustrates Mexican American pride. on a semi-military style. Known as the Brown Berets, they later started branches in other cities. Ihe group regarded itself as "defensive," protecting Mexican Americans against police and other authorities and sometimes acting outside the law. Sanchez said: We're not a violent ora nonviolent organization... we are an emergency I otganization____If we see a cop treating up I a Chicano, we move in and slop the cop. we I tr)'to be ready for every emergency. Political Action Some Latinos worked within ainstream politics. In 1961 voters in San | Antonio, Texas, elected Henry B. Gonzalez to ongress. Another Texan, Elizo "Kika" de la Sara, went to the House of Representatives in j 1964, while Joseph Montoya of New Mexico I was dected to the Senate. New political groups formed to support itino interests. For example, |osd Angel e brought together Mexican American oups in Crystal City, Texas, leading to the formation of the political party hi Raza Unida in 1970. The new party' worked for better housing and jobs and backed Mexican American political candidates. Another leader, Reies I.ripez Tijerina, argued that the Anglo culture had stolen the Chicanos' land and heritage. To call attention to broken treaties, in 1966 his Alianza Federal de Mercedes (Federal Alliance of Lind Grants) marched on the New Mexico stale capital. At about the same time, the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund (MA1.DEF), was founded. It has provided legal aid to help Mexican Americans gain civil rights and encouraged Mexican American students to become lawyers. Different regions of the United States are home to larger numbers of certain ethnic groups. What ethnic groups arc prominent in your area and what discrimination do they lace, if any? Asian Americans Fight Discrimination Ever since their arrival in the United States, Americans of Chinese and Japanese ancestry- have faced racial discrimination. Prejudice against Japanese Americans reached a peak during World War II, and the communist takeover of China in 1949 influenced attitudes toward Chinese Americans. In general, the years after the war brought many hopeful and positive changes for Asian Americans. Japanese Americans After the War A major issue for Japanese Americans was compensation for the losses they had suffered during their wartime internment in the 1940s. As discussed in Chapter 26, lapanese American citizens living along the West (loast were forced to relocate to internment camps after the government decided they were a risk to American security once the nation declared war on Japan. Not only had their lives been disrupted, but they had lost hundreds of millions of dollars in homes, farms, and businesses. The main voice for lapanese Americans, the Japanese American Citizens League (JACL), in 1948 won passage of the lapanese American Claims Act, under which Congress eventually paid relatively small amounts for property losses. JACL also worked for changes in anti-Asian immigration laws. About two thirds of Japanese Americans who had been relocated returned to the Pacific Coast, but others moved to cities east of the Rockies. Their new communities were more a part of mainstream society than the prewar nihonntachis—"Japantown'—had been. Economic Changes .Although Asian Americans as a gmup were well educated, in 1960 they earned less than white Americans. In California, for example, for each $51 a white male was paid, a Chinese man would earn $38 and a Japanese man, $43. College graduates faced prejudice in attempting to move into management jobs. Geography and History; Interpreting Maps * _ Patterns of immigration from Asia changed dramatically in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. Whirh (wo countries sent the greatest number of people in the 1950s? In the 1970s7 preparing them for college. Of those who went on to higher education, only 7 percent completed their course of study. In many cases, these figures were due to lack of encouragement in school, combined with discrimination in counseling and class assignments. Native Americans Take Action On their own. Native Americans made considerable gains in the 1980s and early 1990s. They gave particular attention to increasing their education and to developing their business The AIDS quilt is a personal memorial to Americans who have died of the disease. Friends and family members contribute patches that celebrate the lives of their loved ones. In 1992 the quilt was displayed before the Capitol. It contained 26,000 panels—only one sixth of the total number of Americans who had succumbed to AIDS by that time. "Time and Place," on pages 950-951, contains a full discussion of the AIDS epidemic. The Movement for Latino Rights Latinos continued to make political gains in the 1980s and 1990s. Henry Cisneros was elected mayor of San Antonio, Texas, while Federico Pena was elected to the same post in Denver, Colorado. In New Mexico, Governor Toney Anaya referred to himself as the nation's highest elected Hispanic American. Nationwide, more and more Latinos won elective office, and more Latino administrators were appointed at all levels of government. In 1988 Lauro Cavazos was named secretary of education, becoming the first Latino to serve in the President's cabinet. Outside government, the number of latino college and university faculty members more than doubled in the decade ending in 1980. Appointments to prestigious positions, like that of Manuel T. Pacheco as president of the University of Arizona in 1991, promised to lead to future gains for Latinos. Yet Latinos also faced continuing problems in the United States. In 1987 only 60 percent of all Latino high school students graduated, and only 31 percent were enrolled in courses and legal skills. © Many tribal communities founded their own colleges. In the decade after Congress passed the Tribally Controlled Community College Assistance Act in 1978, twenty tribally controlled colleges received financial support. In the early 1960s, only a few hundred Native Americans in the entire country attended college, but in the 1980s, the number rose to the tens of thousands. Another approach involved the development of business skills, although many business values and ethics contradict traditional Native American attitudes. Dale Old Horn, department head at Little Big Horn College in Montana, explained the problem of clashing values: The Crow Indian child is taught that he is part of a harmonious circle of kin relations, clans and nature. The white child is taught that he is the center of the circle. The Crow believe in sharing wealth, and whites believe in accumulating wealth. Nonetheless, a number of Native American groups started business ventures in an effort to improve their communities' prosperity, lola Hayden, executive director of Oklahomans for American Society in the 1990s Though known as a "nation of immigrants," the United States still had problems dealing with the many people who sought to immigrate in the 1990s. This California road sign warns drivers to be on the lookout for undocumented aliens who might have crossed the border from Mexico. By the 1990s, the face of the United States had changed. With an increase in the number of immigrants and a rise in minority birth rates, a much larger percentage of the population than ever before was African American, Latino, Asian American, or Native American. The United States needed to find new ways to deal with this ethnic and cultural diversity. Key Concepts • In the 1980s and 1990s, more immigrants came to rhe United States from parts of the world other than Western Europe. • Several factors combined to change the ethnic and cultural composition of the United States. • Many Americans supported the attempt to include all groups in the definition of the nation, but others worried that this effort could he taken to extremes. Key Terms, People, and Places bilingual education, mulliculluralism s the United States shifted course In both domestic and foreign affairs, the makeup of the nation itself changed. Although the 1990 census revealed that during the 1980s the population had increased from 228 million to about 250 million, the growth rate was one of the lowest in United States history. More important was the changing composition of the population. By the early 1990s, the number of Americans with non-European roots had risen dramatically. This increased ethnic diversity forced the United States to take a fresh look at itself as a nation of immigrants. New Immigration Patterns and Policies Immigration patterns changed in the 1980s and 1990s. The Immigration Act of 1965, which was part of Lyndon fohnson's Great Society, altered quotas that favored Western Europeans and allowed the freer acceptance of people from all parts of the world. The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 sought to curb illegal immigration while permitting aliens who had lived in the United Slates since 1982 to register to become citizens. The Immigration Act of 1990 went even further. This law increased immigration quotas by 40 percent and cased restrictions that had denied entrance to many people in the past. In the 1980s, 37 percent of all legal immigrants came from Asia and 47 percent came from Mexico, the Caribbean, and Latin America. (See the pie chart on page 973.) The same patterns continued in the 1990s. The so-called Sun Bell, stretching from Florida to California, felt the impact of this immigration most of all. In cities such as Los Angeles, numerous new arrivals—Koreans, Vietnamese, Cambodians, Filipinos, Samoans, Taiwanese—competed for jobs and apartments with Mexicans, African Americans, and Anglos. This was the same kind of competition found among different groups in New York City a century before. The adjustment was not always easy for the recent immigrants. The new arrivals often strained public services. "We just can't keep up," declared Los Angeles board of education president Jackie Goldberg: Often we get the child without the parent. How do they come? / think most come on a bus. after walking a long time. They come with whatever money their parents can spare and a piece of paper with a name and address. H'e get kids of II or 12 who have never been to school Language posed a particular problem for the nation's schools. The pros and cons of bilingual education, in which students are taught in both their native language and English, were hotly debated. Amelia McKenna, director of Los Angeles's bilingual education program, observed, "We have between 84 and 90 languages in our district Nearly 40 percent of our students—242,000 children—are limited in English." As native-born Americans struggled with hard times, they became less sympathetic to new immigrants than they had been before. A Newsweek cover story in August 1993 noted that while a majority of those polled felt that immigration had been a good thing in the past, a mere 29 percent thought it was good in the present, and 60 percent said that it was harmful to the United States today. A poll in the newspaper USA Today that same summer found that 65 percent of the people questioned wanted to see immigration cut back. Some people felt that immigrants took jobs from working Americans, drained taxpayer dollars, and threatened the stability of American culture. "They bring different values and that's why we have more crime and drug prob- lems," declared Mary Goldsmith, a homemaker from Kentucky who was one of those surveyed by USA Today. Once again, as in the past, the United States had to deal with opposition to immigration. During what other periods of United States history haw Americans disapproved of immigrants moving into their communities? Why did they object to immigration? Ethnic and Cultural Diversity in the 19805 and 1990s, as immigration increased and minority birth rates soared, the number of Americans with roots outside Europe rose dramatically. As the chart on page Origins of Immigrants to the United States, 1981-1990 St- 37% 23% 2% 6% 10% 0.1% 6% 0.6% joy r 12% Total Number of Immigrants: 7,338,062 Oceania I Mexico | Europe Canada I Asia m Central America Source Mmv York rimes. May 31. 1992 South America Caribbean Africa Other Interpreting Charts Which group comprised the largest percentage of immigrants to the United States in the 1980s? What was the second largest group? How would you expect these statistics to affect the overall ethnic composition of the United States over several decades? 976 shows, an all-time high of 23 percent of the population in 1990 was African American, Latino. Asian American, or Native American, up from 20 percent ten years before. Now the nation included 30 million African Americans (11 percent of the population), 22.4 million Latinos (8 percent of the population), 7.3 million Asian Americans (3 percent of the popula- tion), and 2 million Native Americans (just under I percent of the population). The United States was entering a new age. It was becoming, in the words of writer Ben ). Wallenberg, "the first universal nation." O African Americans continued to make major strides forward. They were increasingly visible in national politics as a result of the elections of 1992. Carol Moseley-Braun of Illinois became the first African American woman ever to serve in the United States Senate. In the House of Rep resentatives, the number of African Americans rose from twenty-six to thirty-nine. In the field of education, Condoleezza Rice became the first African American woman to hold the position of provost, or chief academic officer, at Stanford University in California. Using Historical Evidence Whom does the man in the cartoon represent? In what ways has he climbed out of the pit of racial inequality? What new obstacle does he face as he emerges from the first pit? What circumstances in the United States of the 1990s does me cartoon reflect? © Senator Ben Nighthorse Campbell (below) was elected to represent his home state of Colorado in the election of 1992. ©Latinos made similar gains. In Congress, the number of representatives rose from thirteen to nineteen in the election of 1992. This was the largest Latino delegation in United States history. In the past, most Latinos in Congress were Mexican Americans. Now Cubans. Puerto Ricans, and other groups were represented. They were ready to help the nation move in new directions. As Nydia M. Velazquez, a Puerto Rican member of Congress from New York, noted, "Many of the new members were elected on [the promise of] changing business as usual. The message and mandate from voters was clear. We have to change and put partisanship [party politics 1 aside." Native Americans, too, became increasingly visible and vocal. Ben Nighthorse Campbell of Colorado became the first Native American in the Senate in more than sixty years when he assumed his seat in 1993. Outside of Congress, some Native Americans pressed long-standing claims for land that had been taken from them years before. The Oglala Lakota, for example, struggled to regain possession of the Black Hills of South Dakota, and turned down a $300,000 cash settlement offered by the government in an effort to get them to drop their claim. Elsewhere, a number of Native American groups fought to keep the landscape front being despoiled. In 1991 the I lualapais in Arizona defeated plans to build a uranium strip mine near the lip of the Grand Canyon. A growing sense of pride and self- determination among Native Americans made it possible for them to fight such developments, even when some Native Americans viewed industrial growth as the way to overcome poverty and unemployment in their communities. Women, too, contributed to increasing cultural diversity in the United States. In the 1992 Congress, the Senate included six women and the House forty-eight—both new records. Women who had demanded equal pay tor equal work in the past now began to argue that they should receive equal pay for comparable work, so that employees in jobs traditionally relegated to women might still earn a fair wage. Legal cases dealing with this question of comparable work began to make their way through the courts. Gay men and lesbians began to assert their identities and fight for their rights more aggressively in the 1990s. President Clinton, while compromising on a campaign promise to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military, supported homosexual rights and appointed an openly lesbian woman, Roberta Achtenberg, as an assistant secretary of housing and urban development. A few gay and lesbian characters began to appear on television and in movies, demonstrating a gradually increasing tolerance of and sensitivity to homosexuality in the mainstream culture. In the spring of 1993, one of the largest marches in United States history took place in — 