THE PURSUIT OF LIBERTY )A History of the American PeopleVOLUME TWO SINCE 1865THIRD EDITIONR. Jackson WilsonSmith CollegeJames GilbertUniversity of MarylandF1.1Karen Ordahl KuppermanNew York UniversityP9851996Stephen NissenbaumUniversity of MassachusettsU.2Donald M. ScottThe New School for Social ResearchHarperCollinsCollege PublishersDETAILED CONTENTSMAPS, TABLES, AND FIGURESxThe Powerless Presidents64Hayes Versus His Own Party64PREFACExiiGarfield and Arthur65SUPPLEMENTSxviGrover Cleveland65Benjamin Harrison67ACKNOWLEDGMENTSxixCleveland, Again67The Rise of the Populist Party68ABOUT THE AUTHORSxxiThe Grange68The Alliance Movement69Currency and Credit7014 RECONSTRUCTION1Monopolies71Defeat of the Populists72McKinley Versus Bryan72Episode: Edisto Island-Land andRace, Class, and the Constitution77Freedom3CHRONOLOGY79Reunion and Reconstruction19SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERLincoln's Plan for Reconstruction21READING80Presidential ReconstructionUnder Johnson2316 THE CLIMAX OF THEBlack Codes26INDUSTRIALCongressional Reconstruction27Radical Reconstruction29REVOLUTION81The Republican Coalitionin the South32Episode: The Haymarket-Strike andRedeeming the States36Violence in Chicago83The End of Reconstruction41Factories, Workers, and a New SocialCHRONOLOGY42Order97SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERREADINGTechnological Change9843An Agricultural Revolution98Improving Rail Transport99Manufacturing10015 THE POLITICSThe Steel Industry100Other Industries100OF RESTORATION45The Growth of "Big Business"102The Factory System102Episode: The Election of 187647Changes in Organization102Government in an Age of IndustrialCompetition and Consolidation103Capitalism63The Trust104VviDETAILED CONTENTSThe Courts and theSUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERCorporations104READING161Railroad Cases105Federal Regulation106-The New Americans10718 THE GOSPEL OFShifting Trends in Immigration107WEALTH163Reaction to the Newcomers108Becoming "American"110111Episode: The Lizzie Borden Murders 165UrbanizationTechnological Factors111Money, Class, and Women183The Industrial System112The Gilded Age184Conditions of Labor112The Monied Class184Early Attempts to OrganizeThe Preoccupation withLabor114Wealth, Display, and Status185Strikes and Strikebreakers116The Preoccupation with Manners187American Culture, 1875-1900117Utopian Vision of the Family188Literature117The Middle-Class Woman'sArt and Architecture119Burden191CHRONOLOGY120The Other Half193SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERWomen's Work193READING121Which Women Worked?194Women's Jobs195CHRONOLOGY19717 A NEW WEST123SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERREADING197Episode: Massacre at WoundedKnee12519 THE POLITICS OFLast Frontiers142REFORM199The Last West142The Mining Frontier143Episode: The Most DangerousTransportation West146Woman in America201Trail, Stage, and Pony146A Transcontinental Railroad146In Search of the Public Interest217From Buffalo to Cattle148Corporations Versus Unions218The Long Drive148Corporations Organize218The End of the Open Range150Unions Organize219The Defeat of the NativeMiddle-Class Reformers220Americans151Churches and Colleges220Advantages of the Whites152Science and Society221Dealing with the Tribes153The Good-GovernmentThe Sand Creek Massacre153Movement222Negotiations with the Sioux153Women and Progressivism223The Battle of Little Bighorn154The Settlement-HouseChief Joseph and the Nez Percés 154Movement223A Changing Policy155Suffrage223Farming on the Plains157Progressivism as a Movement224The Homestead Act157Theodore Roosevelt226Other Land Acts157The Path to the White House226Hardships and Solutions157Business Policy227CHRONOLOGY160Other Achievements229DETAILED CONTENTSviiWilliam Howard Taft229Wheels and Wings: The MotorThe Election of 1912231Age309Wilson's Progressivism232Perfecting the Automobile309CHRONOLOGY236Life in the Motor Age310SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERAir Transportation310READING236New Manners and Morals311A Revolution for Women311The Jazz Age31320 IMPERIAL AMERICA239A Black Renaissance314A Search for Innocence318Episode: The Conquests of theIllusions of Disillusionment318Philippines241CHRONOLOGY321SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERProgressive Foreign Policy, fromREADING321Empire to World War262The Myth of America's Destiny262The Reality Behind the Myth26522 CAPITALISM INA New Foreign Policy266TRANSITION323The Spanish-American War267Results of the War271U.S. Foreign Policy, 1901-1916272Episode: Defeat of the BonusRoosevelt and the PanamaMarchers325Canal272Crash, Depression, and a New Deal339Taft and "Dollar Diplomacy"274A Tide of Reaction339Wilson and MissionThe Red Scare340Diplomacy274Prohibition and Reaction341World War I

276The Ku Klux Klan342The United States: FromThe Politics of Conservatism343Neutrality to War279Warren G. Harding344War and Peace280Return to Normalcy344War at Home281The Ohio Gang345CHRONOLOGY286Coolidge and Business346SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERThe Democratic ChallengeREADING286of 1928347Boom and Bust348A Warped Economy34821 MASS CULTURE ANDThe Stock Market Crash350THE JAZZ AGE289Hoover's Optimism351New Federal Powers352The New Deal352Episode: Lindbergh's Flight291The Election of 1932352Society and Culture in the 1920s304Launching the New Deal353Reaching a Mass Audience305The Debate over Meaning354The CommunicationsFDR354Revolution305Relief and Stabilization356A Middle-Class Public306Reforms of the New Deal357The Machine and the MaverickTwo-Thirds of a Nation359in a Technological Society307Women359Electric Power and AssemblyAfrican Americans360Lines307Mexican Americans364Effects of Mechanization308Native Americans366viiiDETAILED CONTENTSEnd of the New Deal367Eisenhower's SecondCHRONOLOGY368Administration454SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERThe Kennedy Years456READING369The Renewed Promise456Kennedy and Civil Rights458Kennedy's Foreign Policy46023 A GLOBAL NATION371CHRONOLOGY463SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHEREpisode: Hiroshima373READING464World War and Cold War392The World War II Alliances39225 LIBERALISMThe War Begins393IN DECLINE467Japan396The United States Entersthe War397Episode: Chicago, 1968469The Wartime Economy398The Limits of Politics489Japanese-AmericanJohnson as President490Internment400Social Programs490The War in Europe401The Election of 1964491Germany Capitulates403The War in Vietnam491The War in the Pacific406The New Right496Demobilization and PostwarReaction to the Warren Court496Allied Cooperation408Intellectuals and Evangelists497Cold War in Europe409Segregationists497The Korean War412Splintering of the Left498Cold War at Home415Black Unrest498CHRONOLOGY417Student Radicals499SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERThe Counterculture502READING418American Women503Johnson's Presidency504The War Escalates50524 THE AMERICANLBJ and Civil Rights505CENTURY421Johnson Bows Out507CHRONOLOGY507SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHEREpisode: Martin Luther King, Jr.-READING508The Pursuit of Liberty423An Era of Promise441The Peacetime Economy44226 QUESTIONS OFTruman's First Administration442CREDIBILITY511The Election of 1948444Truman's SecondAdministrationEpisode: Three Mile Island-444An Accident Waiting to Happen513The Eisenhower Years446The Shift to the Suburbs446The Credibility Crisis531The Election of 1952447American Society at aEisenhower's FirstCrossroads531Administration449Economic Problems532The Election of 1956 and theWomen533Dawn of the Youth Culture452Minorities534DETAILED CONTENTSixNixon and Southeast Asia535Terrorism606Vietnamization536Intervention606Fighting the War Protesters536The Iran-Contra Affair607Détente538Summit with Gorbachev609The End of the War538The Reagan Record610Nixon's Credibility at Home539CHRONOLOGY612The Economy540SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERDomestic Spying541READING612Watergate541Consumers Lose Faith545Gerald Ford and the Failure28 AMERICAN DIVERSITY 615of Leadership546The Election of 1976547Episode: Witnessing617Jimmy Carter and theThe Politics of Diversity634Credibility Crisis548Energy Policy549The New Immigration635The Economy and Malaise550Recent ChangesForeign Affairs551in Immigration635The Election of 1980552Worldwide Immigration637CHRONOLOGY553The End of the Reagan Era638SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERContinuities638READING554Bush as President642The New World Order645Ethnic and Religious Turmoil64727 AN ERA OFRepublicans and Recession649Managing the Ecónomy649IDEOLOGIES557"The Economy, Stupid"651A Three-Way Race652Episode: The Case of Baby M-

Multicultural Culture655Private Lives and Public Morals559Cultural Contention656The Eighties and Beyond586New Ethnic Communities657New Lifestyles586Multicultural Politics658The New Poor587Crime659Surging Subcultures588A Multiethnic World660Asian Americans588The "Contract with America"662Hispanics588CHRONOLOGY663The Eighties Economy591SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHERThe Global Economy592READING664Other Social Changes592AIDS592THE DECLARATION OFThe Media Explosion593INDEPENDENCEA-1Materialism594Vigilantism595THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITEDEvangelism595STATES OF AMERICAA-4Conservatism596The Election of 1980597AMENDMENTS TO THERonald Reagan598CONSTITUTIONA-13Reaganomics600Reagan and Social Issues603CREDITSC-1Foreign Policy605INDEXI-1The Arms Buildup605THE New AMERICANS107In all the important cases of the 1880s andbut they would probably have come from Eng-1890s, the Court had consistently ruled in favorland or Scotland. When they arrived here, theyof the arguments of corporations, and against thewould have found the language, the ways ofregulation of business by either federal or stateworshiping God, and the customs familiar andgovernments. Later, many legal scholars and his-comfortable.torians would come to call the decisions "conser-But the "common" men and women invative," even "reactionary.' But there was nothing1900 were more likely to be Jews from Poland orconservative about them. The Court was not pro-Catholics from Italy. They lived in a great citytecting legal tradition against innovation. It wasand probably had a job in a factory or a business.making innovations, and it was doing so not toTheir English might be poor. Their memories ofprotect the past but to sanction the present.the "old country" would be at least as importantto them as their hopes for the new. They repre-sented a social revolution that had accompaniedTHE NEW AMERICANSthe revolutions in technology, industry, and busi-ness-the creation of an urban immigrant work-Industry has always needed people to do theing class.work, and the new industrial order needed armiesThere have been immigrants in America forof them. The growth in agriculture, railroads, andthousands of years, since people began to crossindustry demanded millions of people.over from Asia into Alaska. In the hundred yearsThe American population kept pace withfollowing the American Revolution, the actualindustrial growth. For every 100 people living inproportion of immigrants to the total populationthe United States in 1870, there were 126 indid not change much. Two other things hap-1880, 158 in 1890, 190 in 1900, and 230 inpened instead. First, the nature of the immigrant1910. In one generation, the population morepopulation changed. Second, the immigrantsthan doubled, from about 40 million in 1870 to(along with other Americans) began to congre-over 90 million forty years later.gate in great urban centers. These two changesThese were the millions who moved intomade industrial cities like Chicago the gatheringthe Great Plains and the Rockies, bringing aboutplaces for a new kind of American: the poor im-the final defeat of the Native Americans. Thesemigrant from a country where English was notwere the millions who made or bought Mc-spoken and where an Anglo-Saxon ProtestantCormick's harvesters, who built the railroads thatwas unheard of.carried his reapers into every flat corner of theIn 1790, when the United States took itscountry where grain could be planted and har-first census under the new Constitution, nine outvested by machine.of ten Americans (except for the black slaves inthe South) had English or Scottish ancestors. Thispattern changed somewhat with the immigrationSHIFTING TRENDS IN IMMIGRATIONof the 1840s and 1850s-the "old immigra-These millions, however, were not just more oftion"-when large numbers of German, Scandina-the same kinds of Americans who had lived invian, and Irish immigrants began to arrive. Al-the United States in preceding generations.though their languages might be strange toMany of them were new people-with differentAmerican ears, most of the Germans and Scandi-languages, different religions, and different waysnavians were at least Protestants. And althoughoflife. Before the Civil War, the American "com-many native-born Americans resented themon man" was, most likely, born in America; heCatholicism of the Irish, these immigrants at leastwas white, Protestant, and a farmer. His parentsspoke English. In 1865 the United States had onlyor grandparents might have been immigrants,about 200,000 inhabitants who had been born in

108CHAPTER 16 THE CLIMAX OF THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTIONPEOPLEIMMIGRATION BY REGION, 1860-19204,000,000 -3,500,000 -3,000,000 -2,500,000 -2,000,000 -1,500,000 -1,000,000 -500,000 -0-NORTHWEST SCANDINAVIAEASTERNCENTRALSOUTHERNASIATHEEUROPEEUROPEEUROPEEUROPEAMERICASNorthwest Europe = Great Britain, freland, Netherlands, Belgium,Central Europe = Germany, Poland, Hungary, AustriaLuxembourg, Switzerland, FranceSouthern Europe = Italy, Spain, Portugal, GreeceScandinavia = Norway, Sweden, Denmark, IcelandAsia = China, JapanEastern Europe = Soviet Union, Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, Finland,The Americas = Canada, Newfoundland, Mexico,Rumania, Bulgaria, (European) TurkeySouth Americasouthern or eastern Europe. They were easily ab-to America were from southern and eastern Eu-sorbed in a total population of about 40 million.rope. Between 1901 and 1910-the peak decadeBy 1914 this picture had changed dramati-for immigration in the history of the Unitedcally. A "new immigration"-mainly from Italy,States-the proportion of new immigrants rose toPoland, Russia, and Austria-Hungary-floodedover 75 percent, as over 6 million Italians, Rus-into the United States. Poverty drove many ofsian Jews, Hungarians, and other immigrantsthese people from their home countries. Somefrom southern and eastern Europe poured intomen left to avoid the military draft, which dis-the country.criminated against the poor. Jews wanted to es-cape the official anti-Semitism of Russia andREACTION TO THE NEWCOMERSPoland. Armenians fled from persecutions carriedout by the Turkish government. The new immi-The McCormick strike and the Haymarket affairgrants were drawn to the United States by adver-occurred just as the new immigration was aboutbtisements of cheap steamship transportation, byto reach its peak. So the entire Haymarket affairrumors of free land and golden opportunity, andfed off deep prejudices that had been aroused bynby a massive propaganda campaign conducted bythe entry of Irish and Germans, and by the begin-Wrailroads anxious for workers and for customersnings of the influx from eastern and southern Eu-bito buy up their lands.rope. Both the McCormick strike and the trial ofthImmigration from southern and eastern Eu-the Haymarket Eight occurred in an atmosphereli:rope amounted to only a trickle in the 1860s andof fear and bigotry. The Pinkerton report on there1870s. But by the 1890s over half the immigrants"fighting Irish" molders and the newspaper hyste-ficTHE New AMERICANS109ria about "foreign anarchists" make it clear thatAmerican children attended public schools. Noevents in Chicago would probably have been dif-one thought it necessary for them to learn Eng-ferent if they had not taken place at the time oflish. They were the victims of harassment, cruelthis bewildering flood of immigrants.jokes, and vicious cartoons. The state of Califor-The new immigrants were not only differ-nia had special taxes for "foreign" miners. Mur-ent in culture, language, and religion, they be-derous riots against the Chinese took place inhaved in ways different from those who had pre-every major western city during the 1870s andceded them. They moved into a society that was1880s. The Asians subtle and sophisticated wayno longer predominantly agricultural and rural,of cooking attracted some favorable attention, butbut urban. So they did not fan out onto farms aseven their food came into the American diet andmany of the old immigrants had done. Instead,language as "chop suey," an unkind culinarythey followed the lead of millions of other Ameri-joke.cans and settled into cities. Two-thirds of foreign-In California, especially, the Chinese immi-born residents in the United States lived in townsgrants were the objects of a double discrimina-and cities by 1900.tion. Almost every American of European ances-Bewildered and often victimized in Amer-try believed Asians were "racially inferior." Butica, new immigrants clustered together in theirwhite workers also resented competition in theown city neighborhoods, or "ghettos"-originallylabor market, especially during times of eco-an Italian word for a segregated neighborhood ofnomic depression and high unemployment. InJews. People from a particular European provincethe 1870s the California Workingman's party be-or even a particular village would move intogan to agitate for a law forbidding any personbuildings on the same block, re-creating much offrom China to hold a job. The effort succeeded.the culture of their Old World homes. As the newIn 1879 a clause was added to the state constitu-immigration swelled, so did antiforeign senti-tion of California that forbade any employer evenment. Ghetto dwellers developed a reputationto hire Chinese workers. But no state had a con-among native Americans for being clannish,stitutional right to forbid immigration. That wasdirty, superstitious, and generally undesirable.up to the national government. In 1882 an act ofThey were considered "strange," chattering inCongress put a ten-year prohibition on Chinesetheir old languages, and somehow "suited" onlyworkers entering the United States as immi-for city life. Actually, of course, they were nogrants.more "natural" city dwellers than were the Eng-And so the new society that grew out of thelish who had come to Virginia and Massachusettsindustrial revolution was an intensely segregatedin the seventeenth century. They were simplysociety. As a result of the railroads and the rushcaught in a phase of the industrial revolution-of pioneers to the West, Native Americans werethe creation of an urban society.confined to their shrinking reservations. Blacks,Immigrants from Asia-almost all fromAsians, and European immigrants in the townsChina and Japan-were among the most ghetto-and cities were just as confined to their ghettos.bound of the newcomers, rigidly segregated inThe very meaning of the word "American," as it"Chinatown" communities. And for generations,was normally used, reflected these racial and eth-neither the Asian Americans nor native-bornnic segregations. Being an "American" meant, towhites believed that they ever could or shouldmost native-born white people, not being "col-become integrated into American life. Most ofored," not being Catholic or Jewish, not havingthe Asian immigrants believed that Western civi-Slavic or Greek or Polish ways and words. Thelization was a form of barbarism, something to betwo most intensely debated questions of the dayresisted in every possible way. Few American of-among "Americans"-tha is, Protestant whiteficials paid any attention to whether Asian-people whose ancestry was British or northwest

110CHAPTER 16 THE CLIMAX OF THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTIONOPEN-AIR RESTAURANT. This pair of Chinese Americans have established their restaurant in a lumbercamp in the West. Chinese cuisine made its way into the European-American diet only slowly in thenineteenth century. Guidebooks routinely described Chinese restaurants as the "haunts" of theChinese themselves, and of the European-American poor, "outlaws," and African Americans. Itnever occurred to the authors of the guidebooks that poor people might not be quite as bigoted asthe American-born middle class (and that they might have better taste in food as well).European-were: What could be done to slowReal assimilation meant, first, knowing thedown or stop the "foreigners" from coming? Wholanguage. Many immigrant parents made enor-among them (if any) had a chance to becomemous sacrifices to bring their families to a coun-"Americans"?try where education was free and easily available.Mary Antin, a Jewish immigrant, remembered itBECOMING "AMERICAN"this way:The goal of many-perhaps even most-of theEducation was free. It was the one thing that mynew immigrants was to stay in the United Statesfather was able to promise us when he sent forfor a time, then return home with enough moneyus: surer, safer than bread or shelter. On ourto buy land or set up a shop. But the hope ofsecond day in the country a little girl across thesome immigrants was still takealley came and offered to conduct us to schoolon the traits of their new society so as to blendWe five children between us had a few words ofwith it. But becoming an "American" was not anEnglish by this time. We knew the wordeasy process for most European immigrants in"school." We understood. This child, who hadthe late nineteenth century.never seen us till yesterday, who was not muchURBANIZATION111better dressed than we were, still was able to of-Columbus, Rome and Alexandria had long sincefer us the freedom of the schools of Boston! Nodeclined. The only European cities to haveapplication made; no questions asked; no exam-reached a comparable size were London andinations, rulings, exclusions; no fees.Paris. At the time of the Haymarket affair, how-Learning the language was only one step to-ever, Chicago had already become a great city. Inward assimilation. Many immigrants joined somefact, by 1900 the United States had six cities withkind of voluntary association that brought themmore than half a million inhabitants.contacts with native-born Americans. In cities, theThe process of urbanization was not con-most obvious associations were political parties.fined to the United States. All the industrializingThey could provide favors, food, and jobs.nations of western Europe experienced it too."Boss" Richard Croker of the TammanyThe factory system demanded high concentra-Hall Democratic party organization in New Yorktions of workers, and the agricultural revolutiondescribed the work of his "machine" as dealingmade it possible for millions of people to leavewith people whotheir farms-whether in Germany or in Maine.The United States experienced three greatdo not speak our language and do not know ourmigrations in the generation after the Civil War.laws, yet are the raw material with which weOne was from the East to the Great Plains and thehave to build up the state. [The Tammany orga-Far West. Another was from Europe to America.nization] looks after them for the sake of theirThe third was from the country to the city. Of thevote, grafts them upon the Republic, makes citi-three, the movement from farm to city was thezens of them, in short; and although you maymost extensive.not like our motives or our methods, what otherIn 1800 only about 3 Americans out ofagency is there by which so long a row couldevery 100 lived in cities larger than 8,000. Byhave been hoed so quickly or so well?1900 this proportion had grown 1,000 percent;Another powerful influence on the new im-almost one-third of the nation lived in cities ofmigrants was those who had preceded them.over 8,000. In 1800 there had been only 6 citiesSome of the earlier arrivals learned English andlarger than 8,000; by 1900 there were over 400.helped recruit workers from Europe. They some-This increase was not gradual and smooth.times even paid the newcomers' transportationMost of it came in the half-century after the endand helped them settle in the cities. One popularof the Civil War. During this period, at least 15name for such men was padrone (an Italian wordmillion native-born Americans moved out ofmeaning, roughly, "patron"). A padrone might befarming areas and into cities, and their numberpaid by an employer for supplying cheap labor,was swollen by an almost equal number of newby a political machine for delivering immigrantimmigrants who settled in cities instead of onvotes, or by the immigrants themselves for favors.farms. Statistics tell the story. Between 1870 andOften the padrones, who existed among almost1900 the total population of the United States in-every immigrant group, were ward leaders in po-creased by about 35 million people. During thelylitical machines, serving as links between thesame period the urban population increased byorsewcomers and the city organizations.about 24 million. The cities had absorbed morethan two-thirds of the total increase.hebl.URBANIZATIONofTECHNOLOGICAL FACTORSirdIn the ancient world, only two great cities-A city is not just a collection of people in a smalladRome and Alexandria-had populations of overarea. Like industry, modern cities were madeichhalf a million people. By the time of Christopherpossible by technological change. In the centuries

THE MINING FRONTIER143with stubborn grass. Only the Native Americanspassed a law requiring "foreign miners" to applyand the buffalo seemed able to thrive.for special licenses and to pay a fee of twenty dol-The Rocky Mountain region also seemed tolars a month for the privilege of looking for gold.)offer little to encourage settlement. For manySome of the Forty-Niners did strike it rich,years its great peaks and almost inaccessible highalthough the people who made the most moneyvalleys were the home only of small Indian bandswere probably not the miners and prospectorsand a few white fur traders and renegades. And inbut those who set up businesses to sell themthe Southwest there were real deserts, enormousfood, clothing, tools, or whiskey. Most of thestretches of land that received less than ten inchesmen who rushed to California were disappointed.of rain a year and were covered-if at all-byMany of them began to drift east, through thenothing more than scrub.Sierra Nevada, looking for new bonanzas. InThere were many reasons this myth that1858, prospectors found gold near Pike's Peak inthe West could never be "settled" was dispelled.Colorado. Soon people were pouring into new,Three of the most important were gold, railroads,ramshackle towns like Denver, Pueblo, and Boul-and cattle. As miners, railroad men, and ranchersder. Their covered wagons proclaimed "Pike'smoved into the region, they systematically seizedPeak or Bust!"-though for many, it would beIndian lands. Then came the final pioneers ofPike's Peak and bust. A year after the first strike,the last West, the farmers. In 1890 the Censusabout 100,000 people-mostly men withoutBureau announced that the frontier no longertheir families-had moved into the area. Likeexisted.most other western gold and silver strikes, thePike's Peak boom did not last. The earliestprospectors soon raked off the surface gold. TheTHE MINING FRONTIERremaining precious metal was buried deep in themountains, where it could be mined only withThe western mining frontier had begun in 1848expensive machinery that individual minerswith the discovery of gold in California. In thecould not afford. Within three months in 1859,next year, tens of thousands of people, most ofthe population of the Colorado goldfields dwin-them men, had rushed to the area around Sandled to about 50,000. But enough people stayedFrancisco. They quickly became known as theto create a pocket of white occupation in the"Forty-Niners" and were celebrated in popularmountains.songs and stories. But the mythic version of thisA similar process was under way fartherfirst American gold rush is a far cry from the real-west, in what is now Nevada. Miners from Cali-ity. In most of the mining camps, somewhere be-fornia found gold near the western border of thetween one-fourth and one-half of the men wereregion in the late 1850s. In 1859 they discoveredforeign-born. Experienced and skillful minersthe famous Comstock Lode. One of the richestfrom Mexico came by the thousands, working insingle mines in America, it produced over $200hills and valleys that had belonged to their nationmillion worth of gold and silver in the thirtyjust a few years before. Other skilled, Spanish-years following its discovery. Thousands of menspeaking miners came up the Pacific coast all therushed over the mountains from Sacramento toway from Peru. News of the gold strike rippledbuild nearby Virginia City. Soon the town hadaround the Pacific Rim, and within three yearsfive newspapers, a miniature stock exchange, andthere were 25,000 Chinese in California. (Thea horde of prospectors, saloonkeepers, prosti-new state government of California was quick totutes, and gamblers. A few men became enor-respond to these "foreign threats." In the first yearmously wealthy. Most of the prospectors, how-of statehood, 1850, the California legislatureever, went away disappointed.

144CHAPTER 17 A New WEST181CALIFORNIA MINERS. These miners were photographed in 1852, three years after the California goldrush began. The three European-Americal men are holding the tools of their gold-mining trade,including the large pan for finding loose gold that has been washed down the sluice mixed withdirt from the digging. They seem quite pleased with themselves. The Chinese Americans at right-two of them hardly more than boys-do not seem so cheerful, partly because, as soon as thephotographer left, they would take picks and shovels and go back to their backbreaking digging,and partly because none of the gold that showed up in the sluice would be theirs.Some miners who stayed found smallinvestors. Within a few years, any successful fieldpockets of loose gold that could be mined with asoon became an industrial development, and thepan or a sluice, a simple trough that runs waterprospectors scattered again in search of a newdownhill over dirt and loose rocks, washing outdiscovery and easy pickings elsewhere.the heavy gold dust. This kind of mining, calledThe California gold rush that had excitedplacer mining, soon washed off the free metalso many thousands of Americans in 1849 was re-near the surface. This meant that the miner'speated over and over again throughout the West.frontier quickly became a corporate frontier, ex-In the late 1850s a small strike was made in east-ploited by mining companies owned by easternern Washington, but it soon petered out. RestlessTHE MOST DANGEROUS WOMAN IN AMERICA209maintain much of the early work of the institution. After several trips through immi-grant areas of Chicago, Addams decided to rent a large mansion belonging to the Hullfamily on the South Side of the city adjacent to an Italian section. The settlementquickly took the name Hull House.Although an institution devoted to bettering the condition of the poor and ex-ploited, Hull House was a settlement, a residence for Jane Addams, Ellen Starr, otherwomen of her generation, and women (and some men) who had acquired an educationand who wanted to do social service, but who lacked the outlet for it. Hull House re-leased a generation from the "snare of preparation," and plunged them into what quicklybecame the beginning of the modern profession of social work. As guiding genius ofHull House, Addams not only shaped its activities and defined its aspirations, she alsoused it as a political base to push for social reform on a national and then an interna-tional scale. This was an ambitious, even daunting endeavor, and it occupied a lifetime.ateThe Chicago Jane Addams proposed to reform in 1889 was America's fastestgrowing large city. It had reached almost a million in population by 1890, making itthe second city of the nation and one of the largest urban areas in the world. Certainlyit was one of the most dynamic spots on earth. Thousands of immigrants poured intoits railway stations daily, from southern, eastern and northern Europe and the smallMidwest towns surrounding it. It contained hundreds of thousands of Germans, Irish,Swedes and Norwegians, Italians and Poles, as well as ambitious young men andwomen from nearby farms and villages. Streets unrolled, buildings grew up, populationincreased, and factories mushroomed as if erected by a perpetual-motion building ma-chine. In the most conservative of America's older cities, these forces gave the impres-sion of disorder and a breakdown of institutions. In Chicago, there was no doubt aboutit. Within a six-block radius of Hull House lived 70,000 people representing twenty-sixnationalities. The only citywide institutions of note were political parties, and they wereoften seen as part of the problem of disorder and corruption, not the solution.The first and perhaps most lasting impression that the city made upon Addams andber coworkers was one of disarray and the breakdown of tradition. What bonded peoplelogether, affirmed their identities, offered them help? To some extent, the CatholicChurch did and so did immigrant institutions and clubs. Neighborhoods maintained asemblance of stability-sometimes-but movement in and out was constant. In fact, itseemed as if the whole city of Chicago was in motion. Impoverished immigrants pouredinto the center of the city and then dispersed into newer, less crowded neighborhoods asthey found jobs and acquired English. Sociologists examined this complex process andcalled it assimilation, or, more popularly, Americanization. Captured in the aggregate fig-unes of the census or the social scientists's calculus, this appeared a relentless process. Tothose who looked at it up close, it involved pain and disorientation.Observing the world around them, Addams and her companions saw disorder,but they also saw opportunity to learn and share their learning. This took confidenceand sensibility, a translation of the earnest education that Addams herself had received,into a form that could aid and not threaten her new neighbors. Over the course of sev-eral years, Hull House became the focal point of new neighborhood institutions. Quite

212CHAPTER 19 THE POLITICS OF REFORMveal the humble immigrant parents to their children lay at the base of what has come tobe called the Hull-House Museum."Addams brought this same thinking to her description of wayward youth. Noth-ing so distressed reformers as the apparent aimless and empty lives of young immigrantmen and women. Without the steadiness of traditional culture and living beyond thereach of American small-town mores, immigrant youth became increasingly susceptibleto juvenile delinquency. Although this term had many contemporary meanings, whenapplied to boys it generally referred to some form of criminal behavior against propertyby an under-aged youth (under eighteen). For girls it implied prostitution or an easy at-titude toward premarital sex.To Addams delinquency was a very serious matter and she wrote a popular andsympathetic book explaining it in 1909, entitled The Spirit of Youth and the City Streets.1Once again she pointed to an absence of tradition and culture, exposing young sons\and daughters of immigrants to the temptations and cheap amusements of the urbanenvironment Empowered with freedom, with jingling pockets of loose change, theseSichildren flocked to dance halls, cheap theaters, eateries, and amusement parks. Beyonddadult supervision and untouched by claims of the past, they wandered through adoles-aocence and misspent their youth consuming popular culture. Following fashions andmfads, unprotected, they were spoiled by the temptations of the city. The most dreadedprospect wrote Addams, occurred to girls. "We see thousands of girls," she wrote,th"walking up and down the streets of a pleasant evening with no chance to catch a sightcoof pleasure, even through a lighted window save as these lurid places provide it."COIIt was the responsibility of Hull House to offer alternatives, to convey proper cul-ofture to young men and women, and draw them off the street and into a healthy environ-SOCment. This was so much the harder because the majority of young people worked in fac-centories. They were exhausted and footloose, with few intellectual and moral resources toaucombat the popular culture of the city. So Hull House founded a boys' club and a girlswasclub, which taught a variety of industrial and craft skills. It offered classes in literature. Itsocisponsored plays and held literary discussions. To compete with Saturday-night dances, itarotheld athletic contests in the gymnasium. In each of these efforts, the goal was similar: toandbring the best thought and culture to bear upon the lives of young immigrants; to helpars.them to find their place in the confusing new world they were helping to shape. WhatBureAddams said of the Hull House Shakespeare classes could justify any of these activities"To feed the mind of the worker, to lift it above the monotony of his task and to connectcoulit with the larger world, outside of his immediate surroundings.damsProbably the most singular story Addams recounted in her autobiographyspeci:showed her uncanny insight into the problems of older immigrant women, who werecomnmost victimized by a disruption of culture. During 1912, a rumor swept the localally fccommunity that a "Devil Baby" had been abandoned at Hull House. Scores of womensensitand several men called at the settlement house to catch a glimpse of this (nonexis-honestent) child. Addams might have dismissed the event as a remnant of peasant lore, inworld.spired by the gossip of old ladies. Instead she found some striking, larger meaningworkein the experience.most ilThe story, basically an Italian tale, centered around a curse. An atheist husbandtion abstanding in his bedroom, pointed to a holy picture on the wall and exclaimed to his COWering wife: "Td rather have the devil in this bedroom than that picture." A Jewish versionThe notiof the tale featured a father with six daughters. Before the birth of a seventh child, he aphysicallWORLD WAR 1283VIVEISONaVive WILSON! This electric sign in Paris (which translates as Long live Wilson!) was part of thehero's welcome accorded to President Woodrow Wilson when he traveled to Europe in 1919 tonegotiate a peace treaty. Despite his personal popularity, Wilson won only a compromise fromAmerica's European allies when he asked for a less harsh and punitive treaty against Germany.Wilson's strategy of persuasion was to en-Attacks on civil liberties also soured Wil-courage support for the war and compliance withson's efforts. The Espionage Act of June 1917his economic programs through advertising andand the Sedition Act of May 1918 effectivelypublic agitation. Consequently, in 1917 he ap-outlawed criticism of the American government,pointed progressive reformer George Creel toits leaders, and its national symbols. Intolerancehead the Committee on Public Information. Creelwas also aimed at German-Americans by Ameri-took to his job energetically, overseeing a nation-cans with other backgrounds. In areas of largewide speaking campaign of 75,000 "Four-MinuteGerman immigrant populations in the Midwest,Men" (so named to recall Revolutionary Warlocal authorities tried to suppress the GermanMinutemen). The committee also published 75language and German culture. In their fictionmillion pieces of prowar literature. But its stri-popular writers depicted Germans as degeneratedent, all-or-nothing tone led to a rigid definitionbeasts. Suddenly, ethnic identity and national-of patriotism. Clearly, some of these strains mustism became a dividing line. Racial intolerancebe blamed on Wilson. He had allowed thealso flared in this charged atmosphere, in partoverzealous Creel to wage a vociferous propa-because African Americans moved north to fillganda campaign in favor of the war. Unfortu-war production jobs. One of the worst incidentsnately, the committee had oversold its case.was a violent race riot in 1917 in East St. Louis,

284CHAPTER 20 IMPERIAL AMERICAEUROPE AFTER WORLD WAR I (1925)ICELAND(DEN.)FINLANDATLANTICNORWAYaOCEANSWEDENESTONIA/NORTHLATVIASEADEN.U.S.S.R.IRISHLITHUANIAFREESTATEGREAT.:EASTBRITAINPRUSSIAAND(GER.)N. IRELANDDANZIGNETHPOLANDBELG.GERMANYLUX.OVAKIAFRANCESWITZ.AUSTRIAHUNGARYRUMANIABLACK SEAYUGOSLAVIAITALYBULGARIASPAINALBANIA.0TURKEYNGREECE0TUNISIACYPRUSALGERIA(FR.)(BR.)(FR.)MOROCCONEANSEA(FR.)EGYPTCountries created after World War ILIBYA0250500 Mies(IT.)A TIDE OF REACTION341SACCO AND VANZETTI. Here, in 1927,Nicola Sacco and BartolomeoVanzetti enter the courtroom to maketheir last plea for justice. Somerecent evidence seems to show thatat least one of them may have beenguilty of the crime he was chargedwith. But no amount of new evidencecan set aside the fact that they wereunfairly tried and unfairly convicted.most Americans, they were just dangerousPresident Wilson), Congress passed a law that"aliens," Italian radicals who had been properlylimited immigration, especially from countries inpunished.southern and eastern Europe. According to theThe bonus marchers of 1932 had to con-law, the number of immigrants from a country intend with the lingering effects of the red scare.any given year could not exceed 3 percent of theThey were accused of being communists andnumber of people of that nationality who were al-serving as tools in a foreign conspiracy. Whenready in the United States in 1910. In 1924 theDouglas MacArthur marched on their camp atlaw was made even more restrictive. Quotas-Anacostia, he did so in the belief that he was pro-would now be based on resident population inlecting the country from a powerful revolutionary1890, immigration limited to 150,000 per yearmovement. The irony was, however, that theafter 1927, and Asians totally excluded. The ef-marchers themselves accepted much of the ideol-fect of the laws was to end, almost at once, thebgy of "Americanism" that fueled the red scare.flow of immigration.Their response to the charge that they were com-munists was to insist on their own patriotism,PROHIBITION AND REACTIONand to point proudly to their record of militaryservice. Most of the marchers were probably justLike the red scare and the movement for immi-is devoutly anticommunist, just as insistent ongration restriction, the prohibition of alcohol intheir own "100 percent Americanism" as theirthe 1920s had its roots in the progressive period.entics.In 1919 the necessary number of states had ap-The red scare also made it possible forproved the Eighteenth Amendment, which em-those Americans who feared immigrants andpowered Congress to prohibit the sale of alco-their ethnic and religious differences to restrictholic beverages. The amendment marked theimmigration. In February 1921 (over the veto ofvictory of a long campaign for "temperance." It364CHAPTER 22 CAPITALISM IN TRANSITIONwere defended by a skilled lawyer, Samuel Lei-government He proposed a grand, all-blackbowitz. He had been hired by the Internationalmarch on Washington. The Roosevelt adminis-Labor Defense League, a Communist party affili-tration was anxious to prevent "disorder" in theate. The local prosecutor sneered at Leibowitz incapital. And some officials were afraid that "com-open court, and boasted that "Alabama justicemunists" would infiltrate the movement. Roo-cannot be bought and sold with Jew money fromsevelt decided to negotiate. He told black leadersNew York."that if they would call off the march, he would es-In the second trials, Leibowitz introducedtablish a Fair Employment Practices Commission,medical evidence that clearly proved that Bateswith at least some power to try to enforce equaland Price had not been raped on the train. Buttreatment for black and white workers in the fewthe white jury still brought in a verdict of guiltyindustries where working conditions could beagainst the first defendant. This time, the Al-federally regulated. Randolph and his colleaguesabama judge, James Horton, somehow found theaccepted the deal, and the commission was estab-courage to overrule the verdict. But the authori-lished in the summer of 1941, just a few monthsties found a new judge and held new trials.before the United States entered World War ILAgain, the first defendant to be tried was foundAs one black newspaper put it, most Africanguilty. This time, the Supreme Court threw outAmericans thought they had little choice but tothe conviction on the ground that Alabama lawsupport Roosevelt and the Democrats, "until theexcluded blacks from juries.real thing comes along."In 1936 a fourth round of trials took place.Only five of the nine original defendants wereMEXICAN AMERICANStried, but the five were convicted and sentenced,one to seventy-five years and the others to life.A large migration of Mexican laborers into Cali-Only after fourteen more years were all five menfornia and the Southwest, where most of themfree, four on parole and one by escape. For thebecame migrant farm workers, had taken place inthousands of African Americans who were carry-the 1920s. But the irresistible forces of the de-ing on the struggle for civil rights and socialpression turned on them severely. Hundreds ofequality, there was not much to celebrate. But atthousands of white farm families of the South andleast the Supreme Court had saved eight peopleSouthwest were losing their land or their share-from hanging, and set four of them free. Thecropping arrangements and heading west to Cali-Court had also ruled, not for the first time, thatfornia. The result was a dramatic reversal of thestate courts could not systematically excludetides of migration. At the beginning of the crisis,blacks from juries. The stage was being set foronly a small minority of the migrant workforcenew efforts to use the Constitution and the courtson California farms had been North Americansto protect the basic rights of black citizens-aBy the end of the decade, the North Americans-struggle that would reach a climax after World

the "Okies" and the "Arkies" and the rest-madeWar II, in the 1950s and 1960s.up nine-tenths of that labor force, doing the toil-For those who would not wait, there wassome and low-paying jobs that had once been leftone final consolation to be wrung from the Newto Mexicano "braceros."Deal. It came in 1941, when it was becoming in-The result was a huge outmigration of Mex-creasingly clear that depression and the New Dealicans and Mexican Americans. In the first fivewere about to give way to war. A. Philip Ran-years of the depression, about half a million left.dolph, the brilliant and militant leader of theThe U.S. census-woefully inaccurate when itblack union movement, decided that the timecame to minority groups-counted only half ashad come for blacks to demand justice from theirmany Mexican-born people in 1940 as it had inTwo-THIRDS OF A NATION365MEXICANOS ON STRIKE. The striking"braceros" on this truck wereunarmed. But they were threateningto arm themselves unless the-landowners they usually worked foretput down their own weapons andDEstopped hiring private armies ofthugs to harass striking workers.1930. This drop was just about equal to the num-began to organize, to resist exploitation at theber of landless North Americans who had wan-hands of norteamericano landowners-and ex-dered into California looking for work. But theploitation, too, at the hands of fellow MexicanosMexicanos were not only discouraged by the eco-who organized work gangs and wrote contractsnomic crisis, they also were encouraged to go bywith the farmers. They organized a union, thegovernments like California's, which offered one-Confederación de Uniones de Campesinos yway tickets to Mexico, free of charge, to anyoneObreros Mexicanos (Confederation of Unions ofwilling to leave. And to offers like this, local po-3Mexican Campesinos and Workers. There is nolice and bureaucrats often added harassment andeasy translation of campesino. Literally, it meansugly treatment. A government official in Califor-only "people of the fields." It is sometimes trans-nia said that Mexicans are "trash. "We herd themlated as "peasants." But its meaning in Mexicolike pigs." (His command of English was weak.and Central America covered a variety of forms ofHe was obviously trying to say that he thoughtagricultural experience that included most of theMexicans were like pigs, to be herded. But hisrural poor, even those who owned small farms.)sentence could also mean "We herd them asThe Confederación supported a number of bitterthough we were pigs.")and sometimes bloody strikes during harvest sea-Some of the Mexicanos did resist, didsons in the 1930s. In the largest strike, whichrefuse the free tickets home, and did try to dotook place in 1933, 18,000 Mexicano pickers re-something about their difficult jobs and miser-fused to harvest the cotton crop in the rich Sanable earnings. In the 1930s, Mexicano workersJoaquin Valley of California. But two strikers

366CHAPTER 22 CAPITALISM IN TRANSITIONwere murdered, and the violence eventuallySo the inevitable long-term effect of the Dawesbroke the strike. Still, during the next sevenAct was to promote poverty and want.years, the Confederación promoted twenty-fiveThe situation was perhaps worst in Okla-major strikes.homa, which had once been the Indian Territory.By the end of the decade most landownersDuring the nineteenth century the federal gov-had shown that they preferred to hire Northernment had crowded about thirty differentAmerican workers, if they would work for thetribes onto a skimpy expanse of land that was notsame low wages. The North Americans proved tovery fertile in the first place. Increasing popula-be more docile than those Mexicanos who hadtions were unable to feed themselves adequately.stayed in the United States. As for the federal gov-Disease, especially tuberculosis, was epidemic.ernment, it tried to assist migrant farm workers byTo Native Americans, the news that there wassetting up camps run by the Farm Security Ad-something called a "panic' on a street namedministration, camps that could provide decentWall would have had a significance that wastemporary housing for laboring people. But themainly ironic or bitter. And it appeared that helpcamps were established only in 1937, and thewas not going to come to them any sooner than itmen who ran them, like the landowners, showedwas coming to the Mexican Americans. In 1929a definite preference for assisting North Americanthe Hoover administration ruled that Nativemigrant families. (John Steinbeck's famous novelAmericans living on reservations were not eligibleabout the sufferings of migrant workers in Califor-for even the meager relief funds being providednia, The Grapes of Wrath, was a moving and sym-by the federal government.pathetic book. But it did not have a single Mexi-Then, in 1933, Roosevelt appointed a newcan or Mexican-American character. His depictioncommissioner of Indian affairs, John Collier, aof a Farm Security Administration camp is of anformer social worker. Collier made a number ofinstitution with no Mexicanos-or blacks, either.)decisions that were of real benefit to NativeSince agricultural workers were not covered byAmericans who lived on reservations. Some ofmajor New Deal programs like Social Security orthe decisions were of genuine symbolic impor-the Wagner Act, and since only proven citizenstance. He ordered the bureaucrats who adminis-were eligible for federal relief, the Mexicanos gottered federal programs to respect Native Ameri-little or no benefit from the New Deal.can customs, language, and dress. He told themto stop doing what they had been doing for halfNATIVE AMERICANSa century, trying to force Indians to dress andtalk and act like white people-or somebody'sFor Native Americans, economic depression wasidea of the way white people ought to dress andnothing new. For half a century Native Ameri-talk and act. Other decisions were of more im-cans on reservations had lived in increasinglymediate and practical importance. Early in themiserable conditions. Their main resource wasNew Deal, Collier persuaded Congress to fundland. But land ownership was governed by thethe Indian Emergency Conservation program. Itrules of the Dawes Severalty Act of 1887 (see pp.worked like the Civilian Conservation Corps,155-156). Under the terms of this law, land thatgiving young men jobs building dams, plantingStribes had once owned in common became thetrees, and improving roads. By the end of theproperty of individual families. But with each1930s about 90,000 Native Americans hadpassing generation, a fixed amount of land had toworked in the program-nearly one third of thebe divided among several children. The only al-total Indian population. Paradoxically, life onCternative was for new generations to leave thethe reservations during the Great Depressionreservations altogether, and try to cope withwas probably better than it had been during thehardship and discrimination in towns and cities."prosperity" of the 1920s.398CHAPTER 23A GLOBAL NATIONquate planning of American forces in the Pacificto defeat the Axis powers. He planned an enor-but they also mobilized American public opinion.mous economic effort in which superior re-Roosevelt denounced the "sudden criminal at-sources, supplies, productivity, organization, andtacks perpetrated by the Japanese in the Pacific"scientific breakthroughs would overwhelm theand asked for and got a declaration of war. Onenemy. This emphasis on weapons, he believed,December 11, Hitler joined his Japanese ally andwould minimize American casualties. With thisdeclared war on the United States.aim in mind, he authorized the secret building ofExpansion of the armed services had begunthe atomic bomb. His commitment made the sci-before the United States entered the war. Theence laboratory and the factory assembly lines asarmy had reached 1.4 million men by July 1941.important as the front lines of fighting men.But after total mobilization, this number movedup rapidly. By 1945 over 8 million men were inTHE WARTIME ECONOMYthe army. (The Women's Army Corps-WAC-reached about 100,000 at this time.) The navyThe war buildup also meant new federal eco-experienced a similar expansion, reaching 3.4nomic controls. After Pearl Harbor isolationistmillion, with the marines constituting aboutopposition crumbled and Congress granted500,000 of this total. The air force (administra-sweeping powers to the executive branch. Ontively part of the army) also expanded rapidly.January 16, 1942, Roosevelt created the War Pro-Military service touched all populations induction Board, which had the power to channelAmerica. By the end of the war about 1 millioncivilian production into armaments manufactureAfrican Americans had participated in the vari-and to contract for the construction of new de-ous services, for example. The American armedfense plants. With the massive reorientation offorces in World War Il mixed ethnic groups andproduction, the draft of millions of men, and asocial class, but in a curious way. Universal con-rise in employment, the United States suddenlyscription threw together northerners and south-faced labor shortages. War orders wiped away theerners, autoworkers and college professors. Buthuge unemployment left from the depression.if this necessitated a kind of melting pot cultureThe War Manpower Commission was organizedin the barracks, it did not mean that democracyto recruit new workers for the booming defenseor racial harmony prevailed. For example, blacksector.soldiers were segregated into units commandedThe largest pool of untapped potential em-Wby white officers. Often they were relegated toployees was women, and millions of them eagerlyArstevedore or construction work. Japanese Amer-took over jobs in aircraft, shipbuilding, and mu-icans were placed in special ethnic units such asnitions plants. They went to vocational schoolsthe Nisei 442 Infantry Regiment, which foughtand learned trades and skills that transformedmin Italy. Thus, despite the commitment to defeattheir lives. They were crucial in building the vastthNazism-the most virulent racism of the twenti-array of weapons that poured from the factoriessueth century-few Americans saw anything para-They constructed B-29 bombers like the Enolaalldoxical in establishing and maintaining racialGay that carried the first atomic bomb; they builtansegregation throughout the military. This is eventhe tanks and ships that shattered the Nazi armiesnismore curious because American war films oftenand the Japanese navy.Ropictured foxholes as representative democracies,While the employment of women in facto-Ris

and such films as Bataan (1943) even impliedries was expected to be temporary, it had pro-thethat racial integration existed where it clearlyfound and lasting effects. Several million womengesdid not.attended vocational schools. As early as 1942,Once the United States had entered theover 35 percent of the American workforce waswewar, Roosevelt decided on a strategy of attritionfemale. By the end of the war, surveys revealed, aally400CHAPTER 23 A GLOBAL NATIONa bloody race riot that broke out killed 34 per-security and secrecy increased. For example, itsons and had to be quelled by troops.brought a group of inconsequential AmericanMexican-American workers also flockedfascists and right-wing opponents of the warto defense-industry cities. In Los Angeles, whereto trial.the concentrations of this population were high,tensions between servicemente and Mexican-JAPANESE-AMERICAN INTERNMENTAmerican teenagers exploded in 1943 during the"Zoot-Suit Riots" when soldiers and sailors at-Much more serious was the treatment of Japanesetacked civilians wearing floppy zoot-suits andAmericans. In early 1942, American militarysporting long hair. Over a hundred persons werecommanders on the West Coast argued thattreated for injuries in this battle over clothingJapanese residents must be removed. This fear ofstyles and ethnic symbolism.sabotage scarcely concealed a long-standing racialEventually, full employment and shortagesantipathy toward the Japanese in California.of consumer items like automobiles fueled infla-(There was no corresponding internment oftion and labor unrest. The federal governmentJapanese residents of Hawaii, where race relationsstepped in here too, setting up the War Laborwere better.)Board in January 1942 to prevent strikes andThus, on February 19, 1942, President Roo-runaway wage increases. After several skirmishessevelt issued Executive Order #9066, which per-with labor, the board established the "Little Steel"mitted removal of alien Japanese, Germans, Ital-formula, worked out first for smaller steel-ians, and all persons of Japanese ancestry, whetherproducing companies. This formula, which ap-citizens or not, from any military area. These sensi-plied to other industries as well, placed a limit ontive areas included California and parts of Oregon,pay hikes. Labor disputes did not disappear, butWashington, and Arizona. In practice, exceptionsin general, the War Labor Board did much to easewere made for other groups so that only the Japan-the pressure on wages, and it allowed unions toese were actually removed. Legal protests to theraise their membership extensively.Supreme Court proved fruitless.TiAnother new agency, the Office of PriceThis policy may have had military consid-CeCaAdministration, tried to limit price rises by set-erations as its justification, but it also continued 3ofting maximum prices for standard items. It alsohistory of exclusion and racial segregation. Inoversaw the rationing of scarce items such as cof-1924 Congress had denied further immigrationfee, canned foods (to save tin), shoes, and gaso-to the Japanese, abrogating a "gentlemen's agree-line (to save rubber tires). Although many work-ment" of 1907-1908 between the United Statesers earned more money than before the war,and Japan in which Japan promised to restrictplithere were few goods to spend it on; even a thriv-immigration. Despite the burden of this historying black market could not supply them.and various local laws that discriminated, theExtensive government control over theJapanese community had achieved considerableeconomy was matched by increased federal at-success in agriculture and small businesses. Theirtention to shaping public opinion and prevent-largest communities were centered on Los Ange-ing possible subversion. An Office of War Infor-les and Seattle, with much smaller contingents enmation worked with radio and other media toSan Francisco.advertise savings bonds and drives to collectBy June 1942 over 100,000 Japanese hadscarce raw materials. Sometimes in this climate,been forcibly removed, their property and jobscivil liberties suffered. Of course the militarystripped away. Most were placed in ten crudecensored news from the front. There was littledusty army camps and provided with tarpaperbefeserious opposition to the war, but even so,barracks, cots, common toilets, and sharedtheithe administration overreacted as demands forbathing and laundry facilities.year

THE WAR IN EUROPE401WARRELOCATIONCEDTERThis SIMPLE, WOODEN SIGN, posted in the desert, marked the entrance to the Manzanar relocationcenter for Japanese families uprooted from their homes, primarily in the Los Angeles area. Othercamps housed still more Japanese Americans, rounded up and deported from the coastal areasof the western United States.One internee recalled a camp set on a bleakgizing to Japanese Americans and promisedplain behind Los Angeles:$20,000 in compensation for each internee.There was a lack of privacy when we first wentto Manzanar. The barracks were not actuallycompleted There were terrible wind storms thatTHE WAR IN EUROPEswept through the Owens Valley which broughtdust through the cracks in the door. I thinkWhile the administration worked to organizethere were two months running where we suf-production, it defined its strategy to win the war.fered from diarrhea. The food was not properlyIn practical terms, the United States had disagree-prepared.ments with both of its major allies. Roosevelt op-posed Britain's desire to hold on to its vast colo-Many of the internees gained their releasenial empire. And he was reluctant to allow thebefore the end of the war, but few ever recoveredSoviets to establish control over the invasiontheir farms, businesses, or homes. In 1988, fortyroutes across eastern European nations. Thevears after the fact, Congress passed a law apolo-president tried to circumvent potential frictionSPLINTERING OF THE LEFT499tion, police would call for reinforcements. Thenment he headed was deeply divided over goalsghetto residents would pour out of tenementand strategies. The doors to the house of reformbuildings, attacking and looting stores and set-were, indeed, being shut.ting fires. As the conflagration spread, snipersThe black civil rights movement enduredsometimes appeared. Police and, finally, the Na-one further, and perhaps fatal, loss in the springtional Guard would isolate a riot area, proclaim aof 1968. King was planning a "poor people'scurfew, and arrest thousands of residents. Fre-campaign" and demonstration in Washington toquently, the police and guard put down riotsrekindle the smoldering movement He also par-with excessive force. During 1967, a year inticipated in a strike of black garbage workers inwhich seventy cities were besieged by riots, moreMemphis, Tennessee. The strike was a bitter one.than eighty people died-most of them Africancalled after two workers were accidentally killedAmericans-and thousands were arrested.on the job. The strikers demanded better wagesKing still clung to nonviolence in the midstand working conditions. King worked hard toof this disorder. But groups like SNCC were lessprevent violence. On the evening of April 4, as hehesitant about condoning violence. In 1966prepared to leave his Memphis motel for dinner,Stokely Carmichael, the leader of SNCC, advo-King stepped out on the balcony for a moment tocated self-defense for blacks. He also popularizedspeak to his driver below. A rifle cracked andthe term "black power," which implied cuttingKing fell, mortally wounded.ties with white liberals and pushing for gains us-The news of King's death blew through theing exclusively black organizations.ghettos of American cities like a ravaging wind.After 1967, relations between black civilRiots erupted in over 100 cities. Buildingsrights leaders and the administration deterioratedburned, businesses were looted. The Nationalsharply. In the spring, Martin Luther King, Jr.,Guard and police once more moved in withbroke with the president over the war in Viet-force. Mayor Daley of Chicago, which sufferednam. For the civil rights leader, this was an an-one of the worst riots, spoke of a need to "shootguished moment In 1965 King had briefly crit-to maim or cripple" looters if riots broke outlicez the war, but Johnson had applied enormousagain. When the soldiers and police finally with-pressure, and King had reversed himself. Now,drew, the civil rights movement, and much of thehowever, he believed that the war could not besympathy it had engendered, had been gutted.ignored. Its incessant funding demands had cutinto poverty programs. The draft and college de-STUDENT RADICALSlerments (primarily exercised by young whitemen) placed a disproportionate percentage ofKing and other black civil rights leaders had, byblack soldiers on the Asian front lines. Despitetheir example, inspired the country's white stu-the company of white radicals and black powerdent radicals. Young white Americans had beenadvocates that an antiwar stance placed him in,among the most enthusiastic supporters of Presi-King sharply attacked the war. The United States,dent John Kennedy. His New Frontier appealedhe declared, was "the greatest purveyor of vio-to a generation that rejected the secure and smugence in the world today.' Carl T. Rowan, a blackmiddle-class world they associated with their par-jurnalist, wrote: "By urging Negroes not to re-ents and the suburbs where they lived. Kennedy'spond to the draft or to fight in Vietnam, he hasinaugural address in early 1961 struck a respon-taken a tack that many Americans of all racessive chord. The new president dedicated his ad-consider utterly irresponsible." King's decision ofministration to reviving America's traditionalconscience speeded a process of alienation thatmission in the world: the protection and exten-bok civil rights off the federal agenda. But thesion of political freedom. To the "tempered,"cader had already begun to falter and the move-"disciplined," and "proud" new generation of

588CHAPTER 27 AN Era OF IDEOLOGIESThe concentration of poverty among womencome structure. Like the 1890s, the last twoand children represented, in some sense, the neg-decades of American history have seen a funda-ative side of a striking success story: decliningmental shift in the sources of immigration Al-poverty among older Americans. In 1970 aboutthough the flow to the United States from Asia andone-quarter of Americans over the age of 65 livedLatin America is not new, vastly increasing num-in poverty. By 1987 this figure shrank by morebers precipitated visible changes in this period.than half, to 12.2 percent. This remarkableLike immigrants before them, these newcomerschange vividly highlighted a shift in national pri-entered for a variety of reasons: pushed by politicalorities and confirmed a transfer of national re-repression and poverty and pulled by opportunity.sources and social welfare funds from one groupAs before, they also brought strikingly differentto another, from one generation to another, fromskills, education, and status, which helped or hin-one increasingly disorganized and dispirited un-dered their adjustment to American life.derclass to an increasingly visible and politicallyastute interest group of retired Americans.ASIAN AMERICANSAs the number and percentage of poorerAmericans slowly increased during the 1970s andIn particular, education was a vital badge of suc-then accelerated in the 1980s, the political cloutcess. By the mid-1980s, whereas 16 percent of allSof this population shrank. Participation in presi-native-born Americans had graduated from col-ildential elections by people living in urbanlege, Asian groups-including Filipinos, Koreans,npoverty centers declined by one-half over the pe-Chinese, Japanese, Indians, and Taiwanese-hadUriod. By 1984 three-quarters of the immensesubstantially higher education levels. Only thepgroup of Americans who did not vote were fromVietnamese had lower than average education lev-IIthe blue collar and service workforce. This spiralels. Their education and professional experience,CCof poverty and marginalization increasinglywhich they either brought with them or acquiredinmeant that the poor were viewed as objects ofhere, translated directly into earnings as Asian im-charity, not a potentially strong political bloc ofmigrants, except the Vietnamese, earned wagesgrorganized voters. Victim to its own powerless-higher than or equal to those of the native born.plness, this growing population lost dignity as wellGiven the significance of education to theseotias a sense of participation in society.groups, it is not surprising to find a nationwidesermovement of second- and third-generation AsianstaAmericans into higher education. The impact hasSoiSURGING SUBCULTURESbeen striking. At the University of California atnaiBerkeley, about one-third of the enrollment inlegShifting opportunities and rewards did not al-1989 was Asian American (based on a state popu-imways follow the fault lines of race and ethnicity.lation of 7 percent), while the native-born whitepasDespite the bleak and despairing black slums incontingency fell to less than half. As a conse-of ]American cities, a new African-American middlequence of such scholastic skills and ambitions,whoclass became particularly evident in and aroundcharges were leveled at several elite institutions ofsincsuch cities as Atlanta, Georgia, Washington,maintaining discriminatory quotas against AsiangratChicago, and Los Angeles. Resulting in part fromAmericans.lackfreer access to government employment and$25better-paying service jobs, this important groupHISPANICSacquired both economic and political visibility.dibleMoreover, the explosive growth and matu-The same factors of class and education also in-increrity of newer immigrant groups such as Hispanicsfluenced the lives of millions of Latin AmericansStateand Asians profoundly affected the shape of the in-who came to the United States in this period. OfU.S.-

SURGING SUBCULTURES589foreign-born Hispanic Americans, only Argen-various state legislatures, in turn, gave testimonytinians had a significantly higher education levelto increasing debate over the effectiveness of bi-and average income than the United Stateslingual education. Encouraged by federal govern-norm. Cuban Americans tended to approximatement grants since 1968, bilingual education pro-both American education and income levels, butposed to ease the transition of Spanish-speakingmany other nationalities, especially the largeststudents into English by beginning instruction ingroup, Mexican Americans, had low educationtheir native language. But the programs wereand income.costly and, to critics, ineffective.Concentrated especially in Florida, Arizona,Both of these outbreaks of political contro-New Mexico, Texas, and California, but with largeversy revealed, in turn, a major shift in the natureoffshoot populations in cities such as Chicago andand impact of Hispanic immigration. Before theNew York, Hispanics played an increasingly signif-1970s the relatively open borders of the Ameri-icant role, transforming some cities into biculturalcan Southwest brought a steady source of laborand bilingual centers. With a huge populationfor farms and ranches. Some of these temporarygrowth in neighboring Mexico, and revolutionaryimmigrants remained in the United States, butwars in Central America from which thousandstheir numbers were relatively slight. With thesought refuge in the United States, legal and illegalweakening of the Mexican economy and theimmigration expanded rapidly. By 1985 over 17chronic violence, poverty, and civil war in Cen-million people of Hispanic origin lived in thetral America during the 1970s and 1980s,United States, making this the fastest-growingrefugees who had no intention of returning homepopulation group in the nation. Like previous im-began to pour across the Mexican border, manymigrant groups, Hispanic Americans tended tofrom El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua. Ascongregate in lower-paying service, manufactur-these groups spread out across the United States,ing, and agriculture jobs.they congregated, as a century of immigrants hadAs so often had happened with other immi-before them, in cities where they found relatives,grant groups, Hispanics were welcomed by em-compatriots, or the hope of employment.ployers who wanted cheap labor but resented byLike other immigrants before them, His-other elements of the population. In 1986 thispanic Americans lived in two cultures, theirsentiment spilled out into movements in sixteenadopted North American world and the strongstates to declare English the official language.remnant of the cultural inheritance they broughtSome states, such as California, passed such ordi-with them. Divided by national cultures andnances, ending the use of Spanish in courts, onstrong rivalries, Hispanic Americans were tornlegal documents, and on ballots. To curb illegalbetween old loyalties and new identities. Likeimmigration, particularly from Mexico, Congressother immigrants, their transition to becomingpassed the Immigration Reform and Control Actan American meant giving up the extremeof 1986. This act granted amnesty to immigrantsparochialism of loyalty to town and province inwho had been living illegally in the United Statesthe old country, and even their identity as Mexi-ince 1982. But to close off further illegal immi-cans, Salvadorans, or Cubans. Ironically, theygration, the act criminalized hiring workers whobecame Hispanic Americans in part becauselacked official documents and imposed fines ofother Americans, in dealing with them, disre-250 to $10,000 on employers for doing so.garded complex questions about national ori-This bitterly contested legislation made au-gins. A Hispanic was someone who came from alible a problem of growing intensity: opposition toSpanish-speaking culture.ncreasing Hispanic immigration into the UnitedAs the numbers of Hispanics increased, thistates, particularly across the lengthy and porousculture became more visible. With millions of po-IS.-Mexico border. The fight over language intential buyers, the Hispanic community attracted590CHAPTER 27 AN ERA OF IDEOLOGIESUUGO CANA PIZZA HELADOSFRITAS CUBANASBiki Coffee ShopGIABAPOCAFETERIAPIZZADOGBATIDOS HELUNA CAFETERIA EN MIAMI LATINO. This small coffee shop typified businesses that sprang up inmajor American cities with large Latino populations. Its bill of fare, although primarily Cuban,features typical American food-that is, food brought to the United States by other immigrants.

specialized advertising in Spanish. Radio and tele-significant inroads made by Protestant evangelicalsvision stations sprang up to cater to these largelike the Jehovah's Witnesses and Baptists, who of-groups of consumers. Among the favorite pro-fer a service and religious culture sometimes moregrams were broadcasts of Latin American soccercompatible with Hispanics desires. The secondmatches and novelas (Latin American soap operas).trend will bring Hispanic membership in theA more controversial impact of HispanicsAmerican Catholic Church to a dominant positionwas on the American Catholic Church. A hierar-sometime before the year 2000. By that time,chy dominated by Irish and other older immi-about one-half of all American Catholics will be ofgrant groups, the church seemed cold, formal,Hispanic origin.and inhospitable to the huge numbers of HispanicWith enormous numbers of immigrants,Catholics. With their emphasis on cults of the Vir-refreshed by new recruits, and a culture madegin Mary, festivals, and other locally importanttenacious by the Spanish language and a host oftraditions, Hispanics often found themselves eitherspecially created media, merchandising, andclashing with or avoiding the American Catholicbusiness institutions, the question that the immi-Church. For example, when the union leader Ce-gration act and the fight over bilingualism posedsar Chavez organized Mexican farm workers andwas whether this new immigrant culture, unlikemarched behind the banner of the Virgin ofso many others, might resist melting into theGuadelupe, he found little support initially fromgreat, confusing sea of American ethnic groups.the established Catholic Church in California.Since there is no way to know, the argument andThis distance underscores two importantits manifestations ensure that the controversy willtrends in Hispanic-American religion. One is theremain.The Politics of DiversityOn September 9, 1990, boats ferrying passen-unions with relatives and compatriots, and togers resumed regular runs to Ellis Island inwork in the labor-hungry mills and sweatshops ofNew York harbor. Unlike the sixty-two yearsa booming industrial economy.when it was the port of entry for millions of new-In 1990, the buildings were clean andcomers to America, however, the island was re-quiet-no children, men, or women clamoring inceiving no new immigrants. Its doors opened in-Italian, Polish, Yiddish, or Russian; no adultsstead to tourists, many of them from among theweighted down carrying the family's belongings100 million Americans descended from parentson their shoulders; just tourists asking questions.or grandparents who had passed through its por-As had happened so often in the past, the Unitedtals. Others were merely curious. Ellis Island,States received millions of immigrants whoonce the principal entry point for the "new" immi-looked, acted, and spoke in dramatically differentgrants from eastern and southern Europe, had be-ways. Yet the force of Americanization over-come a museum to commemorate a multi-culturalwhelmed cultural distinctions that once seemedpast. This huge wave of newcomers that rose inindelible. Wave after wave of people had passedthe 1880s and fell back in the late 1920s, forthrough generation after generation of transfor-which the facility had been built, permanentlymation.changed the nation. Once controversial because ofYet the suspicion was regularly renewedtheir differences from older immigrant groups,that each time some new group arrived, Americathese "new immigrants" were now an accepted,would be changed dramatically; consequently, iteven celebrated part of the American past.could no longer hold open its doors. Ellis IslandThe buildings of the new national parkNational Park commemorated a multiculturalwere careful restorations of the huge complexpast. But it was not the sort of ethnic pluralismwhere immigrants had been processed and ac-that typified the new immigration of the 1980scepted, or in some cases, returned. Obvious dis-and 1990s and that transformed Los Angeles1ease, or mental impairment, or physical deformi-(and New York itself) into a particularly strikingaties, or political opinions like anarchism mightexample of the new world metropolis. Similartldisqualify an entrant. But in most cases, inspec-revolutionary urban agglomerations like London,tltors asked perfunctory questions: general health,Berlin, Miami, and Singapore in Malaysia repre-ainame, birth date, place of origin, and prospectssented something distinct in modern history:CIfor work. In this way, America had greeted itscities that had as much in common with othertonewcomers and sent them on their way to re-world cities as they did with the nation wherebcse634The New IMMIGRATION635IfIfIIInFORTRESSLIKE ON ITS OWN ISLAND, the immigration reception center at Ellis Island greeted hugenumbers of European immigrants. It was reopened in 1990 as a monument to the successfulassimilation of those who passed through it.they were situated. Absorbing large, shifting pop-ropeans are still attracted by the promise of work,ulations of newcomers, such places bear thewealth, and political and religious liberty, butstresses of mass migration and the character of anAsians and Latin Americans now make up the ma-international mass culture. They also exhibit thejority of newcomers seeking fortune and freedom.opportunities and difficulties of new forms of cul-tural pluralism.RECENT CHANGES IN IMMIGRATIONRecent changes in immigration became possibleTHE NEW IMMIGRATIONbecause of revisions in law. After World War Ilthere were temporary amendments to the Immi-The Los Angeles that exploded after the first ver-gration Act of 1924 that made it possible fordict in the Rodney King case visibly exaggeratessome refugees from the devastation of Europe tothe nature of the new immigration that has sweptenter the country. Up through the 1950s Euro-through the United States in the last fifteen yearspeans still represented more than half of all im-and that is transforming American society andmigrants, but their percentages quickly declinedculture. However, nothing like Ellis Island existsthereafter. In 1965, a new Immigration Actto focus the entry of newcomers. Americangreatly altered policy, reversing decades of priori-boundaries today are porous by land, open to theties granted to newcomers from northern Europesea, and easily accessible by air. Thousands of Eu-and putting in place a complex system of priori-

636CHAPTER 28 AMERICAN DIVERSITYties that applied to every applicant. It also placeda maximum general quota on immigrants fromboth the Eastern and Western Hemispheres. Theunforeseen result of this legislation was an in-creasing number of newcomers from developingCAUTIONnations-often highly educated and skilled. Bythe mid-1970s, Mexico, the Philippines, Cuba,Korea, China, India, and the Dominican Republicwere sending the largest share of persons to theUnited States. Most of these congregated in sixstates: California, New York, Florida, Texas, Illi-nois, and New Jersey. By 1985 New York, LosAngeles, and Miami all had populations morethan 25 percent foreign born. To the undifferen-tiating eye, these immigrants were either Euro-peans, Asians, or Hispanics. In actuality, theyrepresented an extraordinary variety of distinctreligions, cultures, and languages.If legal immigration (around 269,000 peryear) brought dramatic changes, illegal (undocu-mented) immigration magnified these trends. Inthe 1980s, for example, about 1,600,000 Mexi-cans entered the United States legally. When ille-gals are added, the number practically doubles. Agreat many in this hidden surge lacked the skills,education, or opportunities of Asians or Euro-peans. Consequently, they found themselves con-THIS SIGN IS A SERIOUS WARNING to motorists to avoidcentrated in poorer districts of cities, relegated tostriking illegal immigrants who fled up the median stripsof highways leading from the Mexican-U.S. border.the worst-paying jobs, and often living outsidethe social services and economic possibilitiesopen to others. Much the same was true of popu-signed by President Bush on October 30, 1990,lations from the West Indies (Jamaica, Haiti, andraised the ceiling of total immigration and greatlythe Dominican Republic) and the Caribbeanincreased slots open to skilled workers. Illegal(Trinidad, Guyana).immigration, however, remained serious as un-Another large category of immigrants werescrupulous entrepreneurs shipped illegals frompolitical refugees fleeing communism in EasternChina, Latin America, and Europe. Hundreds ofEurope, Vietnam, and Cuba. After the 1965 act,thousands more made their way on their own.875,000 Cubans, 750,000 Indochinese, andThe impact of this continuing wave of new-about 600,000 Eastern Europeans arrived. Thosecomers is difficult to measure. Americans remainescaping the political repression of totalitarianambiguous about new arrivals, sometimes forget-governments friendly to the United States-forting their own origins. Yet the United States hasexample, Chile and Haiti-were, however, gener-been a success among nations in creating a multi-ally turned away on grounds that they were eco-cultural society. Changes in recent immigrationnomic, not political, refugees.will, like other new developments, test this flexi-The immigration laws of the 1980s hardlybility. Whatever the outcome, the present per-deterred large numbers of people wishing to en-centage of immigrants in the population remainster the United States. A further law passed andfar lower than in the past: in 1910, 15 percent ofTHE NEW IMMIGRATION637Americans were foreign born, as opposed to halfWestern Europe, North America, and Asia and thethat number in 1990.Middle East. Adding to the turmoil of populationswas a vast movement of people into urban areas.WORLDWIDE IMMIGRATIONThe result was huge agglomerations like MexicoCity with 20 million inhabitants.Immigration into the United States is only part ofThis movement of peoples shook Westerna worldwide dispersal of populations. In JulyEurope. Former colonial powers such as England1993, the United Nations reported that 100 mil-and France have been inundated with migrantslion persons lived outside the country of theirfrom former colonies and "guest" workers hiredbirth. Of these, 17 million were refugees from warto perform jobs that ordinary citizens refuse.or political oppression and 20 million had fled vi-These immigrants generally have some knowl-olence or environmental disaster like drought. Inedge of English or French, but their culture and1989, these migrants sent $66 billion home toreligions are distinct. Muslim Algerians in Francefamilies, thus transacting the second largest in-have encountered severe difficulties in assimilat-ternational economic exchange, behind oil sales.ing. Racist political parties committed to endingWorld immigrants were widely scattered: 35 mil-immigration have gained significant voter sup-lion in sub-Saharan Africa and 15 million each inport. In Germany the problems of guest workersCONCENTRATIONS OF ETHNIC POPULATION - 1990African AmericanHispanicAsian AmericanMultiple ethnic concentrationsOther ethnicityWAVTMEMTNDMNNHORNYMAIDSDWIMIRIWYCTPAIONJNEOHDENVILINMDUTWV)CACOVAKSMODCKYNCTNOKAZNMARSCMS ALGALATXALFLHI

638CHAPTER 28 AMERICAN DIVERSITYfrom Turkey have been compounded by refugeesshift in income shares that increased America's du-from the formerly Communist parts of Germany,bious leadership among all industrialized nationsstreaming westward together with immigrantsin economic inequality. The increasing stalematefrom collapsing nearby countries like Yugoslavia.between Congress and the presidency; the contin-During 1992 and 1993, gangs of German youthsuing impoverishment of cities that housed themurdered a number of immigrants and refugees,poor, the homeless and the least assimilable immi-seriously challenging that nation's texture of tol-grants; and the growing distrust of traditional in-eration and reviving memories of its Nazi past.stitutions gave rise to the sentiment that AmericaThe new immigration intensified the anxi-had succumbed to the moral disorder of greed andety of many Americans about multiculturalism.self-interest. This sentiment had a tangible, de-If, as many demographers predict, the Unitedpressing side. During the 1980s, only one-half ofStates will have a majority of non-European in-American families maintained or improved theirhabitants in two generations, that reality has al-standard of living; others slipped lower.ready begun to appear in the nation's schools. Lo-At the same time, significant groups ofcal school boards have tried to accommodate thisAmericans had grown to distrust institutions thatnew trend. Should they offer bilingual educationonce made pluralism the defining character of pol-such as English/Spanish or English/Vietnamese?itics. Loss of faith in Congress, repeated scandalsCan learning take place if only traditional Ameri-in the executive branch, and the political contro-can and Western cultures were taught? Shouldversies surrounding the Supreme Court made gov-other approaches prevail: Afro-centrism, whichernment seem to be, as the Republican sloganstresses the priority of African achievements andmaintained, the problem not the solution. Persis-heritage, for example? How could schools createtent high unemployment and worries about Japan-an environment in which the contending nationalese and German manufacturing competition ag-and social groups could be integrated, especiallygravated doubts about the economy. The failure ofif there were several? Could the classroom simul-scores of savings and loan institutions at the end oftaneously privilege traditional American Protes-the 1980s, worries about the reliability of Socialtant and Catholic cultures, African-American,Security and private pension systems and medicalAsian, Hispanic, women's, or gay identities andinsurance costs added to the sense that the Ameri-still educate citizens for a integrated society withcan dream might end. Other traditional elementsshared goals? Was the relevant history to learnof social order such as churches became highlystill the story of the Puritans, the Civil War, pro-politicized over issues of abortion, women's rights,gressivism, and the Industrial Revolution?and gay rights. Revelation of scandals and corrup-tion among some Evangelical ministries and sexualabuses by Catholic priests compromised trust inTHE END OFreligious institutions. Institutions of informationTHE REAGAN ERAand learning-such as newspapers, television net-works, universities and colleges-became em-Such questions exerted considerable force afterbroiled in disheartening accusations of bias and1988 and the end of the nostalgic political hol-privilege. Add to this discouraging mix the despairiday of the Reagan years. The broken graph ofover crime and drug use and the scourge of AIDS,achievement by African Americans, Hispanics, andand the political agenda of 1988 suffered from anwomen during the 1980s measured problems thatoverload of divisive issues.returned with renewed intensity at the end of theCONTINUITIESdecade. The politics of equal opportunity had, infact, exacerbated inequality. The presidency ofTo win the presidential election of 1988, oneRonald Reagan did not create homelessness,candidate had to exploit these issues and turnpoverty, or racial discrimination, but it did foster athem into a problem for his opponent. The per-New ETHNIC COMMUNITIES657of free speech. Its defenders asserted that a uni-computer monitor-and spent their leisure doingfied American culture would emerge from thewhat they did at work.free competition of ideas. But opponents wishedto know whether free speech included the rightto insult and degrade other individuals. Incorpo-NEW ETHNICrated around the phrase "political correctness"-COMMUNITIESan ironic term for multicultural sensitivity-de-bate over this question echoed from schoolyardPerhaps the most significant new communityto university quadrangle, from television studiosonly just began to emerge from the ignorance ofto Congress.inattention and prejudice in this period. Sud-Some Americans found community else-denly in the 1980s and 1990s, it became obviouswhere, not in political or social institutions,that Spanish-speaking immigrants were revolu-but in the new technology of computers andtionizing American demographics. Like so manycomputer-generated reality. The new public/ethnic groups before them, the immense newprivate world of cyberspace was their preoccu-numbers of Latinos experienced stereotypingpation. Literally referring to the imaginaryfrom many other Americans and suffered invisi-"space" created by the interlacing telephone ca-bility in terms of political and economic power-bles, communications satellites, and computeras evident, for example, in their underrepresenta-modems, cyberspace became part of the new vo-tion in descriptions of the Los Angeles riots.cabulary of computer culture, anticipating theAlways a major presence in the history offusion of human and machine. It rested on anAmerica from the settlement of the Southwestextraordinary linkage of individual computersto the twentieth century, Hispanics were a minor-via the Internet in what was undoubtedly the

ity whose large numbers and concentration with-most important innovation in communicationsin a few states and cities created a strong pres-during the era. Popular novels such as Williamence. Yet recognition was feeble compared to theGibson's Neuromancer and films such as Bladeimportance of this group. Despite the inadequa-Runner, Robocop, Terminator 2, and Lawnmowercies of the US Census and the problems of under-Man, visualized a futuristic world of human-estimation of populations, it is projected thatlike robots and virtual reality. The latter experi-with its continued rate of differential growth, theence, created by donning a special computerHispanic population will surpass the African-helmet and wearing a data glove, made it theo-American population sometime around 2005, per-retically possible to design programs in whichhaps earlier.the individual might wander in an interac-The largest part of this population is oftive computer-generated world, responding toMexican origin (around 60 percent) with muchcomputer-generated sensory stimuli.smaller percentages of Puerto Ricans and Cubans.Linked together by electronic networks, theConcentrated in border cities in Arizona, New"console cowboys" of this group created "virtualMexico, and Texas, as well as in Miami, Chicago,communities"-aga dependent on modern in-and New York, Hispanics have made consider-formation technology. Despite the unfamiliar ter-able political inroads and promise to make farminology and science-fiction imaginings of suchmore. For example, there were around 3,360communities, their experiments only exaggeratedelected officials of Hispanic origin in 1990. At thethe ordinary-what already existed in familysame time, the Spanish language emerged as therooms and offices around the country. From Nin-second language of choice for English-speakingtendo games to integrated fax, phone, E-mail,students in schools and is increasingly spoken ontelevision, and desktop publishing work stations,radio and television. Like every other major eth-more and more Americans worked watching anic group, its culture, in terms of food and music,658CHAPTER 28 AMERICAN DIVERSITYhas made a significant crossover into the USthat articulated this deep division in Americanmainstream. For example, the religious impact ofsociety. Republicans were avidly supported by re-this varied community has also been broadly felt,ligious conservatives and traditionalists, amongboth within the Catholic Church, the traditionalthem Protestants, Catholics, and some Jews.religion of Spanish-speaking America, and withinTheir vote was lopsidedly male and they lost theevangelical Protestant groups that have success-majority of African-American and Hispanic vot-fully recruited converts from this population bothers. Democrats, on the other hand, attracted awithin the United States and in such countries asmajority of Hispanic, African-American, Jewish,Peru and Guatemala.woman, and gay voters. This division of the vot-In other areas like Hollywood films, actorsing population initially defined the actions ofof Hispanic origin are still perhaps less importantthe Clinton administration once it took officethan in the 1930s and 1940s, when exoticism, ain 1993.foreign accent, and a romantic setting were farThe new president found he had to pro-more frequent. To some degree this inattentionceed on three fronts simultaneously to satisfy hisbegan to change as numbers of actors andconstituencies and fulfill his broad campaigncelebrities grew during the 1980s. Probably thepromises. In searching for early appointments, hemost important Latino film of this era was Lamade a strong and successful effort to make hisBamba (1987), which became a crossover hitgovernment "look like America," in other wordsthroughout the country. As with traditional Euro-to be representative of its population in terms ofpean groups of immigrants, Hispanic Americansethnicity and gender. This meant several cabinetwere pulled in two directions: toward preservingappointments for Hispanics, blacks, and women.the heritage of the countries, provinces, and vil-Two were Hispanics from the Southwest. A for-lages of their origin and adopting the powerfulmer mayor of Denver, Federico F. Peña, becameculture of the new country where they reside.transportation secretary; and Henry G. Cisneros,former mayor of San Antonio, took over housingMULTICULTURAL POLITICSand urban development. There were also twoAfrican Americans: Ronald H. Brown became sec-In 1992, economics provided an issue that pre-retary of commerce and Mike Espy became secre-vented the contentious issues of multiculturalismtary of agriculture. Former president of the Uni-from deciding the presidential election. Never-versity of Wisconsin, Donna E. Shalala, becametheless, Democrats and Republicans more or lesssecretary of health and human services. On OC-followed the faultlines of groups and argumentscasion, however, Clinton faltered and eitherRACE AND ETHNICITY IN AMERICA, 1980-1990Race19801990%1980%1990White188,371,622199,686,07083.180.3Black26,495,02529,986,06011.712.1Native American1,364,0331,878,2850.60.8Asian3,500,4397,273,6221.52.9Hispanic14,608,67322,354,0596.49.0Source: World Almanac, 1993 (New York, 1993), p. 388.



