L AHlSTORY OF Daniel J. Boorstin Brooks Mather Kelley Ruth Frankel Boorstin Needham. Massachusetts • Upper Saddle River, New Jersey Half Title: Childe Hassam. "The Fourth of July." (detail). Courtesy Berry-Hill Galleries. New York Title Page: Childe Hassam. "The Fourth of July." Courtesy Berry- Hill Galleries. New York Table of Contents Credits: 1. "Mrs. Elizabeth Freake and Baby Mary," (detail), Worcester Art Museum. Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Albert W. Rice 2. "Boston Massacre." American Antiquarian Society 3. "Seminole Chief Osceola." (detail), by George Cat- lin. National Portrait Gallery. Smithsonian Institution, on loan from the National Museum of American Art 4. "The Battery." (detail). Museum of the City ofNew York 5. "The Emancipation Proclamation." (detail). A.A. Lamb: National Gallery of Art, Washington. D.C.. Gift of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch 6. "Canon of the Rio Las Animas," by William Henry Jackson. Colorado Historical Society 7. "Dewey? We do!" (detail). Art Resource. NY 8. "Flappers." (detail), by John Held, Jr.. Culver Pictures 9. "Cologne In Ruins." Wide World Photos 10. "The Atom Bomb." Department of Energy 11. "Martin Luther King. Jr., at Lincoln Memorial 1963." Wide World Photos 12. "Brandenburg Gate Celebrations." Anthony Swan/Black Star ©> Copyright 1996 by Prentice-Hall. Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permission in writing from the publisher. Making Connections Text Credit: "First Fig" (p. 616) from Collected Poems, by Edna St. Vincent Millay. Copyright © 1950 by Harper & Row Publ. Reprinted by permission of Harper & Row Publishers. Inc. Making Connections Credits: 73TL "London Bridge." by John Visscher, The British Library: 73TR "The Spanish Mission and Presidio," by Louis Choris. The Bancroft Library. University of California. Berkeley: 173TL "The Second Continental Congress approves the Declaration of Independence," Historical Society of Pennsylvania (detail): 173TR "Alexander Hamilton," by Charles Willson Peale, Independence National Historical Park Collection: 247TL "Wooden figure of Andrew Jackson." Museum of the City of New York: 247TR "Webster replies to Robert Hayne," by G.P.A. Hcaly, City of Boston Art Commission, painting located at Faneuil Hall. Boston: 328B "Geese in Flight." Leila T. Bauman: National Gallery of Art. Washington. Gift of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch (detail): 329TL "Slaves Dancing." Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Center. Williamsburg, Virginia: 329TR "Original Cover Sheets for Music dedicated to Cyrus W. Field," Library of Congress; 409TL "The Emancipation Proclamation." A.A. Lamb; National Gallery of Art, Washington. D.C., Gift of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch; 409TR "Chief Joseph," Smithsonian Institution; 479TL "The Grand Opening of the Brooklyn Bridge," by Currier and Ives. Art Resource, NY; 479TR "Advertising Improved Farm Machinery." The Oakland Museum: 573TL "Ida Tarbell," Culver Pictures; 573'1'R "World War I shipyard." Library of Congress: 617TL "Henry Ford's Assembly Line," Brown Brothers; 617TR "Flappers." by John Held. Jr., Culver Pictures; 703TL "Destroyer Shaw exploded in Pearl Harbor Attack." Wide World Photos; 703TR "New Deal Opponents," The Conde Nast Publications. Inc.; 771TL "Republican nomination in 1952," Wide World Photos: 771TR "Martin Luther King," Bob Fitch/Black Star; 841TL "Desperate refugee in Vietnam." Philip Jones Griffiths/Magnum: 841TR "President and Mrs. Nixon's Visit to China." Magnum; 943TL "U.S.M.C. Troops in Operation Desert Storm." Peter Tumley/Black Star; 943TR "Bill Clinton and A1 Gore Campaigning." Cynthia Johnson/Gamma Liaison Printed in the United States of America A Division of Simon & Schuster Tipper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458 23456789 03 02 01 00 99 98 97 96 95 Contents List of Maps xiv List of Charts and Graphs XV List of Primary Sources XV A Note on American Pictorial Art xvi Prologue xix i The Making of Americans Chapter 1 What Europeans Found: The American Surprise Christopher Columbus: Who he was and why he came Before discovery Why Europeans went exploring Spanish adventurers French and English exploration Chapter 2 An Assortment of Colonies The Spanish Empire A great and victorious England The planting of Virginia The Puritans come to New England Other Europeans in North America The proprietary colonies Chapter 3 New Ways in a New World Many kinds of Americans The colonists govern themselves Britain against France vii Forming a New Nation 1763 1800 Chapter 4 The Road to Revolution and Victoiy The British take a collision course Declaring independence How British power was overthrown Chapter 5 From Confederation to Nation New state governments The Continental Congress A weak confederation Writing a nation's constitution The states ratify The American discovery The making of America Forming a new nation, 1763-1789 Chapter 6 The United States Begins The nation in the 1790s George Washington sets the course Foreign affairs for a new nation John Adams and the rise of parties E pluribus unum: One Made from Many 1800-1840 Chapter 7 Jefferson in Power The man and his policies Buying Louisiana Jefferson, Marshall, and the courts Trouble on the seas Chapter 8 Straggles of a Young Nation The War of 1812 Madison and Monroe The Missouri Compromise The Monroe Doctrine A national spirit Chapter 9 The Jacksonian Era A second Adams in the White House The new politics Jackson takes command Banks and money / A Nation Growing and Dividing Chapter 10 The Flourishing Land Drawing the people together The Industrial Revolution America's leading import: People The rise of the West The cotton kingdom Chapter 11 Reforming and Expanding An age of reform The abolition movement Westward ho! Texas and Oregon War with Mexico Chapter 12 The Failure of the Politicians The Compromise of 1850 How the compromise collapsed The nation comes apart The election of 1860 5 The Rocky Road to Union 1860—1890 Chapter 13 The Civil War A new kind of war The first year: 1861-1862 The widening conflict Gettysburg to Appomattox, 1863-1865 Chapter 14 To Punish or to Forgive? "With malice toward none" Andrew Johnson and the Radicals i 384 < 384 1 391 1 396 ( 401 < c The New Industrial Age 1865—1900 Chapter 16 The Nation Transformed Railroads and big business Rock oil lights up the world City goods for country customers Buyers' Palaces Things by the millions Labor begins to organize Chapter 17 The Challenge of the Cities The growth of an urban nation Reformers and self-helpers The spread of learning Bridge-building heroes Going up! elevators and skyscrapers New towns in the country Chapter 18 Politics in the Gilded Age Parties in balance The Democrats come and go The farmers' revolt Our money: Gold versus silver 1789-1898 A new nation A nation expanding, reforming, and dividing The nation transformed Democratic Refonns and World Power 1890—1920 Chapter 19 The United States and the World 504 Looking outward Expanding on the seas War with Spain Chapter 20 The Progressive Era Theodore Roosevelt's Square Deal Middle-class reformers Taft in the White House Woodrow Wilson and the New Freedom Seeking a world role Chapter 21 The United States and World War I A spark ignites Europe Helping to win the war The home front Losing the peace x From Boom to Bust 1918—1932 .... Chapter 22 Return to Normalcy. 1918-1929 576 The postwar reaction Searching for the 576 good old days "Keeping cool with 583 Coolidge" 588 Life in the Jazz Age 592 Chapter 23 The Coming of the Great Depression 598 A prosperous nation The 598 big crash 601 Foreign affairs in a gloomy world The 609 election of 1932 613 Depression at Home and Aggression Abroad 1933-1945 Chapter 24 "Nothing to fear but fear itself' Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal From recovery to reform The end of the New Deal Chapter 25 Reshaping American Life Problems on the farm The problems of black Americans The New Deal and women The struggles of labor Chapter 26 Clouds of War Foreign Affairs, 1933—1939 The battlefield is everywhere War comes to the United States Chapter 27 A World Conflict Mobilizing for defense "The end of the beginning"—1942 Victory in Europe The war in the Pacific xi Postwar Problems 1945—1960 Chapter 28 Truman: Neither War nor Peace 706 Beginnings of the cold war Dealing with a new world President in his own right Chapter 29 Eisenhower, Moderate Republican The Republicans return Everybody's New Deal The fight for equality Difficulties abroad Chapter 30 Mobile People and Magic Machines A changing people Everyday life transformed Education and religion Art and the machine Turbulent Times 1961—1974 Chapter 31 Years of Hope and Promise 774 John F. Kennedy wins 775 Learning hard lessons 778 Facing Communist challenges 783 A New Frontier 788 The tragic end 792 Chapter 32 LBJ: From the Great Society to Vietnam 796 Taking the reins 797 The Great Society 801 Black revolt and youth rebellion 804 Vietnam: "The most unpopular war" 809 Chapter 33 The Rise and Fall of Richard Nixon 816 Electing the President, 1968 817 Nixon's first term 820 The fall 830 xii lie United States Looks Ahead . 843 Chapter 34 In Pursuit of Civil Rights for All 844 The two ideals 845 Dealing with racism 850 Women seek equality 855 Spanish-speaking peoples 860 New waves of immigration 865 The American Indians 867 New vistas of equality 870 Chapter 35 Changing Leaders in Washington 876 Gerald Ford becomes President 877 Carter: A campaigner as President 882 The United States and the world 888 New foreign initiatives by Carter 892 New directions 896 The changing economy 900 Chapter 36 The Emergence of a New World 906 Troubles abroad 907 Successes and failures 912 New problems for "the Teflon President" 917 The end of the Reagan years 921 The end of the cold war 924 A dangerous world 930 The State of the Nation 933 The Clinton Presidency 939 Epilogue: The Mysterious Future Appendixes Atlas of Today's World 950 Presidents and Vice-Presidents of the United States 958 The Declaration of Independence 959 The Constitution of the United States 965 Glossary 1000 Index 1012 Settlers also went north from the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Some moved into New Hampshire, which became a royal province in 1679. Others traveled to Maine where Sir Ferdinando Gorges had tried in vain to plant a colony. He wanted one, unlike Massachusetts Bay, that would be faithful to the king and the Anglican church. But Maine remained a province of Massachusetts until 1820. Section 4 Review 1. Identify or explain: Separatists, Puritans, Pilgrims, James I, Squanto, John Winthrop, Roger Williams, Anne Hutchinson. 2. Locate: Cape Cod, Plymouth, Rhode Island, Hartford, New Haven. 3. What was the Mayflower Compact? Why was it important? 4. What made the Puritans successful settlers? 5. Why was the Rhode Island Colony founded? 6. Critical Thinking: Drawing Conclusions. In which colonies were religious beliefs a central focus? 5. Other Europeans in North America Three centuries ago the kings and queens of Europe regarded as their own private property any lands that ships flying their flag discovered. They granted these lands as they pleased to settlers or trading companies. Vast tracts of land in America were sold for cash or given away to favorites by the States-General (parliament) of the Netherlands and by the English, French, and Swedish kings. New France. Samuel de Champlain—expert navigator, student of science, brave explorer, earnest missionary— became the founder of New France in America. At Quebec in 1608 he planted the first permanent French settlement in the New World. For the French that was only a foothold. From Quebec, their explorers, missionaries, fur trap pers, and settlers moved up the St. Lawrence River, through the Great Lakes, and down the Mississippi. In time, they claimed an empire that stretched over a great arc—behind the English. The French Empire reached from New Orleans on the Gulf of Mexico to the powerful Canadian fortress, Louisbourg, on the Atlantic Ocean. But while New France was vast in area, it remained small in population. The reasons are not hard to find. Only French Roman Catholics were allowed in the colony. The fierce Iroquois were a constant menace. Farming was difficult in this cold northern land. Though those who did migrate found that by hard work they could become comfortable and relatively prosperous, most French people did not want to leave home for this rugged, far-distant colony. All of this still might not have stopped settlers from coming. But the French crown, unlike the English, did not allow those who were discontented at home to go abroad. The English monarchs wisely let their dissenters leave. The French rulers insisted on keeping their Protestants, called Huguenots, at home where they could be watched and punished. As a result, by 1700 the English population along the Atlantic seaboard had grown to a quarter of a million. Meanwhile, the French population in Canada had barely reached 18,000. The Dutch colony on the Hudson. The best place on the Atlantic Coast for a trading colony was at the present site of New York City. Its grand natural harbor invited commerce from the whole world. At the same time a broad river provided a super-highway for furs from the interior. Not the English but the Dutch took possession of this choice region. In September 1609 Henry Hudson, an English captain in the service of the Dutch, sailed up the river that now bears his name. Like countless other mariners in those days, Hudson was searching for the Northwest Passage from Europe to Cathay. After Hudson's voyage, the Dutch set up a trading post on the river near the present site of Albany. Later, in 1623, they settled at Manhattan for their marketplace. They bought the island with trading goods valued at 60 Dutch Print Collection. I.N. Phelps Stokes Collection. Miriam & Ira D. Wallach Division of Art. Prints and Photographs. The New York Public Library. Astor. Lenox and Tllden Foundations. This early engraving shows the little village of New Amsterdam and its protective fort about 1626. guilders (about $24) from several Indian chiefs. Of course, in those days $24 was worth what several thousand dollars'would be worth now. The Dutch called their colony New Netherland. But unlike the Puritans, the Dutch settlers were less interested in building "a City upon a hill," a model community as an example to the world, than in making money. The Dutch were the merchants of the world. There on Manhattan Island they began the great American democracy of cash. If you had money or goods, the Dutch would trade with you. It didn't matter who you were or what you believed. The Dutch let in nearly everyone to New York—not so much because they believed in toleration, but simply because it meant profit. The Dutch colony was a wedge between New England and the southern colonies. So in 1664, when England was on the verge of war with Elolland. Charles II granted his brother James, Duke of York, all the land between the Connecticut and Delaware rivers, including New Netherland. When a fleet sent out by the Duke of York arrived at the fort at the foot of Manhattan Island and called for the surrender of the colony, the stubborn Dutch Governor Peter Stuyvesant refused. But the leading citizens, hardheaded merchants, knew that resistance was hopeless. They finally persuaded Stuyvesant to yield, and New Netherland fell without a blow. The English flag now waved over an unbroken coast from Canada to the Carolinas. New Sweden. When New Netherland fell to England, so did the land that had once been New Sweden. This was a colony first settled by Swedes and Finns in 1638 on the western shore of the Delaware River where Wilmington now stands. But since the settlement was small and weak, it was easily seized by the Dutch in 1655. New Sweden gave America the log cabin. In the cold Swedish forests farmers had learned to use rough logs to build a cozy weather-tight house. Clever Swedish builders brought here their skill with logs. And the log cabin became standard housing on the western frontier. Secti°n 5 Review 1. Identify: Samuel de Champlain, Peter Stuyvesant, Duke of York. 2. Locate: Louisbourg, New Orleans, Albany. 3. What was distinctive about New Netherland in American history? 4 Critical Thinking: Recognizing Cause and Effect. Why did the French colonies stay relatively small? 1. Many kinds of Americans During the seventeenth century the English settlements in America grew slowly. One hundred years after the landing at Jamestown the colonies still held only 250.000 people. Then the 1700s saw immigration and a high birthrate create the first American population explosion. The number of people more than doubled every 25 years. By 1765 they counted two and a quarter million. These were no longer just European emigrants, but a new breed of people, shaped by a New World. A land of many peoples. The people who lived in the thirteen colonies at the end of the French and Indian War came from many lands. But the population was more English than it would ever be again. Since about 60 percent of all the white settlers had come from England. It is not surprising that the English language. English customs. English law, and English ways of government dominated the land. Pennsylvania had the most mixed population of all, but even there the English stock made up at least half of the population. What transformed Britons into Americans was that here they had the challenges of living with Africans. Scots, Scotch-Irish, Irish, Portuguese Jews, Swedes. Finns, Swiss, and even a few Austrians and Italians. This made life here much more interesting than life back home. Of course it made some new problems, but it created new opportunities. These many peoples had come for many different reasons. Most came because they wanted to, some because they were forced. Some, like the Swedes, learned English and became Americans quickly. Others, like the Germans, tried to hold on to their own language and their own customs, even in this New World. Still others, like the indentured servants and many of the blacks from Africa, might have wanted to become full- fledged Americans but were not yet allowed that chance. Black Americans had been brought here against their will. Most were slaves, but at an early date there were a few who were free. In 1765 the colonies held 400,000 blacks scattered from Massachusetts Bay to Georgia. Over half worked on the tobacco plantations in Virginia and Maryland. Only 40,000 were found farther north. Besides colonists of English or of African descent, the largest group consisted of the Scots, the Irish, and the Scotch-Irish (the Scots who had tried to settle in Ireland). These hardbitten, intelligent people took naturally to the frontier. They could usually be found in the "back country." This was a new American expression for the unsettled lands that stretched from Pennsylvania down through the mountains into the Carolinas. A smaller number were the Germans, industrious and thrifty, who settled mainly in Pennsylvania. So many came in the mid-eighteenth century that the English settlers there feared that the whole colony would become German. The Germans worked large farms on the rich limestone soil. Some of their descendants are still working the same lands today. They are often mistakenly referred to as Pennsylvania Dutch (from Deutsch, meaning German). They were ingenious and willing to try new ways. For hunting they replaced the old-fashioned musket with the accurate long rifle of frontier fame. For travel they built the sturdy Conestoga wagon, which took many pioneers west. And to warm their houses in the winters, which were much colder than those in Europe, they developed and improved the iron stove. The French Protestants, a small group, had an influence all out of proportion to their numbers. These Fluguenots came to America after 1685 when the French government deprived them of their religious freedom and their right to take part in government. An older French law, the Edict of Nantes, which had once given them religious liberty, was repealed. Now they joined the stream of refugees who, over the centuries, came here to escape persecution. It was against the law for them to leave France, but they came anyway. Their intelligence and their skills enriched the colonies. One famous descendant of the French Fluguenots was Paul Revere, who made the celebrated ride in 1775 to tell the people that British American Antiquarian Society Americans were horrified that 20,000 people were beheaded on the guillotine or killed by mobs during the French Revolution. Revolution and now was spreading all over Europe— and even to America and other continents. On April 22. 1793, the President issued a Proclamation of Neutrality, which declared that we would not take sides in the struggle. Jefferson had opposed this decision. Pie had wanted first to extract some concessions from Britain. Pie wanted Washington to declare that we might become neutral if Great Britain would remove its troops from the Northwest and give the United States trading privileges throughout the British Empire. But the Proclamation gave away that bargaining position. Soon afterward. Jefferson announced that he would resign. "Citizen" Genet ignored the Proclamation of Neutrality and defied the rule of diplomacy that forbade interference in the politics of the host country. Pie appealed to the "true" republicans here to support their "sister republic" across the Atlantic. Pie enlisted sailors and fitted out privateers in United States ports to prey on British commerce in the West Indies. Pie tried to stir up the Canadians to revolt. Pie even prepared an expedition against Spanish New Orleans. Elis conduct was so outrageous that even Jefferson, despite his sympathy for the French, agreed that Genet must go home. Genet's mission and the war between Great Britain and France brought a new bitterness into American party politics. Federalists and Republicans shrieked at each other with a new rudeness. Federalists were shocked by the bloodshed and violence of the French Revolution. In addition, they wished to preserve our valuable trade with the British Isles. They despised the Republican supporters of France as "filthy Jacobins" and "frog-eating, man- eating, blood-drinking cannibals." The Republicans replied by singing the "Marseillaise" (the battle hymn of the French Revolution) and by sneering at the Federalists as "aristocratic snobs," "Anglo-men," and "British boot- lickers." Jay's Treaty. In spite of Washington's Proclamation of Neutrality, the United States barely escaped war with Great Britain. In December 1793. Britain began to seize American ships trading with the French West Indies. Great Britain also stopped our ships, took off the sailors whom they claimed to be British citizens, and "impressed" them to serve in the British navy. War fever swept the country. People heard about a speech by the British governor- genera' of Canada to the Indians telling them to do their worst on the frontier. A bill cutting off all trade with England passed the Flouse of Representatives. It was defeated in the Senate only by the tie-breaking vote of Vice-President Adams. The Federalists, who liked England, still wanted to avoid war. Flamilton saw his whole financial plan on the edge of ruin, since the country's revenue depended on the duties received from British imports. Flamilton urged Washington to try to make peace. In May 1794, the President sent Chief Justice John Jay to Fondon to try to make a treaty. Unfortunately for Jay, Flamilton had let the British know that the United States would not join Denmark and Sweden in an alliance against the Natchitoches Lewis and Clark and Pike Explore the West Route of Lewis and U^rk i Route of Pike SB # - WEST-FtOKIDAiT (Spanish) New Orleans* Chihuahua "San Antonio 500 Kilometers present-day North Dakota. There they hired Toussaint Charbonneau, a French-Canadian fur trapper, and his wife Sacajawea, a Shoshone Indian, as interpreters. Sacajawea. carrying her infant child, guided the expedition and persuaded the Shoshones to help them. Without her, it is doubtful the expedition could have been successful. During the summer of 1805, the explorers crossed the "Great Divide" in the Rocky Mountains, and by November they had reached the Columbia River, where they began a turbulent descent. On December 3, 1805, in a fierce, cold rainstorm they reached the Pacific Ocean. There Clark carved on a tall yellow pine tree, "William Clark December 3rd 1805. By land from the U. States in 1804 and 1805." This historic moment confirmed the claim of the United States to the whole Oregon region. The claim had been based on the discovery of the mouth of the Columbia River in 1792 by Robert Gray, captain of a fur-trading ship out of Boston. But the Lewis and Clark expedition did even more. It began to sketch in details of the vast heartland that the nation had purchased. The samples of rocks and plants and animals the explorers brought back revealed unsuspected natural treasures. new way of manufacturing. Soon the Interchangeable System was used to make all sorts of things. Even before the Civil War. locks and watches were actually cheaper in the United States (where they were made by this system) than they were in countries blessed by many skilled locksmiths and watchmakers. This is what we mean by "mass production." It means producing masses of items of exactly the same kind. It means, as Whitney explained, using the skill of the machine instead of the skill of the worker. In France, for example, a young man had to work for years as an apprentice before he finally became a master gunsmith. But in America the machine became specialized, not the worker. Here what you needed was general intelligence so you could handle complicated machinery. Here the worker had to be quick to learn new ways. Since things produced in this way were cheaper, more people could afford to buy them. When there was a wider, more prosperous market, other people were encouraged to make still more inexpensive things to sell. Each worker's time was worth more, for now he could produce more of anything—guns or locks or watches— in a single day. The employer could afford to pay him more and still make a profit. Almost anything could (and would) be manufactured in this new way. Out of all this grew an American Standard of Living that astonished an envious world by giving more things to more people than ever before. 3. America's leading import: People To occupy the land, to build the roads, canals, turnpikes, and railroads, to staff the factories, the United States needed people. It was not surprising, then, that the United States became a nation of immigrants. Reasons for coming to America. While Europe became more and more crowded, America offered open air and cheap land. When families in Europe could not find food or places for their children in school or as apprentices, they naturally thought of America. In Europe, too. it was an age of turmoil. Between the time of the American Revolution and the American Civil War, there were revolutions and dictatorships in France, Spain, Germany, Greece, Italy, and Belgium. And it was an age of floods and famines. There were lots of reasons why people in Europe might want to get away from their old world. The disasters of Europe made refugees by the millions. And there were plenty of reasons why sc me- one would want to come to America. Of course. Samuel Waugh painted this colorful scene of immigrants debarking from a ship in New York Harbor around the year 1855. New York Public Library Section 2 Review 1 How were the Industrial Revolution and the Transportation Revolution linked? 2 What contributions did Lowell and his associates make to the development of the factory system? 3 What role did Eli Whitney play in the development of mass production? 4 Critical Thinking: Drawing Conclusions. How did the Industrial Revolution bring about a national economy? the old legends started in the early advertising brochures had enticed people to the colonies. These still brought people to the new nation. Now there were lots of new legends—of rich land, undiscovered mines, and fast- growing cities. And there was the real-life romance of a new nation with its doors open and its people's eyes on the future. When you had so little to lose, why not go to America? During the 1820s only about 500,000 people migrated to the United States. But then the pace quickened. In the 1830s and 1840s, 2.5 million men, women, and children arrived, and in the 1850s. 2.7 million. It was lucky that the United States had so much unfilled land. The overflow of the Old World could find a place in the New. Peoples who did not know one another or who had fought against one another could now live side by side. America would be called the "last best hope of earth. " The story of European hopelessness is a story of American hope. In the years between the American Revolution and the Civil War, the two great sources of new Americans were Ireland and Germany. Events in those countries far across the Atlantic Ocean helped make the United States a world nation. The Irish and the potato Jamine. Potatoes were the main food of the Irish poor. But suddenly in the fall of 1845 a blight hit the potato crop and spoiled a third of it. In 1846 the blight destroyed the whole crop all over the country. The potato blight continued until 1850. Tens of thousands died of starvation. Weakened by hunger, hundreds of thousands died of disease. Death haunted the land. Even before the famine, the Irish had been coming to America by the thousands. Downtrodden by English rule, they had tried to revolt many times, but they were not able to throw off their English masters. So some Irish had come to America. The United States, in the phrase of the time, was "a sort of half-way stage to Eleaven." To many Irish it seemed almost as hard to get here as to reach heaven, because the cost of a steerage ticket across the ocean (between $12.50 and $25) then seemed so high. Letters written back to Ireland made everyone want to come. "This is the best country in the world." wrote one Irish girl from New York City in 1848. One new arrival wrote back with glee that the Irish here "eat the pig themselves, and have plenty of bread to their potatoes." "Every day is like a Christmas Day for meat." And now the Irish came by the hundreds of thousands. Through the port of New York City alone, between 1847 and 1860, from Ireland there came over a million. That was nearly half of all the Europeans who landed in New York in those years. The Irish in America. But once the Irish had landed in Boston or New York or some other port city, they had very little choice about where to go. Few had the money or the desire to move to a lonely western farm. The farming they knew in Ireland did not make them lovers of the land. So most of them stayed in the port cities of the eastern seaboard where they could enjoy the fellowship of others recently arrived from the old country. Many of those who did move westward in the early years used their strong arms and sturdy backs to dig canals and build railroads. When the digging of the Erie Canal began in 1817. there were not many Irish around. But before it was completed eight years later, the Irish were arriving by the thousands. On the canal they were well known for their strength, courage, and willingness to work. Irish contractors organized teams of their fellow immigrants. When the Erie Canal was finished in 1825. the enterprising and industrious Irish immigrants moved on to help build other canals and then the railroads. They helped bring life to many new western cities. Soon people could say that "of the several sorts of power working at the fabric of the Republic—water-power, steam- power, and Irish-power." none had worked harder than Irish-power. The Germans emigrate. The other large group of new arrivals in the years before the I Civil War was the Germans. Nobody planned I it that way, but whenever and wherever the I people of Europe suffered, the United States I The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Harris Brisbane Dick Fund. 1941 Many Irish immigrants helped to build the Erie Canal. This lithograph shows the excavation process a: Lockport. New York. A horse drives the treadmill that powers the primitive crane. somehow gained. Over there, 1816 was the terrible "year without a summer." The Rhine River flooded, floating away bams and livestock. Autumn storms uprooted fruit trees. Hunger and misery' cursed the farmer. We cannot be surprised then that during the following year about 8000 Germans arrived in American ports. Again in 1829—1830, the winter was one of the worst in the history of Europe. People froze because there was not enough wood to bum in fireplaces. Food was scarcer than ever, and prices went up. By 1832. more than 10,000 Germans were turning to America in a single year. As suffering m the German countryside deepened, it became plain that their government was not going to help. Then Germans started coming to America by the tens of thousands. They continued to arrive in vast numbers till nearly the end of the 1800s. In 1854 alone (when Germans were half of all immigrants to the United States) they numbered nearly a quarter-million. The move to America became a craze. Overnight, people would decide to leave Germany, and they would depart the next morning. A 13-year-old boy with a pack on his back walked 300 miles to the French port of Fe Havre in order to find passage to America. The Germans revolt. Throughout these years, revolutions were brewing in Germany. In 1815 at the end of the Napoleonic Wars the rulers of Europe met at the Congress of Vienna to shuffle boundary lines and restore the old monarchies. Nearly 40 German states were organized into a loose German Confederation dominated by Austria. Wanting democratic rule and freedom from Austria, students formed secret societies and studied new constitutions. Peasants refused to pay taxes and roughed up tax officials. In central Europe, Prince Mettemich, the clever and calculating Austrian foreign minister, was in charge. Ele had seen the terror of the French Revolution of 1789, and he hated democracy, which he imagined was always government by a mob. Ele organized tyranny in Germany. But even Mettemich could not prevent protests like that in May 1832 when 25,000 people gathered in a small German town to drink the health of Lafayette (the hero of the American Revolution) and to demand a republic. Mettemich's policies created a rising flood of refugees. By 1848 there was civil war and a full- fledged revolution in Germany. The land was in turmoil, and many had to flee when the rebellion collapsed. The political refugees. These political refugees from Germany were not many—perhaps only a few thousand. But they included some, like the daring Carl Schurz, who became eminent here and helped to build in the United States the democracy they could not build in Germany. Back in Germany he had joined the rebel forces against the government. When the leader of his movement was put in prison, at the risk of his own life he helped his friend escape. When the German Revolution failed. Schurz came to the United States. Elis career covered the whole country. After becoming a lawyer in Milwaukee, he campaigned for Lincoln in 1860 and fought as a general on the northern side at Gettysburg. Tie was minister to Spain, senator from Missouri, and then served in the Cabinet as Secretary of the Interior. As the career of Carl Schurz and many other liberty- loving Germans showed, Germany's loss was America's gain. New Americans from Germany built whole cities like Milwaukee, and helped make Milwaukee a brewing center for American beer. They spread all over the country, becoming farmers, teachers, professors, lawyers, doctors, and journalists. They built prosperous businesses. Many others besides **^^*ft n/ttry /. //• //. **4 ✓ // //. / : 4//.______./m/v /y A"/**r~./. ,,/ /yU /. . ,.~r '. /y/. //...✓ I.~ '/,/ - The Huntington Library. San Marino. California The flags of the United States and Germany decorate the menu cover for a party on March 2. 1899, honoring Carl Schurz. Carl Schurz fought on the Union side in the Civil War. The Germans brought with them some new ideas for schools. They believed in physical education, and many early physical education teachers were German. They persuaded Americans to build gymnasiums attached to schools. Until the Germans came, it was not usual to send children to school before they were old enough to read. The Germans brought over the Kindergarten (a German word meaning "garden for children") where children as young as four years old could learn by playing. The idea caught on, and soon there were American kindergartens everywhere. The great migration. In the half-century before the Civil War, although the largest num- Qiapter 10 TAeview Focusing on Ideas 1. Describe the role of federal, state, and local governments in the development of roads, canals, and railroads. Why did people seek such help from the government? 2.Identify at least three people who played major roles in the early stages of the American Industrial Revolution. Show how each contributed to the growth of industry. 3. What "favorable conditions" awaited immigrants to the United States? 4. What arguments would you expect an abolitionist to use in condemning slavery? What arguments did some white Southerners use to defend the institution of slavery? Taking a Critical Look 1 .Identifying Central Issues. Explain how the completion of the Erie Canal might have benefited each of the following: a wheat farmer in northern Ohio; a merchant in Buffalo; a Dutch immigrant family headed for Michigan Territory; an Albany hotel owner. 2. Making Comparisons. Compare pre-Civil War Irish and German immigration with regard to: motives for coming; dates; numbers; settlements; and contributions. 3. Demonstrating Reasoned Judgment. How was the birth of western cities a testament to American optimism? Your Region in History 1. Geography. Identify major roads, canals, and railroads built in your state or region between 1820 and 1860. How did these transportation developments affect where people in your state or region chose to settle? 2. Culture. What immigrant groups settled in your state or region between 1820 and 1860? When and where did they settle? What contributions did they make? 3. Economics. What kinds of manufacturing, if any, developed in your area in the period 1820- 1860? Why did they develop there? Historical Facts and Figures Synthesizing Information. Look at the table below to help you complete the following exercises: (a) Summarize the overall immigration trend between 1820 and 1855. (b) Summarize the changes in the overall immigration trend that occurred between 1856 and 1860. (c) Using information from this chapter, write a hypothesis that explains the immigration trends between 1820 and 1860. Origins of Immigrants to the United States, 1820-18(| Ireland Scotland, England, Wales Germany All Other TOTAL 1821-25 16.540 11.300 2.362 18.686 48.888 1826-30 37.798 16.189 5.367 43.582 102.936 1831-35 72.257 32.182 45.593 102.462 252.494 1836-40 135.124 43.628 106.862 62.107 347.721 1841-45 187.095 80.186 105.188 57.867 430.336 1846-50 593.624 186.858 327.438 174.995 1.282.915 1851-55 645.056 235.981 647.273 220.114 1.748.424 1856-60 219.436 187.993 304.394 137.967 849.790 Source: US. Immigration and Naturalization Service Kansas-Nebraska Act 1854 II Free States and Territories II Slave States and Territories J Open to Slavery under Compromise of 1850 § Open to Slavery under Kansas-Nebraska Act Angry rallies were held across the North in protest over the Kansas-Nebraska Act. The question of slavery in the United States had now been transformed into a battle over whether slavery should be allowed to spread into the territories. Expansion and sloven'. There was one odd but significant truth about the bitter congressional battle over the spread of slavery into the territories. It was a battle over slavery where it did not exist and might never go. This did not make the struggle any less heated. Yet it did conceal an important fact. Many Northerners, of course, were against the expansion of slavery because they hated the "peculiar institution." But many others opposed its spread into the territories not so much because they disliked slavery as because they did not want to live near or compete with blacks. Several midwestem states such as Illinois and Indiana had even put in their constitutions a ban against blacks moving into their states. These restrictions were seldom enforced. Many Northerners would have been willing to guarantee slavery where it already existed in order to be sure they would never run into blacks—slave or free— in the western territories. Southerners failed to recognize the extent to which the opposition to the spread of slaver was actually opposition to blacks. They saw it as an attempt to bar them and their property (slaves) from the territories. To them it appeared to be just one more way the power of the North was being used to injure the South and prevent it from growing. The new Republican party. The Kansas Nebraska bill was greeted by anger in the North Public meetings were held in many states. At one such meeting at Ripon, Wisconsin, the members decided to organize a new party tore sist the extension of slavery. To show their con nection to Jefferson's Democratic-Republican party, they now chose the name "Republicans' which had been dropped by the Democrats. On July 6. 1854. the party was launched ata meeting in Jackson. Michigan. Its platform |1) declared that slavery was "a great moral, social, and political evil," (2) demanded the repeal o( the Kansas-Nebraska Act and the Fugitive Slave Act, and (3) resolved to sink all political differ ences and unite in the battle against the exten sion of slavery until the fight was won. During the summer and fall of 1854, conventions in Maine, Vermont. Massachusetts. Ohio, and New York organized units of this new Republi can or "Anti- Nebraska" party. The congressional elections in November 1854 produced a revolution in American politics. The old Whig party—which in recent years had been held together by nothing but the de sire for office—was shattered. Its northern members deserted and moved into the ranks of other parties. The Democratic party staggered but did not collapse. Of the 42 northern Demo crats who had voted for the Kansas-Nebraska Act. only 7 were reelected to Congress in 1854 The Democrats had held a substantial majority in the 1852 Congress, but in 1854 there were only 83 Democrats to face 108 of these new Re publicans and 43 representatives of another new party—the Know-Nothings. The Know-Nothing party. Numerous parties quickly appeared and as quickly disappeared during the active year of 1854. Only two of these new parties proved significant—the Republicans and the Know-Nothing party. The Know-Nothings were a reaction to the ever- increasing flood of immigrants into the country The party grew out of the Order of the Star- Spangled Banner. This was a secret association formed in 1849 to combat the political influence of foreigners." especially Roman Catho- s. Its real name was the American party, but everyone called it the Know-Nothing party because its members evasively replied, "I don't know," when asked about the party's activities. Ever since then. "Know-Nothing" has been a name for people who refuse to face the real issues of their day and instead seek refuge in hate and prejudice. In the election of 1854 the Republicans and the Know-Nothings together won enough seats to control Congress. It was not always clear, in fact, who was a Republican and who a Know- Nothing, since the Know-Nothings were still partly secret. It appears that nearly a majority of the members of the House were both Republican and Know-Nothing. Bleeding Kansas. When the Kansas- Nebraska bill became law. Douglas boasted that "the struggle over slavery was forever banished from the halls of Congress to the western plains." He was wrong about the halls of Congress but right about the western plains. For the Kansas-Nebraska Act would bring bloodshed to Kansas. The major problem with the doctrine of "popular sovereignty" was that it did not say when a territory could decide about slavery. As a result, there was a race for Kansas from South and North. The first to gain control, the first to create a majority—of Northerners or Southerners— would decide the fate of slavery in the territory. Antislaveiy New Englanders organized and raised money to rush Free-Soil emigrants to During (he 1850s Kansas was known as "Bleeding Kansas." In this lithograph, the Battle of Hickory Point, a village about 25 miles north of Lawrence, is shown. A band of proslavery men. armed with a cannon, arc attacking the settlement of Free-Soilers. Anne S. K. Brown Military Collection. Providence. RI (detail) (Chapter 17 The Challenge of the Citie In 1873. two years after the fire that had destroyed Chicago, architect Louis Sullivan visited the center of the city. He found it magnificent and wild: a crude extravaganza, an intoxicating rawness, a sense of big things to be done. For "big" was the word . . . and "biggest in the world" was the braggart phrase on every tongue. . . . |The men of Chicago] were the crudest, rawest, most savagely ambitious dreamers and would-be doers In the world . . . but these men had vision. What they saw was real. This. too. was the spirit of the years between the end of the Civil War and the turn of the century. It was called the "Glided Age" to describe its vulgar, cheap, and gaudy aspects. But though it was sometimes ruthless, corrupt, and destructive, for the most part it was moving, building, expanding, reforming, and dreaming. -n 1. The growth of an urban nation During the years alter the Civil War there was not only a movement westward to settle the Gnat Plains, but also another great move men I ulpeople Irom the country to the cities When the Civil War began, only one American In five living In a city. By 1915. cities held half of ill Americans Between 1800 and 1915 the moon's rural population just about doubled, bm the urban population grew more than 700 patent. Formers move to the city. The new cities #nr mainly in the East, the Middle West, and tbrFjr West, but tliey could be found wherever industry was developing. The new city-people oar from everywhere. Railroad builders sent salesmen overseas to butt the wonders ol tlic American farms and pnuadr immigrants from European elites and lanns to come settle along tlieir tracks In the ikst At the same time, many American farm- mtn the East and Midwest were moving away h*n Die land to tlir city. Behind them In the comtrvsKlr they kil ghost villages. One such ritigr in New England h id a popuLitlon of two afcibltants. o"ie living on each side ol the bud street. The abandoned church and the dfepidatrd school house were being taken apart I* lumber and for kindling wood. Some of the bnnrrs had gone west, but most had gone to fcmhe* By 1910 more than a third of the peo- ffcthing in American cities had moved in from krtinm farms. Emigrants come to the cities. Of the 25 mil- bn immigrants who came to the United States tevmi the Civil War and Work! War I. most set- to! in the cities. Outside of cities many of them wukl have felt lonely and lost. They loved the tfeidljr bustle and wanted to be dose to people themselves. And some ol them had no . They had spmt everything to cross the wan and had no money Writ for a trip west. Within the big American cities there sprouted immigrant cities By 1890 New York City as many Germans as Hamburg, twice as Irish as Dublin, half as many Italians as Vju jJ Su-artt Wavumln Immigrant wumen gather in Uwr market *quarr of a mtddlrwcstem town m tlx 1890s. One itu Icfll lu& adopted an Amer lean-style hat. Naples. And besides, there were large numbers ol Poles. Russians. Hungarians. Austrians. Norwegians. Swedes, and Chinese. Four out of live New Yorkers either were born abroad or were the children of foreign |iaren(x. The Ger mans and Irish who had come before 1880 were found nearly everywhere in the United States. There were also lots of Canadians in Boston and Detroit. Poles In BufTatoand Milwaukee. Austrians in Cleveland, and Italians in New Orleans. The urban mixture. Cities were sometimes called tlic nations "melting pots." Perhaps they* slMNild have been called "mixing bowls." The adult immigrant sometimes became American- I zed only slowly. But very quickly a whole colony found its special place in American life. Just as the new United States had first been made from thirteen different colonies, now a great nation was being made from countless colonics of Immigrants. Wherever you came from, you couki find a neighborhood in New York or In the oilier big titles where you could feel at I ionic. Whether you were from Germany. Italy. Hungary, or Inland, you couki shop in your own old-country Uvt ImrmrsKIwaci puccln**. bkc thnsr xJwm-n in ihi* photograph by Jacob Rll* about 1900. cfcrthrslUies Mrctchrd Irooi post to powt and from pocvh to backyard alky Notice tlic I lower pot* and plant boxes on the railing. language, buy familiar old-country foods, and at lend a church offering your old-country services By 1892 nearly a hundred newspapers in Get man were published in American elites. And there were dallies In French. Italian. Japanese. Polish. Yiddish, and a dozen other languages. Although these immigrant colonies tried to keep sqxtfitc. they could not stay separate forever. The people from different colonies became more and more* alike Children went to school and learned English. They stopped speaking their parents' language and sometimes stopped going to their parents' church They were afraid to seem foreign. Then. too. a young man from the Italian colony might marry* a young woman whose parents spoke German In die city, people could not help feeling closer to one another. City slums. If the crowds were the Jordfl city, crowding was the curse. New X nation's biggest city and busiest the magnet for the worlds inunigi where tlie problem was worst And in Sew American know-how. which at the saat was huiWhng grand cast-iron palaces for mail stores, produced another, but American invention. This was the "• house." New Yorkers, of course, did not iimol te 1 slum. European cities had their streets of "| dent rickety buildings and rvil-smelllnghiJM where die poor were tumbled together, butal the years after die Civil War. New York Cm produced a new kind of slum—the tctmf-1 house slum. Most newcomers to the cify could not jAnJ | to pay much rent. Back in die earhr years of ft 1800s die |xiorer people of New York \T4TS 'll tV In shacks on the swamps at the edge " tan Island. Ikit as the island tilled with to<* ^ specially designed buildings went up for fft'^ ^anle I * city's new pwr. Tenement houses were hui!s T lugs six or seven stones high designed to b* the largest possible number of Umthe* Hr were solid blocks of deep buildings whrwr " side rooms had no windows or vemJitiu There were also helter-skelter buildings of other kinds. The dumbbell building. Then in 1878. u I help find something better. The Plumber a* I Sanitary Engint^r. a builders magazine. & viounccd a contest for architects The cdltcn olfrrrd a 8500 prize for the best pLm for ten* men! apartments for the poor. The winning plan was the "dumhbri' let* ment. It was called dial because (hr white hiilkllng. looked at from abo\e. was thin talk middle and bulged at lx>th ends like the dutd> hells used in gymnasiums. This plan hadaftrf deal to be said for it compared with the plan u die flimsy flrctraps dial were common before The dumbbell tenement, usually built of bnrk was supposed to be fireproof It was designed to fit on a narrow* lot On cad of I lie seven floors there were four sets of apir incuts— two in front and two in bark. Smct dr Tfw <4 Ihr CIV"# W" n* UuM-m "" ih# 1" V td Wr V"tt% Tlie UiKimni kitchen x>a niulupurpoevt room U wax a *ccond brUiuum flop) foe nuuiv poor families It abo provldnf u'-fkTmp (boUumi foi Other* Tbr sewing nuM'liinr |Hi*vi"lnrl .i livrlilw*"l f"ir (ImmimimU of Immigrant hmihr** IkHli pho(c"ni|iln air by Kim. stairway ran up the middle, the front and back rooms got some light and air from their win dows on the street. Many people could be crammed into a small space, What was view about the fgan was that Ihr Inside rooms were also Mip|>osed to gel some light and air When another tenement like I was built alongside between them there narrow air shaft on which each inside mom hi a window This became the standard \ jUl\ ta tenements By I BOO on the island of Manhattan ifc* there were more Ilian 40.000 buildings of Ihl type holding 1.500.000 people A pozewmnii plan had produced the world s prt/e slum* The air shaft between the buildings wa"uriH 5t> inches wide—so marrow that it did not rrili I bring in light Instead Ihr foul air brought u?l smells from the garbage piling up al the bitl tom. II llaere was a lire, the air shafts hnanrH flues which quickly Inflamed all thf nrail arouiKl. Up the air sluift resounded the noiatdfl quarreling neighbors. There was no privacy. I Dirt, dtseu.se. and crime. The primlttefl plumbing In the hallway on each floor warn shared by four families. It bred flics and germ I Sometimes (he toilets became so disgustixgl that the tenants would not use them but dr* pended on the plumbing at work or at school There were no bathtubs with running water Nearly every one of these tenement houses hai at least one sufferer from tuberculosis, and sometimes there were many more. When Theodore Roosevelt was governor d New York, he appointed a commission in 19(0 to report on the tenement-house slums Tbn were not at all surprised that these building festered with poverty, disease, and crime Bit they were surprised that. In spite of it all. sc many of the people raised there managed to become decent and self respecting. And the com mission reported that the slums were on worse than they had been 50 years before. Slum neighborhoods were given names Ukr I "Misery Lane" and "Murderers' Alley " This was I hardly the America that the thousands of hope I fill immigrants were looking for. Boss rule. Under the influx of people and tlv I pressures of rapid growth, the governments d I big cities broke down. Streets were unrepaired sewers nonexistent, garbage uncollected Bg cities were described as the worst-governed Wliu in this democratic nation. In New York I City during tlic days ot Boss TWeed between 1366 and 1871. the city was looted of some | $100 million by the boss and his underlings. Other political groups, "rings" as they* were oiled at the time, robbed Philadelphia. Pltts- Iburtf, and other cities. Mam- reformers blamed this state of affairs i the immigrant wiio. they said, was 'a European peasant whose horizon has been narrow*. moral and religious training has been ■eager and lalse. and whose ideas of life are But Philadelphia. w*here 47 percent of population was native born of nati\T-born parents, was as corrupt as New York, where HO percent of the residents were of foreign birth or foreign parentage. The immigrant and the politician. Imml grants did tend to vote for the boss and the followers of his political "machine." But this was because the machine members—often alder men. or city councillors— provided friendly help. They* supplied government Jobs and money* and advice. A new arrival who was arrested for a petty crime could turn to the aider- man of his ward to find him a lawyer or to per suade the Judge to let him off. The alderman Shinn, who brgan hte carter a* a nrw*paprr artist. (Minted Cron* Street* of New York" In Mr wo* one of the group of painter* known a* the ~aahr"n school*' breaue tlwy chow scents city life a* subjects for their canvases. n*" ■ I Cumrtyrm An Clfl a* M Madras organized bead it dances. The money paid for dance tickets would go to some worker who had been crippled at his work or to a widow who had no way of supporting her children. The alderman found doctors for the sick and brought groceries to the poor, lie reached Into his pocket to give a few dollars to needy orphans or to men wanting a new start in business Hr was a one-man United Fund. No wonder imnil grants voted for him and lor the machine again and again The disappearing frontier. The problems of the Glided Age corruption in government and business, strikes, and Libor violence—worried Americans Why was It all happening? On bright young historian. Frederick .lateral Turner, who had been raised In the backvwikl ol Wisconsin, thought he knew the reason Ifcl Census of 1890 had announced that the Urartfl Stales no longer had an unbroken line of ri I demess Irontier l\imer proposed the thrarl that this disappearance of the frontier ft I plained many of the country's troubles. According to Turner, what had made Ammo the I .and of Promise was not cities but the kroner. The free land out west, lie said, had " been a safety valve. In earlier times if a famshs an eastern city wanted a second charter, they could move oul west. But now that the country An*t nan-boro J Krpplrr " o lithograph cartoon from the magazine Puck shows a group of well-to-do American* barring I hr entry of a new immigrant. The Newcomer *rcs what the Oldcofnem cannot tl"c shadows looming behind them of their own immigrant fathers. tra* bring filled up. II was no longer possible to find a second chance by going otit lo the edge of civthr.itioii Now If you were an unlucky new- I'omrr In a slum, there appeared to be no c*ape. OUkomers versus Newcomen. For a while it seemed tlial tire country might he divided be tween Oklcomers and Newcomers. Oldcomers lb*selves, of course, had come from immi grunt families, but their families had been liere for a long time Among diem were die rich and famous. Few of them were crowded into slums. In die older eastern states that still controlled Congress, the Oktcomcr* were In charge. They nitr most of those who had money and education and power. But dir Oklcomers did ih>( .Ii>rrr on how to cure the country's Ills Some fried to Im Ip die Immigrant learn new ways, hot y"mr were simply frightened. They wanted to keep the eotintry the way It was. They blamed flu* troubles on tlie Newcomers. Their answer W4* to slam the door Simply because their fain dies had hem here longer, they felt that the ■bolr nation belonged to lliem. At Harvard College a group of New Kngland blue bloods thought dial their world was routine W> ail end. Three young men in the class of INH9. Charles Warren. Robert DcCourcy Ward, and Prescott Farnsworth Hall, had been taught their prolessors that tlicre was an "Anglo- Saxon" race superior to all others. Tlie race was supposed to lie separated from other races not bt color but bv tlieir homeland The superior" people were sup|x"sed to be from England and Germany And that just Happened to be where ihc families ol Warren and Want and Hall had come from! These young men had been raised near Hos- luo. Tlieir parents were horrified by llie hordes ct "vulgar" immigrants and especially by time vith unfamiUar ways from Ireland and from southern and eastern Europe These New Eng tad aristocrats said that the nations problems could be solved In* keeping out all jxnple who xere not like themselves. Five years after their graduation. Warren tod Ward and hall formed the Immigration urns* V>in(.'nil—<jllkrauHmaH4" Chinese imm"cr."nK drr**d in tradltmiuil cftudir* oikl with I heir hair in kmc ptglaih. dwm a uxcti In San Francisco* crcnrdrd Chinatown <Umil IMFIO RrviHitH.il League lo prrMiadf Com*rrvi to paw laws lo keep out aU undesirable" Imml ftninls In their League they enUsted famous professors and writers Ttinr real object was to keep out the "new" immigrants I Ik- Newcomers Thrsr new immigrants, they argued, were (He main cause of the increasing ertme. I He strikes, and most of the troubles ol die country. The literacy test To keep out undesirables they proposed a "literacy test. According to their |wofxjscd law persons over fourteen years ol age who wanted to come Into tHe United States would have to prove that they could rr.nl and write. They did not have to know English, provided they could read and write their own native language At first sight live test seemed harmless enough Actually it was aimed against people from certain countries, such as Italy and Greece, where poor peasants Had no chance to go to school Hie Boston blue bloods believed that because Newcomers from such countries were not "Anglo-Saxons'* tliey must be "inferior." Bui In their |>ro|xiscd law tliey dKl not dare list |kirtirul.ii countries. There already were many people in the United States from those countries. They would be insulted—and they, too. elected members of Congress. Year after year Hie Immigration Restriction League tried to persuade Congress to pass a literacy test. Hut even when they finally pushed their hill through Congress, they did not man age to make It Into a law. One President after another vetoed the bill. President Grover Cleveland called the law underhanded.** because it did not say what It really meant. President William Howard Taft said the United States needed the labor of all immigrants and should teach them to read. President Woodrow Wilson agreed All three Presidents said the law was un- Axncrican. The United Slates had always been "a nation of nations.' It made no sense to keep out people simply because they had been oppressed. America was a haven for the oppressed. Here the starving could find bread, and the illiterate could learn to read. In 1917. however, when the war In Europe was frightening Americans, the literacy test finally had enough voles in Congress to pass over 1 "resident Wilson's veto. Oul on the West Coast. Oklcomers feared Newcomers from Asia. They worried about imaginary hordes Uiat might come across the Pacific And they had persuaded Congress to I KINS a Chinese Exclusion Ac! in 1882. Then, in 1907. President Theodore Roosevelt without the use of any law against the Japanese persuaded the Japanese government to stop their people from emigrating. This un-American agreement came to be called the "GentkfflffT Agreement " And this became the slang expres slon for any agreement to discriminate a®u": people wtien you were ashamed to admit you were really doing. Section i Review 1 Identify or explain "meting pots' and *rwrg bowls.' dumbboll butkfcng. TwogO Rng oo*> cal machines, aldermen Turner s front* tests. Immigraton Restriction League. Chncsfi Exclusion Act. Gcntkjmen s Agreement. 2 What movements accounted tor the grewtn erf citios after the Crvil Warn 3 Describe a typical tenement house 4 Why and flow was a start made on limrtrg emigrations 5 Cntical Thinking: Recognizing Cause and Effect. Why did immgram colonies form r re cities9 Why did they lose their separateness' 2. Reformers and self-helpers Not all I hr Oldromers were frightened Son* became reformers. If the country had too num strike* and too much crime, tliey said, thar could not he blamed on tliosr who had jud arrived. It was mainly the fault, they said, of the Amrr icans who had been here kmgest and who had had the most chance to make the country be ter. Who had built the cities and tlir sdutie where the poor were condemned Co live? Wb* were the members of Congress and the trader* of business* and the police officers? It was not the immigrants' fault if the nation was not per pared to receive them. Jane Adda ms. One of (lie mast remarkabk d the reformers and one of the most origin* Americans of the age was .lane Adda in*. She was born with a deformity of the spine wtixt made her so sickly that after graduating freu? college in 1882 she had to spend two years ± wmfd and played—and wmellmrs fought— together. They came to know one another belter than their parents knew jicoplc from other ftxintnes And some of these young propie went I on to study at new colleges and learned to be- I cqsdc leaders. IV schools make Americans. At home aum families spoke Polish or Italian or some I othrr language, but in srhool everybody spoke | English. E%m if the parents spoke English with mi foreign accent, soon the children sounded like ^othrr Americans. At home the children taught tbrj parents English and all kinds of American I curtoms One little girl in New York City who I had teamed to use a toothbrush brought it I ircor from SClKJOl. Slie showed it to her mot her. In ibo had been born m a peasant hut in Poland and had never seen such a tiling. Her mother. I too. was soon brushing her teeth in the Amen ran manner. Vw many children could go on to the Irre pubbe high sclaooL which u'as an American in- moon After 1870 these new public tngh trhoobt sfwead across the country. By 1900 tbrrr were 0000 high schools attended by warty 520.000 students, more than two and a ImK times the number attending only ten years Wit TV flourishing schools made tiu* United Slates one of the world's first literate nations. Thousands of the peasants and poor city worker who arrived from Europe had never learned tetrad. But In llie United States die proportion d people who could read and write steadily tn- <w**d after the Civil War Unfortunately In die South (lie promising start made during Kccon- Rmctlon was not followed by the Ok\ Confcdrr mb when they took office. towlh of the colleges. America had always torn a land of help yourself. But It was not easy far Newcomers to become leaders. So many refutable institution** remained In the hands of ts whose families had been here for icsiturv or more. For example. Harvard Col- I Hr—our oldrst college, where young blue had learned their Ideas of Anglo-Saxon Ity—was run by Oldcotncrs. It t %Hr HMMtad Smtrtj VWlv*nm Tills pliotugraph takrn at Ihr end ol the 19th century slkiws |Nip4K from a school near Ittark Rim Falh. Wt*run*ln awmhlrd with thrlr trarlicT for thnr annual M tiool pU furc The Muslim d <Wr<* Sr. Vurk Jacob R1K a Hanmli mi migrant, helped to imprtnrthe lot of New York City * pnot with his hnokft and striking photograph*. This one showed Christmas Eve at a nettkment house. hard even to become a student there If you were not one of than. New institutions offered the lint chance for Newcomers who wanted to heroine leaders. Among the most remarkable and most American were the scores of new colleges and universities. Ai the outbreak of the Civil War there were only seventeen slate universities. Then. In 1862 an energetic Republican congressman. Justin S. Morrill from rural Vermont, secured the passage of the Morrill Art. This act granted lands to the states from the public domain—30.000 acres for each of tlie states' senators and representatives in Congress—to support new state colleges. In these "land-grant" colleges students would Ik- taught to be better farmers. The land- grant colleges also often olfrrrd solid courses In engineering, science, and literature. So here Newcomers, too. found an opportunity to learn. After the Civil War. hundreds of other colleges and universities were founded. In the later years of die 1880s. some ol the wealthiest Go- Getters gave millions of dollartt to found and endow* still more institutions of higher leam- inji. in 1*70 Jonn" Hopkins urmmiiy Mr ev taWished from lire fortune left by a Balllnwr merchant. In 1886 a railroad builder. \Aad! Stanford, in memory of his son. set up \jeimt Stanford. Jr.. University. Ill 1891 John D Kockeldlcr. the Go- Getting oil millionaire, c* ated I Ik- University of Chicago. And there wrr scores of others. Many of these cottrge founders had thrr. selves nrver gone to collrge. But they slum) dr American faith in education. Even before dr | end of tlie 1800s. the United States had war colleges and universities Ilian there were In* western Europe. And a larger proportion ii thr citizens could afford to go to college here Hub in any other country. The children of poor m migrants, along with millions of oilier Amro cans, now trad a belter chance to me in ttr world Franc** IVn|umln Johnston, a prom I nm I turi"-o4-thr-criittir> photographer, caught this smior Americall history cUu at Fiooker T. Washington's Tuskrgrc Institute n6 Hits look Ihw pKiurr of immigrant chlklrrii valuliii** thr flag ■* in if*' Sum Industrial Chad in New York City in the cartv 1900b In rund airas tlir utie-ruoai srhnolhouv w."n usual Women's cxrllcgcs multiplied rapidly in tlic tA:s alter the Civil War In 1861 Matthew Vas- ir who had been born III Kngland and liad i—jr Ins fortune as a bvrwer and in whaling, coded Vassar College When Vaaaar advert'd to attract sludriits to Ills college, he also Limited the important r of higher education r vomcn Before long there were more worn i * collrgm. including Wellesley 118701. Smith 875). and Bryn Mawr 1 18801 Many other new ilrgcs. especially In the Middle West, were pn to women as well as men. And the number I iwnen in college grew Iron* 9000 in 1809 to ore than 20.000 in 1894. Creation Jor black Americans. Wealthy n and women, month from the North, also nr millions of ckdlars to licip educate black wpk. By 1900 there were already aho"it 30.000 black teac hers John I). Rockefeller, for example, hail conlrlK>uted over S50 million, most of it to train more teachers for black schools The South spent less money' than other parts of the country cm education of all kinds. And blacks there had to attend separate, and inferior, schools. Ilow then were they to gel ahead? Black leaders could not agree One way was promised by Hooker T. Washington Bom a skive. Washington worked his own way upward until he was famous throughout the world. Ilis own story of his life. Up from Slavery (1901). was read by millions In 1881 Washington founded Tuskcgre Institute in Alabama. There he trained thousands ol blacks to he better farmers and mechanic*, lo make a good living, and to ticip build their communities lie believed in a stcp-by-61ep way 'up from Following his example, excitable citizens were roused lo vent tlielr (cars and their hates against any Americans who seemed diffrrenl." These included blacks. Jews, and Catholic?*, along with all rclormcrs Somehow, forgetting that the nation had been built hv immigrants. Palmer and his followers aimed llielr blasts against all "loreigncrs." The fear of foreigners. During the wai the Immigration Restriction League Iwd Anally ob- tamed fiavtagr of I lie law that every Immigrant must be able lo read to l>e admitted to the United States (p. 443). Bui tlu-y were not inter- (i | |uat m literacy They had sarong rat ii me! etlniH prrjmlk es. In (at I. wanted to cut down immigration from Russia. I N"la u<l. Italy, and Hie other countries of eastern and southern Europe. Hie nation had been enriched In- the thousands wtio had come here from those countries Ix- lwmi 18<K) and 1010. Hut the rest 1 let lot i falta had an odd tlicoty ol their own about "super lor ' and 'interior races. They pretended that it was a science. Rcalh Ii was only a wav of dressing up I heir prejudices. Their own ancestors happened to come from northern and western Europe. They liked to think, therefore, tlial all the best people came from their The restrict ionists included university presidents and were led by eminent New Englanders. It would lake many years to remove the stain they' kft on our immigration laws. The nation seemed to have forgotten Its own origins! Free immigration had made lire United States a free nation. Then in 1921 national quotas for Immigrants were introduced. The National Origins Act ol 1924 reduced quotas until, in 1929. only 150.000 immigrants were allowed to enter the Unltcx! States each year. The quota from each country was based on the 'national origins' of the people of the United States In 1920. This favored northern and western Europe, since the large immigration from other pans had come more recently Tire National Origins Act barred all Chinese. Japanese, and other Asians. It is trot surprising that in Japan there were "hate America" mcri lugs held on "Humiliation Day." July 1. 1924. On I he other hand. Canadians and Latin Anisic, ms were exempt from the laws provision The 1920a saw the first large Immigration the United States ol Mexican Americans The "new" Klan. While the Immigration If strict ion League used the laws, another j *n - was using terror and violence to enforce ily- prejudlcrs. A new Ku Klux Klan appeared In t* South and lire West. It pretended to be in thr old southern tradition to defend the right*4 lhe best" people. But in fact It was led by act* lectkHi of roughnecks and human drrgv u : some respectable follower*, who made a carm of harassing blacks. Jews. Roman Cathoki and ah "foreigners " Somehow they wire ablm enroll about 4.5 million "native born wh gentile Americans." These Included nun) wanted someone to blame (or lac k ol <o>Ixn - it many who were worried by the lunimtl of jkk war Europe. Somehow the Klan oil he todies ilate the politics of srvrral slates. To enlist and keep its memliers. the KU shrewdly used all sorts ol hocus-pocus. Tho had passwords, marched about m whiteahtrft and held secrrl meetings But they wen " laughing matter. They whipped and killrd inn>- cent citizens Tliry burned buildings *d brought terror to whole commiiinflrs. Yet seldom went to jail (or their crimes, betja* they bullied sheriffs and judges into jawing them The conviction In 1925 of the Indiana Grai Dragon for murdering hi* secretary marked lit beginning of the end of (he "new" Kiin. Hr newspapers then began to expose the crime* <* the Klan and respectable Americans avoided it like the plague. Sacco and Vanzetti. Every epoch of Amcnm history has had Us martyrs. Their namrsmr.fr (he folklore. John Broun was a willing mar hid (lie light against slavery In this later age Nicoo Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti. two Italuo- born Immigrant!*, became unwilling nuitmin thr struggle (or equal justice for ah In 1920 a holdup took plaee at a South Braintree. Massachusetts. n!m** factory. A paymaster irwtr Mill ill! welcomed all these groups with their tl*i* I song. ''Solidarity Forever." Women found new <"|*i lings In thr kctoiT I because the CIO began to recruit workers nick- out regard to sex. Within a lew years nearly 1 million women Joined the unions. But mnfe I the unions women were not yet quite equal F" example, the litx-ral Amalgamated Oothiof Workers Still allowed women lo be paid k*ss irm men for I lie same work. The unions themselves showed drimau: I changes. The International Ladies Gannur I Workers Union, whose members tiad bttc I largely .Jewish at lire end of World War L new in I the mid-1950s was nearly half Italian. Bcfmr I 1940 many of Its members were I\ierto Kjcan* I By opening their doors lire unions had thr I power to open opportunity for new immiSnim* I and the children of immigrants. The lalMir movement continued to hartwr I large pockets of prejudice. Despite the csuunpk I of like CIO. certain unions—especially in build I mg trades—continued to exclude bheto Puerto Ricans. (IttfwrMty U-..mil Cmulmm JINAdWsins, and others whan they considered Dunn*: the 1930* like nuinbri of wxHturu mirk mg UKTcuvptl liwn 10 6 to 13 million NGm worked in factories and were able lo join the CIO. Firestone Rubber. General Electric, and some major textile linns signed CIO contracts. Un ions would play a strong new n>lr in American industrial life. As never before, workers would look to them to lieur their grievances and protect their rights 'Hie power of factory owners over their workers was much reduced. Through the NLRB, the lederal government supported the unions Challenged lw the success of the CIO. the AF of L swung into action to ex|kind its membership. Between 1936 and 19:18 membership in all unions increased from 1 million to 6 million. Soon big labor would face big business. New union members. The membership of the old line ciaft unions of the AF ol L had been mosth Americans of the older immigration— English. Scots. Germans. Irish, and Scandlna Viaiis. Oul of fear and from pirjudlcr these unions commonly excluded the later comers from southern and eastern Europe in addition to blacks and women. Tlic new CIO unions "different." Farm laborer*, im- I gratory workers, and domestic servants rr | matned outside I he ranks of organised labcc Neither the unions nor tire New Deal could bring an end to unemployment. Even after thr mobilization for war In 1940 had prodded thousands of new jobs, there were still 6 miBrr out of work in 1941. Not until 1943 would thr nation reach full employment Section 4 Review 1 Identify John L. Lewis. Samuel Gompeti fli ham Green. CIO. 2 How did some employers try lo break strkes" 3. What gams did American labor urwyis rake m the years 1936-19387 4. What groups formerly Iclt out ol unpns rao? b"g gams through the eflorts ol the CKP 5 Critical Thinking: Making Comparisons. Hj * tkd an mdustnal umon cbtter from a era" uroon? TV rise of McCarthy. At this moment a kwr and unscrupulous politician began to ;"y upon the fear and hdplrssnm felt by '.TKriCJms. It was hard to explain how the vugeM iiitiioii in ilic world had reached such ipn Was this the fault of traitor* Inside the ulrd State*? Joseph R. McCarthy. Republi- aivmjtov from Wisconsin, gave them the an- 'wrthnr wanted to hear. On February 9. 1950. r i Mpcrrh In West Virginia he charged that the Orpuitinent was lnfeste<l with Commu- m agents, lie waved a piece of paper on which Vtaid were listed their names, ills charge, rented over and over, increavrl die alarm. Even Arr McCarthy was unable to find a single Com - inht In the State Department, many trou- :*d Americans still listened to him. McCarthy wramr the strongest poll! mil power In the - unity outside of the major party leaders. Even fcrsxlmt* leared to cross him. trotecting the United Stales. Members of "ngrcvb. too. seemed panicked t"y the internal nut for which there was so little proof. But nc*t of all they wanted to prove that they were m Mix on communism. In 1950 Congress ; *atd the McCarran Internal Security Act. It ■ squired Communist or "Communist-front*' rtmuations to register with the Attorney' Gen- 'nl These included groups dud were not Com! ounw at all but which, it was suspected. ! u#ii harbor some Communists Of course. It ! os impossible in practice for any large organl- j aUon to prove dial It had no Communists. The wpfct groups had to |>rovide membership md financial statements. Membership ill V Communist party Itself was not made a I nor but employment of Communists In de | inv phnts was forbidden. In case ol an Inter- laf security emergency, die act gave the Brest[ tot sweeping |*m*rrs to round up and detain Immr who might even possibly commit csplo- I ucr or sabotage President Truman vetoed the I Harr an An. lie -oud that It was worse than IV Sedition Act of 1798 (p. 1671 and dial it DKA* 'long step toward totalitarianism. " But lie Iwr was passed over his veto. I thin* the excuse of "Internal security." in |t%2 Congress pavsrd a new Immigration law. die MeCarran-Walter Art. Again Truman vetoed die hill, hul again It was passed over Ills veto. TIr- law kept the quota system, which favored Immigrants from northern and western Eu rope. It provided a complicated and Insulting system of loyalty checks lor foreigners who wished to visit the United States. It also gave the Attorney General the power to deport immigrant* for being member* of Communist and Communist-front grotqis even after they* had become citizens. The law did Include one small victory for die American tvaditloci. It finally allowed Aslans living in dir United States to lie come citizens and set a quota permuting about 2000 to enter the country each year. The fears of Communist subversion were heightened by die arrest of Julius and Edict Rosenberg and Morton Sobeftl. on the report of Klaus Fuchs that they had passed key secrets about the atomic Iximb to die Russians. In March 1951 the Rcmenbergs. after a lengthy Inal, were sentenced to death for a crime worse than murder.** Sobdl was sentenced to 30 years. The Rosmbrrg* were executed in 1953 As with Sacco and Vanzett! hack In the 1920s. many citizens doubted that the Roscnbergs were guilty. Or they helloed that oen if they were guilty, the nation was not well served by Inflicting this drastic penalty In peacetime Civil war in Korea. Troubled by these problems at home. Americans soon discovered that from the other side of the globe the Soviets could find ways to threaten the American peace of mind. Civil war exploded In Korea in June 1950. Korea was an ancient country* (the size of Mississippi and Indiana together) on a priiln sula In East Asia, opposite Japan. Its borders touched Communist China and the Soviet Union It had been annexed by Japan in 1910 and was surrendered to the Allies in 1945. At the end of the war Russian troops taw! moved info the country as far as the 38th parallel Amerkan troops liad freed the country south of that line. Korea was supposed to be united under a government cKkjocii by free elections ordered by the UN In 19*17. But the Soviet Union prevented live vote from taking place. Instead the Soviets set To sign the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. LBJ went back to the one-room schoothouse in Stonewall, a mile from htsbirthplace m Texas, where he had gone as a boy. He knew how to make the ceremony into a warm human drama Present there were his first teacher and also seven Mexican Americans who had attended the school In Cotnlla, Texas, where he had taught before graduating from college A flood qf bills. President Johnson had chosen the right strategy Alter these two controversial hills passed so easily. h*s others found dear sailing. Tlie list of important laws passed by tlie 89th Congress was eve- popping It covered the nation There were law's to beautify the highways fsti|>portcd by his wife. Lady Bird) AfifMlarhfta rxn a main target "| the War on IWllT Ainwl grrat iuilnr.il beauty, mtllxKtn lurtl Ihrre in extreme poverty. IUII S m'/nil I I: Sur and laws for clean air. There was a law to town truth in packaging The Appalachian Krtwxul Development Act gave to the pomty-stnrta mountainous region stretching from Pwmsyf vania to Alabama and Georgia $1.1 btihre for highways, health centers, and mdusirt development The cities, too. received their share Thr Housing and Urban Development Act of 1S65 aided construction of a quarter-milion units of low-rent public housing. "Urhan RtnenT-thf clearing of slums and rrbuikllng of citirs- received $2.9 billion. The rents of low- ind moderate-income families were subsidized Congress created a Department of Housing and Urban Development To head tlie dtpart- ment .Johnson named Robert C. Wravrr. thr first black in the Cabinet The fofewln* year. Congress established tlie Department of T ransportation The Immigration Act of 1985 abolish'd ft* quota system. Eac h year 120.0CX) prrsom axdd come from Western Hemisphere lands Ancther 170.000 amid be admitted from aB oltrr m lions, but not more than 20.000of thrsroxild come from any one country. Families of prop* already In the country, skilled workers, and ref ugers had priority. Congress voted billuc&toc the war on poverty and for exploring cum space. LHJ s program offered soiwlhlnt fcf near tv everybody. The power of books. Prarideiits had ptal power. But so did authors. Rachel Carson, a slight, modest woman, graduated from Johm Hopkins University and became a famous m* rlnc biologist. Her poetic books about thr oceans and the seashore introduced Amman to the wonders of life in the unpolluted sea Then tn 1962 she published Silent Spnnq—* blockbusting book on a most unlikely subject She showed that pesticides—especially DDT- were damaging the environment more than anyone suspected. The poisonous new ebeim cals used to wipe out destructive Insects war passing through the food chain—from the insects to the birds who ate the insects Bird* were dying from tlie poisons meant for insects One day. she warned, we might awaken to a It would take a long time to make opportunity equal for all Amcncans There would never be perfectly equal opportunity, even with a whole system of free education for all. There would always be differences between families Natu rally, some parents would be more anxious than others for their children to go on with their education And. of course, better educated par cuts In IKHIICS where there were lots of books would lx* able to give their children a head start in the competition. Still, a meat deal could be done to make opportunities more equal In the southern states where slavery had flourished and where blacks continued to be treated as second-class etti rcn*. the public schools were not equal at all. And in big elites In the North, segregated black neighborhoods tended to leave their children at a real disadvantage When the Supreme Court of I hr United Stairs in 1954 outlawed segregation in the public schools it took a big step to insure I hilt educational op|M>rt unities would lie more equal. 'Hie 1962 law against segregation in fell crally funded public housing helped. After the anti poll lax amendment to the Constitution flVventy-fourth Amendment) was dually adopted in 1964 and the Voting Rights Ai 1 was passed In 1965. blacks in I lie South were able to use tlirir votes to elect officials who would protect their nghls and improve their opportunities. The years after World War II saw these* and other strenuous effort* to fulfill llie American dream of equal opportunity. Immigrant problems and immigrant inequality. The blacks were not the only Americans whose opportunities had not been equal. Every immigrant group except the English had their painful problems. They had been kept out of tile best schools, the best colleges, tlie best neighborhoods, and the best jobs With only a few exceptions, there had been no civil rights laws or constitutional amendments to protect them In fart, as we have seen (p 443). some of the most respectable, richest, and first educated Americans actually formed organizations purposely to discriminate against new Immigrants. When the Irish came here in the l&Kk" refugees from the potato famine and fro* religious persecution, they were treated * intruders bv some of New England's oldest resident*. Factories and offices needing rmplnym displayed tlie sign saying. "No Irish Ned Apply." The Know Nothing party, begmninfco a secret society in New York City m 1849. rrfc" nized discrimination against Catholics aid immigrants. Its special targets were the new Irish Americans and the many German Amm cans who had been moling Into tlie MlAIr West. Hatred against Catholics was againorta nfaDCtf in 1887 in a group that called itself thr American Protective Association. Its member* Im>iired slanders on the thousands of recent Kalian and Polish immigrants. In 1894. whn tlie flood of immigrants came from central eastern, and southern Europe, many leads* Bostonians (whose parents had Imnugr.itH some time before) Joined with professors x*\ university presidents from Harvard. WIscqihb and California to form the powerful Imnuera lion Restriction League. Among the groups most dt*<Txnimatrd against wen- the Jews. Seeking refuge fnen ghettos and persecution ill Germany. Poland, and Russia. Jews bn sight with them a traction of learning and a reverence for lx**. * and education. Many were e;iger to pun** their studies in the fn-sl uiwersitff* and medical school*. But the !>est untversiffes U* Harvard and Yale, setup shameful restrict)* quotas, which deprived Jews of their equal chance*. Chinese. Japanese, and Korean ImnngrarXv too. suffered discrimination—simply berau* they' also wanted their full opportunities m Americans. Tlie school board in San Franmco even tried to force their segregation In the public schools until FYesident Theodore Rnostndt made them stop. At the dawning of Ihe twentieth century Ihrrr were 76 million people in Die United States Of these, more than 10 million had been born art side the country, and more than one third of all Americans— 26 million—Mad at least one foreign born parent Although people brx*<H that this was a nation of Immigrants, nearh viftt IW thmk* of all Sfmnl*h upeaklng people m the United Stair* arr "*f Mexican origin TIkst rrfleM a Mexican Independence Day parade m Lo* Angeles. CallfnmU. are < rlrferating Ihrtr •tit urai hmUfie *rv kind of immigrant at some time had suf rod wmp sort of discrimination! Tilt social disease of disc rimination lasted nofcntly into the modem rmtiavy. In the 1920s t* Ku Klux Klan. along wUh It* hocus-pocus ml te costume ol white sheets, terrorized jlhoks. Jews, and blacks In the South and tip Midwest. When I Ik- aide A1 Smith ran for hnfcknt In 192S. he lost votes merely because if uto a Cathohc. (hiring World War IL FDR {iwlnto panic and put llwusands of Innocent and Japanese Americans into eon camp* And when John F Kennedy as nominated lor President In I9G0. political wondered whether the time had yet when a Catholic could be elected, hqudtcr and discrimination, then, were not ■onupotv ol any one part of the country or of any one period In our history. Perhaps they would never lx- entirely cured. But the United State* had made a good start. The traditional American open door policy at home gave refuge to oppressed people from the whole world. The Emancipation Proclamation and the Ttiir teenth. Fourteenth, and Fifteenth amendments to the United State* Constitution were long overdue steps In World War II the United States had fought tlie discrimination, barbarism, and racial superstition* of the German Nazi* Now Americans were ready again to move ahead. Civil rights laws, supported by Presidents of both panics beginning with Truman, signaled that the American con science had l>ccii reawakened. In our land the twentieth century would be another century of progress for human equality. Although originally a rural people, now. like the whole nation, they are mainly urban. Fully $0 percent havr settled togrllirr in city neighborhood*, whic h they c all barrios. From the very beginning the differences of religion, language, skin color, and culture between the Mexican Americans and white Amcr lain* (whom tliey call "Angles' or "gringos") created conflict*. Kadi group tended to think it* own way of doing things was better. But in most areas Anglos were the majority, in control of government, courts, and schools. Mexican Americans were often discriminated against. Great numbers of them ended up in low-paying jobs where no training was needed. The rise of a "Brown Pou'er" movement. The Mexican Americans organized to voice their needs. Their first civil rights group, founded in 1929. was the League of I tilled Lathi American Citizens. Hie thousands of veterans who had tought in World War II formed the Mexican C.I. Forum. Then, In the tumultuous 1960s. Mcxi cans began to speak out more loudly. During the 1960s there developed a Chlcano or "Brown Power" movement . Among its most outspoken leaders was the feisty Keies Lopez Tijerina, or B1 Tiger. Bom in Texas, he led a fight in New Mexico for the return of die lands be said I Ik- Anglos had stolen from the first Spanish - speaking settlers. But many of the nmservatlve Mexican Americans, like Senator Joseph Montoya of New Mexico, disapproved of Tijerina's radical program. And instead of "Chi ciiHl." which some of Lite young liad begun to use as a symbol of pride, they preferred to hr dimply Americans. Another high-spirited leader was Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales of Colorado He was a former prizefighter and once director of a war on poverty you lit program. In 1965 his Crusade for Justice in Denver began to build Chlcano pride by providing jobs and social services In Chkano communities. Organizing farm laborers. Many Mexicans and Mexican Americans worked as poorly paid Unit laborers. Some of these hrarrms (a Span fcsh word meaning laborers) came north under contracts to work in the fields. Others entered the country Illegally by slipping across die long and difficult-to-patrol border between Mexico and the United States. They were culled "wet backs" because some of them swam or waded aero** tlie Rio Grande. Farm workers had always been the most dif fkult laborers to organize Into a union Since they came to work only for a season, and were spread across the countryside. It was hard to bring them together lor meetings. But the shrewd and eloquent Caesar Chavez decided to try. He had worked as a (anil laborer himself. In 1962 he began to organize the migrant Li- borers brown, white, and black—into a union. In 1965. when 900 FlUpIno grape pick ers in another union went out on strike, Chavez's union decided to go out. too. The following year, the two unions merged to form the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee. Chavez, like Martin Dither King -Jr., believed in nonviolence, lie stuck to his principles through the long, painful years ol the strike against the owners of the vineyards in Delano. California. This dedication won him public support from church groups, from other unions, and from politic-al loaders like Robert F. Kennedy. A brilliant publicist, Chavez organized an cf- fcctivr nationwide boycott of California grapes. When some of his followers resorted to violence, he protested by fasting for 25 din's—and badly injured his health But nonviolence prevailed. Finally, the opposition of the vineyard owners started to crumble. In 1970. alter five years, mam* of them signed with Chavez's union. He had actually organized farm laborers Into a union and won l>rt!rr pay and working conditions for them Chavez, had done what seemed impossible. Chavez himself stayed out of politics, but other Mexican Americ ans won high office. Both New' Mexico and Arizona have elected Mexican American governors. Other Mexican Americans have been chosen for the Senate and the House, or to lie mayors of large critics, like Henry Cisneros of Situ Antonio. Texas, and Federico FeAa in Denver. Colorado. A Mexican American woman. Romana A. Banuelos, was l*i"rrto kM .in iXiy h a time lor parades and rrlrhratmn in NrAr York City ii.tinrd by Presldmt Nixon to Iw iYrasurrr ol the Untied States lYesidcni Reagan apj>ointcd 1-iuro F. C:i\.i/os ;is his Secretary of Education. Pre&ldcnt George Hush retained Cavuzos and also appointed M.tnurl Lujan. Jr.. Serretaiy ol Ihe Interior, and Antonia. C. Ncrvtilo. Surgeon General. Alter Hill Clinton was elected Presi dent in 1992. he appointed Federico I Vila as Ills Secretary of Transportation and Henry Cis Donos I:.- Sci :■ tn J Housing .jm<I I Hmii Development. Puerto Rico and the Puerto Ricans. Hie Puerto Rtcarrs were different from most other lilspanlcs because all of them were dll/ens of the United States before they arrived on I lie mainland. The special relationship between Puerto Rico and the rest of the United States allowed them to go back and forth to their tiome Island at will. liad come to mainland America. When Cdum bus arrived. I lie Arawak Indians were already there During the colonial period Ihe island ww settled by Spaniards and by black slaves un ported from Africa. The land and the tiioulc were ideal for raising sugar cane. And frontht sugar was made ihe famous Puerto Rican rum In 1898. alter the Spanish-American War thf United States took over the Island. One of FDR's bralntrustcrs. Rcxlord G. Tuj- well, was sent to lYierto Rico as governor m 1941 There he and Luis Munoz Mann, a port* and Inspiring Puerto Rlean pollUeal leader. pn> dueed "Operation bootstrap." It was a prooam to improve agrietillurr and attract industry to tlic island. In 19-18 Munoz Marin became the island s first popularly elected governor. Ikied Ihe way toward a special Commonwealth'*la tus lor Puerto Rico witluii the United States The ( on if nonwrap h of Puerto Rico wa% pro claimed on July 25. 1952 The following win showed how ihe resourcefulness and intelfo- genre of |M*op)r might make up lor the Urk d other viahiml resources. Under tlie ingenious "ComiiionwealUf plan hirrlo WMr UN*U rtmhft*co became an independent, vil governing state in voluntary association with the Unile<l Stairs. Puerto Rico i> represents! in Congress tiy a resident commissioner who car speak Init has no vole, except In eufiimin"*rs Puerto Ricans do not pay leder.il incut nr Luca money earned in Puerto Rico, and they d" nx vote in national elections. By 1970. with thc.ii:! of "Operation Bootstrap." Puerto Rk<o>had tl* highest per capita income and the best sun third of living in Dilin America. Still. P**rto Rican incomes were low compared to ii. the mainland United States. After World War II when the population gnu rapidly, piodticing widespread unemployment, thousands of llierto Ricans moved to the main land. The emigration slowed In tile 1970s. bui by the late 198Qs nvore than 2 million Puerto Ricans were living in Ihe continental United Stales. About one- half lived In New' York Cih where many worked in the garment trades Ihr city now held more than twice as many hierto Ricans as the Island capital of San Juan. Tito were citizens, but In other ways they suffered The island of Puerto Rleo had been visited 1 i;v Columbus tn 1493. even before any Spaniards many of the problems of earlier immigrant*. Since they spoke another language, they fell strange and they formed their own neighbor hoods where the signs were m Spanish Stnm $ers. without the advantages of money or edu ration, tliey. too. Jomed the American quest for equal opportunity. Many Puerto Ricans were not satisfied Some resorted to violence to try to win independence so that Puerto Rico eoiikl be a separate nation Others wanted Puerto Rico to become a state in the Union Still, in election after election the majority of Puerto Ricans voted to keep the unusual Commonwealth status. Meanwhile. Puerto Rico, with its delightful tropical beaches and its Spanish American flavor, became a fa iortte vacation spot lor thousands from the mainland And Puerto Rican*, such as opera Mncrr* Martina Arroyo and Justino Diaz, gui Urbt Jose Feliciano, violinist Jose Figueroa, and actors Jose Ferrer, Rita Moreno. Chita Ri vrra Raul Julia, and lleclor Elizondo, were ranching tlie culture of the United States. The /light from Cuba. Throughout its history the United States has been a refuge for people flenng turmoil and repression Alter Fidel C.t*- tro seized power in Cuba in 1959 and t>rg;iu to create a Communist state, over half a million islander* fled to I hr United State* Somr went on to settle In other land*, but nearly 400.000 chose to rein.iin here. Many stayed in Florida, rsprriiilh* around Miami Some of these newcomers dreamed and planned only for tlie day wlien tliey could return to Ihrir C uban homeland. Hut others br- r-imr Americans and !>egan a new life. Hie Cuban* who came to tlie United States in thr first years after C'astro s takeover were generally well educated, and over two thirds were trained for white- collar Jobs. Hardworking and ambitious, some of them soon rose to head banks and businesses. Dirge sections of Miami became almost as Culkixi as Havana itself. This first wave of refugees was joined in 1980 by more than 100.000 Cubans who fled when Castro suddenly allowed dissatisfied citizens to leave. These new migrants were called ■Martelltos" because they had come to the (MSVr hnto< amp * Am" In ISM0 IVIrl C-istm suddenly nllo*rrd di-s-win-incd Cuban* to m\ fmm the pon of Martel for Hocid.i. In n hnef prrto<l 100.000 went by small trad* arm** the dangerous Wider* to Key West. United State* in a massive flotilla of boat* that *11111111x1 between the Culian harbor of Martel and Key West In Florida. These migrants, too. worked hard, built businesses, and often prospered. Once again the United State* was a haven and a land of new* opportunity. Section 5 Review t. Identify Of cxplarr La Ra2a. barrios. JowjV Montoya. Rodolfo Goniales. Lus Moik" Mam. operation Bootstrap 2. What are the ctwt groups trial make up the Spanish speaking peoples of the United States? Locate at least throe major areas of settlement 3. mow does the legal status o' Puorto Means drf •cr from that ot other Hspanc '"'emigrants to the United States? 4 Critical Thinking- Drawing Conclusions. Hew <Jd the work ot Caesar Chavoe hc*> bmg about greater egujfcty lor all Mexican Amencans? "68 ________________________________________________ 6. New waves of immigration In the 1970s and 1980s. tininigx.ition c ontinued Refugees from war. revolution, prrsccu- tion. poverty, and tens oi thousands simply seeking a better life—all flocked to what they considered the New World promised land. They. too. sought equality and freedom. They enriched the nation with their hopes and their efforts, but they added problems. In the 1990s. the United States sometimes decided to reduce the flow Asians from many nations. The fall of South Vietnam Laos, and Cambodia to the Communists In 1975 sot oft a massive emigration by land. sea. and air Refugees fled to Thailand. Malaysia. Hong Kong, the Philippines, and China. Main hoped to come to the United States. To help those who had aided the United States during the Vietnam War. 125.000 Vietnamese were allowed to enter the country right away. It seemed that this was enough relief at the time With the rapid nv in thr mimlx*i c*t Aslans in the I niird Stairs, new Asian shops and rrst.iur.ints catrrrd to the tastes nut only of the new immigrants but .ih*> o4 nuine bum Americans U"1 U-r*JK<".w*r" - niJ. * bCoi But thousands more continued to flee. Tbnt ] filled the refugee camps in Southeast Asia aoi I overflowed to the United Slates and other "- I lions. By 1985. 728.000 of them had cun** I thr United States. Uiese new immigrant** bat 1 distant binds did well They were eager to be I come American*. They worked hard anil a delightful new Asian spice to the hfe \mA food) of the United States Many /Vain you* |ieople wrrcun* the language handicap oi did exceedingly well in school. IVrsident Ra gan. in his Slate of the Union message toCm- grr*s in 1985. pointed to Jean Nguyen, lbo was se ated in the balcony beside Mrs Kca&a Just ten years liefore she had fled Vietnam "th lier family, and now she was alxiul to gradua* from the United States Military Academy * West Point. In 1988. in New York City, ekvesrf lire fourteen finalists in a nationwide scltacr competition were Asians. From other parts of Asia from India. Inwall. Korea, and the Philippines—they came by the tens of thousands. In the 1980s Asm Americans were the nations fastest grown* minority, and tlie visible success of so nuai Asian Americans led some observers to rai I them "the model minority.** In fart, many .Von Americans, particularly South blast Asun Americans, experienced severe economic hard ship In America, with low Incomes and hlAi rates of dependence on welfare for survival Refugees from Latin America and the Cork bean. Another wave of unhappy people ar rived from troubled Central America, and fntn strife tom Guatemala. Nicaragua, and El Sii vador. Many came in haste and terror without passports or visas. A third wave came from thr poverty stricken and turbulent islands of the Caribbean. From llaiU. they were fleeing the brutal dictatorship of the Dinrahrrs. "Papa Doc'* and his son ' Baby Doe." Hall the people had no jobs on that Island of hunger. Even after the long Duvallcr rule (1957-1986) ended fey still came. To check the flow, the government began to send back those who came without permits. Other refugees were detained in pn* ons and camps while courts decided whether they should be granted political asylum. Alter the Haitian military overthrew President Jean Bertrand Aristide In 1991. I Ik- exodus increased MJ dramatically lliai Prrsldmt Bush ordered the immediate return ot thousand* of proplr fleeing by buat. In 1993 and 1991. President Cllntofi continued that policy, whflr working with die United Nations to Ini* posr a trade embargo that lie hoped would farrr the military to reinstate President Arts Udr. Tlie military responded to international pressure with repression, and more Haitians, with no sure destination, left that troubled county's shores. in 1991. a new Hood of refugees left Cuba for Flor*ti Cuba's economy was in tatter*, and >ijfcT the breakup of the Soviet Union (p. 9301. Cuban President Castro had no strong alb', By creating a refugee crisis. Castro hoped to pres "urv the United States to end the trade embargo on Cuba. But lYesident Clinton refused ti>end the cmlxariio. or allow Cuban refugees to enter the United States, until Castro reformed his Communist dictatorship. Immigration reform Immigrants came from trouble spots on all continents—from Afghani nan. South Alik a, the Soviet Union. Ediiopla. and Ireland They c ame for a Job and for a brt- icr life Even If they had entered illegally they often found work. They were willing to take jobs that oilier Americans shunned, and they worked hard, Their children who were born hrre were citizens of the United Slates, according to the Constitution. And If they became fetal residents, llielr relatives would be admit fed to join them. President Carter proposes! a law* In 1977 to nake legal all life* illegal aliens who had been hre since 1970. Alter that, employer* would lie fined lor hiring illegal alien*. President Reagan for a similar law. But Congress refused act. By 1986 the whole nation wa* troubled. United States had been built by those Tig asylum from poverty and tyranny. How wr to adjust this tradition to the rircum- cs and problem* of the late twentieth iiiy? In 1986 there were million* of illegal aliens in United States. Unemployment and inflation in neighboring Mexico drove more across our southern border every day. In late 1986. the Immigration and Naturalization Sendee re ported that in Just one year it had caught a record 1.8 million people, most from Mexico, who were trying to slip in. Thousands of other* never became statistics. Finally Congress passed the Immigration Reform and Control Act ui 1986. Illegal alien* who could prove that they had been In the United State* since January 1. 1982. were al lowed to become legal residents. For the first time, anyone hiring Illegal immigrants would be fined. And our borders were to br more closely patrolled. Not everyone was luifvpy with the law. but It was generally welcome. Until then there really was no clear policy. 1-tw* on the book* were sometimes enforced, sometimes ignored. For die moment, our doors were not open wide to all comers. But neither were they closed all the way. Secti°n 6 Review 1. Wlvit maior immigrant groups sought refuge n the United States Inthe 1970s and 1980s9 Why did they leave thor homes? 2 Why were many Americans n tavor of refermng mrrAgraben laws in the 19/Os and 1980s9 3 Critical Thinking: Making Comparisons i what ways 6 the "sanctuary movement" of the 1980s Ike the "underground rairoad of tie nvd 1800s? in what ways does it cffler? 7. New vistas of equality As other groups of people sought equal rights. Americans were forced to reexamine the meaning at the word cqtinfili/. They discovered new opportunities ;ind new problem*. Gay and lesbian rights. Till* "minority" was not an immigr.uit group. It inclinlcd Americans ot all races, all religion*, and IxHh sexes. It was 