^=0©=^ A History of the American People R. Jackson Wilson Smith College James Gilbert University oj Maryland Karen Ordahl Kupperman Nov York University Stephen Nissenbaum University oj Massachusetts Donald M. Scott The New School for Social Research HarperCollinsCo/lege Publishers Executive Editor: Bruce Borland Developmental Editor; Judith M. Anderson Project Coordination and Text Design Rutile, Shaw & Wethenll, Inc. Cover Designer: Kay Petronio Cover Illustration. Painting by Helen Lundeberg: "Pioneers of the West," 1934. National Museum of American Art, Smithsonian Institution Transfer from General Services Administration. Art Studio: Mapping Specialists Ltd Photo Researcher: Comne Johns Electronic Production Manager. Angel Gonzalez Jr. Manufacturing Manager. Willie Lane Electronic Page Makeup: Amcricomp Printer and Binder. R.R. Donnelly & Sons Company Cover Printer: The Lehigh Press. Inc For permission to use copyrighted material, grateful acknowledgment is made to the copyright holders on pp. C-l through C-3, which are hereby made part of this copynght page The Put suit of Liberty: A History of the American People, Volume One To 1877. Third Edition Copyright © 199b by HarperCollins College Publishers fln 1 larperCollins® and im(B are registered trademarks of HarperCollins Publishers Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in the United Stales of America. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information address HarperCollins College Publishers, 10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022. For information about any HarperCollins title, product, or resource, please visit our World Wide Weh site at http://www.harpercollins.com/collrge. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data The pursuit of liberty . a history of the American people / R Jackson Wilson . [et al.I. — 3rd ed. p. cm. Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index. ISBN 0-673-46921-2 (pbk v 1) — ISBN 0-673-46922-0 (pbk. : v. 2) 1 United Stales—History. I. Wilson, Raymond Jackson. 973—dc20 C1P 95 96 97 98 987654321 Brief Contents Detailed Contents vii Maps, Tables, and Figures xiii Preface XV Supplements xix Acknowledgments xxiii About the Authors XXV Fpisttde: Sir Walter Raleigh and the Beginnings of the British Empire 3 Europe's New World 24 Episode: 1622—Clash of Cultures in Virginia 49 Patterns of Settlement to Mid-Seventeenth Century 68 Episode: Witchcraft at Salem Village 91 New Peoples and New Patterns in the Later Seventeenth Century 109 Episode: Runaway Slaves and Spanish Florida 135 Expansion and Consolidation 149 Episode: The Boston Massacre 177 The Coming of Independence 194 Episode: George Washington, from General to President 217 The Malting of the American Constitution 232 Episode: Aaron Burr, Conspirator 253 Dissent and Conflict in the New Nation vi Brief Contents Episode: The Trail of Tears—The Tragedy of the Cherokee Notion 295 Expansion and the Market Economy 316 Episode: 1840—The Log Cabin Campaign 335 Democracy and a New Politics 35i Episode: The Garrisons—Ail Antebellum Tamil} 381 The Self-Made Society 397 Episode: Nat Turner's Rebellion 425 Slavery and Southern Society 440 Episode: Uncle Tom's Cabin 465 Slavery, the West, and the Fate of the Republic 483 l pisode: Abraham Lincoln—f rom Politics to Martyrdom 513 The Mighty Scourge of War 528 Episode: Ldisto Island—l and and Freedom 555 Reunion and Reconstruction 57J The Declaration oe Independence A-3 The Constitution of ihe United States of America A-6 Amendments to the Constitution A-15 Credits C-l Index 1-1 Detailed Contents Maps, Tables, and Figures xiii Preface XV Supplements xix Acknowledgments xxiii About the Authors XXV Episode: Sir Walter Raleigh and the Beginnings of the British Empire 3 Europe's New World 24 Native American Cultures 24 First Contacts 28 Columbus 28 John Cabot 29 The Spanish 29 The French 31 The Impact of European Diseases 33 First Colonies 34 The Southwest 34 Spanish and French Settlements in the East 35 The English Approach to Colonization 38 Jamestown 40 Captain John Smith 41 Indian Relations 42 Colonies Established 44 Episode: 1622—Clash of Cultures in Virginia 49 Patterns of Settlement to Mid-Seventeenth Century 6" The Southwest 69 The Chesapeake 70 Virginia 70 Maryland 74 New England 74 Puritanism 75 Plymouth 75 Massachusetts Bay 77 Middle Colonies 82 New Netherland 82 New Sweden 84 Pal terns 85 Episotle: Witchcraft at Salem Village 91 New Peoples and New Patterns in the l ater Seventeenth Century 109 New Colonies 110 The Carolinas 110 Pennsylvania 112 vii viii Detailed Contents Trade 114 The Atlantic 114 Mercantilism 115 Trade and Settlement in the Interior 116 New England to Florida: The Settled Colonies 117 New England 117 New York 119 The Chesapeake 120 Florida 121 Colonial Wars 122 The Pueblo Revolt 123 Bacon's Rebellion 123 King Philip's War 12 5 Glorious Revolutions 127 Patterns 129 Episode: Runaway Slaves and Spanish Florida 135 Expansion and Consolidation 149 New Areas of Settlement 149 Immigration 149 Settlement of the Frontier in the East 151 American Indians and the Clash of Empires 154 The West 156 The Settled East 160 Religion and Colonial Elites 160 Economic Growth 164 Slavery in the Eighteenth Century 165 Social Order 166 The French and Indian War 168 Effects of the War 169 Lpisode: The Boston Massacre 177 The Coming of Independence 194 Novel Taxation 194 The Sugar Act 194 The Stamp Act 195 Constitutional Challenges 195 The Stamp Act Congress 196 The Townshend Acts, 1767 197 The Boston Tea Party and the Coercive Acts 199 The Quebec Act 201 The Continental Congress, 1774 201 First Shots 202 Washington Takes Command 204 Tom Paine's Common Sense 204 The Declaration of Independence 205 War 206 Indian Involvement 208 Turning Point 209 France Enters the War 209 The Home Front 210 Victory 210 Episode: George Washington, from General to President 217 The Making of the American Constitution 232 The Confederation Period 233 Government Under the Articles 234 Achievements Under the Articles 235 Five Major Problems of the Confederation 237 Detailed Contents ix The Philadelphia Convention 239 The Virginia and New Jersey Plans 240 The New Constitution 241 Powers of the Federal Government 241 Checks and Balances 242 Attitudes Toward Democracy 243 The Struggle for Ratification 244 Things Left Unsaid and Undone 245 Political Parties 246 Slavery 247 The Bill of Rights 248 Episode: Aaron Burr, C onspirator 253 Dissent and Conflict in the New Nation 270 Partisan Politics 271 Defining the Executive Branch 271 Hamilton's Financial Program 272 The Whiskey Rebellion 274 Republicans Versus Federalists 274 The Election of 1800 276 Jefferson's Republicanism 277 Marshall and the Judiciary 279 Foreign Affairs 280 A Shaky Neutrality 281 Negotiations with France 282 Territorial Expansion 283 The Louisiana Purchase 284 Trouble with Britain 284 The War of 1812 287 The Hartford Convention 289 Episode: The Trail of Tears—The tragedy of the Cherokee Nation 295 Expansion and the Market Economy 316 Osceola and the Seminole Wars 316 The Expansion of Southern Agriculture 319 War 319 Land Hunger: The Rise of "King Cotton" 320 The Expansion of Northern Agriculture 323 Tecumseh, William Henry Harrison, and the Defeat of the Northwestern Indians 323 land Hunger: The Rise of Wheal 327 Getting to Market: The Erie Canal 328 The Expansion of Market Agriculture 330 Episode: 1840—The Log Cabin Campaign 335 Democracy and a New Politics 351 Political Parties 351 Politics and the Panic of 1819 352 The Republican Consensus and Diplomacy 354 The End of the Dynasty 355 John Quincy Adams 357 The Election of 1828 358 The New Politicians 359 Politics and the Law 361 Detailed Contents A New Theory of Party 362 The Two-Party Idea 362 Parties and the Government 363 Parties and "The People" 364 The Politics of Sectionalism 367 The Missouri Compromise 367 The Nullification Crisis 368 The Bank "War" 369 Jackson and His Parly 370 And Tyler Too 372 The Travail of Martin Van Buren 373 The Whig Split 375 Government "By the People" 375 Episode: The Garrisons—An Antebellum Family 381 The Self-Made Society 397 Economic Growth and Transformation 397 The Rise of Corporations 398 The Advent of the Railroad 399 Population 399 Urbanization 400 Technology. Growth, and Their Effects 402 The "Self-Made Man" 404 Middle-Class Evangelism 405 Charles Grandison Finney 406 Tracis and Missionaries 406 A New Model of Family Life 407 Changes in the Role of Women 409 A Feminist Alternative 410 An Age of Reformers 411 Utopian Communities 413 The Mormons 413 Workers' Movements 414 New Artists, New- Ideas 415 Fpisode: Nat Turner's Rebellion 425 Slavery and Southern Society 440 Slavery and Market Capitalism 442 Slavery and Colton 443 Slavery as a Social System 446 Varieties of Slave Experience 447 The Master's Power 448 Slaves' Responses to Servitude 449 Resistance 449 The Slave Family 449 Slave Culture 452 Slave Religion 453 The Social Structure of the South 453 Planter Rule 454 The Proslavcry Argument 455 The Ideal of Southern Womanhood 458 .v*"sea=f 12 EXPANSION AND THE CRISIS OF THE UNION 463 Fpisode: Uncle Tom's Cabin 465 Slavery, the West, and the Fate of the Republic 483 "Manifest Destiny" 485 The Mexican War 486 Mexican Independence 486 Texan Independence 487 The Texas Question 488 War 490 Slavery and Expansion 494 Slavery and Politics: The Election of 1848 495 The Crisis and Compromise of 1850 495 Detailed Contents xi The Resumption of Expansion 498 The Kansas-Nebraska Act 498 "Bleeding Kansas" 500 The Rise of the Republican Party 501 Republican Ideology 502 The Rush to Disunion 503 The Dred Scott Case 503 John Brown s Raid 504 The Election of 1860 505 Southern Response to Lincoln's Election 506 Episode: Abraham Lincoln—From Politics to Martyrdom 513 The Mighty Scourge of War 528 Building and Equipping Annies 528 Strategy—Theory and Practice 530 The Struggle Begins 532 Leadership and Opposition in Wartime 536 War and Slavery 538 The Struggle Climaxes 542 The Election of 1864 544 The Straggle Ends 546 The Toll of Total War 547 Episode: Ldisto Island—Land and Freedom 555 Reunion and Reconstruction 571 Lincoln's Plan for Reconstruction 573 Presidential Reconstruction Under Johnson 575 Black Codes 578 Congressional Reconstruction 579 Radical Reconstruction 581 The Republican Coalition in the South 584 Redeeming the States 588 The End of Reconstruction 593 The Declaration of Independence A-3 The Constitution of ihe United States of America A-6 Amendments to the Constitution A-15 Credits________________________C-l Index 1-1 New Peoples and New Patterns in the Later Seventeenth Century The years between 1640 and 1660 were a tune of upheaval in English life that saw civil war, the execution of Charles 1, and an experiment with Puritan rule. No new colonies were founded during this period. But with the restoration of the Stuart line and the return of Charles II to the English throne, a new phase of colonization began. New colonies were founded, and these attracted broad streams of immigration. And many of the older colonies continued to draw settlers in large numbers. So, interest in colonization continued on two levels: investors saw the plantations as a good place to put their money; and ordinary men and women saw America as a place offering opportunities they lacked at home. The colonies were dramatically different in the later seventeenth century from the pattern earlier in the century. First, and foremost, they drew complex populations. The voluntary immigrant stream after mid-century was composed of people from all over Britain and Europe, not just from England. New' Netherland had seen such a migrant pool from the beginning. Nowr mixed populations became the rule in the colonies, although the New England colonies received relatively fewer new immigrants and therefore retained a more homogeneously English population than other regions. Secondly, a large percentage of newcomers were involuntary immigrants from Africa. During the later seventeenth century slavery became established as the labor system of the southern colonies, and slaves were present in all colonies. Even the minister in Salem Village, Samuel Parris, owned a slave, Tituba. This added yet another kind of complexity to colonial populations. Slavery also meant that the difference between the style of life of those who owned numbers of slaves and those who had fewr or none became increasingly greater Colonists who started well-off, especially sons and daughters born in America, became wealthier. A man or woman who received an estate from parents got a start in life that newcomers could not match. Even in the middle and northern colonies, such "social distance' between rich and poor grew, although the extremes were less far apart than in the south. The new colonies founded in the later seventeenth century shared design characteristics that set them apart from the earlier settlements. All these colonies were the property of one or a small number of proprietors, replacing the joint- stock company form that sponsored most ol the successful early colonies. Several founders of later colonies took their rights as proprietors seriously and seized the opportunity to experiment with Chapter 3 Growth and Diversification novel forms of government. Like earlier colonies, they offered land to colonists. They also offered a degree of religious toleration, and thereby attracted many who, fearing persecution in Europe, welcomed the chance to create a new life for themselves and their families in an atmosphere of freedom. The Carolina coast had always lxien considered an attractive site for settlement. The French Protestant Huguenots, the Spanish, and the English had all tried to create settlements there during the sixteenth century Bui all had failed, and Carolina remained unsettled until after the middle of the seventeenth century. When the time came, the Carolinas were created in a unique way. Rights to colonize were granted to a group of men by Charles 11 as a reward for their loyalty in supporting King Charles I during the Civil War. Eight aristocratic proprietors were given Lhe grant of Carolina, which originally included both North Carolina and South Carolina, in 1663. Although the constitution they drew up for Carolina included provision for creation of an aristocratic, almost feudal, structure in the colony, the proprietors followed the lead of other successful English colonies in offering self-government through an elected assembly, religious toleration, and a generous headlight system—originally 150 acres for every immigrant. The immigrants from Europe to Carolina, as in all the colonies in the later seventeenth century, were largely from areas other than England. Some English religious dissenters came, who were excluded from civic life at home because of their religious beliefs. Other immigrants were from Scotland, still a separate country, Scots-lrish from Northern Ireland, and Huguenots from France. But many of the earliest Carolina planters, especially in the southern part, did not come directly from Europe but rather from the English colony of Barbados in the Caribbean. That colony had become extremely rich as a sugar-producing island, and wealthy planters were prepared to set up their sons as planters in South Carolina. Drawing settlers from Barbados carried momentous consequences, because slavery was already well-established in the sugar islands. In the older mainland plantations in the Chesapeake, the transition from indentured servitude of Europeans to permanent slavery of Africans was in its early stages and the proportion of slaves in the population remained fairly small in the 1660s. In South Carolina, by contrast, slavery was the principal labor system from the beginning on the plantations, and slaves made up a large percentage of the population. The Barbadian immigrants received enormous land grants and, using their slaves, set up large-scale plantations. The city of Charleston was created in 1670 as a planned city, with streets and squares laid out in advance, and many of the planters chose to live in the city, spending much of their time away from their plantations. South Carolina was set apart from other colonies by the scale of us commitment to slavery. It also differed in its wealth. South Carolina was to be the most lucrative of all the mainland colonies, and therefore was accorded most importance in the eyes of English officials. Charleston society maintained an opulence of style not seen in the other colonies. Travelers remarked that Lhe Charleston people lived like the nobility in England: "Stale, magnificence, and ostentation, the natural attendants of riches, are conspicuous, among this people." They also kept up with the latest fashions from England, in dress, the theater, books, and music. Huge landholdings meant that parents of this elite class could endow' all their children, women as well as men, with estates. Women thus became important in the maintenance of family' position, and intermarriage within this elite cemented relationships. Expansion and Consolidation America continued to be a magnet for Old World peoples in the eighteenth century. The opening land offered unparalleled opportunity for Europeans tleeing religious or economic adversity. Many such migrants were prepared to serve long terms of servitude in order to pay for their own passage and to bnng over iheir families. Afncans, involuntary immigrants, were brought in even larger numbers, and it was their labor that helped build the dreams of other immigrants Their servitude would never end. and their children would inherit slave status Opening opportunity for some and closing the door to freedom for others proceeded together throughout' the century that would lead to the American Revolution, Unparalleled growth transformed American life in the half-century before the Revolution. Because land was still available in the original grants, the settlements were able to perform a feat considered impossible: absorb huge numbers of new people without a drop in the standard of living In fact, the population of the thirteen colonies doubled every twenty-five years in the century' before the Revolution. Natural increase, more births than deaths, was the source of much of the growth, particularly in the healthy North, but immigration was the great provider of new Americans, increasing the population tenfold from about 200,000 in 1700 to almost 2 million by 1770. Immigration from Germany, one major source of newcomers, peaked through the middle years of the eighteenth century', with 50,000 men and women Hooding into America in this period. They were attracted by available land and religious toleration, and they fled war, conscription, persecution, and high taxation. But, despite the many reasons for coming, the servant flow began to grow only when the recruitment process became highly organized Recruiters, often returned immigrants themselves, went through their old neighborhoods publicizing the opportunities available in America. Offering to arrange all die details of the passage, these recruiters worked with merchants in Rotterdam who carried the migrants across the Atlantic. Newcomers signed contracts that gave them a specified amount of time to pay off their passage, either by getting a relative already in America to pay for them or by working after arrival. The length of the term of servitude would depend on the skills the newcomer brought. The German migration was fam- Chapter 4 The Eighteenth Century German immigrants. Tlie Salzburgers, persecuted Lutherans recruited to colonize the new colony of Georgia, are shown in this 1732 broadside. They were part of the flood of immigrants from all over Europe that flowed into Britain's American colonies in the eighteenth century. ily-centered, and many newcomers did find support from relatives and former neighbors already in America. The flow of settlers was most intense in the period between 1760 and the Revolution. Immigration from Britain contributed to the flood in those years. As many as 100,000 to 150,000 Scotch-lrish from northern Ireland came before 1760. And well over 100,000 Protestants from Ireland, plus Scots and others from the north of England, came in the decades before Lhe Revolution. The decision to emigrate always involved a combination of push and pull factors All men and women who made the agonizing decision to leave their homes, fnends, and families came partly because of hard times at home But they also were lured to America by the organized recruitment that advertised the opportunities available across the Atlantic, the chance to build for a secure foundation for the future. The recruiters set up the organizations and connections that tunneled Europe's discontented into the ports and ships that carried diem to their new homes Enslaved Africans came in the largest numbers of all, but theirs was a forced migration. The mainland southern colonies had moved slowly and tentatively toward replacing the system of European indentured servants with slaves in the seventeenth century, although the number of enslaved Africans was still relatively small in 1700. In the eighteenth century, while indentured servants continued to arrive, there was a major shift to slavery as the preferred labor system, especially in the South. Huge numbers of slaves, aL least 250,000. were imported in the decades after 1700. These unwilling immigrants went through a series of terrifying and heart-rending experiences. Al least one-lifth died at sea Many were sick when they arrived and would die early in their enslavement. The captains were careful to load their ships with cargoes from different parts of Africa so that the captives could not talk together and plot rebellion at sea. In the eighteenth century most slaves destined for America came from Nigeria, the Bight of Biafra. and Angola. On their arrival, they went through the humiliating process of exami- New Areas of Settlemem nation by prospective buyers. This poking, prodding inspection of their naked bodies might be repeated many times. Then came transference to a plantation and unfamiliar work routines. Apparently, slaves fresh from Africa, faced with this overwhelming change, coped by denial, by running away repeatedly or by refusing to understand what was required of them. Edward Kimber. who visited the Chesapeake in 1747, described the planters' frustration: a "new Negro must be broke . . You would really be surpriz'd at their Perserve ranee; let an hundred Men shew him how' to hoe, or drive a Wheelbarrow, he'll still take the one by the Bottom, and the other by the Wheel." Such "ignorance* was the mode of resistance open to slaves. Georgia, the last English colony, was created in 1732 on a plan different from any previous colony. The Georgia trustees were brought together by their concern about the plight of the poor in the growing cities of Europe. Their leader, James Oglethorpe, had served on a commission to study the hopeless situation of those imprisoned for debt in England, and had become convinced that the poor needed a place to make a new start. While they remained in the cities, they w'ould never have the chance to get out ol the endless cycle of debt and low w'ages. But if they could have land of their own in America the "deserving poor," those who had fallen into poverty through no lault of their own, could pull themselves back up into independence and respectability. In line with these goals, the trustees decreed that each immigrating family would receive fifty acres. Slavery was forbidden, as was runt, and the immigrants were forbidden to sell their land for twenty-five years. Georgia was to be a colony of freeholders working their own land, not a land of large siave-run plantations. The plan was paternalistic and idealistic, and the trustees stipulated that they would receive no income from the colony. The plan attracted two of the greatest English religious leaders of their time: John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, spent two years in Georgia, 1736 and 1737, and when he returned to England, George Whitefield took his place. Whitefield, while carrying his evangelical message all over the colonies, continued to be committed to Georgia for the rest of his life. Georgia's other purpose was to serve as a buffer between South Carolina, whose crops ol nee and indigo made it the richest of the mainland colonics, and the Spanish colony in Florida. England sought to protect South Carolina from raids from the south, and also to cut the flow of runaway slaves into Florida. Thus the planters of Georgia, grateful for the second chance in life they had been given, were expected to repay their benefactors by a willingness to spring to the defense of South Carolina if that colony were threatened. Although the colony drew large numbers of immigrants, the experiment rarely worked as planned. Most of the settlers sent to Georgia were from English cities and had little knowledge of how to farm, particularly in the unfamiliar soil and climate Only the Gennan religious migrants known as the Salzburgers stuck to the original plan. Other settlers quickly found ways to bring in slaves as "indentured servants" and leased their land out. In the early 1740s the restrictions were removed and larger plantations and slave labor became the rule Georgia became a satellite of South Carolina, as men like Jonathan Bryan moved in. The longer-settled colonies continued to draw new immigrants. New towns filled empty spaces in the already settled areas, but most of the immigrants went to the frontier, where huge numbers settled in the west of Pennsylvania, Virginia, the Carolinas, and Georgia. In some cases these new communities were created to realize the religious and social ideals of planners in Europe. The Moravians, a religious group from Germany, acquired land in Pennsylvania. Maine, and North Carolina on which they built "villages of the Lord." On these tracts Moravians could live and worship together and maintain their traditions. Their goal was to live "without interfering Economic Growth and Transformation ready issued almost 2,000 corporate charters. And by the 1820s the state of Massachusetts alone had more corporations Lhan all of western Europe. After the 1830s, the pace of incorporation became even faster. Before then, in most slates it look a special act of the legislature to create a corporation. But after 1830, the states all began to adopt general incorporation laws, which made incorporation a relatively simple clerical process ihai required no legislative approval. The advantages of corporations—from the point of view of those who owned them, at least—were basically two. First, the corporation could, by selling shares of stock or bonds, create a large pool of capital. Second, the corporation limited the liability of any single shareholder. If an individual went bankrupt, he might lose everything—house, furniture, horses, even clothing, But if a corporation failed, the investors would lose only the value of the stock they held. They would not be liable for any of the unpaid debts of the corporation. THE ADVENT Of I HE RAILROAD ________________ The large-scale corporations depended heavily on the capacity of producers to get their goods to market rapidly. The Erie Canal, its dozens or imitators, and the steamboats on the Ohio and the Mississippi provided the basic transportation network. But after the 1830s the water and road systems were supplemented by a new invention, the railroad. The workability of the steam locomotive was proved in England in 1829. Within just a few years, the idea caught on in the United States. Short lines were built to connect cities like Charleston or Boston with their surrounding countryside. Then, tn the 1840s, a number of major cities were connected not just to the countryside bin to each other. In the next decade, rail mileage increased 400 percent, and by 1860 the United States hatl a total of 30,000 miles of rail lines (about ten times the total canal mileage). Building the transportation network required corporations, of course. In fact, railroads were among the first truly large corporations in American history. But something more was needed. There was not enough private capital in the country to build the railroads and canals. The crucial missing portion was supplied by governments. The slates were especially generous patrons of the canal and railroad companies. All in all, the states went into debt almost $100 million to help finance the construction of rail lines. And what state governments did on such a huge scale, local and county governments imitated wherever they could. Local governments may actually have financed as much as one-fifth of all the rail mileage in the United States before 1860. In 1850 the federal government eniered ihe picture. Congress voted to give almost 4 million acres of land to the Illinois Central Railroad to help it pay for building a line from Illinois to Alabama: By 1860 the federal government had granted away a total of 22 million acres of the public's land to railroad corporations. All these changes demanded people—people to produce the goods, to get them from place to place, and to buy them. The population of the United States increased about 600 percent between 1800 and f860. Some of this increase was the result of a high birthrate, particularly in rural areas. But the overall birthrate was actually declining, and by the 1840s only a new wave of European immigration could keep the rate of population growth as high as it had been, in the 1840s and 1850s a stream of Irish and German immigrants joined the continuing British immigration Most of the immigrants were young. And this fact, coupled with the high birth rate of earlier decades, created a population that was dramatically younger than that of western Europe. By the middle of the century, seven Americans out ol every ten were under thirty—as compared to six out of ten in England and five out of ten in France. The population was both young and mobile. In live towns in western Massachusetts, nine Chapter 10 A New North An early locomotive. This machine, named the Atlantic, was the first steam locomotive to enter Washington, D.C. It was operated by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad and was built in 1832. To the modern eye, the engine seems frail and even slightly comic, But to the men and women of the 1830s, it was an imposing symbol of power and technological progress. out of ten people who were between the ages of sixteen and twenty in 1850 had left their communities by 1860. The Garrison family's nomadic life—from Canada to Massachusetts, Maryland, and Vermont—was typical of the experience of their contemporaries. And it was typical in another way, too. Most of the people who moved around the country were poor or unskilled, looking for work or for land, and providing a ready pool of cheap labor for commercial and manufacturing enterprises. On the other hand, the economy aBo needed a pool of skilled workers. Someone had to design and build the boats and engines. Someone had to add up the columns of figures, keep track of the inventories, pay the bills, and file the receipts. These needs were met by governments, mostly state and local, through the school system. Although public schools had existed in America since the seventeenth century, the first true public school law was passed in Massachusetts in 1837, and it was quickly imitated by a number of other states. Most of the schools were only at the elementary level, but most of the people in the northern states attended them and at least learned to read and to do simple arithmetic. For some others, there were more years of school ahead. In 1860, 300 high schools and 137 colleges in the United States were turning out the managers, the accountants, and the engineers needed to tend the new economy. Skills and education led people more often than not into towns and cities. During the eighteenth century, four port cities had contained more than half ihe urban population of the nation: Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore. After about 1820 the pattern began to change. Boston, Philadelphia, and Baltimore continued to grow, but less rapidly than the population as a whole. Only New York outstripped the national growth Economic Growth and Transformation 4 / jtm i If f 4 r/<* /fit i • / 4 .hi ¥ X. \ ml / RJ* !>VA. \ M"i'' Hw' Irish immigrants. This detail from an 1847 painting shows an Immigrant ship being emptied In New York. The Irish immigrants are of both sexes and all ages. In the lower center, a portly gentleman (not an immigrant, his dress and cane suggest) may be negotiating a job with one of the immigrants, who is shown hal-irvhand. At the lower left, another gentleman, in a dandified white waistcoat, is studying a woman, perhaps with a different sort of transaction in mind. The mass of people still on deck suggests how overcrowded the immigrant ships were. rate to become, by the middle of the century, the dominant city. The Hudson River and the Erie Canal gave New York crucial access to the fastest- growing section of the United States, the trans- Appalachian interior. The same reasons that explain the spectacular growth of New York also explain the rise of hundreds of new towns and cities, from the coast to the Mississippi. Where in 1800 there had been only villages or wilderness, new centers like Cincinnati. Rochester, Louisville, Pittsburgh, St. Louis, and New Orleans sprang into life. In 1800 the United Slates contained only thirty-two cities of the second rank—less than 50,000 inhabitants. By 1860 there were ten times as many. The opening of the agricultural West was an important development, and Americans tend to look to that frontier experience for their myths and their heroes. But migration to the cities was in fact larger than migration west- New Artists, New Ideas The women of the mills did try, from lime to time, to assert their own collective power, and in ways that violated middle-class notions of woman's "proper place." In 1834, when they were threatened with a 25 percent wage cut, 2,000 workers in Lowell went on strike, and a Boston newspaper reported that "one of Lheir leaders . . . made a naming speech on the rights of women and the iniquities of the 'monied aristocracy.'" But such strikes almost always failed. And it became even more difficult to mount any sort of labor organization among textile workers after the 1840s, when native-born women were gradually replaced by immigrant workers, mostly Irish, who had little choice but to accept whatever wages and working conditions the mill-owners offered. Unions of skilled male workers had somewhat more success. The demand for construction workers, particularly carpenters, was high, and their skills were still essential. Construction workers in major cities managed to create stable trade unions. In many cities, they struck successfully for a standard ten-hour day to replace the traditional sunup to sundown workday—which could Iasi thirteen or even fourteen hours during the summer months. Philadelphia developed a particularly strong tradition of trade unions. There, in the late 1820s, skilled workers organized a general union, the Mechanics' Union of Trade Associations, and even founded a political organization, the Working Men's Party. Similar trade unions were created in other cities, and in 1834, many of them became federated with the first (and fragile) attempt at a national union, the National Trades Union. This effort failed, but several national unions were formed by men who pursued particular crafts—painters, shoemakers, iron molders, and machinists. Shoemakers, a group whose traditional skills were threatened by new manufacturing methods, were very prone to radicalism, particularly in the manufacturing towns of the Northeast. In 1830, the shoemakers of Lynn, Massachusetts, formed a strikingly militant organization, The Mutual Benefit Society of Journeymen Cordwainers. They produced a radical analysis of the way the new economy had altered the relationships between workers and their employers: "Labor now becomes a commodity, wealth capital. . . . Capital and labor stand opposed." The shoemakers' stark analysis may have been correct. But their goal, the triumph of labor over a "monied aristocracy," was beyond their immediate grasp. Several factors made it very difficult for workers to organize successfully. Capital was being concentrated in fewer and fewer hands w'ith every passing year. Technological innovation was occurring at a dizzying pace, and each new invention threatened to make some workers' skills obsolete. An increasing flow ol immigration from Europe gave employers a growing pool of "replacement" workers, men and women they could hire instead of a union activist. Many states had laws that made it a criminal "conspir- acy" for a union to demand the "closed shop '— an agreement that every' employee in the workplace be a union member. Worst of all. ihe panic of 1837 and the long depression that followed produced so much unemployment that workers were forced to accept whatever wages and working conditions the "market" dictated. The depression of 1837-1843 also seems to have made working people much more open to the messages of evangelical revivalism than to talk about the opposition between labor and capital. During the first half of the nineteenth century, the United States produced a remarkable generation of writers, who created what Americans began to celebrate as their own, new'" national literature. This literary explosion began during the first two decades of the century with the work of Washington Irving: first with his comic Knickerbocker History o/ New York (1809) and then, in 1819, with the Sketch Book—particularly its tales of Rip Van Winkle and lchabod Crane. During Chapter 12 Expansion and thh Crisis or the Union What Americans call the Mexican War was actually the final armed struggle in a sequence of conflicts lasting more than a decade. The first phase was the war of Texas independence, which took place in 1835-1836. Then, in 1841, a second, brief war was fought between the Republic of Texas and Mexico as a result of Texan efforts to occupy even more Mexican territory. The third and final phase was a declared war between the United States (now including Texas as a state) and Mexico in 1846-1847. This long sequence of wars would be a dominant issue in American political life during the 1840s. The wars' outcomes would pose the fateful issue of the politics of the 1850s. The final act in the drama would be the American Civil War, but some of its origins lay in another, older struggle—the revolution that brought Mexico independence from Spain In August of 1821, a twenty-five-year-old Virginian named Stephen Austin was making his way toward San Antonio, the capital of the Mexican province of Tejas. He was going to try to persuade the Spanish governor of the province to allow him to inherit a Spanish land grant made to his father. At dawn on a Sunday morning, a group of Tejanos rode into Austin's camp, shouting "Viva Independence!" Austin and the little group of Americans who were with him took up the shout. Mexico had gained independence from Spain and had become a republic. After Austin reached San Antonio, the governor confirmed the land grant, A process had begun that would bring thousands of American immigrants into Mexico and make it one of the main focuses of the expansive ambitions of Manifest Destiny. The Mexican struggle for independence had been a very difficult and bloody ten-year revolution against Spain During the revolution, the people of the northern province of Tejas had suffered even more than most Mexican people. At the time of independence, the Hispanic population of Tejas was only about one-third of what it had been a decade earlier. Tejas was a problem for the government in Mexico City. The loyalty of the Tejanos was uncertain; the government even tried to forbid them to carry' weapons The government was having difficulty pacifying the Native American tribes in the area. And, to make matters worse, there were already about 3,000 Anglo-Americans living in Tejas, most of them illegal aliens, "wetbacks" who had crossed the Sabine or the Red River without permission. Many of them were outlaws or frontier ruffians, far outnumbering the tiny force of 200 men the Mexican government had in Tejas To try to deal with this impossible situation, the Mexican government decided to legalize what it could not prevent. The result was the Colonization Law of 1825. It permitted unrestricted immigration from the United States or Europe into both Tejas and the province just south of the Rio Grande, Coahtiila. The law guaranteed immigrants' land titles and constitutional rights and even exempted them from taxes for four years. It worked all too well. By 1830, there were 7,000 Anglo-Americans in Tejas, and still only about 3.000 Mexicanos. In 1830, an anxious Mexican government repealed the Colonization Law, not only outlawing immigration from the United States but expressly forbidding anyone to bnng slaves into Tejas. But the government could not enforce the law, and in 1834 immigration was made legal again. By this time, there were aboul 20.000 norteamericanos in Tejas, and they were coming across the border at the rate of a thousand a month. There were also certain compatibilities between Mexico and the United States that encouraged Anglo-American migration into both Tejas and Alta California Mexico was not only a republic, but, like the United States, it had adopted a federal system. Its constitution contained many of the same guarantees of liberty that were in the United Slates Constitution. Perhaps more important, most members of the governing Mexican elite had the same brutally racist and genocidal 