Copyright 1997 by D. C. Heath and Company. Also copyright 1949, 1947, 1951,1954. No part of the material covered by this copyright may be reproduced in any form vdthout vcritten permission of the publisher. Printed in the United States of America. 5 A 7 The American Story> is intended for the senior high school. Compared with other textbooks in its field it is less difficult and less voluminous and, we believe, more teachable. It avoids difficult words and long sentences. It leaves out the unnecessary details which weary and confuse so many pupils. It focuses attention on the really significant events and issues of American life. The American Story> is more than a political history. It is the story of the American people — how they lived, what they thought, and how they struggled to realize the American dream of equal opportunity for all. The task of writing the Constitution and launching the national government is presented as the great achievement it was. Yet it is recognized that much still remained to be done to bring about a government by and for the people and that in consequence there have always been groups who vigorously demanded and obtained reforms. The American Story> is concerned with American idealism and love of country. It records the public services of our outstanding statesmen and reformers — those whose names are household words and others whose patriotism should not be forgotten. These men and women are portrayed as the leading characters in an inspiring drama. The ten units cover American history from colonial times to the present. In harmony with the recommendations of the Report on American History in Schools and Colleges, nearly two thirds of the total space is given to the period from 1850 to the present, while more than one fourth of the total space is given to the story of the United States in world affairs. The organization in the main follows the chronological pattern. However, at times the narrative is halted in order to consider separately some of its important strands. Thus, the topical organization appears in Chapter 2, iMaking a Living in Colonial Times; Chapter 3, Colonial Society; Chapter 4, Colonial Government; Chapter 17, The Period of Jacksonian Democracy; Chapter 25, The Rise of Big Business; Chapter 26, The Rise of the City; Chapter 27, The Rise of the Labor Movement; and Chapter 28, The End of the Frontier. In Unit VIII, The United States as a World Power, Unit X, The End of Isolationism, and Unit XI, The United Shtates as a World Leader, the treatment is partly topical. The illustration of The American Story> has required many months of labor and research. More pictures have been included than in most high school histories. The pictures have been carefully selected for interest Foreword and educational value. Contemporary pictures have been used wherever possible. The exact source and date of most of the pictures are given. The maps, especially drawn for this book, were designed for maximum simplicity and usefulness. There are also a number of helpful diagrams. The teaching aids have been carefully planned. At the end of every chapter there are names to identify, words to explain or define, and questions to help develop full understanding of the text. There is also a list of subjects for oral or written reports. These are intended for the abler students and will enable them to supplement and enrich the text. At the end of every unit practicable group activities are suggested. Each unit also has a bibliography. The titles are those which high school teachers generally have found most usable for collateral reading. Titles suitable for the slower readers are designated. Textbooks and books too difficult for high school pupils were excluded. The Constitution, which appears in the Appendix, has been annotated in order that it may be more intelligible than young people usually find it. Additional teaching helps and suggestions, including lists of source materials and catalogs of visual aids, will be found in the teachers' manual. This is your book. It was planned and written to bring you greater satisfaction and enjoyment in the study of American history. We have worked hard to make it clear and interesting. We believe The American Story will help you to understand and take pride in the development of your country. We hope it will inspire you to cherish the American ideals of equal opportunity, liberty, and justice for all. Criticism and suggestions from teachers and students who read The American Story would be of interest and value to the authors. Ruth Wood Gavian Assistant Professor, Department of Education Brooklyn College William A. Hamm Associate Superintendent, New York City Schools Formerly Chairman, Social Studies Department Walton High School, New York City UNIT ONE. Our Colonial Heritage UNIT TWO. Forming a More Perfect Union UNIT THREE. The National Government Grows Stronger i UNIT FOUR. Nationalism and Sectionalism i Contents UNIT FIVE. Conflict between the North and, South 263 2 I THE STATES OF THE DEEP SOUTH SECEDE 29i 23 THE TRAGIC ERA OF RECONSTRUCTION 32i UNIT SIX. The Emergence of Modern America (1865-1900) 337 UNIT SEVEN. The Progressive Movement 415 30 THE PROGRESSIVE ERA (1896-1916) 4l7 UNIT EIGHT. The United States as a World Power 455 UNIT NINE. Do?neStic Affairs (1920-1940) 5il 54: Contents vii UNIT TEN. The End of Isolationism 559 UNIT ELEVEN. The United States as a World Leader 625 National Origins of White Settlers in English Colonies in 1775 7 Settled Portions of the English Colonies in 1700 and 1763 13 European Possessions in North America Before and After the French and Indian War 52 Principal Thrusts and Battles of the Revolutionary War 76 North America in 1783 84 Western Lands When Claimed by States 99 Western Lands after States Had Given Up Claims 99 Louisiana Purchase and Exploration 144 Territorial Problems Solved — 1819, 1824 170 Independence Movement in Latin America 173 Principal Routes Used by Western Settlers 178 The People Move West, 1790-1830 187 First Textile Mills in the United States 196 Sections of Our Country When Jackson Was President 209 Lands of the Five Civilized Tribes 214 Oregon Boundary Dispute and Settlement 246 Territorial Growth of the United States, 1783-1853 249 Maps The Mexican War 253 The Missouri Compromise, 1820 279 Slave and Free Territory by the Compromise of 1850 289 The Kansas-Nebraska Act, 1854 292 States of the North and the South in 1863 304 Principal Thrusts in the War between North and South 314 The Readmission of the Confederate States 326 Railroad Lines and Grants 344 The United States Has Rich Mineral Resources 352 Settlement of the Far West, 1850-1890 382 Westward Advance of Center of Population, 1790-1900 388 Progress of the Woman Suffrage Movement 422 Prohibition on the Eve of the Eighteenth Amendment 429 Lands Irrigated under the Reclamation Act 437 National Parks and Forests of the United States 437 Expansion of the United States, 1867-1916 456 The Panama Canal Zone 480 The Flags of Sixteen Nations Fly over Caribbean America 486 American Operations on the Western Front 509 Territorial Changes in Europe, 1918-1923 519 The Presidential Election of 1920 522 The Presidential Election of 1928 532 The Presidential Election of 1932 537 Foreign Spheres of Influence in China, 1914 590 Japanese Advances in China 591 Territory Held by the Rome-Berlin Axis, October, 1942 604 The Axis Pincers Threaten World-wide Shipping 617 Theater of War in the Far East and the Pacific 619 Military and Economic Aid 671 The Federal Government in 1789 and Today 109 Extension of Suffrage since Washington's Day 207 Relative Strength of North and South in 1861 305 Per Cent of People Living in Cities 360 Shift of Workers from Agricultural to Nonagricultural Pursuits, 1820-1940 The City Manager Plan 421 Immigrants Entering the United States, 1830-1940 530 Extent of Soil Erosion in the United States 547 Cost of World War I to the United States and Four of the Allies 569 Free Exchange and Barter Trade 579 The Structure of the United Nations 626 The history of the American nation begins with the settling of the thirteen original colonies. Many kinds of people came to these colonies. Some sought religious or political freedom: others were looking for a chance to earn a better living than they could earn in the old world. The new world was a land of opportunity, but only those with courageous hearts were willing to face its hardships. The settlers had to tame the wilderness and protect themselves from the Indians. They had to produce nearly evetything they used. Men, women, and children worked hard. There was little time for play. The voters took a lively interest in their government. They expected the legislature to protect their rights and keep a watchfid eye on the governors sent from England by the king. The colonial legislatures quarreled continually with the governors and often refused to pay them. As the colonies grew stronger they saw no need to depend on England for any kind of help. They wanted to make their own laws without interference from Parliament. They finally took up arms to resist British control. The struggle for independence was long and hard, but victory was finally won. A new nation — the United States of America — was born. •k 'i'he American StOTv WEAVING ROOM in Slaters factory'. The designs for these machines were drawn from memory by Samuel Slater, an English immigrant. (Bettmann Archive) machinery did not stop manufacture at home and in small shops using hand methods. In 1820 two thirds of all the cloth produced in the United States was still made in the home. As late as the middle of the century a great deal of manufacturing was still carried on by hand methods. Why the factor)* system developed in the North. The factory system grew much faster in the North than in the other sections. Perhaps the most important reason was that Northerners had money to invest in factories — money they had made in commerce and banking. Other advantages of the North were abundant water power, a population with much mechanical and business ability, and a labor supply of farm girls and of immigrants from Europe. The first center of the factory system was New England, especially Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. From this section the system spread to eastern New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. Later it developed in Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. The growth of immigration. The early factory owners found their labor supply on near-by farms. The fanners' daughters were glad of a chance to earn money, and they were used to long hours and hard work. As more factories opened, the supply of American-born Nationalism and Sectionalism '9 5 SHOEMAKER'S SHOP ABOUT 1830. At this period all shoe manufacturing was earned on by hand in little shops like this one. (Courtesy of Essex Institute, Salem) women and children was not enough. Factory owners then began to encourage immigration from Europe. From 1790 to 1825 the number of immigrants was only about eight thousand a year. These easily found work. By 1830 the number of immigrants reached fifty thousand a year, and by 1840, one hundred thousand. Then famine in Ireland and a revolution in Germany sent a flood of newcomers to our shores. By 1850 three hundred thousand foreigners were coming each year. Most of them entered Northern ports and stayed in the North. They were usually uneducated and very7 poor. They had spent everything they had to get here, and they had to take any job they could find, regardless of poor wages and working conditions. New social problems due to industrialization. The factory system brought a number of new social problems. 1. The workman's loss of independence. As factories gradually took the place of small shops, the life of the workman was changed in many ways. The skills he had learned through years of experience were not needed in the factory; even a child could soon learn to run most machines. The workman could no longer look forward to being his own boss; he could not start a factory of his own, for machinery The American Story The earliest textile mills in the United States were built in New England. The industry soon spread to near-by states. cost too much. He was dependent for a living on the man or the company owning the factory. The native-born American hated the thought of working for somebody else. He would prefer to go to the frontier and farm. Many did go west rather than work in a factory. Those who took factory jobs did not expect to stay in the factory long. But many factory workers were unable in a whole lifetime to save enough money to go west with their families and start a farm. 2. Long hours. The hours of work in factories and shops followed the custom of the fann, where everyone labored from sunrise to sunset. The usual workday in a New England mill began at five o'clock in the morning if light permitted. A half hour was allowed for breakfast at eight and for lunch at noon. The day ended when it became too dark to see. Such hours taxed the strength of women and children to the limit. Nationalism and Sectionalism 3. Low wages. Skilled men sometimes got as much as $2.00 a day, but 85 cents to $1.00 was far more common. Women received from $1.50 to S3.00 a week. Children got from 50 cents to $2.00 a week. This wage scale did not change much until after the War between North and South. The single man, who could get a week's board, room, and washing for $2.50, might save money to buy a farm in the West. The man with a family of children found it very hard to make ends meet, even though his wife and some of the children were wage earners. 4. Child labor. Since a man could not support a family on his wages, lis wife and children went to work too. Women and children had ilwavs worked, and the public did not realize that tending a machine .ill day in a factory was more tiring and unhealthful than working in the house and on the farm. In one Rhode Island mill in 1801 an ob~ server tells us that he found a hundred girls from six to twelve years of age. They earned from 12 to 25 cents a day and had a "pale, dejected look." At that time most factory workers were children. Nothing much was done about the child-labor problem until late in the century. 5. Industrial accidents. The factory, or industrial, system, as it came to be called, brought new dangers to the worker. Machines then did not have "foolproof' safety devices; in fact they were built without much thought of safety. Artificial lighting was hardly ever used in factories and when used was very poor. Accidents were frequent, particularly to children, who are naturally careless. Some employers gave money to their injured workers, but others did not. Under the common law (see page 49) the employer did not have to pay an injured worker if the worker or any of his fellows was in any way to blame for the accident. 6. Unhealthy living and working conditions. The factory system led to an increase in sickness. Sanitary arrangements were crude, and large numbers of workers in one building favored the spread of infections. Besides, the manufacturing process often created dust, steam, or fumes, causing a high rate of tuberculosis among factory workers. Other health hazards were due to the rapid growth of the factory towns. Few of them had water or sewer systems. Most factory workers crowded into cheap, unhealthy tenements. Poor housing, poor food, and long hours of work under unsatisfactory conditions resulted in a high sickness and death rate, and at this period the city was much less healthful than the country. IMMIGRANTS arriving in the United States from Europe. American factory' owners and mineowners were eager for additional workers; so the immigrants usually had no difficulty in finding jobs. ( Drawn by A. Berghaus for Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper, November 23, 1878. Culver Service) CHILD WORKERS in a factory about 1840. At this period, and for many years afterward, most factories hired young children. Children worked the same long hours is adults and received very small wages. (From a contemporary woodcut. Bettmann Archive) Nationalism and Sectionalism 7. The labor movement develops. Until 1825 it was a crime in England for workers to organize and strike for higher wages. American judges followed the English practice and put many workers in jail for attempting to strike. There were a few workmen's societies in \mcrica, but they were powerless. After 1825 the labor movement finally got a start. Many trade unions were organized. In 1828 the trade unions of Philadelphia combined in a federation. Similar federations were soon formed in other cities. By 1834 a national federation of trade unions was established. Then, as now, labor unions struggled to improve wages, hours, and working conditions. In these matters they ac first had little success. Strikes usually failed, for there were many immigrants who could fill the strikers' jobs. Besides, public opinion did not approve of strikes and in most cases took the side of the employer. Since strikes rarely succeeded, the labor organizations of this period put most of their efforts into Aettinor better laws. o o Workingmen win the right to vote. Most of the new Western states permitted all white men to vote. The older states limited the vote to property owners. This caused such discontent among wage earners that in the 1820's and 1830's all the states except Rhode Island decided to let any white man vote, whether or not he owned property. From now on political parties had to pay more attention to the needs of the working class. The winning of the right of all men to vote was a big forward step for American labor. Labor organizations now worked to elect men friendly to labor. In 1828, for example, they joined with the farmers to elect Andrew Jackson President. They also asked for laws to improve the position of working men and women and to give them greater opportunity. They called for free public schools, equal rights for women, free homesteads for Western settlers, abolition of imprisonment for debt, abolition of slavery, laws establishing a ten-hour day, and other reforms. Labor wins some of its demands. The labor movement won some solid gains. The ten-hour day was established in several of the skilled trades. Cities and states adopted the ten-hour day for government workers, and in 1840 President Van Buren declared ten hours to be a legal workday on government construction jobs. In 1843 Massachusetts prohibited the employment of children under twelve for more than ten hours a day. The effort to obtain free public schools was successful. (See pages 225 - 226.) So was the effort to end compulsory militia service. The The American Storv LOWELL, MASSACHUSETTS, IN 1834. Cotton mills were built in Lowell in 1822; thus it is one of the oldest manufiirturina cities in the country'. Its water power attracted textile mills. The early millowners wanted to make it a model city'. (Lrom the lithograph by Pendleton. Courtesy of American Antiquarian Society, Worcester abolition of debtors' prisons was another victory for the labor movement. In 18 2 9 it was estimated that about seventy-five thousand Americans were imprisoned for debt every year, many of them for debts of a dollar or two. Five sixths of the prisoners in city jails were poor debtors. In the 1830's one state legislature after another did away with imprisonment for debt. Few reforms have done more for the poor and unfortunate. Demands of the industrialists. The growth of the factory system not only created a laboring class but also a small and powerful group of factory owners, or industrialists. These captains of industry believed that laws which helped manufacturing would help the whole nation. They wanted a high protective tariff. They wanted sound money and a national bank. They wanted to encourage immigration in order to increase the labor supply. At first the factory owners wished to discourage the westward movement because it took laborers away from manufacturing districts. They did not favor free homesteads for Western settlers or any other plans for helping the poor man get a farm in the West. As tune passed Nationalism and Sectionalism NEW ENGLAND SAILING SHIPS at Mocha, Arabia, in 1824. At this period New Englanders carried on a brisk trade with foreign lands. Their fast sailing vessels could be seen on every' ocean. (Courtesy of Peabody Museum of Salem) they gradually changed their minds about this, for they saw that the West would furnish a market for manufactured products. The commercial interests take a hack seat. The commercial interests — merchants, importers, shipbuilders, shipowners — had long been the most important group in the North. For many years the gifted Daniel Webster, of Massachusetts, spoke for their interests in Congress. In 1816, for example, he protested strongly against the adoption of a protective tariff. Again, in 1824, when a new tariff bill was being considered, he spoke against any increase in the duties. By 1828, however, he believed that manufacturing had become more important to his section than commerce, so he voted in favor of a high protective tariff. His action was a sign that the commercial interests of the North would soon lose their control. From now on Congress would pay increasing attention to the demands of the manufacturers. @ @ ® identify: Industrial Revolution, Francis Lowell, Samuel Slater, Daniel Webster. The American Story To explain or define: debtors' prison, factory system, industrialization, power loom, protective tariff, spinning jenny. Subjects for Talks or Written Reports I. The history of manufacturing in your own community or any community in which you are interested. 2. The story of the development of a practical steam engine, beginning with the toy engines of the ancient Greeks. 3. The history of spinning from early times until now. 4. The history of weaving from early times to the invention of the power loom. 5. Difficulties which immigrants of the period 1800-1850 experienced on the voyage to the United States and upon their arrival here. 6. Strikes in the United States before 1825. Why they were called. What they accomplished. 7. Dorr's Rebellion — the struggle of Rhode Island workingmen for the right to vote. 8. Imprisonment for debt in the United States. 9. Conditions in an early factory and the surrounding town. Questions for Understanding the Text 1. What changes were brought about by the Industrial Revolution'- 2. How did England try to prevent the spread of the Industrial Revolution? 3. Tell about the beginnings of power spinning and weaving in the United States. 4. Factory methods of manufacture were first used in producing what kinds of goods? 5. State four advantages of the North in the development of the factory system. 6. How do you account for the fact that most immigrants entered Northern ports? Stayed in the North? 7. Name some of the new social problems connected with the growth of factories. 8. Why were the following conditions more serious in the factory than on the farm: (a) long hours, (b) low wages, (c) child labor? 9. What health problems arose with the growth of the factory system? 10. Why did the labor movement in the United States make little headway until after 1825? 11. (a) Why did labor unions turn to politics? (h) What reforms did they ask for? (c) What kind of candidates did they vote for? 12. What progress was made in shortening the workday during the 1840's? 13. (a) During what years were debtors' prisons abolished? (b) Did this reform benefit a large number of people? Explain. 14. What is meant by the term "commercial interests"? When and why did they lose their control? 15. Compare the demands of the factory owners with those of the commercial interests. 16. How and why did the factory owners change their minds about the westward movement? 1 1 \he. end of the old Republican party. In 1824 John Quincy Adams of Massachusetts was elected President. He was the son of John Adams, the second President. He had 6 great ability and a noble character, but he was never pop- JL. ular with the masses, perhaps because they did not understand him. Adams was a nationalist. He recommended that the government build roads and make other internal improvements. He believed that the government should encourage science and urged Congress to found a national university and observatories where astronomers might study the stars and planets. But states' rights men in Congress were able to block nearly everything he suggested. Adams had a merciless enemy in General Andrew Jackson, whom he had defeated for the Presidency. No sooner was Adams elected than the fiery-tempered Jackson began a four-year campaign to succeed him. Jackson and his friends fought Adams at every turn, calling him an aristocrat and a foe of the people. They split the Republican party in two. The Jackson group took the name Democratic Republicans, or Democrats, while those who supported Adams called themselves National Republicans. Jackson's election, 1828. Jackson had been the idol of the West ever since the Battle of New Orleans. (Seepages 161-162.) The frontiersmen lovingly called him "Old Hickory." He was also popular among city wage earners. He was one of the plain people, and the plain people throughout the nation wanted him for President. All the Western and Southern states gave their electoral votes to Jackson, and so did Pennsylvania. Adams trailed far behind, receiving electoral votes only from New England and the Middle States. The election of 1828 is often spoken of as a revolution. It was a greater overturn by far than that which had placed Jefferson in the W hite House in 1800.(See page 137.) Jefferson, though a believer in democracy, was a man of deep culture and learning and not one of the common people. Jackson was the first man of the people, and also the The American Story CHINESE WORKERS in a California cigar factory'. In the 1860's and 1870's thousands of Chinese immigrants were brought to this country by corporations seeking cheap labor. In some occupations on the Pacific coast white workers were entirely replaced by Chinese. The labor unions demanded that the Chinese be kept out of the United States. (Courtesy of Bancroft Library) dustry. By 1900 twelve states limited the number of hours per day or per week that women might be employed. Four states prohibited the employment of women at night. Twenty states prohibited the employment of young children at night, although some of the laws now seem very timid. For instance, one state went no further than forbidding the employment at night of girls under twelve years of age. The real evil of child labor had scarcely been touched, for in 1900 one in every five children between the ages of ten and fifteen was a wage earner. Labor demands curbs on immigration. By 1880 nearly a third of a million immigrants came here every year. Within a few years the figure rose to nearly a million. The United States, it was thought, had room for all who wished to come. Steamship companies sent agents all over Europe to persuade people to come to America. Western railroad companies, with land to sell, did the same thing. Large corporations made contracts with laborers who wished to come to America. The corporation paid the laborer's fare, and the laborer promised to work for the corporation for a certain period of time. Unskilled Chinese laborers by the tens of thousands were brought in under contract to build railroads in the West. The Emergence of Modern America (1865-1900) Labor leaders saw that their efforts to raise wages and improve working conditions would not get far so long as the country was flooded with poor immigrants eager to take any job. The labor unions demanded that the Chinese be shut out, and in 1882 Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act.* Next labor unions called on Congress to stop the practice of bringing in laborers under contract. Congress did so in 1885. Still the flood of immigrants increased. Labor then asked that immigrants unable to read and write be shut out. Many employers were against any such restriction. Some liberals opposed it because they wanted America to continue to be a refuge for the ill- treated. Labor did not have its way until 1917, when Congress passed a law requiring immigrants to be able to read or write in some language. Labor conditions in 1900. At the turn of the century wages and hours were little better than in 1865. According to the census of 1900 two thirds of the male workers received less than $ 12.50 a week. Only the most highly skilled workers earned as much as $ 18.00 a week. Of course prices were much lower than they are now. Beef sold for 17 cents a pound, pork for 14 cents, eggs for 21 cents a dozen. A good pair of shoes cost $2.00, and a good suit cost $20.00. Low as these prices seem, most American workers found that their wages would barely support even a small family. Since the War between North and South the wealth of the nation had increased wonderfully. Yet it was concentrated in a small number of hands. By 1900, 1 per cent of the people owned more than the other 99 per cent put together. However, a large part of the wealth owned by the fortunate 1 per cent was invested in factories, machinery, mines, railroads, steamboats, and other business property. This investment made mass production possible. It would gradually bring about shorter hours of labor and enable the people to enjoy more comforts. To identify: John P. Altgeld, Anti-Injunction Act, Samuel Gompers, Knights of Labor, Terence V. Powderly. To explain or define: arbitration, black list, contempt of court, co-operative business, craft union, injunction, strikebreaker, sweatshop, svm- pathetic strike. * This Act was repealed in 1943. Now a small number of Chinese may come here every year. 586 The American Story two purposes: (1) to end the naval armaments race, and (2) to find a way to keep peace in the Far East. (See pages 561-562.) The Conference also produced the Four-Power Treaty and the Nine-Power Treaty. The alliance between Great Britain and Japan was replaced by the Four- Power Treaty. This bound Japan, Britain, France, and the United States to respect one another's possessions in the Pacific and to consult together if these possessions were threatened by any other power. In the Nine-Power Treaty the same four powers and five others (Belgium, Flolland, Portugal, Italy, and China) agreed not to interfere with China's independence and to maintain the Open Door in China. The signers did not agree to defend China's independence by force; they merely agreed not to attack it. China's request that the powers give up extraterritoriality and other special privileges within her borders was not granted. Exclusion of Japanese immigrants creates nenjj ill Oxlll. The Washington Conference resulted in somewhat better feeling between the United States and Japan. The naval race was stopped. The United States agreed that Japan should be the strongest naval power in the Far East. (See page 562.) Japan promised to uphold the Open Door. Some two years later, when Tokyo was destroyed by an earthquake, Americans quickly raised a large relief fund. For a little while there was real friendliness between the two nations. However, new friction was soon to develop over the immigration question. Following the Russo-Japanese War, thousands of Japanese settled in California. The Californians demanded that Japanese immigrants be excluded. (Chinese laborers had been excluded since 1882.) Not wishing to hurt the pride of a sensitive nation, President Theodore Roosevelt did not want Congress to pass an act to prevent Japanese immigrants from entering the United States. Instead, he got the Japanese government in 1908 to make a "gentlemen's agreement" not to give passports to laborers wishing to come to the mainland of the United States. Japan observed the agreement faithfully. Yet when the Immigration Act of 1924 was passed, Congress, against the advice of President Coolidge and Secretary of State Hughes, insisted on excluding all members of the Mongolian race, Japanese as well as Chinese. The proud Japanese people regarded this as an insult. They thought Congress should have given Japan an immigration quota, as was done for other nations. Japan's quota would have been only a hundred immigrants a year. By shutting them out completely, we aroused the lasting resentment of the Japanese people. The End of Isolationism 587 / Growth of Chinese nationalism. While American-Japanese relations were growing cooler, American sympathy for China continued to increase. The republican movement in China, which began about the turn of the century, pleased Americans. They were pleased, too, bv the growth of national spirit in China. Hundreds of Chinese students after 1900 went abroad each year to study. Thousands more went to missionary colleges in China, where they were taught by European and American instructors. These students came to realize that if China was to take its place in the world, it must adopt Western science and industrial methods, and must develop a strong and democratic government. They wanted to make China strong and free. This aim was also held by many Chinese businessmen in the port cities, who had been influenced by Western ideas. They joined with the educated youth of China to found the National People's party. (The Chinese name is Kuomintang [gwo1 min tang].) Its aims were nationalism, democracy, and livelihood (a living for the people). Its leader, Dr. Sun Yat-sen, hoped to free his people from the injustices they suffered from their own rulers and at the hands of foreign nations. The first revolution took place in 1911. It drove out the Manchus (the family which had ruled for three hundred years) and set up the republic of China. But the people were not yet ready for self-government, and the feeling of national unity was still very weak. For the next fifteen years the country was in the grip of Chinese war lords, who set up their own governments in the provinces and defied the central government. Foreign powers supplied arms to the war lords in return for special privileges. After World War I the National People's party appealed to the United States, Great Britain, Japan, and other powers for help, but got none. Finally they turned to Soviet Russia, which had given up the special rights and privileges obtained by imperialist Russia. With the help of advisers from Moscow, Sun Yat-sen reorganized the People's party and began to build an army. Many Russians migrated to China and carried on Communist propaganda. After Sun Yat-sen's death in 1925, the leader of the army, Chiang Kai-shek (Che ang' Ki' shek'), became the head of the People's party. He led China's second revolution, 1926-28, and founded the Nationalist Government of China. The Manchurian crisis, 1931. Manchuria was a valuable Chinese province north of China proper. The great bulk of the population was Chinese, but most of the business and industry of the province be- 