American History The Early Years To 1877 t 6665 S. Howell Ave. Oak Creek, Wl 53154 414-571-4720 McGraw-Hill New York, New York Columbus, Ohio Woodland Hills, California ft?? 8 Peoria, Illinois Authors ********************************************************************************************** Donald A. Ritchie is Associate Historian of the United States Senate Historical Office. Dr. Ritchie received his doctorate in American history from the University of Maryland after service in the U.S. Marine Corps. He has taught American history at various levels, from high school to university. He edits the Historical Series of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and is the author of several books, including Press Gallery: Congress and the Washington Correspondents, which received the Organization of American Historians Richard W. Leopold Prize. Dr. Ritchie has served as president of the Oral History Association and as a council member of the American Historical Association. Albert S. Broussard is Associate Professor of History at Texas A&M University. Before joining the Texas A&M faculty. Dr Broussard was Assistant Professor of History and Director of the African American Studies Program at Southern Methodist University. Among his publications is the book Black San Francisco: The Struggle for Racial Equality in the West, 1900-1954. The many articles he has published include "Local History and Beyond: Black Urban Communities Revisited" for Locus, Regional and Local History of the Americas. Dr. Broussard has also served as president of the Oral History Association. Glencoe/McGraw-Hill A Division of The McGtwvl lilt Companies Copyright © 1997 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. Printed in the United States of America Send all inquiries to: Glencoe/McGraw-Hill 8787 Orion Place Columbus, OH 43240 ISBN 0-02-822312-8 (Student Edition) ISBN 0-02-822313-6 (Teacher's Wraparound Edition) 7 8 9 1011 12 027/046 03 02 01 ( i Contents ■ America's Beginnings Prehistory-1700 CHAPTER l The Geography of the Americas 6 1 Themes in Geography 8 2 The Tools of Geography 12 3 Landscape of the Americas 19 4 Climate and Resources 26 Chapter 2 Vie First Americans Prehistorx/ to 1492 36 1 The First Americans 38 2 Native American Culture Groups 45 3 Empires of the South 52 Chapter 3 Explorers Reach the Americas 1 A Changing Europe 62 2 Portugal and the Age of Exploration 69 3 Columbus Reaches the Americas 75 4 Early European Claims to the Americas 81 Chapter 4 European Empires in the Americas 1500-1700 90 1 The Fall of Two Empires 92 2 Spain Builds a Vast Empire 98 3 French, Dutch, and Swedish Colonies 105 Contents n Colonial Settlement 1587-1775 Chapter 5 The 13 English Colonies 1607-1733 1 English Settlers in Virginia 2 Pilgrims Found Plymouth Colony 3 Settling the New England Colonies 4 Settling the Middle Colonies 5 Settling the Southern Colonies Chapter 6 ft* ********* ****** ******* ** *************************^ f UNIT Trim ANeiv Nation 1776-1791 CHAPrER 8 The American Revolution 1776-1783 212 1 Declaring Independence 214 The Declaration of Independence 220 2 The Colonies at War 224 3 The War Moves South 232 4 Victory at Yorktown 238 Chapter 9 life in the 13 Colonies 1620-1763 1 The New England Colonies 2 The Middle Colonies 3 The Southern Colonies 4 Democracy Takes Root Chapter 7 The Road to Revolution 1754-1775 1 An American Way of Life Develops 2 The French and Indian War 3 Taxes and Boycotts 4 On the Brink of War Creating a Nation 1776-1791 248 1 Forming a Union 250 2 The Confederation Era 255 3 The Constitutional Convention 261 4 A More Perfect Union 267 Citizenship Handbook and United States Constitution 276 1 A Lasting Plan of Government 277 2 Five Principles of the Constitution 282 3 Government in Action ' 286 4 Duties and Responsibilities of Citizens 291 The Constitution of the United States 296 Contents vu U j'J J T F U u f i Early Years of the Republic 1789-1830 ★ ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★it Chapter 10 The Federalist Era 1789-1800 324 1 Establishing the New Government 326 2 Dealing With Other Nations 333 3 Political Parties Develop 338 4 Troubled Times for John Adams 344 Chapter 11 The Age of Jefferson 1800-1815 1 Jefferson Takes Control 2 The Louisiana Purchase 3 Troubles With France and Britain 4 The War Hawks 5 The War of 1812 Chapter 12 354 356 361 368 372 3 77 The Nation Grows 1815-1830 * 384 1 Industries Take Root 386 2 Moving West 392 3 Nationalism and Sectionalism 399 4 Monroe and Foreign Affairs 407 UNIT fJV£ The Nation Expands 1820-1860 ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ Chapter 13 The Age of Jackson 1824-1842 420 1 The People's President 422 2 A New Spirit in the White House 426 3 Crisis and Conflict 430 4 The End of the Jacksonian Era 435 Chapter 14 Manifest Destiny 1820-1860 ' 442 1 The Oregon Country 444 2 Texas Independence 451 3 War With Mexico 457 4 Spanning a Continent 462 Chapter 15 The Spirit of Reform 1820-1860 472 1 Literature, Art, and Science 474 2 Calls for Widespread Education 480 3 Social and Cultural Change 484 4 The Antislavery Movement 488 5 The Women's Rights Movement 493 Contents Chapter 18 The Civil Wiir 1 The War Begins 2 The War in the East 3 The War in the West 4 Behind the Lines 5 Surrender at Appomattox Chapter 19 ■fcOYS IN 9Zitft> vote and Reconstruction 1865-1877 602 1 Restoring the Union 604 2 President and Congress Clash 609 3 The South During Reconstruction 615 4 Reconstruction Ends 622 1 Settling Differences 2 Moving Closer to Conflict 3 A New Political Party 4 Election of 1860 and Secession Contents UNIT o'A Rift and Reunion 1820-1877 Chapter 16 Sectional Differences 1820-1860 508 1 The Changing North 510 2 Life in the North 516 3 The Cotton Kingdom 521 4 Life in the South 527 Chapter 17 Road to Civil War 1850-1860 Modern America Emerges 1877-Present Chapter 20 Resit aping the Nation 1877-1900 1 Westward Expansion 2 New American Industries 3 New Immigrants, Modem Cities 650 4 Rural and Urban Reforms 656 Chapter 21 The Twentieth Centun/ 1900-Present 664 1 World War I Era 666 2 Between Two Wars 671 3 World War II Era 675 4 The Cold War Years 679 5 Toward a New Century 685 Atlas 696 The World (Political) 698 The World (Physical) 700 United States (Political) 702 United States (Physical) 704 North America 706 Latin America 707 Canada 708 Mexico, the Caribbean, and Central America 710 Europe 712 Eurasia 714 Middle East 716 Africa 718 Mainland Southeast Asia 719 The Pacific Rim 720 United States Databank 722 Presidents of the United States 726 The American Flag 734 Documents of America's Heritage 736 Gazetteer 747 Glossary 752 Spanish Glossary 760 Index 770 Acknowledgments and Credits 791 x Contents ★ ★ ★ Themes American History ★★★★★★★★★★ 'lose your eyes and imagine someone says, "American history." What images flash through your mind? Maybe you see people such as George Washington, Dolley Madison, or Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Perhaps you picture senators making speeches or soldiers carrying guns or flags. All of these images are part of our history. So are books, documents, works of art, steam locomotives, and countless other things. By themselves, these things tell us little about American history. In order to mean anything, they have to somehow fit together. Historians help explain the meaning of history by organizing it around themes. A theme is a concept, or big idea, that keeps coming up again and again. This book is organized around 10 recurring themes that will help you study and understand our nation's history. Theme Definition American Democracy • Form of government in which the people rule themselves, either directly or indirectly Civil Rights and Liberties • Privileges and freedoms to which all citizens are entitled under the law Economic Development • Process in which people use the nation's resources to provide for their needs and wants Geography and the Environment • Land, minerals, climate, space, and all other parts of the physical setting in which people live Conflict and Cooperation • Disputes or fights among nations or among a nation's people • Agreement and harmony among nations or people Influence of Technology • Advances in science and inventions that change the way people live The individual and Family Life • High value placed on each and every citizen • Strength drawn from life in the home Ideas, Beliefs, and Institutions • Thoughts and truths on which Americans founded the nation • Organizations such as schools and churches that uphold what people think is important Cultural Diversity • Mix of national, racial, religious, and other backgrounds among the people of America U.S. Role in World Affairs • The part America plays in dealing with other nations Themes in American History ★ Cultural Diversity ► Fourth ot July Celebration in Center Square. Philadelphia by John Lewis Krimmel, 1819 President James Monroe discussing the Monroe Doctrine with other American leaders, 1823 £ pluribus ununi, a Latin phrase, appears on all United States coins. It means "from the many, [comes] one." The phrase describes American society well. Since earliest times, people from all parts of the world have come to live in the United >w States. Despite their different backgrounds, people have come together under the American flag and all that it stands for. ★ U.S. Role in World Affairs When the thirteen colonies won independence from Great Britain, other countries did not take the new nation very seriously. The world began to change its mind as America grew in economic and military strength. When President ]ames Monroe issued the Monroe Doctrine forbidding European nations to interfere in North or South America, the world respected his warning. Themes in American History xxxiii The Geography ot the Americas Focus The story of our nation begins with geography—the study of the earth in all of its variety. Geography tells you about the earth's land, water, and plant and animal life. It tells you about the people who live on the earth, the places they have created, and how these places differ. The United States is a land of startling physical differences. It is also a nation of diverse groups of people. A study of geography can help you see how the United States acquired its diversity. Journal Notes What would you see if you traveled the length and width of the United States? Imagine and describe some of the sights in the form of entries in a diary. Concepts to Understand ★ Why geography and the environment are important to the study of history ★ How geography is related to cultural diversity in the United States Read to Discover... ★ how geographers study the earth. ★ the variety of landforms, climates, and resources in the United States. ► Modern globe UNIT 1 America's Beginnings: Prehistory-1700 ► Earth observation fa History World Map Outch. 1570 The geography of the world plays a major role in the study of history. This hand-drawn map gave an accurate view of the world as known by Europeans in the sixteenth century. 1776 Declaration of Independence adopted 1700s 1800s Americans move westward 1832 Schoolcraft reaches source of the Mississippi [ 1800s I 1800s Immigrants continue I to settle in the United States 1900s LANDS AT satellites map the earth from space j 1900s I 1900s Protecting the environment raises global concerns CHAPTER 1 The Geography of the Americas Physical Features What might the physical features of a place include? Land and water forms, plant and animal life, soil conditions, and climate are all physical features. Think about the city of Philadelphia. Its physical features include a mild climate, fertile soil, and a river that leads into the Delaware Bay. Cultural Features How would you describe the cultural features of a place? You could tell about its people, their ideas, languages and religions, and a wide range of related human activities. In early Philadelphia, for example, its founder—William Penn—wel- comed people of all national backgrounds and religions to settle in his colony. Diversity among the population thus became one of Philadelphia's outstanding cultural features. Human interaction with the land, natural resources, and other natural features of the United States has affected its history a great deal. An English visitor to Philadelphia in 1774 wrote: It is not one hundred years since the first tree was cut where the city now stands, and already it consists of more than three thousand and six hundred houses. Cutting down forests to build homes is only one way that settlers altered the environment of North America. They also hunted wildlife in the forests and fished the lakes and streams. To build towns, they dammed up rivers. With basic tools—and later with advanced technolo- gy—human beings have continuously changed the environment of America. ★ Human/Environment Interaction Wherever humans have lived or trav- "* eled, they have changed the natural features of the earth, or the environment. ★ Movement Of all of the geographic themes, movement has affected our nation's history most. For thousands of years, immi- grants—people who enter a country to settle—have traveled to this land. ▲ Physical and cultural features Different physical and cultural characteristics help to define what a place is like. What is one physical characteristic of the Teton Mountains (left)? What is one cultural characteristic of the school classroom (right)? UNIT 1 America's Beginnings: Prehistory-1700 Ancestors of the Native Americans arrived in North America first. Then came European explorers. Aboard some European ships came enslaved Africans traveling to the Americas against their will. Political and world economic hardships brought more settlers to America. All the immigrants brought with them their ideas and customs. Their movement shaped the country, just as people moving to the United States today continue to contribute new skills and ideas. ★ Region The theme of region helps us to see more of the big picture of the world. Geographers generally divide the world into large regions, or areas that have something in common. This makes the world easier to study. It also helps us see what relationships exist among different parts of the world. To describe a region, geographers look at physical characteristics such as location, size, landforms, climate, soil, and natural vegetation. They also look at cultural characteristics, which could include such things as the people's language, religion, government, history, and more. Sometimes a region is identified by both its physical and cultural characteristics. Checking for Understanding 1. Identify Philadelphia, Delaware River, Schuylkill River. 1 Define geography, environment, immigrant, region. 3. How do geographers use the five themes of geography? 4. What details about Philadelphia helped to define it as a region? During the colonial times, Philadelphia, for example, lay in a physical region known as the Middle Colonies. The cultural background of its settlers also set this area apart as a region. What traits do you think define the area in which you live as a region Critical Thinking 5. Identifying Relationships Why does the theme of movement have such a strong connection to history in the United States? 6. Create a diagram to show important physical features of the place where you live. Then describe how these features have shaped life in your community. CHAPTER 1 The Geography of the Americas The First Americans Read to Learn ... ★ why people crossed a land bridge to come to the Americas. ★ how the first Americans spread out to inhabit North and South America. ★ what early Native American cultures developed in the present-day United States. Terms to Know People to Meet ★ C.R. Harrington ★ Peter Lord Places to Locate ★ Alaska ★ Bering Strait ★ Cahokia ★ archaeologist ★ maize ★ culture ★ Mound Builders ★ artifact ★ cliff dwellers ★ pueblo ★ adobe ▲ Subarctic woven basket -1- he wind blew in icy sheets, cutting through the hunters' fur robes. In better times, the people would have stayed in the shelter of their caves, waiting for the weather to clear. They had not made a kill for many days, however, and the people needed food. The hunters' only choice was to follow the herds of bison and caribou into the storm. Luck was with the hunters. In the distance they saw a giant mammoth stuck in a snow bank, trying to free itself. The hunters ran forward, shaking their spears and shouting with excitement. First 1, then 2, then 10 spears hit their target. The beast sank slowly into the snow. The hunt was over. The hunters would have food for many days. Such a story could possibly have taken place in North America many thousands of years ago. Americans today can only imagine what life might have been like for the earliest Americans. Scientists, however, can tell us much about the earth and climate of the time and about the traces of early people they have found. UNIT 1 America's Beginnings: Prehistory-1700 ★ People Arrive in the Americas From about 2 million to 10,000 years ago, the earth was in the grip of the Ice Age. The northern half of the world was covered with glaciers. In some places the glaciers were 1 to 2 miles thick. The 56-mile (90-km) strip of water that now separates Alaska from northeastern Asia was the site of a land bridge called Beringia. Because so much of the earth's water froze into ice, the ocean level dropped. This exposed the strip of land between the two continents. Today that land is covered by the waters of the Bering Strait. Large herds of mammoth, bison, and caribou wandered across the land bridge in search of grazing land. Gradually, small groups of Asian hunters who depended on these animals for food followed them into the Americas. Over the years, both the animals and the people made their way into the grasslands at the southern edges of the glaciers. Living in the Americas The first Americans stayed on the move in search of food. They killed mammoths, musk oxen, saber-tooth cats, bison, and other large animals. They also tracked smaller animals such as deer, fox, bear, and turkeys. To add to their diets, they gathered seeds, berries, nuts, and the roots and bulbs of plants. Thus they are called hunter-gatherers. The hunter-gatherers made their own tools and weapons. They shaped pieces of stone and bone to make lewis for chopping and scraping. They used wooden poles as spears and hardened the tips by placing them in fire. They made animal hides into clothing and tents. Archaeologists, scientists who search for traces of peoples from the past, believe that these bands of hunter-gatherers grad_ ually spread south in a movement that lasted about 15,000 years. By about 8,000 years ago, groups of people were living throughout both North America and South America. Responding to Warmer Climates About 10,000 years ago, the Ice Age ended. The earth's temperatures gradually warmed, the ice melted, and the glaciers shrank. Surface levels of the oceans rose, and the waters of the Bering Strait covered Beringia. No more people would come to the Americas on foot. The large animals of the Ice Age began to become extinct, or die out. Some scientists think the change in climate may have been responsible. As the climate grew warmer and drier, grasslands where the animals once grazed became desert. Lakes and streams dried up. As their source of food and water disappeared, so did the animal herds. CHAPTER 2 The First Americans: Prehistory to 1492 39 _ ► Native American grinding stone iV - u 120' w h Tepexpa, Trotut CartCBf Caribbean Sea Tropic 01 Capricorn ★ □ Glaciers — Migration routes a Known sites of prehistoric hunters 0 1.000 2.000 mites 1.000 2,000 kilometers IViQP Movement Over thousands of years, AC* J prehistoric people migrated southward |y JiUQy through the Americas. Eventually they settled the southern tip of South America. Along what major mountain ranges did the migration routes flow? The hunter-gatherers adjusted to the changes around them in a number of ways. As always, their first concern was food. They fished and hunted smaller animals instead of the large animals of earlier times. The areas over which they hunted and gathered grew smaller. Over time, they settled down to live in one place for long periods of time. They built sturdy, permanent shelters and stored food to make it last longer. ★ The First Farmers Sometime after about 9,000 years ago, some settled groups began experimenting with the plants in their environment. They probably planted seeds from the best plants and tended them in simple gardens. These garden keepers became the first American farmers. Later, people in present-day Mexico developed an important grain plant from certain wild grasses growing in the highlands. The grain was maize, the first corn. The practice of growing maize soon spread from Mexico to Central America and South America. By about 2,000 years ago, some groups in North America were growing maize, too. Early American farmers also learned to grow beans, squash, and many other crops. Examining the Evidence Archaeologists search for remains of tools, weapons, jewelry, artwork, building materials, or any other items used by early Americans. Studying such traces gives scientists clues about how the people lived. Stone Spearheads Stone spearheads once tied to the spears of early hunters have been found throughout North America. Spearheads found in 1932 in a cave at Clovis, New Mexico, are about 11,000 years old. Scientists have used that clue to help establish when humans first lived in the Americar Southwest. Carved Bone at Old Crow River In the summer of 1966, scientist C.R. Harrington visited a village of Native Americans called the Loucheau in northwestern Canada. Harrington believed this UNIT 1 America's Beginnings: Prehistory-1700 oaths, and women were allowed to speak in their meetinghouses. They opposed war and would not serve in the army. Quakers also refused to pay taxes. They were the first religious group in the colonies to take a stand against slavery. Like other Quakers, Penn went to jail several times for expressing his beliefs. It was unusual for someone of Penn's social class to be a Quaker. His wealth and influence, however, allowed him to create a haven for other Quakers in America. their land. Pennsylvania's farms quickly I became prosperous. In addition to Eng- I lish Quakers, the colony drew many I other European settlers. One large group of settlers were Ger- I man farmers fleeing religious wars. Thev settled on the rich farmland along the I Delaware and Susquehanna Rivers in I tight-knit communities that kept alive I their customs. These people became I known as the Pennsylvania Dutch, from the word Deutsch, meaning "German." The Founding of Pennsylvania Penn's father had once loaned King Charles a large sum of money. To repay the loan, in 1681 the king made the younger Penn the proprietor of a large grant of land in America. Penn named it Pennsylvania—Penn's woods—to honor his father. To attract settlers, he distributed pamphlets that described the colony's beauty and richness. One pamphlet described Pennsylvania as a land where "the Air is sweet and clear, the Heavens serene, like the South-parts of France, rarely Overcast." Penn's plan of government was based on religious freedom and popular support of the government. He treated the Native Americans fairly, paying them for Delaware One problem that landlocked Pennsylvania faced was the lack of seaports from which to ship its farm products. Farmers produced large quantities of wheat, barley, and rye for export. In 1682 Penn received a grant from James, Duke of York, for three counties along the Delaware River, once part of New Sweden. This gave the colony access to the I Atlantic Ocean and shipping to England. I Trying to unite Pennsylvania with these I lower counties, called Delaware, caused I trouble among the settlers. As proprietor, I Penn later allowed the area to elect their I own assembly, although he remained its I governor. The counties later broke away I to form the separate colony of Delaware. I ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ !★★★★★★★★★★★★★*! Checking for Understanding 1. Identify Henry' Hudson; Peter Minuit; Peter Stuyvesant; King Charles II; James, Duke of York; William Penn; Hudson River; New York; New Jersey; Pennsylvania; Delaware. 2. Define patroon, proprietor, proprietary colony, Quakers. 3. Why did the English want the Dutch settlement of New Netherland? 4. What were William Penn's goals for the colony of Pennsylvania? Critical Thinking 5. Identifying Alternatives What different reasons did New' York and Pennsylvania have for welcoming people of various religions and nationalities? 6. You have been asked to create a flag for one of the Middle Colonies. Choose one colony; then decide what symbols and colors you will use to represent it. UNIT 2 Colonial Settlement: 1587-1775 Linking Past and Present ★★★★★★★★★★★★★ (r ★★★★★★★★★★ The Fear of Smallpox Throughout history, people have feared certain deadly diseases. Today, at least one of those diseases—small- pox—has been wiped out worldwide. Then__________________ A Dreaded Disease Europeans brought smallpox to the Americas. This disease killed or scarred millions of people. Smallpox was as contagious, or easy to catch, as the common cold. If a victim coughed the virus into the air, anyone nearby might catch it. Native Americans had no resistance to the virus and easily became infected. Whole populations died. Now__________________ ► Colonial doctor A Dead Disease In 1796 English doctor Edward Jenner introduced a vaccine that prevented smallpox. By the 1940s, smallpox had been wiped out in Europe and North America. By 1980 smallpox was officially declared dead throughout the world. Middle Colonies were settled by people from many countries, with different beliefs, customs, and languages. Descendants of the original Dutch and Swedish settlers lived in New York, New Jersey, and Delaware. Other large groups who came from Europe by the 1700s were the Germans and the French. Many also came from England and other parts of the British Isles. Some were Scotch-Irish, Welsh, or Scottish. Many Religions Unlike the New England Colonies, the Middle Colonies did not have a single religion that was more powerful than any other. People who came from one country usually shared the same religious beliefs. Most belonged to one of several Protestant denominations, or groups, that had faced persecution in Europe. A minority of the people were Roman Catholics or Jews. Many Germans followed the Lutheran religion, as did the Swedes. Others belonged to smaller groups with distinctive beliefs, such as the Amish and the Mennon-1 ites. One Mennonite leader who came to | Pennsylvania in 1683 described his trip as I traveling on a "Noah's Ark" of religious faiths. He arrived with Roman Catholics, I Lutherans, Quakers, and Calvinists as well I as his own group of German Mennonites. I Quakers came to the Middle Colonies I from England, while the Scots and Scotch- Irish were mostly Presbyterian. Most French settlers were Huguenots, a term for French Protestants. The Dutch were main-1 ly Dutch Reformed, another Protestor group. The Jews in New York, Rhode Island, and Pennsylvania came fron Spain and Portugal. Country Customs and Fun As soon as Pennsylvania was founded in 1681, groups of immigrants poured into UNIT 2 Colonial Settlement: 1587-1775 its Delaware River valley. Newcomers worked together to clear land and establish communities. One German custom that soon spread throughout the region was ham raising. Neighbors gathered to help raise the frame of the bam, then relaxed with a huge outdoor feast with music and dancing. Sheepshearing, comhusking, and butchering were other chores that settlers often shared. Any community gathering might end with footraces and jumping contests. Women also gathered in one another's farmhouses to spin or make quilts together. * Education and Training While many colonists respected education, the Middle Colonies did not set up public schools. Children were taught by private tutors or in church or private schools. Merchants in some cities funded charity schools for those who could not afford private school fees. Not all young people continued their schooling. Any ambitious 12- or 13-year- old could learn a craft by becoming an apprentice, or trainee, to a master craft worker. The apprentice would work without wages for several years while learning the craft. Everything from shoeing horses to making wigs was taught in this way. The master was required to provide the apprentice with food, board, and clothing. Sometimes the master also gave instruction in religion and basic reading and writing. At the end of training, an apprentice might become a paid assistant in the same shop or go to work for another artisan. ★ The Frontier Early colonists settled in a band along the Atlantic coast and the banks of a few large rivers. As more and more people National Origins of Colonists, 1760 Maine loston Pennsylvania f A 45< New York ■adelphia Wilmington Baltimore Delaware Virginia North Carolina English German Scotch-Irish African Dutch Scottish 100200 100 200 kliome! A South Carolina "hades Town vannah MflD Place Although all lived under British _ I . rt ilp> n*"nnl" in the Ameirinan r.n!nni"s rule, people in the Amencan colonies came from many different national and cultural backgrounds. What group settled mostly along the Appalachian Mountains? arrived, some moved farther inland to the frontier, a thinly settled area on the outer limits of the colonies. In the 1600s, the frontier of the Middle Colonies was the eastern foothills of the Appalachian Mountains. By the 1700s the frontier extended west into the Ohio Valley. The frontier drew an assortment of people. Many—including young married couples, recent immigrants, and former indentured servants—wanted cheap land and a new start in life. Some young single men wanted adventure and freedom from CHAPTER 6 Life in the 13 Colonies: 1620-1763 has the power to "regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States." Over time, the government has used this clause to exercise authority in a number of different areas. It has banned discrimination, or unfair treatment, of different races. Ithas built a sprawling interstate highway system. In the 1990s, it used the commerce clause to pass laws governing information sent over computer networks. Judicial Review * The power of the Supreme Court to I review government acts and possibly I declare them unconstitutional is known as I judicial review. The Constitution never I directly gave the courts this power. A 1 strong-willed chiyf justice named John I Marshall, however, believed that this was I what the Founders meant. In 1803, Mar- I shall called an act of Congress unconstitu- I dona! in a landmark case known as I Murium/ v. Madison. By doing this, he established a precedent, or example, for future courts to follow. Practice and Tradition Routine political practices have changed government, too. The Constitution, for example, did not call for the President to have a cabinet, or panel of advisers. President George Washington started the practice by relying on a group of trusted assistants. * The Role of the President As defined by the Constitution, the sident has four main duties. CHief Executive An executive is a manager. As Chief tive of the United States, the Presi- | dent's job is to manage the government by ing out its laws. A great many laws ▲ Roles of the President The President's main roles are chief executive, chief of state, commander in chief, and chief legislator. Which role allows the President to sign legislation into law? exist. Therefore, the President relies on a huge bureaucracy, or organization of government workers. The federal bureaucracy includes the departments that make up the cabinet. It also includes more than 30 executive agencies. Each agency is in charge of some special task or program. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), for example, manages the nation's space program. Chief of State As chief of state, the President directs national diplomacy, or relations with Citizenship Handbook and United States Constitution Defend the Nation All men aged 18 and over are required to register with the government in case the country needs to draft, or call up, men for military service. Since the end of the Vietnam War, there has been no draft, and American military service has been voluntary. Nevertheless, the government has the authority to use the draft i^ the country should suddenly have to go to war. Serve in Court The Constitution guarantees every citizen the right to a trial by jury. To ensure this, every citizen must be prepared to serve on a jury. People can'ask to be excused from jury duty if they have 2 good reason, but it is better to serve ii possible. People on trial depend on their fellow citizens to give a fair and just verdict at their trials. Another duty of citizens is to serve as witnesses at a trial, if called to do so. ▲ Naturalization Citizens from other nations become United States citizens through a process called naturalization. The process takes several years and involves many steps. What are the duties of citizenship? harming one another; traffic laws prevent accidents; and local laws help people get along with one another. Pay Taxes Taxes pay for the government's activities. Without them, the federal government could not pay its employees, maintain an army and navy to defend its citizens, or help those in need. Your city could not hire police or firefighters, and your state could not pave roads or maintain prisons. Citizens pay taxes in several ways. The federal government and some states and cities collect income taxes, a percentage of the wages people receive. Most states and some cities collect sales taxes. Your school district collects taxes on the residential and commercial property within the district. Attend School In most states, people are required to attend school until age 16. This is important both to you and to the government School is where you acquire much of the knowledge and skills you will need to be a good citizen. * Responsibilities The responsibilities of citizenship are not as clear-cut as the duties. Because responsibilities are voluntary, people are not arrested or punished if they do not fulfill these obligations. The quality of our government and of our lives will diminish, however, if our responsibilities are not carried out. Be Informed Keep in mind that government exists to serve you. Therefore, one of your Citizenship Handbook and United States Constitution ▲ The XYZ Affair This political cartoon shows Americans resisting threats and demands for money from French officials What did the French agents demand in return (or a treaty with France? French Republic." This accusation, of course, was aimed at Jefferson and the Democratic-Republicans. Before publicly asking Congress to declare war, Adams decided to wait. He hoped that either France would negotiate or the American people would unite against France. Soon Talleyrand did want to meet again with American diplomats. France's new leader, Napoleon Bonaparte, was at war with Britain and did not want the United States as an enemy too. Adams once again sent an American peace commission. In the Convention of 1800, France and the United States agreed on terms for peace. Losing Federalist Support Many historians consider that making peace with France was Adams's greatest achievement as President. At the time, though, many Federalists were angry about the treaty. They vigorously opposed friendship with France. Many were eager for war as a way to strengthen the federal government. Hamilton himself hoped to lead the army. Making peace divided the Federalists and lost Adams the support of his own party. Adams, however, was very proud of his accomplishment. He wrote that he wanted the following words on his gravestone: "Here lies John Adams who took upon himself the responsibility of the peace with France in the year 1800." ★ Alien and Sedition Acts Beginning in 1798, the Federalist-con- trolled Congress passed four laws that stirred up a storm of debate. The new laws were aimed at stopping the growth of the Democratic-Republican party Three of the laws, known collectively as the Alien Acts, were supposedly to protect the country from aliens, or foreigners living in the United States. The Naturalization Act increased the time required to become a United States citizen from 5 to 14 years. Federalists wanted to make citizenship more difficult for newcomers. Most new immigrants coming from France and Ireland joined the Democratic-Republican party. The Alien Act gave the President power to imprison or deport—send out of the country—any foreigner. This applied to people from both friendly and enemy nations, if they were considered dangerous. The Federalists hoped this law would silence the French refugees who opposed Federalist calls for war. The Alien Enemies Act allowed the United States government to arrest and deport all aliens who were citizens of foreign nations at war with the United States The final law in this group was the Sedition Act. Sedition means to act or speak out against the government in a way that causes unrest. This law made ita UNIT 4 Early Years of the Republic: 1789-1830 Texas Independence Read to Learn ... * how conflict developed between Mexico and settlers in Texas. ★ how Texas won its independence from Mexico. i Places to Locate ★ San Antonio ★ Goliad Terms to Know ★ Tejanos ★ empresario ★ reform People to Meet ★ Stephen F. Austin ★ Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna ★ Sam Houston ★ Juan Seguin exican cannons boomed outside I the Alamo's walls. Colonel William Travis lit his face in his hands and tried to nk. His co-commander, Jim Bowie, lay ck with pneumonia. His small force vould not hold out for long. Travis picked I up a quill pen and wrote a plea for help. [ { 4 To the people of Texas & all Americans in the world.. .. I call on you in the name of liberty, of patriotism & everything dear to the American character, to come to our aid. ... v, J*fr<-' iSl1 w," "h"* Old | To ft/,,.. '**• **a". yy ▲ Advertisement for Texas settlers Soon people all over the United States learned about the desperate situation at the Alamo. The road to the Alamo started in the 1820s with the arrival of the first United States settlers in a Spanish-owned colony called Texas. ★ Colonizing Texas In 1820 Texas included a handful of Americans and about 3,000 Tejanos. Tejanos are people of Mexican heritage who consider Texas their home. Most of the region belonged to Native Americans— CHAPTER 14 Manifest Destiny: 1820-1860 A Stephen F. Austin Comanche, Apache, and others—who fiercely resisted colonial settlement. Spanish officials believed they might lose control of Texas unless they lured more settlers into the territory. The First Texas Empresarios In the early 1800s, the Spaniards decided to offer large tracts of land to empre- sarios—people who agreed to recruit settlers. News of the offer caught the attention of Missouri businessman Moses Austin. In 1821 Austin convinced the Spanish government to give him a huge tract of land along the Brazos River. In exchange, Austin promised to bring 300 families to his colony. Moses Austin died before he could organize his colony. His son, Stephen F. Austin, carried out his plans. In 1821 he established the first settlements along the Brazos and Colorado Rivers. About this same time, Mexico won its independence from Spain. Mexico soon issued new land grants to Austin and extended the boundaries of his colony. American Colonists in Texas The Mexican government granted each settler in Texas large tracts of land. In exchange, the colonists promised to become citizens of Mexico, obey Mexico's laws, and accept the Roman Catholic faith. Austin chose the first group of settles carefully. He frowned on lying, using foul language, or drinking alcohol. He wanted only "civilized and industrious" settles for his new colony. Austin issued land titles to almost 300 families. These handpicked pioneers later became known as the Old Three Hundred. Although other empresarios founded other colonies, Austin's settlement proved the most successful. By 1831, about 5,665 people lived in his colony. Growing Conflicts The Mexican government used the empresario system to ensure loyalty. Meanwhile thousands of United States settlers moved into Texas without MexH co's permission. Unlike Austin's colonist* they never promised to uphold Mexican Footnotes to History Father Of Texas Stephen F. Austin earned the name "Father of Texas" because of his leadership in populating the Mexican Territory of Texas. By doing this, Austin fulfilled his father's dying request to colonize Texas. After Texas won its independence, Austin lost the presidential election to Sam Houston. Houston appointed him secretary of state. UNIT 5 The Nation Expands: 1820-1860 laws or accept the Roman Catholic faith. Instead, they wanted to keep their own culture, or ways of living. Even the Old Three Hundred had scattered clashes with the government. Colonists on the Brazos were using slaves to grow cotton in 1829 when the Mexican government prohibi ted _sla very. The cotton growers protested so vigorously that the government decided to permit slavery- in Texas, at least temporarily. Slaveholders balked at the idea that the government might deprive them of their human "property." Settlers from the United States also had quarrels with the form of government in Mexico They wanted to have the same voice in government that they had enjoyed in the United States. Mexican officials, however, insisted on tight political control. Mexican Fears By 1830 more than five times as many Anglos, or United States settlers, lived in Texas as Tejanos. Manuel Mier y Teran, a Mexican general assigned to Texas, warned: " The North Americans have conquered whatever territory adjoins them. In less than a half century, they have become masters of extensive colonies which formerly belonged to Spain and France and of ... territories from which have disappeared the former owners, the Indian tribes. Mexican officials heeded the warning. In 1830 the Mexican Congress banned further Anglo immigration. It also ordered construction of five new army posts in Texas to enforce Mexican laws. These actions brought furious protests from Anglo settlers. Many people talked about defending their rights. A few even talked of splitting Texas off from the Mexican state to which it belonged. In 1833 Stephen F. Austin traveled to Mexico City with a petition. The petition listed reforms, or improvements, demanded by both Anglos and Tejanos. The reforms included repeal of the ban against immigration and creation of a separate Texas state. ★ The Fight lor Independence Austin waited for months to present his petition to General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna, the new head of the Mexican government. When they finally met, Santa Anna insisted that Texas remain part of Mexico. Austin wrote a letter urging Texans to go ahead with statehood. When the letter fell into government hands, Santa Anna threw Austin in prison. Austin secured his release eight months later. By this time, Santa Anna had suspended the Mexican constitution and assumed the powers of a dictator. Many Texans believed the time had come to break away from Mexico. "Come and Take It" News of unrest in Texas reached Santa Anna. In October 1835, he ordered soldiers to seize a cannon at the Texas town Texas Republic, 1839 For its first six years, this Lone Star flag I symbolized the independent nation of the Republic of Texas. Texans kept the Lone Star banner as their official state flag after joining the Union in 1845. ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ CHAPTER 14 Manifest Destiny: 1820-1860 ▲ The Battle of the Alamo Outnumbered by the Mexican army, the Texans fought heroically to defend the Alamo. Where is the Alamo located? of Gonzales. When Mexican troops arrived, they faced dozens of Texas volunteers. Over the cannon, the Texans had defiantly hung a flag that read "Come and Take It." After a brief skirmish, the soldiers left without the cannon. Today many Texans consider the fight at Gonzales "the Lexington of Texas," or the first battle in the Texas war for independence. Santa Anna did not intend to surrender Texas without a fight. He soon ordered Mexican troops to occupy the Texas town of San Antonio. In early December hundreds of Texas volunteers attacked the city. After five days they drove out the Mexicans. The Texas Revolution had begun. Defense of the Alamo On March 2, 1836, Texans met at Wash- ington-on-the-Brazos. At this meeting, they announced the creation of the Republic of Texas. They placed Sam Houston, a former governor of Tennessee in command of the army. Meanwhile, in San Antonio, less than 200 Texas soldiers took cover in and defended an empty mission called the Alamo. The defenders, both Anglos and Tejanos, included William Travis, Jim Bowie, and Davy Crockett. For 12 days Santa Anna's forces shelled the mission. Defenders inside the Alamo held out against overwhelming odds Finally, on March 6, Santa Anna ordered an all-out attack. The first wave of Mexican soldiers faced the long rifles of Daw Crockett and his Tennessee sharpshooters These riflemen picked off soldiers 200 yards (183 m) away. For every Mexican soldier that fell, however, another moved forward. Mexican troops swarmed over the walls of the Alamo. The defenders fought on in furious hand-to-hand combat. A bullet killed Travis. Bowie died fighting from his sickbed. Mexican soldiers captured and executed Crockett. By 9 a.m., all the Alamo defenders had died. Only a handful of women, children, and slaves survived. The Goliad Massacre The fight at the Alamo angered and inspired Texans. To learn firsthand about the Alamo, Sam Houston met with Susanna Dickinson, one of the survivors, in Gonzales. After hearing Dickinson's account of the final battle, Houston vowed to prevent other Alamos. He sent word to James Fannin, the commander in Goliad, to abandon the fort there. Fannin waited several days before obeying the order. When he finally led troops from the town, they ran into a Mexican a d UNIT 5 The Nation Expands: 1820-1860 "j cn a. c <c army on the Texas prairie. After a short fight, Fannin surrendered his force. A week later, the Mexicans began to execute the prisoners. Many escaped, including Fan- nin, but some 350 others fell before Mexican firing squads. The Battle ot San Jacinto News of events at the Alamo and Goli- ad spread like wildfire among Texans. About 1,400 volunteers rushed to join Sam Houston, who did not strike immediately. He took time to build an army. He also stayed informed of the movements of the Mexican army with the help of two spies—Deaf Smith and Smith's African American son-in-law Hendrick Arnold. In April 1836, Sam Houston decided to strike. He moved his troops onto the prairie just west of the San Jacinto River. On April 21, the Mexican soldiers settled down for an afternoon siesta, or nap. At that moment, Houston ordered the attack. Texas volunteers raced into battle, screaming "Remember the Alamo" and "Remem- ber Goliad." Jacinto. 21.188 1836 Mexican forces 3+t Mexican victory <•— Texan forces ♦ Texan victory Texas War for Independence, 1835-1836 Unorganized Territory yn Ark. Republic of Texas Washington-on- K the-Brazos < Alamo. San Antonio*_____, Bexar, —iS*. Dec. 10.1835 / \ 4/ Goliad. Guff ot Mexico Refugio. March 14, 1836 San Patricio. Feb. 27.1836 ■ Austin's colony li Territory disputed between Texas and Mexico 0 SO 100 miles 50 100 kilometers n Location In 1836 General Santa Anna led r j Mexico's main forces across the Rio lUdy Grande and into Texas. At which places did Texans win victories? ▲ Sam Houston CHAPTER 14 Manifest Destiny: 1820-1860 ▲ Juan Seguin Biography Juan Seguin, A Texas Hero Juan Seguin grew up on his family's ranch along the San Antonio River. He disliked the arrogant Santa Anna. Like many Tejanos, Seguin believed Santa Anna would use the army to crush all opposition. Seguin became one of the first volunteers to join the Texas Revolution. He commanded a company of Tejanos in San Antonio. He and eight members of his company fought at the Alamo. Seguin risked his life to slip through Mexican lines to find reinforcements. When he returned on March 6, he saw the Alamo in flames. At the Battle of San Jacinto) Houston was not sure the Tejanos should participate. He feared Anglos might mistake them for the enemy. Seguin and his followers refused such protection, declaring that they had joined the army and wanted to face the enemy. Houston admired the courage of Seguin and the Tejanos and changed his mind. The battle of San Jacinto lasted only 16 minutes. It became the most intense battle of the Texas Revolution. More than 600 Mexican soldiers died. Hundreds more were wounded or captured. Mexican soldiers shot two horses from under Houston before a musket ball finally shattered his ankle. When the battle ended, onlv nine Texans had died. Santa Anna had disappeared during the fighting. The next day Texas soldier? found him hiding in tall grass and took him prisoner. ★★★ The Republic of Texas The war had ended. On May 14 Texans forced Santa Anna to sign a peace treaty He also signed a secret treaty promising to support Texas independence. In September 1S36, Texans elected Sam Houston president of the new independent nation—the Republic of Texas. ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ ★★★★★★★★★★★★★** Checking for Understanding 1. Identify Stephen F. Austin, Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna, Sam Houston, Juan Seguin, San Antonio, Goliad. 2. Define Tejanos, empresario, reform. 3. How did the Mexican government attempt to control United States settlers who moved into Texas? 4. What were some of the causes of the Texas Revolution? Critical Thinking 5. Making Predictions How do you think people in the United States responded to news of Texas's independence? 6. Imagine you are Stephen F. Austin and you need to recruit settlers to colonize Texas. Draw an advertisement or create a catchy slogan that would attract American colonists to Texas. UNIT 5 The Nation Expands: 1820-1860 By the mid-1840s, a group of Americans wanted to see the United States claim that honor for itself. They believed the nation had a "manifest destiny." Manifest means clear or obvious. Destiny means something that is sure to happen. Some Americans thought the nation was obviously meant to expand and spread across the continent. They gave little thought to the Native Americans and Mexicans who would lose their lands in the process. Annexation of Texas After gaining independence from Mexico, Texans immediately voted to seek admission to the United States. Most Southerners strongly supported extending the cotton-growing area by annexing Texas. Northern abolitionists, however, opposed adding another slave state to the Union. Presidents Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren had refused to recommend annexation. The issue soon arose again. As the 1844 election approached, territorial expansion took center stage. The Democrats nominated James K. Polk of Tennessee as their presidential candidate. As you read earlier in the chapter, Polk campaigned with the slogan "Fifty-four forty or fight!" and made manifest destiny the main issue in the campaign. Polk won in a close election. Outgoing President John Tyler considered Polk's victory a mandate for the annexation of Texas. In February 1845, at Tyler's urging both houses of Congress passed a joint resolution to annex Texas. In December 1845, Texas became the twenty-eighth state to enter the Union; however, some problems still had to be resolved. The boundary between Texas and Mexico remained undetermined, and the Mexican government threatened war. President Polk responded by sending agent John Slidell to resolve differences. Polk instructed Slidell to convince Mexico to accept the Rio Grande as the southern border of Texas. He also told Slidell to offer Mexico $25 million for California and $5 million for New Mexico. Mexican officials exploded in outrage. They considered such a low sum of money an insult and refused to even speak with Slidell. ★ The Brink of War President Polk wanted to move against Mexico. He knew most Americans backed expansion but was not sure they would back it to the point of war. Polk decided to press the question by sending troops into Texas. Soldiers under the command of General Zachary Taylor crossed the Nueces (nu"AY"suhs) River and set up posts just north of the Rio Grande. Although Texas claimed this as its southern boundary, Mexico considered it Mexican territory. Colonel Ethan Allen Hitchcock, one of Taylor's aides, observed: U We have not one particle of right to be here.... It looks as if the government sent a small force on purpose to bring on a war, so as to have a pretext for taking California and as much of this country as it chooses. t In April 1846, Mexican soldiers attacked a United States cavalry patrol and killed 11 Americans. Taylor quickly notified Polk. On May 9 President Polk announced that "Mexico has . . . shed American blood on American soil." He then asked Congress for an official declaration of war. On May 13 both houses of Congress voted by a large majority to declare war on Mexico. Opposition to the War Fourteen antislavery representatives in the House voted against the war. Ohio representative Joshua Giddings called the UNIT 5 The Nation Expands: 1820-1860 war "aggressive, unholy, and unjust." Illinois representative Abraham Lincoln challenged Polk to name the spot where Mexicans "shed American blood on American soil." People outside of Congress also criticized "Mr. Polk's War." New England poet John Greenleaf Whittier wrote, "[I am] heartsick with this miserably wicked Mexican War." Abolitionists considered the war a Southern plot to add more slave states to the Union. They called it a scheme to steal "bigger pens to cram in slaves." Most American newspapers, though, rallied behind the President. Major Battles Even before Congress declared war. General Taylor's soldiers fought north of the Rio Grande at Palo Alto and Resaca de la Palma. In May of 1846, Taylor and his army crossed the Rio Grande into Mexico. By September they captured Monterrey. In late 1846 Santa Anna rallied his forces. He personally led an army CHAPTER 14 Manifest Destiny: 1820-1860 Mexican 1(9 90 W f 70 W Ceded by U S. \Tsln CANADA 1 ^*J_818 1818, ! Ceded by Great Britain / j-y WthSter-Asbburton Treaty {842 -, no w Oregon Territory 1846 Louisiana Purchase 1803 United States 1783 Texas Annexation 1845 Gadsdi Purcha 1853 x ^ Florida * \ Qession wo 181,i 1819 200 400 mile* Spam 1819 Annexed by U S. Guitot Mexico 0 200 400 hJlOfTtrtar* mQD Location By 1853 the continental United States had reached its present national fStudy k°unciar'es' *"*ow mar|y complete states were later carved from the Oregon Territory? against Taylor. In February 1847, however, Taylor regained the upper hand after defeating Santa Anna at the Battle of Buena Vista. As armies clashed in Mexico, General Winfield Scott landed troops on the Gulf Coast near Veracruz. Scott's army won victory after victory as it marched west. In September 1847, after Mexicans made a heroic last stand at Chapultepec (chuh*POOL*tuh"PEHK), Scott took over Mexico City. The Bear Flag Republic Soon after the war began. General Stephen Kearny marched his army to Santa Fe, the capital of present-day New Mexico. The Mexican governor, along with Mexican troops, fled without firing a shot. From Santa Fe, Kearny led about 300 soldiers to California. In 1846 some 500 Americans lived in California. Captain John C. Fremont, an American army officer and explorer, urged Americans to revolt against their Mexican rulers. In the summer of 1846, rebels hoisted a handmade flag emblazoned with a grizzly bear. With this act. they announced the creation of the independent Bear Flag Republic. When General Kearny arrived, the rebels replaced the Bear Flag with the Stars and Stripes. Fremont joined United States forces in fighting the Mexican War In January 1847, Mexicans in California surrendered, and the United States took possession of the territory. UNIT 5 The Nation Expands: 1820-1860 Making Peace On February 2, 1848, the Mexicans signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidal- go. Under its terms, Mexico ceded, or gave up, all of California and New Mexico. This territory has since become known as the Mexican Cession. It included the present-day states of California, Nevada, Utah, and parts of Arizona, Colorado, Wyoming, and New Mexico. The United States agreed to pay S15 million for these lands and agreed to pay the claims of American citizens against Mexico up to $3.25 million. Mexico agreed to recognize Texas as part of the United States. The Mexican government also accepted the Rio Grande as the border between Texas and Mexico. ★ Gadsden Purchase Americans, however, wanted still more territory claimed by Mexico. Railroad owners envisioned a southern route to the Pacific that ran over a strip of land just south of the Gila River. To fulfill this dream, James Gadsden, the minister to Mexico, arranged to buy this land for $10 million. The Gadsden Purchase completed the boundary between Mexico and the United States and the expansion of the United States across the continent. ★ New Citizens The acquisition of Mexican land brought thousands of Mexican citizens into the United States. The Mexican government worried about the fate of these people. To protect their rights, Mexican negotiators insisted that the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo include provisions allowing Mexicans to freely relocate to Mexico. For Mexicans who remained on their land, the treaty promised them "all the rights of citizens of the United States according to the principles of the Constitution." A difficult choice faced Mexicans. About 2,000 people headed south into Mexico. A far larger number, however, chose to stay in the United States. Mexicans who remained in the United States contributed to a rich culture that blended Spanish and Native American traditions. When English-speaking settlers moved to the Southwest, they brought their own ideas and culture with them. The settlers, though, learned much from the Mexican Americans. Mexican Americans taught the newcomers how to irrigate the soil and mine minerals. Many settlers, however, did not treat Mexican Americans and Native Americans fairly. These two groups struggled to protect their cultures and rights against the newcomers. ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ Checking for Understanding 1. Identify Zachary Taylor, Winfield Scott, Stephen Kearny, Santa Fe, Mexican Cession, Gadsden Purchase. Critical Thinking 6. Analyzing Information Why do you think the Texas voters approved annexation to the United States by a great majority? 2. Define Bear Flag Republic, cede. 3. What were the causes of the war between Mexico and the United States? 4. Who urged Americans living in present-day California to revolt against Mexican rule? 5. What were the terms of the Mexican Cession? 7. Imagine you were a Mexican living on lands acquired in the Mexican Cession. Write diary entries in which you record your feelings on learning the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. r CHAPTER 14 Manifest Destiny: 1820-1860 ★ Rushing to California As the Mormons built houses in the desert, Swiss immigrant John Sutter ordered a crew of workers to build a sawmill along the American River in northern California. On January 24, 1848, a golden glint in the river caught the eye of John Marshall, the supervisor of the job. Marshall reached into the water and pulled out a lump of ore. A single word slipped through Marshall's lips: "Gold." Marshall tried to keep his discovery a secret, but word spread quickly to nearby towns. The mayor of Monterey, California, described the reaction of townspeople: 44 [T]he farmers have thrown aside their plows, the lawyers their briefs, the doctors their pills, the priests their prayerbooks, and all are now digging for gold. ▲ Gold Mining Thousands of people went to California during the Gold Rush searching for great wealth. What term did people use for gold seekers in California? Forty-Niners by the Shipload Tine gold seekers who stampeded into California became known as the forty- niners for the year, 1849, in which many of them came. Thousands of forty-niners sailed to San Francisco from New York, Boston, and Galveston. Most traveled around the southern tip of South America. Some more adventurous—or impatient- travelers sailed to the Isthmus of Panama. They climbed on mules and rode through the steamy jungle to reach the Pacific coast. At the coast, they caught ships bound for California. The people who departed from the ships in San Francisco came from nearly every corner of the earth. During the first half of 1849, 5,000 miners arrived from Chile alone. Others came from as far away as China. Traveling Overland By far the greatest number of gold seekers traveled to California on overland trails. Guided by former mountain men, many traveled over a southern spur of the Oregon Trail, called the California Trail. Still others headed over the Mormon Trail In 1849 alone, more than 80,000 people poured across the continent. ★ Life in the Mining Towns When the forty-niners reached California, they threw' up temporary towns overnight w'ith names such as Shinbone Peak and You Bet. Most townspeople lived in tents. The lucky ones owmed cabins, most of which lacked window's or chimneys. Some women staked claims, but mote made money by opening boardinghouses or laundries. One laundress along the Feather River earned $1,000 a wreek— I more money than some miners. Mining towns had no police or pns- I ons, so robbers posed a real threat to 1 business owners and miners, also called I UNIT 5 The Nation Expands: 1820-1860 Linking Past and Present ]eans One of the most enduring made-in~the-USA fashions came out of the mining camps of California. Then. Only for Gold Miners Levi Strauss listened as miners complained about how fast their clothes v^re out. Strauss had an idea. He stitched up a pair of pants made from a tough easy-to-care-for fabric called denim. To make sure the pants were extra tough, Strauss folded ovriuus the seams and reinforced the corners with small copper tacks called rivets. The pants did not tear when miners hung their tools or bags of gold from their belts or pockets, and the dark blue color did not show dirt! Strauss had a fashion hit. In 1873 his company began producing the first Levi's. A World Favorite Today people call Levi's by a variety of names—dungarees, denims, blue jeans, jeans, or by the name of the designer who makes them. Regardless of the name, miner's pants are the top sportswear choice of people around the world. Imagine standing in a market in the middle of Nairobi, Kenya, or Kathmandu, Nepal. Your blue jeans i A Teenagers in jeans may be a hotter trading item than your American dollars. How many pairs of jeans do you own? ■mMs ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ ◄ Early Levi pants ad prospectors. Townspeople took law into their own hands, forming vigilance committees. The committee members, or vigilantes, drove petty thieves out of town and hanged murderers. Such hasty justice became known as vigilante justice— law without judge or jury. ★ Dreams of Freedom In 1849 California delegates drafted a constitution that prohibited slavery. The next year California entered the Union as a free state. Hoping to find riches and freedom, a number of African Americans headed west. By 1852 more than 2,000 African Americans lived in California. Some struck it rich in the mines. Others succeeded at business enterprises. Biddy Mason, for example, worked as a nurse. She then invested her savings in real estate until she built up a fortune. Mason used some of her money to found Los Angeles's first elementary school for African American children. As a group, African Americans in California boasted savings of more than $2.3 million by 1855. The shadow of prejudice, however, still produced huge inequalities. The California legislature denied African Americans the right to vote. Black laws barred African Americans from testifying in court and prohibited integrated schools. Led by African American journalists such as San Francisco newspaper owner Mifflin Gibbs, African Americans forced the repeal of the black laws. But they did CHAPTER 14 Manifest Destiny: 1820-1860 4 65 not win the vote until passage of the Fifteenth Amendment in 1870. Freedom Lost For Native Americans, the migration of thousands of settlers to California proved disastrous. Tens of thousands of prospectors forced Native Americans to work. Native American men toiled in the mines while Native American women worked in households. Disease and forced labor reduced the Native American population in California from about 150,000 in 1848 to 35,000 by 1860. The national government had created the Bureau of Indian Affairs in 1824. The bureau attempted to reduce Native American land claims. In the 1850s the government advocated confining Native Americans on reservations, or lands set aside for Native Americans. Despite Native Americans' fierce resistance to this policy, by 1858 the bureau had created eight reservations in California. The Search for the Gold Mountain Immigrants from China also felt the heavy hand of prejudice. Lured by tales of the American's Gam San, or "Gold Moun- tain," hundreds of Chinese peasants poured into California from 1849 to 1851. By 1852 their numbers had swelled into the thousands. The rising tide of immigration from Asia alarmed the miners in the United States. In 1852 they convinced state lawmakers to tax foreign-born miners who did not plan to become citizens. Federal law limited citizenship to whites, so Chinese miners had to pay the tax or quit mining. Under the law, the government took a total of $5 million from the pockets of Chinese prospectors. Forced out of mining), the Chinese opened other businesses. .Chinese laundries, restaurants, and boardinghouses became familiar sights in the mining towns. In San Francisco these shops made up a city within a city called Chinatown. The End of the Gold Rush Although the Gold Rush continued into the 1850s, latecomers found little gold left in rivers and streams. After a few years, large companies took over most of the mining in California. Many forty-niners settled down as farmers, shopkeepers, or city workers in towns like San Francisco. When the mines ran dry, smaller towns went bust and people moved on. Many towns became abandoned ghost towns. Some people continued the search tor gold, however. Their search carried them north to British Columbia, east to Colorado, and across the Pacific Ocean to Australia. ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ i ★★★★★★★★★★★★★** Checking for Understanding 1. Identify Brigham Young, John Sutter, Biddy Mason, Salt Lake City, San Francisco, Isthmus of Panama. 2. Define forty-niner, prospector, vigilante. 3. Why did the Mormons settle in the deserts of Utah? 4. How did the Gold Rush help California grow? Critical Thinking 5. Making Comparisons How was the establishment of a settlement in Utah in the 1840s similar to the founding of the Massachusetts Bay Colony in the 1620s? 6. Draw or create a scene of a California mining town. UNIT 5 The Nation Expands: 1820-1860 to his way of thinking by pointing out the benefits to society. He explained that education "does better than to disarm the poor of their hostility toward the rich, it prevents them being poor." Common Schools in the 1800s In 1837 Mann helped Massachusetts form the first state board of education in the United States. Under his leadership, the board raised teachers' salaries, established statewide standards of education, set up the first schools for teacher training, and extended the school year to six months. After many years, the efforts of Mann and other reformers resulted in common schools in most states. During the 1840s and 1850s, the flood of immigrants into the United States helped free public schools gain general acceptance. Many Americans realized that schools were the ideal agents to teach American values to the new arrivals. The schoolbooks already in use were ideal for introducing American values. The popular McGuffey's Reader, for example, focused as often on morals as on reading skills. A typical McGuffey exercise read: Beautiful hands are they that do Deeds that are noble good and true; Beautiful feet are they that go Swiftly to lighten another's Despite advances in public education between 1830 and 1860, schools needed more improvements. School buildings remained inadequate. During the late 1830s in one Connecticut county, the average school housed 30 students at a time. Yet it measured only 7 feet (2.3 m) by 18 feet (6 m). In 1842 Mann compared these cramped quarters for children with the neat buildings complete with walkways that New England farmers built for their hogs. Other areas of education also had not changed or had not changed enough. Most states did not require that students attend school. Others required attendance for only 12 weeks a year. And most students' education ended with the eighth grade. By 1860 only about 40 public high schools existed across the nation. As late as 1900, only about 4 percent of the population between the ages of 17 and 22 went on to higher education. ★ Women, Minorities, and Schools Even with reforms, for many Americaa*- getting into any kind of school remained a struggle. Most areas of the country neglected the education of women, African Americans, and the physically challenged. Bold and far-sighted reformers, however, took up their cause. Education of American Women By the end of the Revolutionary War, most elementary schools admitted girls Girls, however, received only a basic education. Even private schools taught girls morals and manners rather than science and mathematics. In 1819 reformer Emma Willard pointed out to the New York legislature that the education of women had "been too exclusively directed to fit them for displaying. | their] charms...Two years later Willard remedied the situation by starting the Troy Female Seminary in New York. Parents o! students there were shcxrked to find their daughters studying, among other subjects, anatomy. In 1824 Catharine Beecher founded a similar school in Connecticut. And in 1837 Mary Lyon established Mount Holyoke Seminar)' in Massachusetts. Oberlin College in Ohio, founded in 1833, admitted women on the college level in 1837. Professional schools continued to reject women applicants until Geneva College admitted Elizabeth UNIT 5 The Nation Expands: 1820-1860 ▲ Arrival of Immigrants Immigration in the 1800s dramatically increased the population of the United States Why did employers hire immigrants? these goals, some unions called strikes. A strike means that workers refuse to do their jobs until employers meet their demands. Most early strikes failed. Because strikes were illegal, strikers faced fines and jail sentences. Women Workers Organize Women workers faced special challenges. They earned less money than men and most union leaders wrould not allow' women to join. In 1824 the first women's strike occurred. In 1833 a union for female factory workers formed. In 1860 Massachusetts shoemakers went on strike for higher wages. One thousand women joined 5,000 men and paraded through a snowstorm in Lynn, Massachusetts, marching and carrying banners. The women's banners proclaimed "American ladies will not be slaves" and "Give us a fair compensation and we will labor cheerfully." After several weeks, the strikers finally won higher wages. But the factory owners refused to recognize the union. Some unions did make gains during the late 1840s and 1850s. In response to union demands, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and other states legislated 10-hour workdays. They also required schooling for children to prevent them from working long hours. In 1842 a Massachusetts court declared that workers even had a legal right to strike. This acceptance of labor unions, though, had force only in Massachusetts. Many years went by before unions made a nationwide impact. ★ Workers From Across the Ocean Most of the workers at the Pemberton Mill had been Irish immigrants. An immigrant is a person wrho comes to a country with the intention of living there permanently. Millions of Europeans had come to the United States during the first half of the 1800s. The nation's industrial growth required a large labor supply. Employers discovered that immigrants would work long hours for low' wages with few complaints. Immigration Between 1830 and 1860 In the 1830s nearly 600,000 immigrants entered the United States. For the next 2 decades, the tide of immigration rose sharply. As a result, about 4.2 million immigrants arrived between 1840 and 1860. By 1860 one out of every eight Americans had been born elsewhere. Most came from Europe. One European UNIT 6 Rift and Reunion: 1820-1877 mayor could not resist commenting on the phenomenon to an American visitor: "I welcome you in the name of our city's 4,000 people, 3,000 of whom are now in 1 your country." German Immigrants Why did Europeans leave their native countries? In 1848 CV-rman academics and skilled workers led a movement to unite 38 states into one nation. When their revolution failed, they fled to avoid harm from government authorities. Thousands came to the United States. Soon after, many German peasants followed them across the ocean. In all about 1.3 million Germans immigrated to the United States before 1860. Many stayed in New York City, where they had entered the country, while others continued inland. There they settled on farms near the Ohio River and Great Lakes. Irish Immigrants An even larger group—about 40 percent of all the immigrants—came from Ireland. In the 1800s poor Irish farmers depended on potatoes for food. Between 1845 and 1854, a disastrous blight, or disease, ruined several potato crops. By 1855 1 million peasants had died from famine—severe food shortages—or sickness. Rather than starve, many survivors chose to leave. One and a half million Irish sold their belongings and bought passage to the United States. Once in the United States, most Irish immigrants settled in or near eastern cities such as Boston and New York. They lived in crowded, unhealthy conditions and took whatever jobs they could find. The immigrants supplied much of the unskilled labor needed to build the North's growing industries. The men mined coal, dug canals, and built railroads. The women worked as servants and in factories. By 1852 half the factory workers in New England mills had come from foreign countries. Most of these workers were Irish. Immigrants and the American Way Over time immigrants assimilated, or adopted the manners and language of their new country'. They also made contributions to American society. Germans taught Americans horticulture, or the science of growing fruits, vegetables, and flowers. The Irish furnished leaders for the labor movement. Irish American Terence Pow- derly headed a labor union called the Knights of Labor in 1879. And Irish-born Mary Harris—better known as Mother Jones—led a campaign to end child labor in 1903. America had become a nation of immigrants. As author Herman Melville noted: 44 Our blood is as the flood of the Amazon, made up of a thousand noble currents all pouring into one. We are not a nation, so much as a ★ Immigrants Face Resentment Some native-born Americans distrusted anyone different from themselves. They did not welcome the immigrants. They resented and feared their different languages, customs, and religions. These Americans especially mistrusted Catholics, many of whom were Irish and German immigrants. Americans who felt this way became known as nativists. Nativists wanted to discourage immigrants from coming to the United States. They also wanted to stop those already here from becoming citizens or participating in politics. Some nativists proposed that immigrants wait 21 years to qualify CHAPTER 16 Sectional Differences: 1820-1860 for citizenship. Others demanded laws barring Catholics and immigrants from public office. Know-Nothing Party To get what they wanted, nativists formed a new political party, the American party. Their critics called it the Know- Nothing party because members always responded "I know nothing" when asked about the organization's secret activities. The party became so powerful that in 1856 Know-Nothing candidates won 48 seats in Congress. Soon after, though, the party collapsed. In spite of hardships, immigrants continued to flock to the United States and participate in American democracy. Once the Irish gained the vote, they quickly learned to use it for their benefit. They organized political machines in big cities such as Boston and New York to help elect their candidates. In 1880, for instance, Irish voters elected William R. Grace as the first Irish Catholic mayor of New York City. ★ African Americans in the North Slavery had once been legal in the North, by the early decades of the 1800s, though, all Northern and New England states had passed emancipation laws to abolish slavery. Thousands of African Americans lived in the North. Although they had been freed, many African Americans faced discrimination in the northern states. Discrimination occurs when certain groups of people aVe not treated fairly. In no state could an African American serve on a jury or be elected to Congress. In most areas, African Americans could not ride in the same carriage or work in the same building with a white person Good jobs were seldom open to them African Americans most often faced complete social and economic separation from whites. Despite the overwhelming obstacles they faced, some free African Americans established successful careers. James Forten, a leading abolitionist speaker, began his career as a sailmaker and became wealthy as the owner of a Philadelphia sail factory. Frederick Douglass and Flarriet Tubman became powerful and influential Northerners while fighting against slavery. Although denied voting rights, African Americans fought bravely in every American war, published their own newspapers, and founded their own churches Many also contributed time and money to the antislavery movement. ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ Checking for Understanding 1. Identify Terence Powderly, Mary Harris, Lawrence, Lynn. 2. Define labor union, strike, immigrant, assimilate, nativist, discrimination. 3. How did bosses treat factory workers in the mid- 1800s? 4. Why did immigrants come to the United States in the mid-1800s? Critical Thinking 5. Making Predictions What do you think Irish immigrants might have said to other Americans who wanted immigrants to wait 21 years to become citizens? 6. Imagine you are a journalist reporting on the collapse of the Pemberton Mill. Record your report on tape. UNIT 6 Rift and Reunion. 1820-1877 dollars. They might not have succeeded, however, without government help. Both Vanderbilt and Gould often bribed government officials to arrange cash subsidies—grants of money to assist a company—and choice land grants. Railroad heads also cooperated with bankers to gain more profits. New York banker J.P. Morgan formed a compact with major railroad owners to eliminate competition from smaller railroads. Meanwhile, thousands of workers involved in the day-to-day construction of the railroads received only $1 or $2 a day. Most workers came from Ireland and China, and many had fought in the Civil War. Their backbreaking work seemed never ending. They dug, chiseled, and dynamited their way across the United States. Many lost their lives. In 1889 alone 22,000 railroad workers were injured or killed. ★ The Rush to the Mines People started to move to the Rockies and Great Plains even before the railroads reached those areas. After 1849 miners flocked to California looking for gold and silver and hoping to make quick fortunes. Mining continued to attract settlers to the West throughout the late 1800s. Towns sprang up wherever people discovered gold or silver. Americans called these communities boomtowns because of their rapid growth. When miners exhausted the veins of ore, they quickly moved on. These communities dwindled into ghost towns—empty towns where no one lived. ★ Cattle Kingdoms Spread After the Civil War, the demand for beef encouraged cattle raisers to ranch in the open range—the broad grasslands in the West. On the open range, ranchers grazed their herds free of charge and unrestrained by boundaries. Eastern demand created opportunities for great profits. In 1866 dozens of Texas ranchers drove a quarter of a million cattle along the old Shawnee Trail to the closest railroad station in Sedalia, Missouri. That same year Texans Charles Goodnight and Oliver * Loving drove their cattle along an old mail route to mining camps in Colorado.' Soon Texas became a major beef supplier and the Goodnight-Loving Trail became the main artery for cattle drives to the Rockies. In 1867 the Kansas Pacific Railroad completed a rail line that ran as far west as Abilene, Kansas. Cattle merchant Joseph McCoy built pens at the railroad station to hold herds waiting for shipment east. Between 1867 and 1871, freight trains carried 1.5 million cattle from Abilene to meatpacking plants in Chicago and Kansas City. Then the Santa Fe Railroad ▲ Mining Towns The discovery of gold started a mass migration of people to the West. People flocked into "boomtowns" hoping to become rich. What name was given to a boomtown after everyone left? CHAPTER 20 Reshaping the Nation: 1877-1900 New Immigrants, Modern Cities Read to Learn ... the struggles of immigrants in the United States, how American cities had changed at the turn of the century. Terms to Know ★ tenement ★ slum ★ settlement house ±hi , he woman smiled as she recalled her arrival in the United States: U My first day in America I went with my aunt to buy some American clothes.... 1 took my old brown dress and shawl and threw them away! ... When I looked in the mirror, I couldn't get over it. I said, boy, Sophie, look at you now. Just like an American. ★ Starting Over Like Sophie, many courageous immigrants came to the United States in search of a new start. They left their native court- People to Meet ★ Jacob Riis ★ Jane Addams Places to Locate Ellis Island Harlem ◄ Statue of Liberty tries to escape hunger, poverty, and political oppression. In the 1880s almost half a million immigrants arrived at the docks in New York City each year. Immigrants in the Late 1800s Most immigrants before 1870 came from the northern and western nations of Europe. They included Irish, Germans, Scots, and English. After 1870 the pattern of immigration changed. Large numbers of immigrants from eastern and southern Europe also came to the United States. More than one-half of the new immigrants came from Italy, Russia, Austria, and Hungary. They included many Catholics, as well as Jews fleeing persecution in Europe. Most new immigrants from Europe arrived in New York. After 1886 as the UNIT 7 Modern America Emerges: 1877-Present newcomers approached the shores of their new home they viewed the majestic Statue of Liberty, their first sight of America. The statue stood on a small island in New York Harbor and held up a glowing torch as if lighting the newcomers' way. By 1892 the federal government had set up an official immigration center on Ellis Island near the statiA. Thousands of immigrants also reached America through other ports. Many Asian immigrants entered the country at San to some Americans and aroused distrust and discrimination. Immigrants usually lived in their own neighborhoods, practiced their own customs, and spoke their own languages to ease the pain of separation from their native lands. Many Americans wondered if immigrants could ever be assimilated into American life. Some people, especially workers, blamed immigrants for low wages. Employers found that immigrants would accept lower wages than native Americans. Francisco. Most of them came from China and Japan. Although the immigrants faced many struggles in their new country, they helped build the new nation. ★ Immigrants Face Discrimination Not all Americans welcomed newcomers to their country. The immigrants' languages and customs seemed strange ◄ Immigrants. _ 400 | 350 Jj 300 t *0 ■*— i,200 immigration made large gains during the early 1900s. What year on the graph saw the least number of immigrants? 1885 1900 1860 1865 1870 1675 1880 Year 1390 1895 Sourc* Historical Statistic* of fh# Unl9d States Europeans made up the greatest number of immigrants in the late 1800s, but Latin American and Canadian CHAPTER 20 Reshaping the Nation: 1877-1900 Others resented the different cultures and religions of the many immigrants. In the late 1800s hostility grew toward many of the new racial and ethnic groups coming into the country. Some historians believe the rapid changes occurring in America because of industrialization influenced this reaction. Immigrants became easy targets of hostility for Americans uncertain or disturbed by the rapid social changes. ★ Strangers in the City During the late 1800s and early 1900s, the city became a magnet that drew people and ideas and created new lifestyles. Most immigrants settled in American cities. African Americans from rural areas of the United States joined them there. Both groups came looking for jobs and housing, but most found city life difficult and confusing. Community Lite in Urban Areas In big cities such as San Francisco, Chicago, and New York, immigrants found comfort in living close to others from their homelands and in retaining their old customs and ways. They clustered together in neighborhoods where they went to the same church or synagogue. They joined the same clubs. They read newspapers and magazines in their own languages. In this way they tried to recreate the feeling of being back home. After 1900 African Americans from the Southern rural areas formed these same Picturing history ▲ Urban Problems Overcrowding and poverty caused many social changes in cities throughout the United States. Who shocked Americans with his photographs of New York City slums? UNIT 7 Modern America Emerges: 1877-Present Urban and Rural Population Growth, 1860-1900 A 11 ■ 1 n* i L l 3 ■ -4 - Graph Study 1870 Urban 1880 Year 1890 Rural 1900 The gap between the sizes of urban and rural populations narrowed in the late 1800s. About how many more people lived in rural areas than in urban areas in 1900? Source: Hiatoncsl SMWfc" of tfw United Stores. kinds of close-knit urban communities. In New York City, for example, they congregated by the thousands in an area called Harlem. Challenges ol City Lite Despite the sense of community in neighborhoods, city life demoralized many newcomers. Every day they faced crime and poverty. In addition, cities had expanded so fast that the growing population lacked enough housing and social services to meet its needs. Poor sewer and sanitation systems contributed to widespread death and disease. Great fires commonly destroyed entire city blocks. Most newcomers to American cities could not afford to own houses. They stayed in city centers and rented from landlords who squeezed as many residents as possible into the smallest available spaces. Landlords proved unwilling to maintain good conditions at these overcrowded apartment buildings, or tenements. As more and more people crammed into tenements, poor, run-down areas developed, called slums. An entire family often lived in a single, small room in slums. Urban Reformers A Danish immigrant named Jacob Riis shocked many Americans with his photographs of New York slums. His pictures and articles introduced middle-class Americans to places with names like Bandits' Roost, Bottle Alley, and Kerosene Row. In 1890 he published his photographs and reports in a book entitled How the Other Half Lives. He challenged his readers to renew the face of the cities. During the 1880s and 1890s, legions of middle-class reformers accepted Riis's challenge. They campaigned for clean water and better sewage systems and demanded better ventilation, plumbing in all new' buildings, and mandatory vaccinations. These improvements meant that few'er people died of diseases like typhoid fever and smallpox. Believing that poverty and desperate living conditions drove many of the urban poor to crime, many ministers worked to improve the A book 0M UHBAN quality of life in the life by Jacob Riis CHAPTER 20 Reshaping the Nation: 1877-1900 mm yi A Jane Aodams with chiiohen from a Chicago settlement house cities. Ministers demanded that the churches help slum dwellers in practical ways. They called this action to improve society's problems the "social gospel." Social gospel ministers founded special schools for slum children. They included gyms, libraries, and social rooms in their church buildings. Some also furnished employment bureaus and summer outings. One religious group, the Salvation Army, offered food, ice, coal, and religious services to the poor. Another group of reformers established settlement houses. Settlement houses, located in the slums, provided immigrant families with food, education, and health care. ★ ★ Jane Addams—An American Social Worker Jane Addams led the settlement-house movement. She and Ellen Gates Starr founded the Hull House in one of the poorest sections of Chicago in 1889. She recruited college students to live in slums and help the local residents to improve themselves and their environment. Settle- ment-house workers organized community activities such as clubs, classes, and day nurseries. Some even pressured city governments to improve schools, parks, and community services. Addams hoped to foster democracy by breaking down barriers between the rich and the poor. Addams insisted that "the dependence of classes on each other is reciprocal [mutual]." Addams's settlement houses became "neighborhood centers," designed for people of every nation and ethnic group. Addams believed strongly in the need to research the causes of poverty and crime and in the importance of trained social workers to help the poor. Most important, settlement-house workers, led by Addams, taught immigrant families about American customs and the American political system. In time, the immigrants would learn about America and make substantial contributions to society. ★★★ ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ Checking for Understanding 1. Identify Jacob Riis, jane Addams, Ellis Island, Harlem. 2. Define tenement, slum, settlement house. Critical Thinking 5. Summarizing What was life like for newcomers to American cities at the turn of the century? 3. How did reformers try to help the poor in the cities? 4. Why did some Americans feel and act hostile toward immigrants? 6. Create a collage illustrating the origins of immigrants who came to the United States after 1870. UNIT 7 Modern America Emerges: 1877-Present World War I Era Read to Learn ... how the United States became involved with lands outside its borders, why the United States entered World War I. why the United States became a world leader. Terms to Know ★ nationalism ★ neutral ★ armistice ★ reparations People to Meet ★ William McKinley ★ Theodore Roosevelt ★ Woodrow Wilson Places to Locate ★ ★ ★ ★ ★ ★ Hawaii Cuba Guam Philippines Puerto Rico Panama ► Poster for war savings stamfs JL hi he news that events in the world's most powerful nations had exploded into war took Americans by surprise. Europeans had been at peace for more than 40 years. Little did they suspect that when the war ended, the United States would emerge as a world leader. ★ Becoming a World Power Europe had always been the United States's major trading partner. In the second half of the 1800s, business and government leaders became interested in Asia and Latin America as a source of new markets. UNIT 7 Modern America Emerges: 1877-Present Expansion in the Pacific In 1898 during the presidency of William McKinley, the United States annexed the Hawaiian Islands. The islands provided a base for the American navy. From Hawaii the United States could oversee its trade in Japan and China. The same year the United States wait to war with Spain after the American press aroused intense American anger by reporting the brutal way that Spain crushed a rebellion in Cuba. Almost immediately, fighting extended to Spanish colonies in the Pacific Ocean as well as in Cuba. When the Spanish-American War ended, not only did Cuba gain its independence, but the United States also gained Guam and the Philippines. Twenty-fifth Flag, 1912 Statehood for Arizona and New Mexico increased the number of stars to 48 in 1912. This flag served as the American flag from 1912 to 1959, more years than any other flag. ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ Its new territories drew the United States even closer to Asia. Americans now had naval bases and refueling stations throughout the Pacific. These bases made trade with China, Japan, and Korea much easier for American ships. Latin American Policies The United States also took an active role in the affairs of Latin America. As a result of the Spanish-American War, the United States had acquired Puerto Rico. The Americans soon came to view themselves as guardians of the whole Western Hemisphere, not just the Caribbean. Theodore Roosevelt, who became President after McKinley's assassination in 1901, liked to proclaim "Speak softly, but carry a big stick." He meant that he preferred peace, but that he would use force when necessary. Roosevelt used the "big stick" to gain control of the isthmus of Panama. For years the United States and other countries had wanted to build a canal across Central America to connect the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Then Colombia controlled Panama, and the Colombian legislature rejected the United States's offer to buy a strip of land across the isthmus. Roosevelt became determined to obtain the canal site. In 1903 he helped organize and finance a revolt in Panama. With the help of American marines, the Panamanian rebels overthrew their Colombian rulers and set up their own government. Representatives of the United States and the new government of Panama quickly signed a canal treaty. For $10 million plus an annual fee, Panama granted Americans control of a strip across the isthmus. Finished in 1914, the Panama Canal ranks as one of the greatest engineering works of all time. ★ World War I While the United States defined its relationship to the rest of the world, relationships among European nations changed. Competition for overseas empires, the building of military alliances, and nation- alism—a people's pride in its country— increased. The growth of these forces led to the outbreak of World War I in 1914. On one side stood the Central Powers—Ger- many, the Ottoman Empire, and Austria- Hungary. On the other side were the ▼ President T. Roosevelt and the 'big stick" CHAPTER 21 The Twentieth Century: 1900-Present The need for defense workers altered traditional patterns of American society. As millions of men joined the armed forces, more women than ever before entered the labor force. "If you can drive a car, you can run a machine," became an advertising slogan for industries. The government, newspapers, radio, and newsreels encouraged women to take factory jobs as a patriotic duty. About 5 million women entered the workforce during the war. "Rosie the Riveter," who first appeared in overalls in a Lockheed Aircraft poster, became a national symbol of the vital contribution women made to the war effort. The war brought about the mistreatment of some Americans. After the bornb- ing of Pearl Harbor, the government, distrusting Japanese Americans, moved thousands of them to relocation camps even though they displayed no disloyalty to the nation. Hie government ruthlessly disregarded the rights of these Japanese Americans and forced them to suffer extreme and lasting hardships. ★ After the War World War II became the costliest and most destructive war ever. At least 50 million people died as a result of the war- more than during any other war. The war devastated billions of dollars worth of property. Life in some countries would not return to normal for many years. Hitler had appealed to national pride and racial hatred in Germany, using force to silence all opposition. Hitler's Nazi party blamed Germany's economic problems on its Jewish population and savagely killed nearly 6 million Jews in concentration camps. The Nazis also murdered about 6 million others. This mass murder is known as the Holocaust. People from all over the globe looked for ways to prevent such a terrible conflict from happening again. They believed that an international organization dedicated to freedom and cooperation among peoples everywhere could ensure peace. In April 1945, delegates from 50 nations met in San Francisco to create just such an organiza- tion—the United Nations. ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ Checking for Understanding 1. Identify Franklin D. Roosevelt, Harry S Truman, Pearl Harbor. Critical Thinking 5. Drawing Conclusions Do you think World War II could have been prevented? Explain. 2. Define dictatorship, ultimatum. Holocaust. 3. What events led to the outbreak of World War II? 4. Why did the United States enter World War II? 6. Imagine you are a reporter during World War II. Research and write a news story on one aspect of the war that you find especially interesting or important. UNIT 7 Modern America Emerges: 1877-Present _ Yoshiko Uchida grew up in California in the 1930s. As a Japanese American, she sometimes felt very different from the people around her. She wanted to be a "typical" American, and often resented the Japanese ways of her family. Eventually Uchida learned to value the "invisible thread" that linked her to her heritage. Read to Discover Yoshiko Uchida's family, like many Japanese Americans, were patriotic citizens during World War II. Japanese Americans, however, were treated as enemies because of their heritage. The American government relocated them to camps during the war. How did Yoshiko and her sister, Kay, spend their time in the internment camp? Reader's Dictionary Tanforan horse racing park used as a camp for Japanese Americans mess hall military-style dining area contraband forbidden items from The Invisible Thread by Yoshiko Uchida (1921-1992) Gradually we became accustomed to life in Tan- foran, especially to standing in long lines for everything. We lined up to get into the mess hall or to use a laundry tub or to buy something at the canteen (find- ing only shoelaces when we got in) or to get into the occasional movies that were shown. We got used to rushing back to our stall after dinner for the 6:00 p.m. head count (we were still in bed for the morning count), and to the sudden unexpected campwide searches for contraband by the FBI when we were confined to our stalls for several hours. For diversion we could also go to talent shows, recorded concerts, discussion groups, Saturday night dances, softball games, art classes, and hobby shows exhibiting beautiful handicraft made by resourceful residents from scrap material. Soon visitors from the outside were allowed to come in as far as the grandstand, and many of our friends came laden with cakes, fruit, candy, cookies, and news from the outside. Representatives from the university, the YMCA and YWCA, and various church groups also came to give us their support and help. They were working UNIT 7 Modern America Emerges: 1877-Present on arrangements to get students out of camp and back into schools as soon as possible. One day our neighbor Mrs. Harpainter came to see us, bringing all sorts of snacks along with flowers from her garden for Mama. Her boys, however, were not allowed inside because they were under sixteen. When Kay and I heard they were waiting outside the gate, we hurried to the fence to talk to them. "Teddy! Bobby!" We ran to greet them, squeezing our fingers through the chain links to touch their hands. But an armed guard quickly shouted, "Hey, you two! Get away from the fence!" Kay and 1 stepped back immediately. We didn't want to tangle with anyone holding a gun. Bobby and Teddy watched us in total horror, and told us later that they thought we were going to be shot right before their eyes. When my mother's good friend, Eleanor Knight, came to see us, we asked her to see how Laddie was getting along. Each day we wondered about him, but the boy who had promised to write hadn't even sent us a postcard. And then we learned why he had not written. "I'm so sorry," Eleanor wrote, "but your dear Laddie died just a few weeks after you left Berkeley." I was sure he had died of a broken heart, thinking we had abandoned him. I ran outside to find a place to cry, but there were people wherever I turned. I didn't want to see anybody, but there was no place to hide. There was no place to be alone—not in the latrine or the showers or anywhere in the entire camp. Responding to Literature 1. Why were Teddy and Bobby not allowed inside the camp? 2. Why did representatives from churches and other groups visit the camp? 3. How do you think you would feel in Uchida's place in the internment camp? 4. Draw plans for a community memorial suitable for remembering Japanese Americans treated unfairly during World War II. UNIT 7 Modern America Emerges: 1877-Present r, . Chapter 20 Reshaping the Nation Railroads brought farmers, ranchers, and miners to the West in the last half of the 1800s. Native Americans, most of whom lived in the West by that time, fought against white settlement. Eventually they were forced onto reservations. The eastern United States also experienced big changes. Thanks to modem inventors, Americans could talk to one another on telephones and light their cities with electric lamps. Industries and cities grew as never before. A new wave of immigrants streamed into the cities to take factory jobs. Workers of all backgrounds tried to improve unsafe factory conditions. Owners, however, seldom changed wages or work rules. Life proved difficult for both immigrant and African American families, who moved to cities looking for work. Reformers like Jacob Riis exposed dirty, overcrowded slums. Their work helped change some of the worst conditions. at Military dictatorships in Germany, Italy, and Japan Germany invades Poland and Western Europe Japan invades the Asian mainland and islands of the Pacific Japan attacks American naval base in Hawaii World War • United Nations formed • United States and the Soviet Union become world superpowers • Cold war develops between Western democracies and Eastern Communist countries ▲ Arrival of immigrants, 1887 Farmers throughout the country fell on hard times after the Civil War. Local groups succeeded in getting lower railroad rates for shipping their products to market. These groups later formed the Populist political party. The Populists and members of the Progressive movement, which came later, brought about a number of reforms. The graduated income tax, direct primaries, and direct election of senators were some of their reforms. Chapter 21 The Twentieth Century By the time the United States entered the twentieth century, it had acquired Hawaii, the Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Guam. Theodore Roosevelt, who became President in 1901, started UNIT 7 Modern America Emerges: 1877-Present 