Memt#r of Harrington Library Conaortoum □ □□ 01 OllOtm T Second Edition Amarillo College Library Dedicated to serving our nation's youth When ordering this book, please specify: either R 489 P or Review Text in United States History, Second Edition 315 Hudson Street / New York, N.Y. 10013 Contents Preface.................................................. iii Part 1. Events in Europe Lead to the Age of Exploration.. 1 2. Spain in the New World.............................. 9 3. France in the New World............................ 16 4. England in the New World......................... 21 5. The Netherlands in the New World................... 25 Part 1. Colonization by England........................... 29 2. Aspects of Colonial Life........................... 43 Part 1. England Gains Control of North America............ 61 2. Growing Differences With England................... 68 3. The War for Independence........................... 78 Part 1. The Constitution Becomes the Supreme Law of the Land............................................. 94 2. The New Government begins to Function..............107 Part 1. Era of Jefferson. Madison, and Monroe.............121 2. Westward Expansion and Early Industrial Progress..138 3. Age of Jackson.....................................156 4. The United States Expands to the Pacific...........169 Part 1. Sectionalism and Slavery Lead to Disunion.........182 2. The Civil War......................................196 3. Reconstruction.................................... 217 Part 1. Settlement of the Western Frontier................226 2. Progress and Problems of the Fanner................235 3. The L nited States Becomes a leading Industrial Nation............................................246 4. Labor Organizes to Improve Its Position............265 tv Contents V Part 1. Immigrants Contribute to the Nation's Growth and Greatness..........................................277 2. Political, Social, and Cultural Progress From 18<i5 to the Present............................................289 3. A Chronology of Presidents (1881 — 1921)........... 319 Part 1. Our Nation Expands Beyond Its Borders...............332 2. World War I and Its Aftermath.......................351 3. The New Deal........................................364 4. World War II........................................373 Part 1. The United Nations Is Established to Preserve the Peace 386 2. America Leads the Free World in the Cold War........399 Part 1. President Truman's "Fair Deal"......................450 2. The Eisenhower Administration..................... 452 3. President Kennedy's "New Frontier"..................456 4. President Johnson's "Great Society".................459 5. The Nixon Administration ............................464 6. The Ford Administration.............................472 7. The Carter Administration ...........................476 8. The Reagan Administration............................481 Part 1. Legislative Branch..................................496 2. Executive Branch....................................500 3. Judicial Branch.....................................507 4. Civic Responsibility...............................510 The Declaration of Independence............................ 519 The Constitution of the United States of America............523 Amendments to the Constitution............................. 538 U.S. Presidents and Vice Presidents........................ 552 Profile of the States........................................556 Index..................................................... 559 Part 1. Colonization by England King James 1 of England issued a charter to the London Company (later known as the Virginia Company) to establish a colony in the New World. In 1607 this group of merchants planted the first permanent English settlement in America, at Jamestown, Virginia. It was located near the mouth of the James River, which empties into the Atlantic. (See map, page 31.) At ihe start, everything went wrong with the venture. Interested chielly in finding gold, the first colonists did not concern themselves with planting crops or building homes. The site chosen for the seldement was swampy and unhealthful. As a result, more than half of the settlers died of famine and disease during the first seven months. Indians added to the hardship of the colonists by their frequent attacks upon the settlement. To Captain John Smith, an adventurer and soldier, goes the credit for saving the colony. He took command of the settlement and demanded that all able-bodied men perform some work, such as building homes and planting crops. He also succeeded in obtaining food from the Indians. Because of an injury. Smith returned to England in 1609. Without his leadership, the colony almost perished. That winter was known as the "starving time." Although fresh supplies and additional settlers were sent to Jamestown, the colony remained on the verge of failure until several important changes took place. 1. Land Is Given to Settlers. One of the main reasons for the lack of early progress was that the colonists were merely employees of the London Company. All property, including land, belonged to it. Under the governorship of Sir Thomas Dale, interest in agriculture was stimulated by allowing settlers to obtain tracts of land as tenant farmers. A few years later die colony allotted settlers larger farms outright. Now that the colonists could raise their own crops and enjoy the fruits of their labor, they worked harder and the colony began to thrive. 2. Tobacco Cultivation Is Started. Planter John Rolfe introduced the cultivation of tobacco, a product acquired from the Indians. He also developed a method of curing the tobacco leaf to make it commercially 30 United States History acceptable. Meanwhile, smoking was becoming fashionable in England, and die colonists began to raise tobacco on a large scale to meet the increasing demand. In 1617 Virginia exported 20,000 pounds of tobacco. Within the next 10 years the figure jumped to 500,000 pounds. The labor needed to work the tobacco fields was first supplied by indentured servants. These were poor persons who were eager to settle in the New World but had no money to pay their passage. They agreed to work without wages for a period of years for anyone who paid their way to America. In 1619 the first black Africans arrived as prisoners aboard a Dutch ship and were purchased by the settlers as indentured servants. Later, to meet the evergrowing need for labor on the expanding tobacco plantations, other Africans were brought over and sold to the colonists as slaves. At first, the Indian chief Powhatan sought to drive out the colonists. Legend has it that John Smith was captured by the Indians and was about to be slain when the chiefs daughter Pocahontas intervened and saved him. In 1614 Pocahontas married John Rolfe, the tobacco planter. Thereafter, until Powhatan's death, there was peace between the colonists and the Indians. When the Indians broke die peace in 1622 by massacring nearly 350 people, the settlers fought back and finally drove the Indians from die area. The colonists had litde voice in the affairs of government until 1619, when the Virginia Company permitted them to form a representative assembly. Called the House of Burgesses, it was composed of two delegates, or burgesses, from each settlement in Virginia. The House of Burgesses was the first elective legislature in America. Only male landowners, however, could vote. In 1624 James 1 revoked the company's charter and made Virginia a royal colonv. The king now appointed the governor and the council— as the upper house of the legislature was called. The colonists, however, continued to elect the members of the lower house—the House of Burgesses. With the arrival of farmers and craftsworkers, and women and children, Virginia grew steadily. Settlements spread from the banks of the James River to the York and Rappahannock rivers. Restless pioneers began to leave the coastal area for the inland region, pushing the frontier westward. By 1650 the population of Virginia was 15,000. In 1685 it was 60,000. Williamsburg, a settlement north of Jamestown and the site of the College of William and Mary, became the capital of Virginia in 1699. t The Colonial Period 31 Early Virginia It remained the political, cultural and social center of Virginia until 1780, when the capital was transferred to Richmond. (Williamsburg is a fascinating tourist attraction today. Its streets, its homes, its shops—even the dress ol the men and women employed in Williamsburg—have been restored in the spirit of colonial times. Wil- liamsburg provides an authentic and vivid picture of life in the Old Dominion, as colonial Virginia was known.) In the 16th century the Anglican Church was made the official Church of England. Everyone was required to support it. Persons who attended any other religious services were subject to fines anti imprisonment. Nevertheless, many English people criticized the practices and organization of the Anglican Church. One group, the Puritans, wished to simplify, or "purify," the church from within. Other reformers, called Separatists, broke away completely and set up independent churches that were more in keeping with their beliefs. To escape persecution, a number of Separatists fled to Holland, where religious freedom was permitted. But they were not happy there because 32 United States History the country was foreign to them, and they wished to raise their children in an English environment. After some years, they decided to seek a new home in America. A small group of Separatists received permission from the Virginia Company to settle on its land in the New World. They obtained financial backing for their venture from a group of English merchants to whom they pledged all the profits that the colony would earn in its first seven years. Thirty-five Separatists, calling themselves Pilgrim, and about 65 other English men and women set sail for America on the Mayflower in September, 1620. Blown far north ol their original destination by heavy storms, they finally sighted the coast of New England. Here the weary travelers decided to setde. rather than continue southward to Virginia. In December, 1620, they landed at Plymouth, Massachusetts, and established a settlement. (See the map on page 34.) Before landing, the colonists faced the need to establish a government of their own. They were now outside the limits of Virginia and were not subject to the regulations of the Virginia Company. The Pilgrim leaders drew up the Mayflower Compact, which 41 adult males signed, pledging to enact just and equal law's lor the common good and to abide by these laws. This agreement was one of the earliest expressions of self-government in America. The colonists suffered greatly during their first winter at Plymouth. Shelter was inadequate, disease was widespread, and food was scarce. Fortunately, neighboring Indians were helpful. Massasoit, an Indian chieftain, made a treaty of peace with the Pilgrims that was maintained for many years. Two Indians, named Squanto and Samoset, showed the Pilgrims how to grow corn and where to hunt and fish. In the fall of 1621 the Pilgrims set aside a day of thanksgiving for the years blessings. They invited the I ndians to join them in a celebration of peace and plenty. This festival became known as the first Thanksgiving. John Carver, the first governor of the colony, dietl soon after the Pilgrims landed at Plymouth, lie was succeeded by William Bradford, who governed w isely for many years. Under his leadership: (1) Each adult male acquired land of his own. Earlier in the colony's history all the land had belonged to the community and had been worked in common. (2) The Pilgrims repaid the merchants who had sponsored their undertaking, thus achieving financial independence. Plymouth Colony, though successful, remained small. In 1691 it was merged with Massachusetts Bay Colony. Plymouth is important as the first permanent English settlement in New' England. The Colonial Period 33 In 1628 a small group of Puritans, ltd by John Endecott, settled at Salem. Like the Separatists at Plymouth, these Puritans came to the New World to escape religious persecution. The following year influential Puritans in England formed the Massachusetts Bay Company and acquired the rights to a large tract of land in New England. Under the company's sponsorship, over 1,000 Puritans came to the Massachusetts Bay area in 1630, settling in and around Boston. John Winthrop, an able and wealthy Puritan, became the first governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Boston was made the capital. The harsh laws enforced against critics of the Anglican Church led to a "Great Migration" of Puritans from England. In the next decade about 20,000 Puritans came to New England. The Puritan Church became the official church of the Bay Colony. All residents were compelled to support it. Those who criticized it were threatened with banishment. Only male church members were permitted to vole or hold public office. The clergy wielded great political power as governmental advisers. They also supervised the daily lives of the people and demanded that everyone live according to Puritan beliefs. Many persons were dissatisfied with conditions in the Bay Colony and sought new homes in the wilderness. A leader in this movement was Thomas Hooker, a Puritan pastor in New Towne (Cambridge) who disapproved of the harsh rule of the colony's leaders. In 1635 a small group of his followers migrated to the fertile Connecticut River Valley and settled Hartford. Hooker led the rest of his supporters there the following year. Other settlers from Massachusetts founded Wethersfield and Windsor. Farther south, in lower Connecticut, Puritans from England settled in and around New Haven. In 1639 Hartford, Wethersfield, and Windsor joined forces and formed a unified government. They drew' up a constitution with provisions for (1) electing deputies to a legislature, (2) choosing a governor, (3) limiting the terms of office of public officials, and (1) assuring fair taxation. This document, called the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, was the first written constitution in America. Until the 1660's the settlements in lower Connecticut functioned independently as New Haven Colony, in 1662 Ring Charles II united all the towns of Connecticut into a single colony. Roger Williams, a young Puritan minister in Salem, believed in freedom of religion and advocated die separation of church and state. His 34 United States History outspoken views so angered ihe officials of the Massachusetts Bay Colony that they brought him to trial and banished him to England. Williams fled and spent the winter among the Narragansett Indians. The following spring, other colonists from the Bay Colony joined him. He purchased land in the Narragansett Bay area from the Indians and in 1636 founded Providence. Anne Hutchinson also came to Rhode Island after being banished from the Bay Colony for criticizing the Puritan Church. With her followers she settled at Portsmouth. Other colonists from Massachusetts founded Newport and Warwick. After receiving a charter from England authorizing them to establish their own government, the four settlements formed a unified colony known at first as Providence Plantations and later as Rhode Island. Under Roger Williams, Rhode Island adopted the principle of complete separation of church and state. The government was prohibited The Colonial Period 35 from passing laws restricting religious liberty or imposing religious qualifications for voting or off iceholding. As a result, people of all faiths were attracted to Rhode Island, and the colony prospered and grew, Rhode Island was the first American colony to guarantee all its people religious freedom. This policy has since become a fundamental principle of American democracy. In 1622 John Mason and Sir Ferdtnando Gorges acquired the tights to a large area in northern New England. Several years later their holdings were divided. New Hampshire going to Mason and Maine to Gorges. Starting in 1623, both men established a number of small trading posts and fishing stations. Soon settlers from the Bay Colony began to migrate northward into these areas. Massachusetts then annexed both New Hampshire and Maine. It retained control of New Hampshire until 1679, when the king granted New Hampshire a charter that made it a separate royal colony. Massachusetts retained Maine until 1820. George Calvert, the first Lord Baltimore, was a prominent Catholic noble and a friend of King Charles I. Seeking a haven for Catholics, who were being persecuted in England, he obtained from the king a tract of land to found a colony. He died shortly thereafter, and the grant passed to his son. Cecilius Calvert, the second Lord Baltimore, became the first individual proprietor, or owner, of an American colony. As proprietor. Lord Baltimore personally owned all the land and could assign, sell, or rent it as he saw' lit. He was empowered to levy taxes, establish courts, and control church matters. However, he could make laws only with the advice and consent of the freemen of the colony. In 1634 a settlement was established at St. Mary's, near the mouth of the Potomac River. Leonard Calvert, brother of the second Lord Baltimore, became the first governor. The colony prospered from the start. Lite settlers were industrious and maintained friendly relations with Indians living in the area. Foot! was plentiful, and the climate and soil were well adapted to the cultivation of tobacco, which soon became an important source of income. Although Maryland was established as a refuge for Catholics, Christians of all denominations were welcome there. People from Virginia and New England, as well as from England, flocked to the colony. Before long, Protestants outnumbered Catholics. To prevent religious disputes and to protect Catholics against discrimination. Lord Baltimore in 1619 successfully urged the passage of a Toleration Act. This law- provided that all Christians should be free to worship as they pleased. 36 United States History Although toleration in Maryland was limited to Christians, this act was nonetheless an important step toward religious liberty in America. Alter the settlement of Pennsylvania, Maryland and Pennsylvania quarreled over the boundary between the two colonies. The dispute was finally settled in 1767, when two English surveyors, Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon, were called in to determine the actual boundary line. The Mason-Dixon Line later became famous as the boundary between the free states and the slave states. Iti 1663 King Charles II issued a charter to eight nobles to settle the region south of Virginia. These individuals received the same proprietary rights as Lord Baltimore enjoyed in Maryland. 1 he area assigned to them was called "Carolina"—named in honor of a former English king, Charles 1. (Carolus is Latin for Charles.) Ten years earlier, in 1653. settlers from Virginia had begun to move into present-day North Carolina, establishing farms in the vicinity of Albemarle Sound. This settlement became part of the new colony. Other people were also attracted to Carolina. From Europe came French Huguenots, Germans, Scots, and Scotch-Irish. Anglicans, as well as Quakers and other dissenters, came over from England. In the northern part of Carolina, the settlers produced tobacco and naval stores (tar and turpentine); in the southern part, they grew rice and indigo. The main port and largest city in Carolina was Charles Town (now Charleston), founded by die proprietors in 1670 in the southern part of their grant. The Carolinians grew dissatisfied with proprietary rule, and there was constant friction between the elective assemblies and the governors. The English government became displeased w ith the proprietors because of the frequent disorders that broke out in Carolina and because of the proprietors' failure to maintain law and order. Opposition from both the colonists and the mother country led the proprietors to surrender their charter to the crown. In 1729 North Carolina and South Carolina became separate royal colonies. The English had long been irritated by the presence of the Dutch in New Netherland. (1) England viewed the area as part of its North American claim, which was based on Cabot's explorations. (2) New Netherland was a barrier separating New England from the English colonies to the south. (3) The Dutch, in violation of English trade laws. The Colonial Period 37 were carrying on extensive trade w ith the English colonies. (4) English merchants were envious of the profitable Dutch fur trade with the Indians. (5) England w ished to gain control of New' Amsterdam, w hich had one of the finest harbors on the east coast of North America. When Charles II became king of England, he granted New Netherland to his brother James, the Duke of York. In 1664 an English Beet sailed to New' Amsterdam and demanded the surrender of New' Netherland. Governor Stuyvesant wanted to resist. But the people ref used to support him, and he was forced to surrender without firing a shot. In honor of the Duke of York, the English changed the names of the colony of New Netherland and of the town of New Amsterdam to New York. Beverwyck, the town that had grown up around Fort Orange, was renamed Albany. Wiltwyck became Kingston. The Duke of York administered the colony's affairs through an appointive governor and council, and he denied the people representation in the government. When the colonists protested, he appointed Thomas Dongan governor and authorized him to call a representative assembly. The assembly met in 1683 and drew up a Charier of Liberties and Privileges. The document provided for the creation of an elective assembly, freedom of worship, and trial by jury. Dongan's charter w as short-lived, however. When the Duke of York became King James II in 1685, he voided the charter and abolished the legislature. Representative government was not restored until 1691, after James II had been overthrown. The region between the Hudson and Delaware rivers had been a part of New Netherland and was inhabited by a scattering of Dutch and Swedish settlers. When the Duke of York took possession after the Dutch surrender, he gave the area It) two of his f riends. Sir George Carteret and Lord John Berkeley. The new proprietors named their colony New Jersey. They encouraged colonization by promising settlers liberal grants of land, representative government, and freedom of religion. English Puritans and Quakers, as well as Scots, Scotch-Irish, and Gentians, flocked to New Jersey, and the colony grew rapidly. A group of Quakers purchased Berkeley's proprietary rights to the section known as West Jersey. Another group of Quakers and some non-Quakers acquired Carteret's province of East Jersey. In 1702, when the proprietors surrendered their governmental powers to the king, the two provinces of New Jersey were united into one royal colony. The Society of Friends was a Protestant sect that arose in England in die middle of the 17th century. Its members were called Quakers because 38 United States History their leader, George Fox, had once warned a judge to "tremble and quake at the word of the Lord." Maintaining that an "inner light" was a person's spiritual guide, the Quakers saw no need for formal church rites or ceremonies. They believed that all people are equal in the eyes of God, and refused to remove their hats or bow down before anyone, no matter how high his or her rank. They considered slavery evil. Believing that war is sinful, they refused to fight or serve as soldiers. Persecuted for their beliefs both in England and in many of the American colonies, the Quakers dreamed of establishing a colony of their own where they could live according to their principles. As a young man, William Penn, the son of a wealthy English admiral, became an ardent Quaker. In 1681, in payment of a large debt that Charles 11 owed his father, Penn obtained a grant of land in the New World. In honor of Admiral Penn, the king named this vast region Pennsylvania ("Penn's woods"). Penn planned to establish a proprietary colony where people of all creeds and nationalities would live together peaceably, where everyone would be equal before the law, and where all would enjoy freedom of speech and religion. lie viewed his venture as a "holy experiment." The first settlers arrived early in 1682 and founded the city of Philadelphia (a term meaning "brotherly love") at the junction of the Delaware and Schuylkill rivers. Before the year ended, Penn arrived to take charge of his colony, and 23 shiploads of colonists came over. Under William Penn's guidance, Pennsylvania expanded rapidly and became one of the largest and most successful of the English colonies. 1. Large Immigration. Penn's liberal attitude toward self-govern- ment, land purchases, and religion attracted many Europeans to the colony. Among the settlers were English and W'elsh Quakers, Irish Catholics, Scotch-Irish Presbyterians, and German members of several different religious groups (ancestors of the Pennsylvania Dutch of today). The colonists were industrious, skilled, and thrifty. As settlements spread northward and westward along the Delaware, Schuylkill, and Susquehanna rivers. Pennsylvania became a region of prosperous farms and villages. Philadelphia, its capital, became the largest city in the colonies. 2. The Great Law of Pennsylvania. To guarantee a responsible and democratic government, Penn drew up a constitution that became known as the Great Law of Pennsylvania. It provided for (a) a governor to be appointed by the proprietor, (b) an elective legislature, (c) religious freedom, (d) protection against unfair trials, (fj reasonable punishment and humane treatment for wrongdoers, and (/) the education of children. 3. Friendly Relations With the Indians. Penn dealt fairly and honorably with the Indians of Pennsylvania. He paid them for their The Colonial Period 39 lands and negotiated a treaty that bound the settlers and Indians to live in peace "as long as the sun and moon give light." He kepi his promises to the Indians and maintained friendly relations with them as long as he lived. When New Netherland fell to the English, the section that had been New Sweden also became the property of the Duke of York. He renamed the area Delaware. To provide Pennsylvania access to the sea, the Duke ceded Delaware to William Penn. Delaware remained a part of Pennsylvania until 1703, when it was permitted to set up its own legislature. Until the American Revolution, however, Delaware was administered by the governor of Pennsylvania. James Oglethorpe, an influential member of Parliament, received a charter from King George II to establish a colony between South Carolina and Florida. In honor of the king, the colony was named Georgia. It was to serve (1) as a refuge for imprisoned debtors who wished to get a fresh start in the New World, and (2) as a barrier to Spanish expansion northward from Florida. In 1733 Oglethorpe led a small band of settlers to Georgia and founded Savannah. Few ex-prisoners came to Georgia, but poverty- stricken people from the British Isles, oppressed Swiss and Germans, and pioneers from Carolina did settle there, and the colony grew. Georgia's governing Ixtdy, a board of trustees, sought to make Georgia a colony of small, independent farmers. The trustees limited landholding and forbade the use of slaves. These policies, though well intentioned, were opposed by the colonists. They w ished to expand their landholdings into plantations and to acquire slaves to work the land. In 1752 the trustees turned over their charter to Lite crown, and Georgia became a royal colony. Plantations and slavery soon developed into major institutions in Georgia's economy. Identification Test 1. Because of my Quaker practices. I was dismissed from Oxford University. I asked King Charles II for a grant of land in America as payment of a large debt he owed my fadier. Here I granted the settlers a measure of religious freedom and treated the Indians fairly. 2. 1 was an English noble and a Roman Catholic. When the English government persecuted people of my faith, I founded a colony where Catholics could worship freely. Its largest city was named after me. 50 United States History 1. Population Growth Year Population Year Population 1625 2,000 1755 1,500,000 1640 50,000 1763 2,000,000 1690 250,000 1775 2.750.000 1715 435,000 2. Regional Distribution. About half of the people lived in the Southern Colonies. The remainder were divided almost equally between New England and the Middle Colonies. 3. Colonies in Order of Population (1775) Rank Colony Rank Colony 1 Virginia 8 Connecticut 2 Massachusetts 9 New Jersey 3 Pennsylvania 10 New Hampshire 4 North Carolina 11 Georgia 5 New York 12 Rhode Island 6 Maryland 13 Delaware 7 South Carolina 4. Different Races and Nationalities. European whites constituted 80% of the population of colonial America, and African blacks 20%. Nine-tenths of the blacks were slaves. Settlers of English origin comprised the largest group in the colonies. Germans, Scots, Scotch-Irish, Irish, and Dutch were also found in large numbers. There were smaller groups of Swiss, French Huguenots, Swedes, Welsh, Spaniards, and Belgians. Note: All the population data above excludes the Indians. The various Indian tribes inhabiting colonial America did not view themselves as English subjects but as independent nations. Educational facilities were limited, and most children did not advance beyond the "three r's" (reading, Titing, and Tithmetic). Pupils learned their letters by means of a hornbook. This device consisted of a sheet of paper mounted on a board and covered by transparent horn to protect it against wear. The hornbook contained the alphabet, the Lord's Prayer, or verses from the Bible. The most widely used textbook in colonial days was the New England Primer. This book taught the alphabet, reading, and religion by means of rhymed sayings, such as: In Adam's Fall We Sinned all. Thy Life to Mend This Book Attend. The Cat doth play And after slay. Formation of the New Nation 1 15 Although war was not officially declared, a number of naval battles were fought in the next two years between American and French vessels. The tiny U.S. Navy gave a good account ol itself, capturing more than 80 French ships against the loss of only one American vessel. Faced with the prospect of a full-scale war with the United States, the French government let it he known that it was ready to receive the U.S. minister and negotiate a settlement. President Adams then sent another group of envoys to France. A satisfactory agreement was reached, thus bringing the undeclared war to an end. While the French crisis was at its height, the Federalist-dominated Congress passed a series of harsh laws known as the Alien and Sedition Arts. (An alien is a resident who is not a citizen; sedition means treason.) Ihese acts (1) raised the residence requirement for citizenship from 5 to 14 years, (2) empowered the President to imprison or deport any alien considered dangerous to the nation's peace and safety, and (3) made it a crime for any person to publicly criticize the government or its officials. The Alien and Sedition Acts aroused a storm of protest. Recent immigrants (many of them pro-Democratic-Republican in outlook) feared the threat of deportation and resented their inability to acquire citizenship for 14 years. Citizens everywhere objected to the restrictions on freedom of speech and press. Fen Democratic-Republican editors and printers were fined and imprisoned for publishing articles critical of the government. Although the Federalists defended the Alien and Sedition Acts as necessary war measures, the ac ts' apparent aims were to (1) strengthen Federalist control of the government, (2) weaken the power and influence of the Democratic-Republican party, and (3) curh political opposition. The legislatures of Kentucky and Virginia passed resolutions (1798- 1799) declaring the Alien and Sedition Acts unconstitutional and void. The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, written by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison respectively, stated: (1) The slates created the national government. (2) The powers of the national government are strictly limited to those expressed in the Constitution. (3) Each state has the right to judge for itself whether Congress has exceeded its constitutional powers. (4) A state need not obey an act that it considers unconstitutional. These principles formed the basis of states' rights, a doctrine that the South later used to oppose high tariffs and defend slavery. 122 United States History responding with the great |>eople of his time; advising his successors in the White House; and planning die design, construction, and curriculum of the University of Virginia. Jefferson's inauguration was the first to be held in Washington, D.C., then a village of unpaved streets and unfinished public buildings. An advocate of simplicity, Jefferson did away with much of the formality and pomp introduced by the Federalists. He put an end to the weekly receptions and stately balls held by his predecessors. The following were some of the significant events of Jefferson's two terms in office: (1) The Alien and Sedition Acts were either repealed or allowed to expire, and those who had been imprisoned under these laws were pardoned. (2) The residence requirement for citizenship was lowered to five years. (3) All excise taxes, including the one on whisky, were repealed. (4) Under the expert financial guidance of Albert Gallatin, Jefferson's Secretary of the Treasury, federal expenses were cut and the federal debt substantially reduced. (5) The United States Military Academy at West Point was established (1802). (fi) The importation of slaves was prohibited (1808). The most significant event of Jefferson's administration was the acquisition of Louisiana. Louisiana, the enormous territory lying between the Mississippi River and the Rockies, was ceded to Spain by France after the French and Indian War. New Orleans, at the mouth of the Mississippi, dominated the river route that was a natural highway for frontier farmers of Kentucky, Tennessee, and the Ohio Valley. It was comparatively easy for the Westerners to float their produce down the Ohio River into the Mississippi to New Orleans, and from there to transship goods to markets in the East and in Europe. To haul their crops overland through the wilderness and across the mountains was virtually impossible. Therefore, in 1795, the United States obtained from Spain, by the Pinckney Treaty, the right to navigate the lower Mississippi and to deposit goods in New Orleans. Hoping to restore the French Empire in North America, Napoleon forced Spain to return Louisiana to France in 1800. Two years later the American right of deposit in New Orleans was withdrawn. Faced with the loss of their outlet to Eastern markets, Westerners appealed to President Jefferson for help. Fearing Napoleon's presence at the nation's back door and aiming to help the frontier farmers, Jefferson authorized Robert Livingston and James Monroe to negotiate the purchase of New Orleans from France. Part 1. Immigrants Contribute to the Nation's Growth and Greatness Except for Native Americans (Indians. Eskimos, and Aleuts), ever)' person in America today is either an immigrant or the descendant of an immigrant. From the arrival of the first English settlers at Jamestown in 1607 to the landing of uprooted and homeless refugees from Europe and Asia in the years after World War II. America has been a land of refuge and opportunity. The earliest settlers came to the New World chiefly to llee religious persecution or to seek their fortunes. Later immigrants came to escape famine, poverty, and religious and political oppression; to work on railroads and canals and in mines and factories; and to farm the Western lands. But whoever they were, wherever they came from, each brought something to contribute to America's diversity and greatness. T oday, the United States is the stun of all these different parts. Note: Unlike other immigrants, most African blacks came to this ■entry involuntarily—as slaves. For more than 250 years, black slaves were deprived of the benefits and opportunities that other Americans enjoyed. After emancipation and a period of painful readjustment, they ottered the mainstream of American society. Until the 1880's most immigrants to the United States came from Northern and Western Europe. T his "old" immigration consisted mainly ot people from England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries. The potato famine in Ireland (1845—1847) brought hundreds of thousands of Irish to .America. The unsuccessful volution of L848 in Germany started a great migration of Germans to America's shores. After the Civil War, large numbers of Scandinavians tame to settle the Western farmlands. Between 1820 and 1890 more than 12,5 million people from Western and Northern Europe migrated to this country. Beginning in the 1880's, large numbers of immigrants from Southern, Central, and Eastern Europe came to America. This "new" immigration consisted mainly of people from Austria-Hungary, the Balkan states, lialv. and Russia (including Poland). I hey came to the United States to improve their living conditions, to secure better-paying jobs, and to escape religious persecution. 1 hey settled mostly in the large cities. 278 United States History Immigration Since 1820 by Decades* Years Immigrants Years Immigrants 1820-1829 128.452 1910-1919 6,347,380 1830-1839 538,381 1920-1929 4,295,510 1840-1849 1,427,337 1930-1939 699,375 1850-1859 2,814,554 1940-1949 856.608 1860-1869 2,081,261 1950-1959 2.499.268 1870-1879 2.742.287 1960-1969 3,266,027 1880-1889 5.248.568 1970-1979 3,937.389 1890-1899 1900-1909 3.694,294 8.202,388 1980-1985 3,396.000 * Immigration from the end of the Revolutionary War to 1820 is estimated at 250,000 Before 1882, America opened its gates to all who wished to come. The country was underpopulated. People were needed to dig canals; build railroads; populate the West; and work in mills, mines, and factories. While the country was expanding, it easily absorbed a great number of immigrants. As time passed, however, many Americans believed that immigration should be restricted because: 1. There was no more free land in the West. 2. Immigrants were willing to work for low wages, thereby threatening the jobs and the wage scale of American workers. 8. Illiterate immigrants became easy prey for corrupt politicians. 4. It was difficult for many of the newcomers to become Americanized. They continued to speak their own language and lived apart in communities of their own. Starting in the 1880's, steps were taken to limit the How of people from abroad. Laws were passed to keep out criminals, paupers, and insane and diseased persons (1882). Immigrants were required to pass a literacy test (1917). Migration from the Orient was curtailed by (1) the Chinese Exclusion Act (1882), which prohibited the entry of immigrants from China, (2) the Gentlemen's Agreement by which Japan agreed to keep its laborers from migrating here (1907), and (3) a ban on all Japanese immigration (1924). After World War I, Congress passed the Emergency Quota Act of 1921. This was a temporary measure designed to stem the tide of immigrants who began to pour into the country from the war-scarred countries of Europe. It set a maximum quota of immigrants to be admitted each year, and it limited the number of people permitted from each country. Limiting immigration and selecting immigrants on the basis of national origin became permanent policies w ith the enactment of the Immigration Quota Law of 1924 and the National Origins Act of 1929. The latter provided that immigration into the Linked States from outside the Western Hemisphere be limited to 150,000 persons a year. A formula was worked out that fixed a quota of immigrants from each country in Modem America Emerges 279 proportion to the number of people of that national origin living in the United States in 1920. No limits were placed upon immigration from Canada or the independent countries of Latin America. The McCanan-Walter Act (1952) continued the national origins quota system but removed the ban against the immigration of Chinese, Japanese, and other Asians. (T he act also set up screening procedures | to prevent the admission of radicals seeking to overthrow the U.S. I Government. In addition, it empowered the Attorney General to deport immigrants who joined a Communist organization after their arrival in this country.) 1. The Displaced Persons Act (1948). This law and several later extensions authorized the admission to the United Stales of more than 400,000 Europeans outside the regular immigration quotas. These people, displaced as a result of World War II, included survivors of I Germ.m concentration camps, war orphans, and Eastern Europeans I who had lied from their homelands when Communists took control. 2. The Refugee Relief Act (1953). This law and later extensions I allowed escapees from Communist persecution in Hungary, Cuba, and * Indot hiiia. as well as refugees tiering from political oppression in other (Duntrics, to enter the United States in numbers above the established quotas. These special programs have enabled more than 600,000 people to make new homes for themselves in America. Main Sources of Immigration to the United States (1820-1980) (in round figures) Europe Germany Italy Great Britain* Ireland Austria-Hungary! Russia; 7.000. 000 5.300.000 5.000. 000 4.700.000 4.300.000 4.000. 000 Sweden Norway France Greece Poland f Portuqal 1.275.000 850.000 750.000 675.000 525.000 475.000 Denmark Netherlands Switzerland Spain Belgium 375.000 375.000 350.000 275.000 200.000 • Western Hemisphere Canada 4,150.000 Dominican Argentina 100.000 Mexico 2350.000 Republic 275.000 Ecuador 100.000 West Indies 975,000 Colombia 175.000 Cuba 575.000 Haiti 100,000 Asia China 600,000 Turkey 400,000 India 225,000 I Philippines 525.000 Korea 350.000 Honq Konq 200.000 425.000 Vietnam 250.000 I 'Son Great Britain came such national groups as the English. Scots, and Welsh ■ilmgrants from the Austro-Hungarian Empire included Austrians, Croatians. Czechs, Hun- I jnarts, Jews. Romanians, and Slovaks. I (Urge numbers of Polish and Russian Jews emigrated to escape religious persecution and I aisl discrimination. 280 United States History 3. Refugee Act of 1980. Willi the passage of this law. Congress approved the adoption of a systematic plan for the admission and settlement of refugees who are of special humanitarian concern to the United Slates. The number of refugees to be admitted each year would lie determined by the President, after consultation with Congress. Many Americans thought that limiting immigration on a basis of nationality was unfair because il discriminated against many national groups. At the urging of President Lyndon B. Johnson, Congress passed the Immigration Act of 1965, which (l) abolished the national origins quota system, (2) limited immigration from countries in the Western Hemisphere to 120,000 a year, starting in 1908, (3) raised the annual limit on immigration from other countries to 170,000, with no more than 20,000 to be admitted each year from any one country, and (4) granted admission priority to immigrants who have close relatives in the United States, or who are refugees from communism, or whose skills and talents are needed in this country. To become a naturalized citizen, an applicant must be: 1. At least 18 years of age. 2. A lawful resident of the United States continuously for five years. (Short periods of absence from the country are permitted.) For husbands or wives of citizens, the period of residence is usually reduced to three years. 8. A [lersoii of good moral character and a believer in the principles of the Constitution. In order to acquire citizenship, an applicant must: 1. File a petition for naturalization. 2. Demonstrate the ability to read, write, and speak everyday F.nglish. (Exceptions: persons physically unable to do so, and persons over 50 years of age who have resided in the country for 20 years or more.) 3. Demonstrate a knowledge and understanding of the fundamentals of United States history and government. 4. Present two reliable U.S. citizens to serve as witnesses to the applicant's character, residence, and loyalty. 5. Renounce allegiance to one's former country and take an oath of allegiance to the United States. Naturalized citizens have the same rights as native-born citizens and may hold any public office except that of President and Vice President. Children born to foreign parents living in the United States are considered native-born citizens. Foreign-born children under 16 become citizens when both parents are naturalized. Alien. A person living in a foreign country and not having rights of citizenship. Modern America Emerges 281 Americanization. The process of acquainting immigrants with American democratic ideals, customs, and traditions; leaching them the English language; and helping them adjust to the American way of life. Citizen. A person either horn or naturalized in ihe United States. An American citizen owes allegiance to the United Stales, receives protection from it, and enjoys all the |>oliiical rights granted by the Constitution. Emigrant. A person who leaves a country to settle elsewhere permanently. As seen from the country of departure, that individual is an emigrant. Immigrant. A person who comes to one country from another to settle permanently. As seen from the country of arrival, the newcomer is an immigrant. Immigration Quota. I he number of persons from each foreign country permitted entry into the United Slates each year. I Literacy Test. When applied to immigration, this is a test given to I determine whether aliens can read and write their own language. When applied to citizenship, it is a test given to determine whether they can read and write English. Melting Pot. A term applied to a society in which many nationalities and cultures have been fused into a common product, as in the United I States. Naturalization. The process by which an alien becomes a citizen. James J, Hill—built the Great Northern Railroad from Lake Superior I to Puget Sound (1890); earned the title "Empire Builder" for his role I iu the development of the Northwest. 11. M. Pei—architect who designed many important buildings in the I United States and abroad, including the East Building of the National I Gallery of Ai l in Washington, D.C.. I An Wang—physicist who in the 1950's formed an electronics firm in I the United States that soon was known worldwide for its word I processors for offices. I Chien-shiung Wu—physicist who in 1957 helped disprove the widely I held law of the conservation of parity. I Edward Bok—editor-in-chief of The Ladies Home Journal (1889-1919); I wrote The Americanization of Edward liok (1920). Hans Kindier—founder and conductor of the National Symphony I Orchestra of Washington, D.C. (1931). I Hendrik Van Loon—journalist, lecturer, and writer; author of The Story ■ tf Mankind (1921). 282 United States History Benjamin H. Latrobe—architect and civil engineer; built water supply systems for Philadelphia and New Orleans; modified plans lor the national Capitol; designed many of the nation's foremost churches and public buildings in the early 1800's. William W. Mayo— pioneer surgeon in the upper Middle West (see page 314). Robert Morris—appointed superintendent of finance by Continental Congress, he served as financier of the American Revolution. Thomas Paine—aulhoi of Common Sense (1776), a widely read pamphlet that influenced many colonists to support the c ause of independence. Joseph Priestley—an established chemist, his main research on oxygen and other chemical elements, and on the nature of electricity, was performed before he emigrated from England; his arrival in the United States in 1794 stimulated Americans' interest in the study of chemistry. Anna Howard Shaw—physician and suffragist (see page 300). Samuel Slater—"father of die American factory system" (see page I lf). Leo H. Baekeland (born in Belgium)—chemist and inventor; a pioneer in the development of plastics, he discovered and produced the synthetic resin "Bakelite" (1909). John James Audubon (born in Haiti)—artist, naturalist, and pioneer American ornithologist; his monumental work. The Birds of America (1827-1838), contains more than 1,000 life-size figures of some 500 species of birds. Eleuthere Irenee du Pont—established a gunpowder manufacturing plant near Wilmington, Delaware, in 1802: liecame chiel supplier of powder for federal government; firm developed into the giant chemical company known today as E. E l)u Pont cle Nemours & Co. Pierre Charles L'Enfant—served in the Continental Army as an engineering officer; drew up plans for the national capital on the Potomac River. John Jacob Astor—fur trader and merchant; founded Astoria, at mouth of Columbia River (1811); dominated fur trading in upper Missouri Territory, Great Lakes region, and Mississippi Valley; invested in real estate in New York City; active in trade with the Far East; at time of death (1848) was richest person in America. Albert Bierstadt—landscape painter; noted for scenic paintings ot the Western wilderness; among his distinctive works is Thunderstorm in the Rocky Mountains (1859). Franz Boas—anthropologist; published numerous studies of Eskimo life, Kwakiutl Indians of the Northwest, and primitive peoples in other parts of the world; his noteworthy writings include Baffin Land Modem America Emerges 283 (1885), The Central Eskimos (1888), and The Mind oj Primitive Man (1911). Fritz A. Lipmann—biochemist; won Nobel prize in medicine and physiology for work on enzymes (1953). Ottmar Mergenthaler—inventor of the linotype machine (patented in 1884), which revolutionized typesetting and newspaper production. Albert A. Michelson—physicist (see page 314). Thomas Nast—political cartoonist whose dramatic cartoons helped expose the Tweed Ring in New York City (1869-1872); introduced the elephant as the symbol of the Republican party and [topularized the donkey as the Democratic party symbol. John A. Roebling—engineer; bridge builder; manufacturer; produced first wire rope in America; designed the Brooklyn Bridge to link Brooklyn and Manhattan across the East River; upon his death in 1869, bridge construction was supervised by his son, Washington A. I Roebling. CarlSchurz—helped organize the Republican party in Wisconsin; Union [ general in Civil War; pioneer in civil service reform: Secretary of the Interior under President llayes (1877—1881). Charles Stcinmetz—electrical engineer (see page 314). John Peter Zenger—-journalist: laid the foundation for the American [ tradition of freedom of the press (see page 54). John von Neumann—mathematician; devised theory of games; made I important contributions to quantum theory; participated in A-bornb I and H-bornb projects (in the 1940's); pioneered development of high* I speed computers. "None of this would be here if we'd had stricter immigration laws." 284 United States History Joseph Pulitzer—journalist; publisher of St. Louis Post-Dispatch and New York World; set up trust funds for establishment of a school of journalism at Columbia University and for award of Pulitzer prizes "for the encouragement of public service, public morals, American literature, and die advancement of education." Leo Szilard—physicist; in collaboration with Enrico Fermi devised and patented a nuclear reactor (1942). John Barry—U.S. naval officer in Revolutionary War; performed daring exploits in command of American war vessels. Edwin L. Godkin—founder and first editor of the weekly Nation: editor- in-chief of New York Evening Post: elevated standards of American political journalism; foe of spoils system and strong supporter of civil service in late 1800's. Victor Herbert—composer and conductor (see page 812). Augustus Saint-Gaudens—sculptor (see page 311). Mother Frances Xavier Cabrini—first U.S. citizen to be elevated to sainthood by Roman Catholic Church (1946); founded orphanages, hospitals, and schools; performed social work among Italian immigrants. Enrico Fermi—physicist (see page 818). Gian-Carlo Menotti—opera composer (see page 312). Arturo Toscanini—world-famous operatic and symphonic conductor. Yasuo Kuniyoshi—painter, art teacher, and graphic artist; created war posters for Office of War Information during World War 11; notable paintings include Mother and Daughter (1945) and Amazing Juggler (1952); first living artist honored by one-person show at the Whitney Museum of American Art. Mary Antin (born in Russia)—author of The Promised l.and (1912) and They Who Knock at Our Gates (1911). Irving Berlin (Ixnn in Russia)—songwriter anti composer (see page 312). Albert Einstein (Irom in Germany)—physicist and mathematician (set page 313). Felix Frankfurter (born in Austria)—influential jurist and adviser to President F. D. Roosevelt; Supreme Court justice (1939-1962) who wrote numerous works in the field of constitutional and administrative law. Samuel Gompers (born in England)—labor leader; founder of AFL and its president for nearly 40 years (see page 266). Sidney Hillman (born in Lithuania)—labor leader: co-founder of CIO; advocate of industrial unionism; adviser to President F. D. Roosevelt. Modem America Emerges 285 Simon S. Kuznets (born in Russia)—economist; his work on national income accounting became the basis for the concept of Gross National Product (GNP); awarded Nobel prize in 1971. Isidor I. Rabi (born in Austria)—physicist; awarded Nobel prize for work in nuclear physics; conducted radar research during World War II and participated in the A-bornb project. Haym Salomon (born in Poland)—merchant and financier; patriot who helped finance the Revolutionary War. Isaac Bashevis Singer (born in Poland)—writer-; awarded Nobel prize in literature for his short stories, children's books, and novels; his noteworthy works include Gimpel the Fool (19f)7) and ,1 Day of Pleasure f (1969). Edward Teller (born in Hungary)—physicist (see page 314). Selman A. Waksman (born in Russia)—microbiologist (see page 314). Kurt Weill (born in Germany)—composer; created such well-known musicals as Threepenny Opera (1928), Lady in the Dark (1941), and One Touch of Venus (1943). George Balanchine—choreographer and ballet master; exerted a profound influence on the development of classical ballet by his dramatic and inventive choreography; his founding of the School of American Ballet (1934) helped make New York Gity a major ballet center. Wassily Leontief—economist; awarded a Nobel prize in economics (1973) for developing a method ("input-output") of analyzing a nation's economy that makes possible the prediction of future economic trends. Vladimir Nabokov—author; an influential lecturer and professor of literature, he also wrote plays, poems, short stories, and the bestselling novels. Lolita (1955), Pale Fire (1962), and Ada (1969). Louise Nevelson—sculptor; noted for her assemblages of bits of wood pm together in abstract form; Sky Cathedral (1958) is one of her well- known constructions. Alexander de Seversky—aeronautical engineer and aviator; invented a bornbsight and other airplane devices; headed a company in the | 1930's that manufactured fighter planes. Igor Sikorsky—aeronautical engineer; built and flew first multimotor plane (1913); contributed to the design and development of the I helicopter. I Igor Stravinsky—composer; achieved lasting fame for his musical scores [ of such ballets as The Firebird (1910), Petrouchkn (191 I), and The Rite I of Spring (1913). I Vladimir Zworykin—electronics engineer, pioneered the development I of television (see page 258). I Ernst F. W. Alexanderson (born in Sweden)—electrical engineer and I inventor; patented more than 300 inventions, many of which helped I revolutionize the field of radar communications. 286 United States History John Ericsson (born in Sweden)—inventor and engineer; developed the screw propeller, which transformed marine navigation; designed and built the ironclad Monitor for the Union Navy during the Civil War. Jacob A. Riis (born in Denmark)—journalist, author, and urban reformer; sought to improve conditions in schools and tenements and to introduce parks and playgrounds in congested districts of New York City; wrote How the Other Half Lives (1890), The Making of an American (1901), and Children of the Tenements (1903). Knute Rockne (Ixirn in Norway)—football coach at Notre Dame (1914- 1931); helped popularize the game and established a reputation as a dynamic sportsman that has persisted to this day. Ole E. Rolvaag (born in Norway)-—educator and author; noted for his novels of Norwegian settlers in South Dakota in the 1870's, particularly Giants in the Earth (1927). Alexander Graham Bell—inventor of the telephone; educator of deaf; founder of Bell Telephone Co. (1877). James Gordon Bennett—editor and newspaper publisher; founded the New York Herald, one of the nation's most influential dailies in the mid-1800's. Andrew Carnegie—industrialist and philanthropist; dominated American steel production in late 1800's; after retirement in 1901, devoted himself to distribution of his fortune for benefit of society; made large contributions for public libraries, public education, and international peace. John Paul Jones—officer in Continental Navy; carried out raids against British shipping; attacked and captured British warship Serapis in most dramatic naval engagement of the Revolutionary War. Severo Ochoa—biochemist; awarded Nobel prize in medicine and physiology for research on substances that control heredity (1959). George Santayana—poet, essayist, and philosopher; wrote The Sense of Beauty (1896), The Last Puritan (1935). The Realm of Truth (1937), and The Realm of Spirit (1940). Louis Agassiz—zoologist, geologist, and educator; conducted extensive field trips to study the national history and geology of the Western Hemisphere; founded the Harvard Museum of Comparative Zoology (1859). Albert Gallatin—politician, diplomat, and financier; as member of Congress (1795—1801), he served as leader of the Democratic-Repub- licans in the House and was a sharp critic of Federalist policies; as Secretary of the Treasury under Jefferson and Madison, he carried out a program of financial reform; he later helped negotiate the Treaty of Ghent (1814) and represented the United States abroad, as minister to France and England. Modem America Emerges 287 Louis Adamic—writer; author of The Native's Return (1934), My America (1938), and From Many l^amh (1940). Michael Pupin—physicist and inventor; pioneered X-ray research and development; invented numerous electrical devices u* improve long- distance communication by telephone; wrote a Pulitzer prizewinning autobiography. From Immigrant to Inventor (1923). Nikola Tesla—inventor; applied principle of rotating magnetic field, I which he discovered in 1881, to invention of alternating current motor and to Tesla coil (transformer); developed an arc lighting system and an alternating-current power transmission system. Multiple-Choice Test 1. The process by which an alien becomes a U.S. citizen is called (a) con- I scriptiou (b) immigration (c) naturalization (d) registration. , 2, Which statement is true of the immigration policy of the United States I toward the end of the 19th century? (a) Restrictions were placed on I Mexican agricultural workers, (b) Quotas were assigned to European countries, (c) Criminals, paupers, and diseased and insane persons were excluded. (d) Japanese immigration was limited. J, An important reason why the United States did little to restrict immigration during most of the 19th century was that (a) immigration from Europe ( was relatively small (h) Congress lacked the power to pass restrictive laws I (c) labor unions favored immigration id) there was a continuing need to I expand the labor force. I t Which was a basic reason why few immigrants setded in the South during I the period 1800—1860? (a) fear of carpetbaggers (b) unfamiliarily with I farming (r) competition with slave labor (d) restrictions imposed by the I federal government. I 1, Which event occurred FIRST ? (at negotiation of the "Gentlemen's Agree- I men!' (b) passage of the National Origins Act (c) passage of the Chinese I Exclusion Act (d) passage of the Displaced Persons Act. If in the early 20th century, immigrants from Southern Europe to the United I States settled chiefly (a) in small towns along the Gulf of Mexico (b) in I the cities along the east coast (c) on the farmlands in the North and I Northwest (d) on die farmlands ol the Ear West. ■.Which law permitted Asians to enter the United States under the quota I plan? (a) Immigration Quota Law of 1924 (A) National Origins Act of I 1929 (c) Displaced Persons Act of 1948 (d) McCarran-Waltcr Ac t of 1952. Hi The Immigration Act of 1965 (a) excluded immigrants on the basis of I racial background (b) abolished the national origins quota system (c) permitted unlimited immigration from countries in the Western Hemisphere id) forbade further immigration into the United States. The largest number of immigrants came to the United States (a) before 1870 (b) between 1870 and 1889 (c) between 1890 and 1919 (</) since 1920. Naturalized citizens may hold any of the following public offices EXCEPT United Suites Becomes a World Power 359 Five years later, as the agreement of 1930 was nearing its expiration date, a second London Conference was held. Whereas the earlier agreement had allowed Japan a navy roughly two-thirds the size of those of the Lbrited States and Great Britain, Japan now demanded naval equality. When its demand was rejected, Japan withdrew from the talks, and the race for naval superiority resumed. rs te :d he as In the presidential campaign of 1920, Governor James M. Cox of I Ohio, a Democrat, opposed Senator Warren G. Harding of Ohio, a I Republican. Harding called for a "return to normalcy." a slogan that so I appealed to war-weary Americans that they voted him into office by a I landslide. During Harding's term: (1) A separate Veterans' Bureau (later called I the Veterans Administration) was established to supervise the various I federal programs of aid to the nation's ex-soldiers. (2) A Bureau of the I Budget (now known as the Office of Management and Budget) was I created to coordinate federal expenditures and receipts, thus making I government operations more businesslike. (3) The Fordney-McCumber MTarif) Act reversed the tariff policy of the Wilson administration by l iaising tariffs to a new high level. (4) The Emergency Quota Act of 1921 I sharply limited immigration into the United States. (5) The Washington ■ Conference was held. Harding's administration was marred by a series of scandals involving I several of his appointive officials. (1) Secretary of the Interior Albert I Fall received large bribes from oil operators for leasing government oil I reserve lands to them under particularly favorable terms. For his part I in this Teapot Dome Scandal, Fall was fined heavily and sentenced to jail. I (2) The head of the Veterans' Bureau and the Custodian of Alien I Property were imprisoned for defrauding the government of huge sums ■ of money. (3) The Attorney General was charged with receiving bribes I and failing to prosecute grafters, and was forced to resign his office. iat ■ es I When Harding died suddenly in the summer of 1923, Vice President ;nt ■Calvin Coolidge of Massachusetts succeeded him. After completing to ■Harding's term, he ran for President in his own right in 1924 and was ■returned to office bv a huge majority. I Coolidge believed that "the business of America is business." He ■ opposed government interference with private enterprise. He worked tin. ■to reduce the public debt, to lower the cost of government, anti to cut rge luxes. During his term, immigration was further restricted, a Soldiers' tval ] Bonus Act was passed (over his veto), and the Kellogg-Briand Pact was m. tgned United States Becomes a World Power 361 The following were some of the causes for the crash of 1929 and the depression that followed: 1. Overproduction. The prosperity of the Twenties had made business owners too hopeful. Industry had expanded too rapidly and was producing more goods than it could sell. 2. Underconsumption. The purchasing power of American consumers was not great enough to buy all the goods being produced. Farmers in particular were unable to purchase their share of America's industrial output because declining farm prices reduced their income. Foreign countries were unable to buy American goods because of war debts, reparations, and tariff harriers. 3. Unsound Financial Practices. Banks made unsound personal and business loans and did not receive full repayment. Brokers sold stock on too small a margin and thus encouraged widespread speculation. Consumers made unwise purchases on the installment plan and were later unable to complete their payments. Even before the sunk market crash. Hoover proposed and Congress passed the Agricultural Marketing Act. It was designed to stabilize farm prices by keeping surpluses from the market. A $509 million fund was set up for the purchase of surplus crops. The plan failed because the farm depression was too severe and the resources of the fund were too limited. When the rest of the economy was hit by the depression. Hoover at brst was optimistic over, the prospects of an early recovery. As the ■pression deepened and became worldwide, however, he took the wing steps: (I) The Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) was established to make emergency loans to financial institutions, life insurance companies, and railroads, (2) A limited program of federal public works was started. (3) States and local communities were encouraged to dertake similar projects and to obtain loans for this purpose from rite RFC. (4) Payments of war debts and reparations owed to the United States by foreign governments were suspended for one year. Such a pension of debts is called a moratorium. Hoover hoped that this atorium would relieve the financial plight of European nations and ble them to buy more goods from the United Slates. Tariffs on imports were further increased by the Hawley-Smoot Tariff Foreign nations retaliated by raising their tariffs, and American -rts suffered a sharp decline. Also during Hoover's administration: I The National Origins Act limiting immigration went into effect. (2) The Twentieth ("Lame Duck") Amendment was adopted. (3) The United States participated in the London Conference on Naval Disarmament 11930. (4) The United States issued the Stimson Doctrine, declaring its sition to Japan's seizure of the Chinese province of Manchuria. Presidential Administrations Since World War II 463 b. Although the Civil Rights Acts of 1957 and 1960 had given the vole to many Southern blacks, about 2 million blacks in seven states were still prevented from exercising their right to vote by the use of literacy and character tests. The Voting Rights Act of 1965 suspended such tests and authorized federal registration of voters in states and localities where less than 50% ol the voting-age population was registered or had voted in the 1961 election. (See page 303.) c. The Civil Rights Act of 1968 prohibited discrimination in the sale or rental of houses and apartments, (See page 305.) It also (1) provided severe penalties for persons convicted ol intimidating or injuring civil rights workers, and (2) made it a federal crime to travel across state lines or to use interstate communications for the purpose ol inciting a riot. 5. Education. The Elementary and Secondary Education Act (1965) established a comprehensive program of federal aid to public schools. ESEA also provided some assistance to parochial and private schools. | (See page 295.) The Higher Education Act extended additional federal .iid to college students and to institutions of higher learning. 6. Immigration. The Immigration Act of 1965 ended the policy of limiting admission to the United States on the basis of national origin. (See page 280.) 7. Transportation. Some 30 federal agencies dealing with travel by air, rail, highway, and water were grouped into a Dcf/artmenl of Transportation (1966). The most serious foreign problem troubling the nation during Johnson's administration was the war in Vietnam. What had begun in 1950 is a minor program of aid to the French in Indochina became after 1965 a major American commitment It involved half a million troops, billions of dollars in expenditures, and the threat of "total" war with Communist China and die Soviet Union. Most Americans supported the view that the United States had an obligation to help South Vietnam preserve its independence. Nevertheless, there was growing concern over the ever-increasing escalation of the war, the assumption by U.S. troops of the main burden of the fighting, and the rising cost in American lives and money. As lime passed and the war became stalemated, more and more people came to i believe that it had been a mistake to involve U.S. troops in Vietnam. Opponents of the war organized peace demonstrations and signed I petitions demanding a halt to the bornbing of North Vietnam. In [addition. many political leaders of both parties publicly voiced their [concern over the administration's war policies. The change in the public's attitude toward the war caused Johnson's popularity to decline | that plv. | The war also created a serious split in the Democratic party, as two [longtime critics of Johnson's Vietnam policies challenged the President [for the party's nomination in 1968. Each of these men. Senator Eugene Presidential Administrations Since World War II 485 filers and $5,000 for joint filers. As a result of these provisions, millions of low-income Americans were no longer required to pay income taxes. c. Many personal deductions were abolished or limited. Capital gains, previously taxed at a much lower rate than other income, were now subject to the same rate as wages and salaries. And most tax shelters tised by wealthy people to reduce their taxes were disallowed. d. The top corporate tax rate was lowered from 46% to 34%. 1. Immigration. Thousands of foreigners were entering the country illegally each year seeking employment and (teller living conditions. To curtail the influx of illegal aliens. Congress passed the Immigration Reform milCmitrol Act of 1986. It required employers to verify the citizenship tutus of job applicants; prohibited the hiring of illegal aliens; and offered legal status to several million aliens who had entered the United Slates illegally before January 1, 1982, and had lived there continuously since that lime. 2. The Environment, (a) In 1986 Congress approved a fivefold (mansion of the program to clean up abandoned hazardous waste dumps It authorized spending S9 billion for this purpose over a five- "ear peritxl; required the Environmental Protection Agency to set Hand aids of cleanliness; and imposed a new tax on corporations and I on crude oil and motor fuel to help finance the program. The tax money would be placed in a special toxic waste "Superfund." (b) 1'he Clean Water Art, passed in 1987 over Reagan's veto, provided $18 billion I to state and local governments (over a seven-year period) for the I Instruction of sewage treatment plants, and allocated an additional $2 I billion for other programs to clean up the nation's water supplies. 3. Water Projects. A $16.3 billion program to conserve and develop the nation's water resources was approved by Congress in 1986. The first major water projects bill in 15 years, it provided federal financing for hundreds of harbor-dredging, flood-control, and other waterway improvement projects throughout the country. It also required local mmunities to pay part of the costs of these programs. 4. Drugs. Responding to national concerns about drug abuse, Con- 'j, passed the Omnibus Drug Act (1986). It increased federal penalties drug crimes and allotted $1.7 billion for anti-drug enforcement, union, and treatment programs. 5. Social Security. With the Social Security System paying out more "n it was taking in. Congress took steps to reverse the trend and re that the system would be able to meet its obligations for years to To generate more revenue, the new law passed in 1983 (a) id higher Social Security payroll taxes on working people, (5) nuired middle-income and upper-income retirees to pay taxes on half ■nf their Social Security benefits, (c) extended payroll taxation to etn- ■feyees of the federal government, and (d) alter the year 2000, raised me age at which retired workers could draw full benefits (from age 65 page 67)- 486 United States History 6. Retirement. To end age discrimination in employ men l. Congress in 1986 abolished mandatory retirement at age 70 for most workers. Kxceptions included police officers, fire fighters, tenured university faculty, and high corporate executives. People in these categories would not come under the protection of the new law until 1994. 7. Japanese—American Reparations. "To l ight a grave wrong," the President signed legislation in 1988 extending apologies to the 120,000 Japanese—Americans who had been forcibly removed f rom their homes on the West Coast during World War II and placed in internment camps. The bill also established a $1.25 billion trust fund to pay $20,000 tax-free to each surviving internee. 8. Other Reagan Proposals. Many key items on Reagan's political agenda failed to win congressional approval. These included the adoption of a plan to allow tuition tax credits to parents who send their children to private schools; and passage of constitutional amendments to (n) outlaw abortion, (b) allow prayer in public schools, (c) require a balanced federal budget, and (d) grant a President the power to veto individual items in appropriation hills. During the first six years of his administration. Reagan enjoyed the support of a Republican-controlled Senate. In the 1986 congressional elections, the Democrats won 20 of the 34 senatorial contests, thereby increasing their representation from 47 to 55 seats and wresting control of the Senate from the Republicans. They also strengthened their hold on the House. When the 100th Congress convened in January, 1987, the Democrats occupied a majority of the seats in both houses. 1. Grain Agreement With U.S.S.R. Reagan lifted the embargo on grain shipments to the Soviet Union that Carter had imposed in 1979 after the Russians invaded Afghanistan. lie claimed that the embargo had hurt American farmers but had not harmed the Russians, since the latter could obtain all the grain they needed from Canada, Argentina, and other sources. In 1983 Reagan negotiated a new, five-year agreement with the U.S.S.R. for the purchase of American grain. It stipulated that the United Slates would not embargo grain shipments during the life of the pact. 2. Korean Airline Massacre. When a South Korean passenger plane, en route from Alaska to Seoul, flew off course over Soviet territory, a Russian fighter jet shot it down (1983). All 269 on board, including 61 Americans, died when the airliner plunged into the Sea of Japan. I he tragedy aroused a storm of criticism around the world. In a nationally televised speech, Reagan denounced the Soviet Union for what he called "the Korean Airline Massacre." Congress unanimously adopted a resolution condemning "this cold-blooded attack" as "one of the most infamous and reprehensible acts in history." Federal Government and Civic Responsibility 507 maintains a fingerprint file, and operates a crime detection laboratory. In time of war, it seeks out spies, saboteurs, and draft evaders. 3. The Immigration and Naturalization Service (Department of Justice) searches for aliens who have entered the country illegally. 4. The Internal Revenue Service (Treasury Department) investigates violations of federal tax laws. 5. The Coast Guard (Department of Transportation) enforces navigation laws and patrols the nation's coasts to prevent piracy and smuggling. ti. The Food and Drug Administration (Department of Health and Human Services) enforces federal laws relating to the purity and quality of foods, drugs, and cosmetics. 7. The Drug Enforcement Administration (Department of Justice) enforces federal laws relating to narcotics and controlled substances. The judicial (law interpreting) branch of the federal government consists mainly of three levels of courts: district courts, circuit courts of appeals, and the Supreme Court. In addition, there are special courts that deal with particular types of cases. federal judges are appointed by the President with the consent of the Senate. Appointment is for life. Judges cannot be removed except by impeachment. The Constitution grants the federal courts jurisdiction over the following categories of cases: 1. Cases arising under die Constitution, laws, or treaties of the United States. 2. Cases of admiralty or maritime jurisdiction (legal disputes arising aboard ship or relating to matters connected with shipping). 3. Controversies in which the United States itself is a party. 1. Controversies between two or more states, between citizens of different states, or between a state and a citizen of another state. (Under the Eleventh Amendment, a state may sue a citizen of another stale in federal courts, but a state may not itsell be sued by such a party.) 5. Cases involving ambassadors or other foreign representatives. The district courts are the lowest courts in the federal judicial system. It is here that most federal cases are first brought to trial. There are 90 judicial districts in the United States, each containing a district court. In addition. Congress has established territorial district courts in Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, and the Northern Mariana Islands. At present each distric t court has from 2 to 27 judges, depending upon the amount of judicial work within its geographic area. 