" Boyer's___________ The American Nation Harcourt Brace dr Company Austin • New York • Orlando • Atlanta ■ San Francisco • Boston • Dallas • Toronto • London About the Author /78 m/h ' '£>77& m aul Boyer is Merle Curti Professor of History at the University of Wisconsin. Madison, and director of the university's Institute for Research in the Humanities. He is also a member of the executive board of the Organization of American Historians, of the national advisory board of the PBS American Experience series and is editor-in-chief of the forthcoming Oxford Companion to United Slates History. Dr. Boyer has held visiting professorships at UCLA and Northwestern University and received Guggenheim and Rockefeller Foundation fellowships. Awarded a Ph.D. from Harvard in 1966. Dr. Boyer is the author of numerous articles, essays, reviews, and books. Salem Possessed: The Social Origins of Witchcraft, which he co-authored with Stephen Nissenbaum, won the John H. Dunning prize of the American Historical Association. Executive Editor Sue Miller Managing Editor Jim Eckel Editorial Stall' Diana Holman Walker, Project Editor Margaret Thompson, Associate Editor Boh Fullilove, Associate Editor Phyllis Salazar. Administrative Assistant Editorial Permission!! Tamara Blanker! Design. Photo, and Production Gene Rumann. Production Supervisor Belinda Barho/a. Adrian Bardin. Kim Anderson. Shirley Cantrell, Production Team Christine Schueler, Design Manager Peggy Cooper. Photo Research Manager Bob McCIcilun. Sherrie lav.. Kristin Hay. Cynthia Godscy, Elinor Strut. Photo Research Team PE and A IT, Design and Production. The Quarwtan Group. Iiu. Cover Photo: © Tony Stone Images. Reza Estakhrian. Copyright © 1948 by Holt, Rinehart and Winston All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher Requests for permission to make copies of any part of the work should be mailed to: Permissions Department. Holt. Rinehart and Winston. 6277 Sea Harbor Drive. Orlando. Florida 32887-6777. For acknowledgments, see page 1041. which is an extension of the copyright pugc. Primed in the United States of America Themes in American History xviii Critical Thinking and the Study of History xx To the Reader xxv beginnings Prehistory-1800 Prehistory-1500 2 1 Peopling the Americas 4 2 Native American Cultures 10 then and now Sacred or Scientific Sites? 13 3 Europe in the Middle Ages 17 4 Asia and Africa in the Middle Ages 23 5 The Lure of Trade and Exploration 28 The Columbian Exchange 34 1 First Contact 38 through others' eyes The Slave Trade 42 2 Conquest of the Mainland 45 3 The Spanish Settle the Americas 50 then an: The Encomienda's Legacy 54 4 The English in North America 56 1620-1763 64 1 The New England Colonies 66 The Salem Witchcraft Trials 70 2 Slavery and the Southern Colonies 74 3 The Colonies After the Restoration 80 4 The Frontier and the Struggle for Land 86 then and now The Vanishing Forests 89 The French and Indian War 91 Native American Creation Myths 96 Interpreting the Visual Record 98 Creating a fJation 1763-181 5 100 1763-1783 102 1 The Seeds of Unrest 104 2 Mounting Tensions 109 3 The Shot Heard Round the World 113 changing WA't Religion and the Revolution 115 4 Independence Declared 117 The Declaration of Independence 119 The Declaration of Independence 120 5 An American Victory 127 Sacagawea guiding Lewis and Clark 1776-1789 1 The Articles of Confederation 138 2 Drafting and Ratifying the Constitution 145 The American Experiment 146 3 The Constitution: A Living Document 153 A Federal Government Is Established Dealing with a Dangerous World Federalists Dominate Party Politics The Nation Expands HISTORY IN THE making Jefferson's Image The Louisiana Purchase The Coming of the War of 1812 Painting of American eagle The Constitution of the United States of America Revolutionary Literature Recognizing Fallacies in Reasoning The American West Growth and Change 1815-1860 222 Covered wagons moving westward 1815-1845 224 1 The Rise of Nationalism 226 2 The Challenges of Growth 232 3 The Rise of Jacksonian Democracy 237 THROUGH OTHERS' EYES American Politics 239 Campaigning 240 4 Jackson's Policies Define an Era 242 AMERICA'S GEOGRAPHY Early Industrialization 252 1 The North and the Middle West 256 THROUGH OTHERS' EYES Immigrant Life 260 2 The Cotton Kingdom 263 3 The Slave System 269 1820s-1860s 280 1 Religious Zeal and New Communities 282 2 Movements for Social Reform 286 THROUGH OTHERS'EYES American Prisons 287 3 The Crusade for Abolition 292 c nging vs The Amistad Mutiny 295 4 The Cause of Women's Rights 297 1820-1860 304 1 The Lure of the West 306 2 American Expansionism 31 I HISTORY IN THE MAKING The Mexican War 314 3 The Far West 317 4 The Rush to California 323 THROUGH OTHERS' EYES The Gold Rush 326 The Natural World 330 Interpreting Editorial Cartoons 332 vii Identification badge of a free black person 1845-1861 336 1 An Uneasy Balance 338 2 Compromise Comes to an End 343 Southern Expansionists and the Filibusters 346 3 On the Brink of War 350 THROUGH others'eyes Harpers Ferry 354 Regionalism 360 1861-1865 War and Reunification 1845-1900 334 1 The Union Dissolves! THROUGH OTHERS' EYES The Civil War 2 The North and South Face Off 3 Eastern Campaigns and the War in the West Remembering Gettysburg 4 The Final Phase changing way The Courageous 54th Teacher with students (1866) 1865-1900 1 Presidential Reconstruction 394 The Emancipation Proclamation 396 2 Congressional Reconstruction 399 3 Reconstruction in the South 405 4 The New South 410 South Carolina Sea Islanders 412 The Pain of Slavery and Civil War 418 Comparing Points of View 420 Painting (1889) of the First Battle of Bull R.un Viii SS CONTENTS The Nation Transformed 1860-1910 422 THE western crossroads 1860-1910 424 1 Native American Resistance 426 Will the Real Custer Please Stand? 430 2 Western Farmers 436 The Transcontinental Railroad 438 3 The Cattle Boom 444 4 A Mining Boom 449 THROUGH OTHERS' EYES The Wild West 452 1865-1910 456 1 Industry's Golden Age 458 2 The New Immigrants 466 CHANGING WAYS Coming to America 468 3 Urban Life 472 THROUGH OTHERS' EYES The Price of Industrialization 474 AMERICA'S GEOGRAPHY Conquering Distance 482 1865-1910 484 1 Restoring Honest Government 486 THROUGH OTHERS' EYES Political Patronage 487 2 Labor Strives to Organize 491 3 Farmers, Populism, and Depression 497 Mark Twain's America 504 Interpreting Economic Data 506 The Scott family outside their Nebraska home, 1889 A World Power 1897-1920 508 1897-1920 510 1 The Progressive Movement 512 2 Reforming the New Industrial Order 517 Immigrant Workers 520 3 Reforming Society 522 Changing wa i The Orphan Trains 524 Detail from Thomas Moran's Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone 1898-1917 556 1 War with Spain 558 2 Expansion in the Pacific 563 3 Expansion in Latin America 569 A Path Between the Seas 571 Yankee Imperialism 573 4 Conflict with Mexico 575 1 Reforming Government 534 2 Roosevelt and the Square Deal 538 Hi N and NO'.'. National Parks 541 3 Reform Under Taft 543 4 Wilson's "New Freedom" 548 changing WAY- The 1913 Armory Show 550 1 Hi4 ough & Women's Suffrage 551 The United States and the World 582 1914-1920 584 1 World War I Breaks Out 586 The Sinking of the Lusitania 592 2 The United States Goes to War 593 The Doughboy's Pack 596 3 The War at Home 601 4 The League of Nations 606 The Spanish-American War 614 Recognizing Stereotypes 616 x Prosperity and Crisis 1919-1945 618 1919-1929 620 1 Postwar Troubles 622 2 The Republicans in Power 628 3 A Nation Divided 634 The Back-to-Africa Movement 636 1920-1930 1 Boom Times CHANGING WAYS Hitting the Road 2 Life in the Twenties THROUGH OTHERS' EYES The Twenties THEN AND NOW Censorship 3 A Creative Era Prosperity Shattered Hard Times Depression Worldwide I hen and now Baseball Hoover Fails 1929-1933 1 Restoring Hope 694 THROUGH OTHERS' EYES The Greatest Man of the Age 695 2 New Challenges 700 3 Life in the New Deal Era 708 HISTORY IN THE MAKING Photographing the Depression 712 4 The New Deal and the Arts 716 1 The Search for Peace 724 2 Relations with Latin America 728 3 The Road to War 732 THROUGH OTHERS' EYES The Spanish Civil War 734 1 Early Difficulties 744 through OT' (ERS EYES Japan Declares War 745 2 The Home Front 751 3 Defeat of the Axis Powers 759 The Navajo Code Talkers 763 4 The Price of Victory 766 Songs of the Cities 772 Recognizing Propaganda 774 Postwar America 1945-1975 776 World War II homecoming 1 The New Frontier 832 through othu Cuban Missile Crisis 838 2 Johnson's Great Society 839 3 The Civil Rights Movement 844 4 Culture and Counterculture 852 history in the makino Social History 855 Urban America 860 1945-1952 1 Healing the Wounds of War 2 The Challenges of Peace 3 The Cold War Begins 4 The Cold War Turns Hot THROUGH others' EYES The Arab Response 1950-1960 Cold War Fears through others eyes The Nuclear Arms Race Americans Go Underground The Affluent Society then AND NOW Pesticides Voices of Dissent Elizabeth Eekford at Little Rock's Central High School LBJ taking the presidential oath, 1963 CHAPTER Wif WAR IN VIETNAM 1954-1975 862 1 Background to Conflict 864 2 The War Escalates 870 3 Americans Divided - 875 4 War at Full Tide 879 5 The Cease-Fire and After 884 THROUGH OTHERS' EYES Remembering Vietnam 885 THEN AND NOW No More Vietnams 888 AMERICAN LETTERS Voices of Change 892 STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS Conducting an Interview 894 ■■ contents Modern Times I 970-the Present 1 The Nixon Years 900 2 From Watergate to Ford 906 THROUGH OTHERS ErES Watergate 907 3 Carter: The Outsider as President 912 4 A Decade of Social Change 918 Mao and Nixon 1980-the Present 926 1 The Reagan Movement 928 2 From Bush to Clinton 936 through OTHER'S eyes The Gulf War 938 3 America in the 1990s 945 American Indian Renewal: A Case Study 948 A Diverse Country 9S4 Challenger crew, 1986 1970-die Present 1 A New Era 958 The Freedom of Information Act 961 Negotiating with Terrorists 962 2 A Global Economy 964 3 Energy and the Environment 969 4 Addressing Global Ills 975 THEN AND now The Peace Corps 978 Stories of Diversity 982 Evaluating News Stories 984 Reference Section Skills Handbook 988 Presidents of the U.S. 1021 Glossary 1045 Historical Documents 1003 Leading Supreme Court Cases 1022 Index 1061 Atlas 1012 Gazetteer 1036 Acknowledgments CONTENTS 1091 Si Chapter 1 Prehistory-1500 For thousands of years great civilizations rose and fell throughout Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Americas. Some of these civilizations had litt/e or no contact vwt/i one another. During the Middle Ages, however, people from diverse cultures increasingly came together to trade goods. By the 1400s the desire for an all-sea route to Asia inspired Europeans to explore beyond the frontiers of their known world. In what ways might a culture be affected by contact with other cultures? How might extensive contact with other societies both benefit and harm a society's economic development? SOCIETY What impact might technological advances have on trade and exploration? 30 c.IOOOb.c. a.d. 610 1096 1324 1498 Rise of farming Kush founded. in desert Southwest. Muhammad founds Islam. Crusades begin. Mansa Musa Vasco da makes pilgrimage Gama sails to Mecca. to India. ■ When and how did the first people arrive in the Americas? ■ How did the changing environment influence the first Americans? ■ What were some of the effects of the Agricultural Revolution? ■ What do the five themes of geography explore? tmong after Europe. Africa, and Asia were populated, the American continents remained empty of human life. From the frozen lands of the Arctic to the southernmost tip of South America, no human voice had ever echoed through the wilderness; no human foot had ever left a print in the soil. Sometime during the last Ice Age, however, men and women began crossing from Asia into North America. Over time, they spread throughout the Americas, adopting ways of life that were suitable to the environments they found. Che first Americans Most archaeologists—the scientists who study the remains of past cultures—agree that the first people who discovered the vast American wilderness cume from Asia during the last Ice Age, when glaciers, or thick sheets of ice, covered much of northern Asia. North America, and Europe. The glaciers locked up so much of the world's water that the sea level dropped by several hundred feet. This drop in sea level exposed a wide land bridge—Beringia— between Siberia and what is now Alaska. The first Americans, whom 4 a! CHAPTER I archaeologists call Palco-Indians, probably followed animal herds across Beringiu to their new home in North America. Archaeologists do not know exactly when— or in how many waves—these men and women came to North America. Estimates place the date for the first arrivals between 12,000 and 50.000 years ago. Nor do scientists know whether the migration ended when the glaciers began to melt around 10.000 years ago. Some archaeologists believe that when the land bridge disappeared beneath the rising waters of the Bering Strait. Asian immigrants paddled to America in skin boats or wooden dugouls or walked across the ice in winter. Why is it not possible to talk with certainly about the Paleo-Indians? With no written records to guide them, archaeologists must rely on human and animal remains and on artifacts such as weapons, tools, pots, and jewelry for clues. The methods for analyzing these clues are not precise. Thus. ▼ Beringia land bridge In the 1400s, Europeans sought an eastward sea route to Asia to replace the long, dangerous, and expensive overland routes. Years of trading in the Mediterranean and the Atlantic had given many merchants valuable sailing experience. Moreover, scientific and technological advances had taken some of the guesswork out of navigation. yew dates in American history are as instantly recognizable as 1492. It was a year that shaped the destiny of continents. With Christopher Columbus's daring voyage, worlds apart became worlds in contact—and conflict. On Friday. October 12, 1492. Columbus landed on an island in the Bahamas and "broke out the royal banner, and the captain's two flags with the green cross." These actions staked Spain's first claims in the Americas. Columbus and his captains admired the beauty and abundance of this land: "Once ashore they saw very green trees and many ponds and fruits of various kinds." Columbus and the Europeans who followed him saw these lands as theirs for the taking. In their zeal to spread their cultures and enrich their treasuries, many Europeans imposed their ways of life on the original inhabitants of the Americas. Rich and varied Native American cultures were changed or destroyed as a result. Still. Columbus's voyages and those of later explorers were remarkable feats. These first explorers and colonists carved out new lives for themselves, often in harsh environments. In the process, they created new American cultures and brought great riches to Europe. Flora and fauna of the Americas Th" Mnropolteftri Section 1 ■ Why did Columbus sail west from Europe? ■ What was the purpose of the encomienda system? How did it affect Native Americans? ■ What reforms did Las Casas urge the Spanish Crown to undertake? ■ What were some of the results of the Columbian exchange? ft the 15th century, Europeans desired a cheaper, faster trade route to the East. Portugal look the lead, concentrating on finding a sea passage around the southernmost tip of Africa. Put Spain, largely because of the boldness and imagination of one man—Christopher Columbus—looked westward. Columbus's landing introduced the Americas to the rest of the world, thus beginning a new era of trade, colonization, and cultural exchange. Portuguese astrolabe Christopher columbus in 1492 a mariner named Christopher Columbus set sail from Spain on the first in a series of historic Atlantic crossings. He understood that the earth was round and concluded that if he sailed far enough west, he could establish a more direct trade route to Asia. Columbus grew up in Genoa, a bustling port city on Italy's western coast. Fascinated by the sea, the adventurous youth sailed on Genoese trading vessels. He became an excellent navigator and learned to handle a caravel—a small, lightweight vessel most often used in sea trade. A former shipmate recalled Columbus's skill: "By a simple look at the night sky. he would know what route to follow or what weather to expect." Eventually Columbus made his way to Lisbon. Portugal, the center of European knowledge about sea travel. While in Lisbon, he studied charts of contemporary geographers and astronomers and read ancient Greek and Roman texts, the Bible, and Marco Polo's exciting account of his travels in Asia. As a result of his studies. Columbus developed a theory about a westward route to Asia. He concluded that the western sea could not be very large and that the great trading cities of Asia lay about 2.4<X) miles w est of Portugal. "■ Columbus believed that by sailing west from Europe, he could find a more direct route to Asia. In the 1480s Columbus tried to persuade various European monarchs to sponsor a westward voyage across the Atlantic Ocean. He had little success. King John IT of Portugal rejected the plan because he doubted Columbus's calculation of the distance to Asia. In fact, the actual distance to Asia proved to he about live times greater than Columbus had calculated. Initially Columbus had no better luck with the Spanish monarchs. Ferdinand and Isabella. They devoted most of their energy and money to the Reconquista, the reconquest of Spain from the Moors. But Columbus persisted. He described to them the golden palaces and temples of Asia mentioned in Marco Polo's tales and tempted them with visions of the riches that could belong to Spain. Columbus also vowed to take the Catholic faith to the peoples of foreign lands, a task for which he believed God had chosen him. This idea impressed the deeply religious Isabella. Nevertheless, it was only after the monarchs had defeated the Moors at Granada in January 1492 that they were willing to back an expedition. On April 17. 1492, the king and the queen authorized the necessary funding for Columbus's journey. To reward Columbus for his future discoveries. Ferdinand and Isabella agreed that the mariner would be knighted, appointed admiral, and made viceroy, or governor, over all the lands he might discover. After his death these titles would be passed on to his descendants. In addition, he was to receive at least 10 percent of the riches he obtained on Spain's behalf. The fateful first voyage Columbus outfitted three vessels—the Santa Murio. the Nina, and the Pint a—and recruited an experienced crew of 90 sailors, most of whom were Spaniards. At dawn on August 3. 1492, Columbus and his crew departed from Palos. Spain. The small fleet first journeyed some 800 miles southwest to the Canary Islands. Spain's westernmost possession. Then in September the three vessels set out across the uncharted sea. Imagine them one month later Somewhere in the vast Atlantic, three small ships sail slowly westward. The men aboard have not sighted land since leaving the Canaries. The crew 's patience is wearing thin, their hopes having risen like the waves with every sign of land—birds, green weeds, cloudbanks—only to be dashed. Many sailors demand that the ships turn back. Then, as ihe lookout on the lead ship scans the horizon in the early morning hours of October 12. he gives the long-awaited cry: "Tierra!" Land! The October 12th entry in Columbus's Journal, his diary of the voyage, reads: ''[At) daylight Friday ... they reached an islet... w hich was called Guanahani [gwahn-uh-HAHN-ee]. . . . Soon they saw naked people, and the Admiral went ashore in his armed longboat." (The Journal survives only in a secondhand summary, which explains why Columbus is referred to as "the Admiral.") The people of the Indies. Columbus and his men had struck land on a tiny coral island in the central Bahamas, about 400 miles southeast of pre- sent-day Florida. Columbus named it San Salvador (Holy Savior). Confident that he had reached Asia, the Admiral called the island dwellers "Indios." the Spanish word for inhabitants of the Indies. The Native Americans Columbus encountered called themselves ''Tamos'' (TEE-nohs). the word for "good" or "noble" in their Arawak language. The Tainos were farmers who lived in settlements of some 100 to 300 people. Some groups traded salt, shells, and other goods peacefully with their neighbors. Other groups participated in raids against other islands. Taino war chiefs increased their power through successful raids. On the larger islands of the Caribbean—such as present-day Cuba. Puerto Rico. Jamaica, and Hispaniola (his-puhn-YOH-luh)—lived groups with a more complex social and political organization. They built larger settlements with leaders living in a central area surrounded by the villagers' houses. They exported tobacco, salt, and handicrafts as far as the mainland. The Spanish praised the Tainos' generosity. "They invite you to share anything that they possess. and show as much love as if their hearts went ▲ This drawing by Gonzalo Fernandez de Oviedo y Valdes shows the type of building in which Taino chiefs lived. with it," Columbus noted. He believed that they would make easy converts to the Catholic faith. But he also took the Tainos' generosity to mean that they "could all be subjugated [conquered] and compelled to do anything one wishes." The search for gold. Because some of the Tainos wore gold ornaments, Columbus concluded that gold mines were close at hand. Over the next month Columbus and his men sailed from island to island—naming and claiming each for Spain—in search of gold. Then on Christmas Eve, 1492, the Santa Maria struck a coral reef off the island that Columbus had named Hispaniola—the site of present-day Haiti and the Dominican Republic. The crew was forced to abandon ship. Believing that the shipwreck was a sign from God. Columbus decided to establish the first Spanish colony here. He named the settlement La Navidad (The Nativity), in honor of the day of its founding. Like the inhabitants of Guanahani. the Indians of Hispaniola were generous to the Spanish. Their chief, Guacanagari (gwah-KAHN-uh- gah-REE). showered Columbus with gold nuggets and ornaments—even promising "a statue of pure gold" the si/e of Columbus himself. This impressive display convinced some of Columbus's men to remain in the settlement. Columbus sailed back to Spain in January 1493, taking with him two dozen Taino captives and evidence of the riches of the Indies. Ferdinand and Isabella gave him a hero's welcome and speedily approved a second voyage. The captive islanders were objects of both sympathy and curiosity. 'I"he queen ordered that the Indians on Hispaniola and elsewhere in the Americas be treated humanely and converted to the Roman Catholic faith. But she left open the possibility that anyone who resisted the authority of the Spanish Crown could be enslaved. Columbus the colonizer When Columbus returned to La Navidad 11 months later, he found the colony destroyed. All the Spaniards were dead or gone. Some probably had left to find gold elsewhere, but most either had fallen victim to illness or had died in disputes w ith one another or with the Tainos. Most likely, the colonists' excessive demands for gold and food had worn down the generosity of the Tainos. causing conflicts. Columbus and some 1,500 male colonists— most of whom were craftsmen, builders, or farm- ers—built another settlement: Isabela. Columbus left the settlement under the care of his brother Bartolomd and spent the next three years sailing the Caribbean searching for gold. While Columbus was away, the pressure the colonists put on the Indians to provide food and gold led the Indians to revolt. Violent disputes over land and Indian labor also broke out between Bartolome and the colonists. Columbus's failure to maintain order led to his eventual replacement as viceroy. Before Columbus was replaced, he granted the colonists control over Indian labor. He thereby informally introduced to Hispaniola what would later become the encomienda (en-koh-mee-EN-duh) system. Under this system the colonists, or encomenderos (en-koh- muhn-DE-rohs). received the right to have a certain number of Indians work for them. The encomenderos used the Indians to mine gold, provide food, and build houses. The system required that the encomenderos instruct their charges in the Roman Catholic faith and permit them to grow food for themselves. This scene, entitled "Baptism of the First Indians," is taken from a Conquista cloth. The Spanish Crown formally established the encomienda system in the Americas in 1503. In the monarch s' eyes Native Americans were not slaves—they were supposed to be paid a small allowance for their labor. But in practice the tnamienda system amounted to enslavement for many Indians because they were seldom paid. The encomienda also disrupted Indian economies and societies. Because of excessive Spanish demands for food and labor. Indians had little lime to grow food for themselves. Widespread malnutrition resulted. The Spanish were thus able to take the most fertile pieces of land away from the Indians. The Spanish also disturbed Indian societies by suppressing Indian customs and religions. ■ ■ The encomienda system gave the Spanish control over Indian labor and disrupted Indian societies. £as CASAS AND SLAVERY______________ Some Spaniards protested the harsh treatment of Native Americans. One prominent critic. Bartolome de Las Casas, had spent some years as 4 This illustration from a history of New Spain written in the 1500s by a Spanish monk, Bernadinode Sahagun, shows the devastating effects of smallpox on the Aztecs. Smallpox, measles, and malaria were just a few diseases brought by Europeans that caused epidemics among Native American peoples. In some areas the epidemics preceded the appearance of the Europeans, and no doubt the resulting devastation made it much easier for the Spanish to conquer the Indians. One Mayan chronicle records the dispiriting effects of an epidemic. a Great was the stench of the dead. After our fathers and grandfathers succumbed [died], half of the people fled to the fields. ,.. The mortality was terrible. Your grandfathers died, and with them died the son of the king and his brothers and kinsmen. So it was that we became orphans, oh. my sons! So we became when we were young. All of us were thus. 99 While the death rale for Native Americans varied, in some areas their numbers declined by over 90 percent by the mid-16th century. To replace the Indian laborers, the Spanish imported African slaves. They reached the West Indies in the early 1500s. By 1550 some 15.000 enslaved Africans had arrived in the Spanish colonies. Many worked on sugar plantations or other large farms, performing hard labor for no pay. Las Casas urged the Spanish Crown to enact laws to end Spanish mistreatment of Native Americans. Commentary ________ The Columbian Legacy Historians offer different interpretations of the lasting significance of Columbus's voyages to the Americas. Some have applauded him for enlarging geographic knowledge. Yet Columbus himself died without realizing he had encountered a continent. Columbus did not even get the honor of having the continent named after him. Another navigator. Amerigo Vespucci (ahm-ay-RKK-goh vay-srooT-chee), received that honor alter lie made at least two trips along the coast of present-day South America. In 1507 the German mapmakcr Martin Waldseemiiller (vault-zay-mool- uhr) credited Vespucci with the "discovery" of America and suggested the newly encountered continent be named America in his honor. Other people have interpreted Columbus's voyages in a negative light. They blame him for introducing the encomienda system to the Americas and for the drastic reduction of the Native American population. But Columbus saw himself as a faithful Christian who had won new converts to Catholicism. Las Casas, the fierce Protector of the Indians, agreed. With such conflicting interpretations of Columbus's significance, how can we judge his impact? Perhaps the best way to understand the legacy of Columbus's voyages is to see the enormous effect they had on the world. The transfer of people, ideas, plants, animals, and diseases between the Americas. Europe, Asia, and Africa initiated by Columbus's journeys has come to he called the Columbian exchange (see America's Geography feature on pages 34-35). The Columbian exchange transformed the world. As various cultures came into contact, they transformed each other. Precious metals and other resources taken from the Americas made many European nations wealthy and powerful. Exotic agricultural products from the Americas, such as com. potatoes, and tomatoes, soon became staples that improved the nutrition of people everywhere and often resulted in dramatic population growth. Foods crops from the Americas transformed African agriculture in particular. The plants adapted easily to the African environment and offered high yields and greater variety. Through settlement and the slave trade, the islands and continents of the Western Hemisphere, formerly inhabited by only Native Americans, were gradually peopled with Europeans. Africans, and Asians. But the Columbian exchange involved more than the transfer of crops and people. The introduction of European animals transformed the American landscape. For example, once cattle, sheep, and pigs arrived in the Americas, they multiplied rapidly in the abundant grazing lands. The horse, introduced to the Americas by the Spanish by 1507. proved to be particularly suited to the Americas. Horses spread from New Mexico in the 1600s throughout the West and into Canada hy the late 1700s. At first the horse terrified many Native Americans, hut several tribes began to use it to their advantage. Soon, the horse had transformed the cultures of many North American peoples, notably the Apaches. Cheyennes. Comanches, and Sioux. With the horse these peoples were able to give up their existence in the mountains and other areas and move onto the relatively uninhabited Great Plains. There. Native Americans hunted on horseback the plentiful buffalo. which became the cornerstone of their way of life. The Columbian exchange also introduced deadly diseases—smallpox and measles from Europe and yellow fever and malaria from Africa. Because Native Americans lacked immunity, or resistance, to these diseases, many died. Historians have estimated that in some areas as much as 90 percent of the Native American population was wiped out. By 1600 practically all of the original inhabitants of the Caribbean were gone. For many, the tragic impacts of disease and military conquest on Native Americans and the introduction of slavery on Africans understandably overshadow the positive aspects of the Columbian exchange. But when determining die significance of Columbus's voyages, we must lake into account the global transformation he initiated. "£ The Columbian exchange resulted in the transfer of people, precious metals, crops, and animals between the Americas and Europe, Asia, and Africa. IDENTIFY and explain the significance of the following: Christopher Columbus, viceroy, Tainos, Guacanagari, encomienda. Bartolome de Las Casas. Columbian exchange. LOCATE and explain the importance of the following: Bahamas. Hispaniola, La Navidad. 1. MAIN IDEA What did Columbus hope to find by sailing west from Europe? 2. MAIN IDEA How did the encomienda system benefit the Spanish settlers? What effect did it have on Native Americans? 3. ASSESSING CONSEQUENCES What reforms did Las Casas request on behalf of Native Americans? Why were the reforms of only limited success? 4. WRITING TO EVALUATE Write an essay examining the long-term effects of Columbus's voyages. 5. USING HISTORICAL IMAGINATION Imagine you are a Taino living on San Salvador. Draw a plan for a mural that portrays your interactions with the Spanish explorers. Pilgrim 5ocMKy. Plymouth. MaswttxnttU ► These artifacts were used A by the Pilgrims I in the 17th century. Clockwise from top are a christening shirt and mitts worn by William Bradford, the wicker cradle used by Peregrine White, who was born aboard the Mayflower, and a pair of boys' leather shoes. the challenge of surviv ing ihe winter. But the cold climate, disease, and hunger took their toll. The colony's record for March 24. 1621. notes: "In three months past dies halfe our company ... Of a hundred persons, scarce fifty remain, the living scarce able to bury the dead." The colony, like Jamestown, owed its survival to Native Americans. The settlers were particularly indebted to Squanto. a member of the Patuxet band of the Wampanoags (wahm-puh-NOH- ags). He taught them where to fish and how to plant corn. He also spoke English. Kidnapped in 1614, he had lived in Spain and England before reluming home in 1619. The Pilgrims viewed Squanto, in Bradford's words, as "a special instrument sent of God for their good beyond their expectation." With Squanto's aid autumn brought a bountiful harvest. The Pilgrims then invited the Indians to a harvest feast—the first Thanksgiving. ^Che puritans and the In contrast to the Pilgrims, most Puritans remained in England and did not leave the Anglican church. These religious dissenters hoped to reform the church from within. The Crown, however, opposed reform. James I feared that Puritan demands would lead to political upheaval. Religious dissent, he declared, "as well agreeth with a Monarchy as God and the Devil]. Then Jack & Tom. & Will <fc SS CHAPTER j Dick, shall meete and at their pleasure censure me, and my Councell, and all our proccedinges." King James's son Charles, who succeeded James in 1625. was even more determined than his father to stop dissent and suppress Protestant ministers and practices. The English Puritans faced economic difficulties as well. England's population had dramatically increased, but employment had not. The growing profitability of wool production encouraged large landow ners to turn from farming to raising sheep. They fenced their lands and drove off the tenant farmers, many of whom were Puritans. Then in the 1620s crop failures and an economic depression in the woolen industry hit Puritan farmers and weavers. To escape both religious persecution and economic ruin, many Puritans decided to risk a move to the colonies. Beginning in 1630. in what is known as the Great Migration, some 60.1)00 people left England for the Americas. While most of them went to the West Indies, some 10.000 to 20,000 settled in Massachusetts. Most Puritans, however, did not leave England. In 1642 the conflict between the Puritans and the Royalists, the supporters of King Charles I. erupted in civil war. Led by Oliver Cromwell, the Puritans won. During Cromwell's rule < 1653-1658). Puritan emigration almost ceased. ■ ■ The Puritans left England to escape religious conflict and economic problems. Abby Aldrich Rockelelloi Folk Art Cantor, WMlamtburg, VA A NEW SOCIETY The diverse ethnic, economic, social, and religious backgrounds of the people in the 13 colonies helped to create societies distinct from one another and from Great Britain. Q REGIONS What five colonies made up the southern colonies? Settlers used their slaves' knowledge and labor to transform the swampy coastal region into fabulously profitable rice plantations. The Carolinas and the thriving port of Charles Town (Charleston) attracted Scots. Scotching Gentians. European Jews. West Indians, and in I6S5. French Huguenots (Protestants) fleeing religious persecution. In South Carolina, however, the demand for plantation workers was so great that by 1720 African slaves made up about 70 percent of the population. On the large rice plantations, the slaves had relatively little contact with whites. As a result. ▲ This Iate-l8th-century painting by an unknown artist, entitled The Old Plantation, shows the merging of African and American cultures through slaves' musical instruments, dress, and dance. they kept more African traditions than slaves in other areas kept. Even their language, Gullah, combined West African dialects and English. Slaves on the rice plantations worked under the task system. Each day the slaves were assigned particular duties. Once they had completed them, the slaves could lend small plots and raise livestock. Some sold (heir hogs, chickens, and produce or worked for wages on their own time. A few slaves earned enough to buy their freedom. Slaveholders worried that their slaves—who now outnumbered them—were becoming loo independent. Fearful of slave revolts, they urged passage of a harsh slave code. J\lEW YORK AND NEW JERSEY Besides rewarding his supporters. Charles II wanted to cripple Dutch trading interests. The Dutch West India Company, attracted by the profitable fur trade, had established a colony in North America. Its colony. New Nctherland. extended inland along the Hudson River Valley and included the town of New Amsterdam, founded in 1626 on Manhattan Island. (The town was renamed New York in 1664.) Although successful at its trading activities, the Dutch West India Company had little luck attracting Dutch settlers. The company did attract others: primarily English. French Huguenots. Swedes. Jews, and free Africans. Colonists also purchased enslaved Africans. By 1750, blacks made up almost 20 percent of New York City's population. ► The Peaceable Kingdom was one of several paintings Edward Hicks made of animals living in harmony with nature. In this version, William Penn is shown in the background, meeting with other colonists. German that described his colony in glowing terms and promised prosperity to would-be immigrants. Often referred to as the "best poor man's counlryPennsylvania attracted thousands of p*x>r immigrants who made the crossing on cramped ships. One German immigrant. Gottlieb Mittelberger, described how they were packed "like herrings" and endured "stench, fumes, horror. ... scurvy.... mouthrot." He added: M Children from I to 7 years rarely survive the voyage; and many a time parents are compelled to see their children miserably suffer and die from hunger, thirst and sickness, and then to see them cast into the water. 1 witnessed such misery in no less than 32 children in our ship, all of whom were thrown into the sea. 99 Those who survived the voyage, however, found cheap, fertile land and a mild climate. Pennsylvania fanners produced a surplus of grain, milling much of it into Hour and exporting it to other colonies and the West Indies. Butchers bought livestock and exported salted meat. The colonists spent their profits on English manufactured goods and luxuries. Some also bought African slaves. ■ ■ The Restoration colonies attracted a diverse group of people. Most farmed their own lands, but slaves worked South Carolina plantations. Most settlers considered their governors inept. Consequently, they refused to defend the colony when an English fleet sailed into the harbor in 1664 and demanded that the Dutch hand over New Netherland. Without a shot being fired, the colony's governor. Peter Stuyvesant. a domineering old soldier with a wooden leg. surrendered to the English. Charles II made his brother. James, the Duke of York, proprietor of New Netherland. James kept part of the colony—renamed New York—and gave the rest—New Jersey—to iwro friends. Pennsylvania and Delaware In 1681 Charles II repaid the £16,000 he owed Admiral Sir William Penn by making Penn's son William proprietor of a large tract of land near New York. Penn's holdings increased the following year when the Duke of York gave him Delaware. Penn wanted to make his colony, which the king named Pennsylvania, a haven for his fellow Quakers. Persecuted by Anglicans and Puritans alike as "violators of order." the Quakers had no formal clergy, opposed warfare, and ignored class privileges. Penn also wanted Pennsylvania to be a "Holy Experiment." where people of different nationalities and religious beliefs "could shape their own lives" and live peacefully together. He extended his policy to Native Americans, paying them for their lands and treating them fairly. While Penn was a man with deep religious convictions, he was also a shrewd promoter who needed to raise cash. To recruit colonists, he published pamphlets in English, Dutch, and illness marred his candidacy. Calhoun, although a favorite in the Lower South, failed to build a nationwide following. He eventually withdrew to become the vice-presidential partner of both Adams and Jackson. Adams, an economic nationalist with antislavery views, had appeal primarily in the Northeast. Jackson, the popular military hero, represented the southern frontier. Clay, the architect of the Missouri Compromise and the American System, drew his support primarily from the Middle West. Andrew Jackson received the most popular voles, but no candidate won a majority of the electoral votes. In such circumstances the Twelfth Amendment directs the House of Representatives to choose a president from the top three candidates. Having finished fourth. Clay was out of the running. But he was in a position to help determine the winner by recommending that his supporters back a particular candidate. Clay, who considered Jackson unqualified for the presidency, threw his support behind Adams. Adams became president. When Adams then named Clay his secretary of state. Jackson and his followers angrily accused the two men of making a "corrupt bargain." Adams and Clay denied any wrongdoing, but suspicions persisted. (■When the House was forced to decide the outcome of the 1824 election, Clay threw his support behind Adams. When Adams won, Jackson charged that Adams and Clay had made a "corrupt bargain." President Adams supported a wide range of federal government projects, from canals and roads to a national university and a standardized system ot weights and measures. Yet. owing largely to his desire to avoid "playing politics" and his unwillingness to compromise with Congress, he was unable to accomplish much during his term. The ELECTION OF 1828___________________ Jackson, a sharp critic throughout Adams's presidency, resigned from the Senate in 1825 to campaign for the 1828 election. Opponents of the Adams administration rallied around the tall war hero from Tennessee. Colonel John Baillie, a British traveler to the United States in the 1820s, was fascinated by the widespread public interest in the presidential election of 1828. In Great Britain the prime minister was (and still is) elected by members of Parliament, not by ordinary voters. Baillie recorded in his journal his amazement at the American political scene: 4<<7 remark [that] every American of whatever condition in life is a Politician. . . . We hear nothing but Jackson and Adams. . .. These Candidates are freely talked over and their merits discussed by every man in the country. The subject is now so worn out that I am quite tired of their names. ... A common address in a stage coach, which has been often put to me, is "I says Mister, are you for Jackson or Adams?" My answer is generally "for which you like sir." 99 Who was this man so eager to be president? Jackson was born in 1767 in a log cabin on the South Carolina frontier to Scntch-Irish immigrants. Orphaned at 14. he had little formal schooling and was a poor speller. Making his limitation a virtue, he later claimed to have no respect for anyone who knew only one way to spell a word! After Jackson moved to the Tennessee frontier, one resident described him as a "roaring, rollicking.... horse-racing, card-playing, mischievous fellow." He became a successful lawyer, land speculator, and planter. In 1788 Jackson met Rachel Donclson Robards. who was then separated Iron) her husband. Believing Rachel's divorce had been granted, the two were Labor unions used many methods to press for reforms. A common tactic was the strike— the refusal to work until employers meet union demands. During the 1830s, workers led more than 100 strikes, mostly to protest low wages or to avoid wage reductions. Women played an important role in the early labor movement. After wages were cut in 1834. the Lowell girls went on strike, marching in the streets and shouting "Union is power." Reacting to the strike. Massachusetts legislators established a committee to investigate conditions in the textile mills. This was the first official investigation of labor conditions in the United States. Sarah Ci. Bagley, who went to work in the Lowell mills in 1836. was active in the labor movement. At first, she liked her job. In fact, in 1840 she wrote the article "Pleasures of Factory Life" for the Lowell Offering, a magazine published by women mill workers. But when mill owners sped up production without raising wages. Bagley urged co workers to form a union. In 1844 she organized the Lowell Female Labor Reform Association. As its first president, Bagley denounced labor conditions and collected more than 2.000 signatures on a petition urging the Massachusetts legislature to limit the workday to 10 hours. A Cover of the Lowell Offering, 1845 ▲ This I860 drawing accompanied an article in Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper on a shoemakers' strike in Lynn, Massachusetts. According to the paper, 800 women led a strike procession through the city's streets on March 7, 1860. After leaving the mill in 1845. Bagley traveled across New England, organizing other mill workers. Later she became the first woman telegraph operator in Lowell. Although Bagley did not win her fight to limit working hours, her efforts pointed the way for future labor organizers. Most unions excluded African American workers. Whites often refused to work with blacks, sometimes calling for laws barring African Americans from particular trades. Some African American w orkers, such as mechanics, coach drivers, and caulkers, eventually formed organizations to promote their own interests. ■ ■ During the mid-l800s, northern factory workers campaigned for better labor conditions. Growth in immigration The labor force grew considerably in the 1830s as more than 500.000 newcomers—eager for work, land, and equality- poured into the country. By I860 they numbered nearly 4.3 million—about 14 percent of the U.S. population. This increase was aided in part hy a transportation revolution in Europe Railways made it cheaper to reach major ports, and steamships reduced the time and cost of ocean travel. Irish immigrants. The largest group of immi- grants—more than 1.9 million—came from Ireland. Poverty, hunger, and mistreatment by the British had driven them from their homeland. British Protestants had seized much of Ireland's farmland hy the 1600s. forcing most of the country's mainly 258 SS CHAPTER a Roman Catholic population to rent land from Protestant landowners. As Ireland's population nearly doubled from 1780 to 1840. the available land could no longer support the growing population. The situation worsened in the mid-1840s. when disease wiped out the potato crop—the major Irish food source— two years in a row. More than a million people (out of a population of some eight million) died from starvation or disease. Most of those who could scrape together money for a steamship ticket left Ireland for the United States. Able to afford only the cheapest accommodations, these immigrants set off across the Atlantic Ocean, crammed together below deck in makeshift berths. Passenger Robert Smith described the conditions: ii Hundreds of poor people, men. women and children of all ages.... huddled together without light, without air,... sick in body, dispirited in heart,.. . living without food or medicine, except as administered by the hand of casual charity. 9 9 Most Irish immigrants had been farmers, but few could afford farmland in the United States Thus, the majority settled in crowded city slums, competing for the lowest-paying or most-dangerous jobs. Many laborers who helped build the nation's canals and railroads, mined coal, unloaded freight, and cleaned streets were Irishmen. Irishwomen cleaned the houses of the wealthy, washed and mended clothes, cared for children, and worked in factories. "You seldom see a gray-haired Irishman" became a common saying in the 19th century because the average life expectancy of Irish Americans was so short. In addition to enduring such demanding work, the Irish often faced grim living conditions. Most lived in dark, poorly ventilated tenements. Whole families crowded into single rooms, cellars. or attics. Slum streets and yards, ankle-deep in garbage and sewage, spread diseases through Irish neighborhoods. But Irish immigrants forged their own communities out of these conditions. They established hundreds of Catholic churches and created a vigorous and active parish life. The Irish also actively participated in local politics. By the 1880s Irish Americans ran the local governments of Boston. Chicago. Buffalo. Milwaukee. New York City. Philadelphia, and San Francisco. In return for votes Irish politicians helped poor and working-class Irish by providing them with emergency food and money, city jobs, and legal aid. IMMIGRATION PATTERNS Prior to 1800. most white immigrants to the United States were of English stock. This changed in the 1800s as millions ol Irish. German, and other non-English immigrants time to America. H BUILDING GRAPH SKILLS In which year did Irish immigration reach its peak? In which year did German immigration reach its peak? Between 1820 and 1860 more than five million Europeans came to the United States in search of a better life. Although most arrived in the "promised land" with high hopes, many of them soon realized that their dreams would not come true. As competition for good jobs was stiff, skilled work was often hard to find. One Scottish immigrant expressed both despair and disappointment in this new land; Wlmi ierica is no place for lawyers, weavers, or shoemakers, for everyone is a pettifoger [corrupt lawyer], a weaver or a shoemaker. For masons there is little use, for slaters [stone roofers] none. The houses are chiefly built with wood, and the roofs are shingled. Watch and clockmakers may stay at home [in Europe], for the Americans are regulated by the sun. It is no place for printers, there are but few readers.... The houses being very simply furnished, cabinet-makers are consequently not much in request. ... In short, to gain a decent livelihood, the tradesman and labourer, must be a 'Jack of all trades.' 99 German immigrants. The second-largest group of immigrants in the mid-19th century was from the then-independent states that make up pre- sent-day Germany. From 1831 to I860, more than 1.5 million Germans came to the United States. Some came for political reasons. A few thousand fled after the failed Revolution of 1848. which had tried to unify Germany. Others sought religious freedom. Most, however, came in search of economic opportunity. German industrialization had left many traditional artisans without jobs. Farmland was growing scarcer. Lacking economic opportunity at home, both groups immigrated to the United States. ■ ■ Irish and German immigrants left economic and social hardships in Europe to seek opportunities in the United States. Many German immigrants went into skilled occupations, becoming brewers, bakers, butchers, machinists, tailors, cabinetmakers, distillers, or cigar makers. Most German-born women worked at home or on the farm. Those women who sought employment outside the home tended to work in family shops or businesses that served the German immigrant community. Unlike the Irish, most 19th-century German immigrants were Protestant (especially Lutheran!. About a third were Roman Catholic, while some 250.000 were Jewish. From 1825 to 1860 the influx of German Jews increased the Jewish popu- lalion of New- York City from about 500 to around 40.(KH). Most German Jews remained on the East Coast, but other German immigrants settled in small towns and rural areas in Wisconsin. Ohm. 2"if.6*ill n < ®e Httf.nl twMi. Shim t tan* n m J' i 6*1*d1 "r tiros d This photograph shows a Pennsylvania-German birth certificate from the early 19th century. Pennsylvania. Illinois, Missouri, and Texas, and elsewhere. Those in larger cities usually lived in tightly knit German neighborhoods, complete with European-slyle beer gardens where families met to socialize. Many communities also published newspapers in German. In the mid -1850s. 56 German- language newspapers were published in the United States. And in some communities, public schools conducted classes in German rather than in English. The nativist response_______________________ Some native-born Americans were troubled by the new immigrants' customs. They disapproved of the beer gardens and the "clannishness" of the Germans. They feared the Roman Catholicism and the growing political power of the Irish. Such feeling gave rise to nalivism—the policy of favoring native-born Americans over the foreign-born. Nativists viewed the immigrants, particularly the Irish, as politically corrupt and socially inferior. Were not, they asked, most of the people in jails Irish'.' Were not parts of Philadelphia. Boston, and New York controlled by Insh gangs with names like the "Dead Rabbits"? Slum conditions rooted in joblessness and low wages were blamed on the new -comers. From the 1830s through the 1850s. anti- Catholic riots hit eastern cities such as Boston, New York, and Philadelphia. Vandalism against Catholic institutions grew so common that some insurance companies would not cover Catholic schools and churches. A Roman Catholic priest wrote in 1854 that he feared "to walk the streets after sunset": M Twice within the past month I have been stoned by young men. ... The windows of the church have frequently been broken—the panels of the church door stove [smashed] in. and last week a large rock entered my chamber unceremoniously about I I o'clock at night. 9 9 Some nativists urged limiting immigrants' rights to vote and to hold public office. Nativists wanted to limit Irish political power because they believed that the pope directed decisions for Irish Catholics. In I84ri a secret society of nativists. the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, emerged. Members swore to support only native-born Protestants for public office, to lobby for a 21-year waiting period for naturalization, and to fight the Roman Catholic church. The organization soon reformed itself as the American party. When asked about their nativist activities, party members would answer "I know nothing." They were thus dubbed fc ; rr* xjt * n 4fcs&n my A This 1844 picture shows an anti-Catholic mob battling the state militia in Philadelphia. . the Know-Nothings, and their organization was called the Know-Nothing party. The American party, with its slogan "Americans Shall Rule America." won numerous city and state elections. In the 1856 presidential election, the party ran former Whig Millard Fillmore, who had served as president from 1850 to 1853. Fillmore carried only Mary land, and the American party—though not the nativist back- lash—soon faded away. ■ ■ Nativists responded to increased German and Irish immigration with violence and demands for limits on immigrants' rights. Che middle west Many immigrants, especially Germans. Swiss, Scandinavians, and Dutch, sought opportunity in the newly prosperous Middle West. Growing northeastern factories and cities needed more farm pnxlucts. which middle western farmers began to supply. Some middle western areas developed lumbering or mining, but commercial fanning dominated most of the region. As the market revolution made many manufactured products less expensive, farm families began to purchase items they had previously made at home. For example, women stopped spinning and weaving cloth, which was cheaper to buy than to make. Most middle western communities eventually had enough settlers to attract merchants selling manufactured goods. Fann families could then buy household items and new mechanized farm machines, such as Cyrus McCormick's reaper, that increased crop yields. Mmitiferiurv, tifid Olfrr for Salt*, the UHWt Complete ami F.itimiuir uaurtrmml of to H! romro in Tin: mural states. Ainu, Hajr, Ntraw mu) Corn Niulk Cutter*, Corn Sh/iUora, Fainting Mill*. Corn and Cob Onmher*, Durr Stour Portable Grinding Milk. Seed Hownrn, Corn I'lnntnm, Hnr*n Pomvr*. Thru* horn, Carta, Cart llartH'M, Ox YuUen. Hand 0"rn Mills, Sti>*et Stt.'Miiilxiat nnd Wlmrf Trunk*. Siumr Mill*. Ac c, ▲ This advertisement from a Boston company for farm equipment and seeds appeared in 1854. With reapers and other new devices, farm families could cultivate more land with less labor. As a result, they focused on grow mg wheat or com or on raising livestock for the market. Women also began making items to sell. Farm women had long made butter and cheese for their families. Now they began making such items for sale. In Ohio, women earned so much money making butter and cheese that some farms began to specialize in dairy production. This work was handled by women who also performed other home and farm chores. An 1862 Department of Agriculture report noted that "on three farms out of four the wife works harder [aiul| endures more than any other [person] on the place." Many women took pride in their ability to contribute directly to the grow ing family income. IDENTIFY and explain the significance of the following: middle class. Lowell girls, strike, Sarah G. Bagley, nativism. Know-Nothings. 1. MAIN IDEA Identify some occupations that were considered part of the new middle class. 2. MAIN IDEA How did factory workers respond to unacceptable working conditions? 3. MAIN IDEA What kinds of restrictions did nativists try to impose on immigrants? 4. WRITING TO DESCRIBE Write an essay describing the life-style of middle-class families in the early 19th century. Include a discussion of male and female roles. 5. CONTRASTING How did life in America differ for Irish and German immigrants? 262 sS CHAPTER 8 toss 001 The crusade against alcohol Alcoholism was a serious problem in early America, and some reformers attacked excessive drinking. Concerned people organized the temperance movement to persuade others to limit alcohol consumption. Reformers blamed nearly all social ills—including mental illness, poverty, and crime—on alcohol. A popular pro-temperance novel. Ten Nights in a Bar-Room and What I Saw There (1854), which was later made into a play, echoed this sentiment. As a character observed, he "never knew a man to go to the almshouse that he hadn't rum to blame for his poverty." The national temperance movement began in the 1820s. By the mid-1830s some 5.000 state and local organizations had sprung into being. Ministers won many converts to the temperance cause. In emotional sermons, they persuaded people to give up drinking completely. According to a woman who attended an 1842 revival meeting in Maryland: 4 to Upwards of 100 gallons of spirits were poured not down people's throats but on the sand and I believe there is now none in the place. Dean and Knotts [liquor sellers] have become members of the Temperance Society and are now earnestly seeking religion. 99 ▼ The American Temperance Society was founded in 1826 with the aim of preaching the benefits of total abstinence from alcohol. Some temperance supporters, however, took more active roles by demolishing liquor stocks. ■i'.- , 1. fJtntLMl ur ft** tkn-sjk 4u*i. fts* iw ItiU* m* nrr> iM iHi"tu"l 4*11 "** 1. M*fcm"^totoi"ly 4lmtlt to** K 3 WLiv HIM *****w W**"* i^flnUnl, Ukn to mU l* to ki ImM lW"*ind Wllfr."l drunk anl* toi mm tniiff u4it " If. •• Ml Hi* Inf 4iink iiqt Ima mn; *j" M *"*■* 4b*tits* un. " U to "ukf la km ft tol*4c* r*toWr. 7 gtom <fcs" • VMftAftllft^ II. TV* iMm jiMum " to* •Vt • duluiUM U toll mI. *"4 rr- X IftMitoUaf 4*t*k" mm 4ft ft* fftftd *■ ft toiilii*, nil itwff Iff ■ •in hIH "i>I Hint *1*141— 4, TV* Mn it to fill •f 4**'. Ifti mt MtUmMm mt ftoft M**f ft **r nt *111 to **•*! y • II. fvRMil *"ll*L"i -*l"t? Itoftf sKiTMv*-. 4rlnfc h" md tor*! *Uf* to* lb* drtnktwf h"Wl k-r -■ ikr ** **■*• ft to ft TtodiMIlil ftfttod to ilwrftftftft ft It* l"*/rf t**rilM ft Ito "l**ry. Mivttr Ml *rton" In up -*b*i poverty am "n"* i" mm -ft*it ft. Halt atom ft*4 iiwrlrm ■*•*" lltft* mis HMatorvt* J*i*Ha| la li^firai ft* kmlili II InlawpiK** nMmibrS il- Ifftdii* •■|ii:r,li.n, r>t>yl"M ""4 mu iu*ftol tWnnn. ^ rf> ETter feM THE UNDERSIGNED SOLEMNLY PROMISE. *R| by the help of god, si Businesspeople became enthusiastic supporters of the temperance movement, in pari because they saw temperance as a way of creating a more disciplined work force. Temperance women linked abstaining from aleohol to presorting the family. They saw a clear link between alcohol abuse and domestic violence. African Americans, often excluded from white temperance organizations, formed their own temperance societies and spoke at rallies, African Americans tended to view temperance, like education. a\ a way to overcome prejudice and become accepted as political and social equals. Many immigrants, on the other hand, viewed the temperance movement as an attack on their customs, w hich often differed from those of native-born Protestant Americans. Most German and Irish immigrants did not view alcohol consumption as a social evil. For them, beer gardens and pubs were places where people came together to socialize. Both institutions helped German and Irish immigrants preserve their cultures in the United States. 4 As a step toward abstaining from alcohol, families were encouraged to sign temperance pledges such as the one shown here. Not all Americans supported manifest destiny. however. Some objected to expansion because the lands were already claimed by other nations. Others feared that expansion would produce a nation too large to govern. But for most Americans, particularly those facing the sometimes hitter realities of the market revolution, debates over manifest destiny were of little interest. Land and opportunity were their main concerns. U.S. settlement of foreign territory was most clearly visible in the Mexican territory of Texas. By 1815 a few hundred Americans had already crossed the Sabine and Red rivers and settled in northeastern Texas. This immigration increased after Mexico won its independence in 1821. After more than 10 years of lighting Spanish rule. Mexicans established the independent Republic of Mexico. Mexican authorities encouraged U.S. immigration toils northern territory to boost Texas's non-Indian population, which was about 4.000 in 1821. Officials hoped the non-Indian settlers would serve as a harrier between Mexico's northern settlements and Apache and Comanche raiders. The tactic was a calculated risk. Mexican officials feared that the United Slates, which had tw ice tried to purchase Texas, would one day take the territory by force. The few thousand Tejanos (tay-HAH-nohs) -native Mexicans living in Texas—stood little chance of blocking an invasion. But if Mexico could recruit enough American settlers and turn them into loyal Mexican cit- izens—something it hoped to accomplish by making them landowners—the country might build a defensive force large enough to prevent a U.S. invasion As a precaution, however, the Mexican government planned to recruit other foreign settlers to offset the American empresarios (em-pruh-SAH-ree-ohs). businesspeo- ple who agreed to recruit and take responsibility for new settlers. The empresarios attracted thousands of settlers to Texas. Though Mexico granted most empresaria contracts to Americans, it gave some to Tejanos. Martin de Leon received a contract in 1824 to settle Mexican families in Texas. He founded Victoria. Texas, as the capital of his colony. Lorenzo de Zavala, a prominent Mexican politician, received a grant in eastern Texas in 1829. but transferred the contract the next year. 5! Mexico promoted U.S. settlement in Texas to shield Mexico from Indian raids and a possible U.S. invasion. Moses Austin, a Missouri businessman hoping to rebuild his fortunes after the Panic of 1819, was the first American granted an empresario contract. In 1821 the Spanish granted Austin permission to start a colony, but he died before he could recruit any settlers. His son. Stephen F. Austin, assumed the grant and went to Texas to select a site for his colony. Recruitment proved easy, since Austin sold large lots for 12 cents an acre. (At the lime, public land in the United States sold for SI.25 an acre.) Many of the settlers were cotton farmers who brought enslaved African Americans w ith them. By 1830 Austin and the other empresarios had relocated some 7.000 Americans to Texas. presence. As an additional safeguard. Mexico did not open settlement to everyone. Instead, it gave generous land grants to A Shown here are Mary and John Rabb, two of the first settlers to receive a land grant in Stephen F. Austin's colony. By 1830. non-Mexicans outnumbered the Tejanos by about two to one. These new arrivals made little effort to learn Spanish or adapt to Mexican culture. In 1830, Mexico, fearing a rebellion in Texas as well as a U.S. invasion, closed the Texas border to further immigration from the United States and prohibited further importation of slaves to Texas. But these measures did little to slow immigration. By 183? approximately 25.000 Americans, including some 3.000 slaves, lived in Texas. Many of these immigrants had entered illegally. The recent immigrants deeply resented the 1830 measures. Slaveholders feared that Mexican authorities would soon crack down on the practice of slavery. The Mexican legislature had banned slavery in 1827. but Texans had negotiated a law to classify slaves as indentured servants. If the government overturned the law, they feared that the Texas cotton industry would collapse. In 1834 the tense situation worsened when General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna seized control of the Mexican government. Santa Anna eliminated state representation by replacing elected representatives with his own appointees. The loss of state power angered the residents of many Mexican states, including Texans. Outraged American settlers and Tejanos rose up in revolt the next year. Isolated clashes quickly grew into a full- scale rebellion known as the Texas Revolution ■ ■ Conflicts over immigration, slavery, and state power led to the Texas Revolution. R/vpf Bast row 200 Mil" 0 100 J00 Kilometers Alban ttioal Af— Protection Santa Fe aa"m*d by US-. Tcjidi. and Mexico TEXAS C OiCUJtr, The Texas Navy prevented supplies from reaching Henan troops and breed Santa Anna to take the overland route to Texas. W<nfiingt on-on the Biaios San Antonio :"nb*r 1835 7 March Alamo |836 __^ h 1836 if-—TT - -O- Austin's 1 ''Refugio Colony r March 1836 Li, the •lo-h Disputed territory 0 Texan victory 0 \ Mexican victory " Texan forces Gulf of Mexico Mexican forces The Texas Revolution LONE STAR REPUBLIC Texans wanted to become part of the United States after winning independence, but for nine years U.S. foreign policy and domestic politics prevented this. El PLACE Which city saw both Texan and Mexican victories during the Texas Revolution? In December 1835. Texas rebels captured San Antonio. Other volunteers soon joined them. Santa Anna, leading several thousand Mexican troops, arrived at San Antonio in February 1836 to restore Mexican rule. From the Alamo, a stronghold built by Spanish missionaries. 187 Texas rebel! fought off repeated attacks by Santa Anna's troops. On March 6. Mexican troops finally overran the fort, killing all 187 rebels (but sparing some TO civilians). The Mexicans paid a heavy price for their victory, though—some 1,500 casualties A few weeks later. Mexican troops defeated a Texas army near Goliad (GOH-lee-ad) and executed some 350 prisoners. The Texans, who had declared their independence on March 2. were badly shaken by these defeats. On April 21. 1836. however, a Texas army under the command of Sam Houston surprised Santa Anna near the San Jacinto River Shouting. "Remember the Alamo!," and "Remember Goliad!," the Texans lore A In this painting by William H. Huddle, Santa Anna is shown surrendering to Sam Houston. Houston, who is lying on the blanket, was wounded In the ankle at the Battle of San Jacinto. through Mexican lines, killing about 630 Mexican troops in less than 20 minutes and taking Santa Anna prisoner in the Hattie of San Jacinto With his troops already diminished and supplies low. Santa Anna agreed to remove his troops and grant Texas its independence. Texans Kt up the independent Republic of Texas, electing Sam Houston the first president and Lorenzo de Zavala the first vice president. The Mexican government refused to recognize the Republic. JLlFE IN THE REPUBLIC OF TEXAS In 1837 Sam Houston petitioned the U.S. Congress for annexation. But northern opposition to admitting another slave slate and a cautious foreign policy toward Mexico kept the U.S. Congress front granting the petition. From 1836 to 1845 Texas existed as an independent republic, known as the Lone Star Republic because its flag had a single star. French and German immigration. One of the Republic's first tasks was to bring more settlers to Texas. In 1842 the Texas congress awarded Henri Castro, a French hanker of Portuguese descent, an empresario grant in central Texas. In September 1844 Castro brought his first 35 French colonists—many of them from ihe German-speaking region of Alsace—to found the town of Castroville just west of San Antonio. In the colony's first year, more than 2,000 settlers established farms with the seeds and supplies Castro provided. The Texas government also allowed a German company to recruit settlers. In 1845 the company's agent. Prince Carl of Solms- Braunfels. and several German families founded New Braunfels in central Texas. From 1844 to 1847 the German company brought more than 7.000 German settlers to the land it called the "Paradise of North America." Following a German tradition, most families in New Braunfels had a farm outside town and a small lot and house in town. Ferdinand Roemer. a German geologist and naturalist who traveled to Texas in the 1840s. described the new colony's houses: The houses were of diverse architecture. ... Some houses were of logs, some were of studding framework filled in with brick, some were frame while others were huts.... Several families were packed into one house, no matter how small it was. The interior of such a house, where men, women, and children were cooped up with their unpacked chests and boxes, often looked like the steerage of an immigrant ship. 9 9 T The First capitol of the new Republic of Texas, shown here in 1857, was located in Houston. The capital was later moved to Austin. EXPANSION AND CONFLICT Si 309 The families did not remain crowded for long, however, since most soon moved out of town and settled on their farms. Many families kept their homes in town, but used them only when they came into town for church or shopping. German settlers spread their farming practices. language, and customs throughout the Hill Country of central Texas. German-language newspapers, church services, and social clubs helped them retain their language and customs for many generations. Discrimination against Tejanos. The Tcjanos did not fare as well as German settlers did in the Lone Star Republic. During the revolution, many Tejanos had fought and died alongside other Texans. After the revolution, however, a spirit of revenge against all Mexicans prevailed. Many Anglo Texans rushed to seize Tejano lands and property. Anglo Texans attacked some Tejanos and drove many others from the country. Juan Nepomuceno Seguin (nay-poh-moo-SAY- noh se-GEEN), a member of a prominent San Antonio family and friend of Anglo settlers, was a tragic victim of prejudice. When the Texas Revolution began. Seguin joined the fight for independence and recruited Tejanos to face Santa Anna. Alter distinguishing himself in battle, he became a captain in the Texas cavalry. Segufn escaped the slaughter at the Alamo only because he was sent through the Mexican lines in a desperate attempt to find help for the besieged rebels. He then joined Houston's army and fought bravely in the Battle of San Jacinto. Seguin served as military commander of San Antonio after the war. bringing order to San Antonio and reassurance to the threatened Tejanos. As a senator in the Texas congress and as the mayor of San Antonio. Segufn worked to improve conditions for Tejanos. "The American straggling adventur- ers," he later wrote of those early years, "were already beginning to work their dark intrigues against the native families, whose only crime was. that they owned large tracts of land and desirable property." The pressure on Seguin gradually mounted "At every hour of the day and night." he later recalled, "my countrymen ran to me for proto, tion." In 1842 Anglo pressures forced Segufn to flee to Mexico. Segufn eventually returned to Texas for a time, hut he lived out his last years in Mexico, where he died in 1890. SS After independence Tejanos faced increased discrimination and lost much of their land. ■ IDENTIFY and explain the significance of the following: manifest destiny, Tejanos. empresorios. Martin de Le6n, Lorenzo de Zavala. Stephen F. Austin. Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna. Texas Revolution. Sam Houston. Battle of San Jacinto, Henri Castro, Prince Carl of Solms-Braunfels. Juan Nepomuceno Seguin. LOCATE and explain the importance of the following: San Antonio, Goliad. 1. MAIN IDEA How did western expansionists try to gain support for their views? 2. MAIN IDEA What did the Mexican government hope to accomplish by encouraging American settlement of Texas? 3. IDENTIFYING CAUSE AND EFFECT Describe the conditions faced by Tejanos after the Texas Revolution. What caused these conditions? 4. WRITING TO INFORM Imagine you are a newspaper reporter. Write a news story giving three causes of the Texas Revolution. 5. SYNTHESIZING How did Texas's empresario policy contribute to the states cultural diversity? US. boundaries, 1853 TERRITORIAL EXPANSION Many Americans supported westward expansion, believing that more territory would help ease social and economic problems. 1 PLACE How many states were admitted to the Union between 1820 and I8S3? The treaty extended the 49th parallel boundary Irom the Rockies to Puget Sound, then through the channel around Vancouver Island to the Pacific. The treaty with Bmam settled the boundary between Maine and Canada. The treaty also adjusted the U.S. Canadian border from Maine westward to (he Lake of the Woods. k the Treaty ol Guadalupe Hidalgo, Ifenct gave up much ol its land in nnm for SIS million. Pushed by southern transcontinental railroad builders, the United Slates paid Mexico $10 million lor this land, which rounded out the boundaries ol the continental United States. 0 200 Kllomntcn After* Fttufli-ArtM Protection Acquired by Oregon Treaty Texas Annexation Mexican Cession "jt Date admitted to the Union Gadsden Purchase Acquired by Webster Ashburton Treaty By the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, Mexico gave up all claims to Texas and surrendered the vast territory known as the Mexican Cession: the present-day states of California. Nevada, and Utah, and parts of Arizona. Colorado, and New Mexico. In return, the United Stales agreed to pay Mexico S15 million and take over payment of the damages claimed by Americans against Mexico. The United States also 1 agreed to grant full citizenship to Mexicans in the Mexican Cession and to respect their religious beliefs and property rights. ''Mexico surrendered present-day California, Nevada, Utah, and parts of Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico to the United States. In 1853 U.S. diplomat James Gadsden negotiated a deal with Mexico to purchase an additional strip of land south of the Gila (HEE-luh) River (in present-day southern Arizona and New Mexico) for $10 million. With the Gadsden Purchase the United States had acquired all of Mexico's territory north of the Rio Grande. /Mexican Americans___________________ With the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, two fifths of Mexico's territory and some 80.000 Spanish- speaking people became part of the United Stales. But many of these new citizens felt, as one Mexican American explained, like "foreigners in their own land." A French artist Theodore Gentilz painted this scene of San Antonio, Texas, around 1848. The painting is entitled /nv/totion to o Ball. For some Mexican American landowners with tics to Anglo Americans, adjustments were relatively easy. Despite the guarantees of the 1848 treaty, however, most Mexican Americans lost their lands. New American settlers challenged Spanish land titles, and Mexican Americans whose families had resided in New Mexico and California for generations fought costly legal battles to defend their claims. Some former landowners became peons or took low-paying jobs in the mines or on the railroads. Many Americans looked down on the culture of the region, with its blend of Spanish and Indian ways. The resulting atmosphere of prejudice and discrimination helped spark Mexican American rebellions in the Southwest. Juan Nepomuceno Cortina, a Tejano rancher and politician, began one such rebellion in 1859. Cortina shot and wounded a Texas marshal who had been using excessive force to arrest a fellow Tejano. Cortina fled south across the Rio Grande to avoid imprisonment. There he found sympathetic supporters, whom he led in a raid across the border to avenge the murders of Mexicans by Anglos. Cortina explained: There is no need to fear. Orderly people and honest citizens are inviolable [sacred] to us in their persons and interests. Our object... has been to chastise [punish] the villainy of our enemies.... These have connived with each other_ to persecute and rob us. without any cause, and for no other crime on our part than that of being Mexican in origin. 99 Cortina continued his raids off and on into the 1870s. In response to such rebellions. Anglos in Texas and New Mexico intimidated Mexican American communities through harassment, heal- ings. and even murders. The bitterness raised by the Mexican War was slow to subside. ■ ■ After the Mexican War, many Mexican Americans lost their lands and faced violence and discrimination. IDENTIFY and explain the significance of the following: James K. Polk, Zachary Taylor. John Slidell. Mexican War. Stephen Kearny, Bear Flag Revolt, John C. Fremont, Winfield Scott. Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, Gadsden Purchase. Juan Nepomuceno Cortina. LOCATE and explain the importance of the following: Rio Grande, Nueces River. Monterrey, Chapultepec, Mexican Cession. Gila River. 1. MAIN IDEA What events led to the Mexican War? 2. MAIN IDEA What problems confronted Mexican Americans after the Mexican War? 3. GEOGRAPHY LOCATION What present-day states did the United States acquire as a result of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo and the Gadsden Purchase? 4. WRITING TO CREATE Imagine you are a Mexican cadet who fought in the siege of Chapultepec. Write a poem describing your efforts to defend the hilltop fort. 5. HYPOTHESIZING How might the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo have been different if Stephen Kearny, John Sloat, and Robert Stockton had not contributed to the war effort? ▲ Forty-niners' tents cover San Francisco's Telegraph Hill in this gold-rush-era painting. Posters such as the one above encouraged immigrants to pool their resources and try their luck in the goldfields of California. On January 24. 1848. one of Suiter's employees. James W. Marshall, detected Hakes of heavy yellow metal at the bottom of a wooden canal used to divert water from the American River. Marshall later recalled. "I reached my hand down and picked it up; it made my heart thump, for I was certain it was gold." He was right, and word of the gold strike spread quickly. Soon after the news reached San Francisco, a local newspaper complained: (( The whole country from San Francisco to Los Angeles, and from the shore to the base of the Sierra Nevada, resounds with the sordid cry of gold! Gold!! GOLD!!! while the field is left half planted, the house half built, and everything neglected but the manufacture of shovels and pickaxes. 9 9 Thai was the newspaper's last issue. Left without staff, advertisers, or subscribers, the editor suspended publication and rushed to the goldfields himself. News of the discovery reached the East Coast in September 1848. Dispatches told the exciting story of former laborers washing out $50 of gold a day with nothing but shovels and dishpans. Soon. President James Polk confirmed the accounts, and the great California gold rush w as on. By early 1849 hopeful gold seekers from as far away as Europe, Australia, and China sailed to North America to join the thousands of Americans. Mexicans, and South Americans trekking to Ik goldfields. Many of the U.S. forty-niners—so called because of the year, 1849—traveled to California through the mountain passes of the California Trail. The trail, which passed through the Salt Lake Valley, stretched almost 2.(XX) miles By the end of May 1849. more than 40,000 people had set off from Independence. Missouri, on the dangerous trip to California. Other forty-niners sailed down the eastern seaboard and around the tip of South America or to Central America, where they crossed over by land to the Pacific Ocean and sailed north to San Francisco. ■ ■By ship and covered wagon, forty-niners from all over the world rushed to California hoping to make their fortunes in gold. EZH are'a minin^ 0Wto*TW . Leading gold ----'mine J Leading supply route In 1849, San Francisco grows Irons a tillage 10 a booming port of 25,000 people. 0 JO 40Kilomrten tun*! Vh hohctK The California Qold Rush FORTY-NINERS The discovery of gold at Sutter's sawmill on the California Trail drew thousands of people from all over the world. Q PLACE Why did Sacramento and Stockton become important during the gold rush? The forty-niners______________________________ Must gold seekers were young, unmarried men— only 5 percent were women and children. The few women who went to California found a rough-and- tumble life far different from the one they left behind. Louisa Smith Clapp, who sailed to California with her husband in 1849. described the frantic atmosphere: M The news spreads that wonderful "dig- gings" have been discovered ... [men] rush vulture-like upon the scene and erect a round tent, where, in gambling, drinking, swearing and fighting, the many reproduce Pandemonium ... while a few honesdy and industriously commence digging for gold, and lo! as if a fairy's wand had been waved..., a full-grown mining town hath sprung into existence. 99 The mining camps. These mining camps, with names like Skunk Gulch. Poker Flat, and Hangtown. were dirty, disorderly, uncomfortable, and dangerous. Law enforcement officers were scarce, but there was no shortage of thieves and gamblers ready to relieve miners of their money. A prospector could easily strike it rich one day and be broke a week later. While some miners found riches beyond their w ildest dreams—one man took out a w hopping 52 pounds of gold from a single claim in just eight days—most found only disappointment. As the months went by, newcomers eager for fortunes passed disappointed forty-niners on the California Trail. Many of the latter probably felt as prospector William Swain did. After a summer of "hardship and exposure," Swain confided regretfully in a letter to his wife that "it is a fact that no energy or industry can secure certain success in the business of mining." The gold rush added to the diversity of California society. Though nearly 80 percent of the forty-niners were Anglos or African Americans from the United Stales and about 8 percent came from Mexico, others arrived from around the world: almost 5 percent from South America and most of the rest from Europe. Australia, or China. This international mix of gold seekers helped sw ell California's non-Indian population from some I4.(X)<) in 1848 lo more than 200.000 in 1852. ■ ■ Many cultures mingled and clashed in the unruly mining camps during the California gold rush. A Mining camps attracted groups of different ethnic and racial backgrounds. Miners at Auburn Ravine are shown here in 1852. Jn April 1851 Belgian ]ean-Nicolas Perlot arrived in Monterey, California, with 44 other men hired by a French gold- seeking company. Upon landing, the men discovered that during their six-month voyage from Europe the company had gone bankrupt. "There we were," Perlot wrote, "thrown on the shore like castaways, without money, without resources, in an unknown land whose language we did not understand." The group looked for work in Hornitos, a mining camp near the Yosem/te Valley. "All around... in the creeks, in the gulches, we saw nothing but people occupied in seeking this precious metal. . . " reported Perlot. "I estimate that there could have been at Hornitos from 250 to 300 persons, all men in the prime of life: I saw no women there, nor children, nor old people. In business, they spoke English and Spanish; in the street, still covered with brush, we heard all possible tongues spoken." When his prospects in California dried up, Perlot went to Oregon. There he started a business that would be more successful than his mining ventures. By relying on his skills as a gardener, he built a successful nursery and landscaping business and hired miners who had found the gold boom a bust. Conflict in the mines. Because ihey reached the goldfields early, Californios made some of the first major gold strikes, or discoveries. By late in 1849, however. Anglo American miners outnumbered all other groups and increasingly drove Californios from their claims. They posted notices declaring that "foreigners" had no right to be there and must leave the mines. These Anglo American miners ignored the fact that the Californios were not foreigners: under the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, they were citizens of the United States. Many Californios who remained in the goldfields were beaten; some were killed. The Chinese fared no better. Shortly after word of the gold rush reached China, men from Guangdong (gwahng-doohng) Province headed for California, which they called Gam Saan (Gold Mountain). Prospective Chinese miners often borrowed money at high interest rates to buy passage to California. The majority were males who hoped to strike it rich quickly and return home. But Anglo prospectors—once they had arrived in force—often took advantage of the Chinese, using them as poorly paid laborers while keeping them from staking their own claims. Many Chinese left the gold camps and returned to China. Others headed for rural areas throughout the Far West, where they became field workers or tenant farmers. Some settled in cities, where they worked as merchants, storekeepers, grocers, or unskilled laborers. By 1852 California's Chinese population numbered over 11.000. African Americans—enslaved and free alike—also suffered at the hands of the while miners. In addition to racial prejudice, black miners had to deal with the strange but widely held notion that they possessed a mysterious power to detect gold. Fearing competition, white miners tried to drive African Americans from the goldfields Battles of Alamo and San Jacinto fought. Tern declares independence. Oregon boundary dispute settled. U.S. Congress declares-- war on Mexico. Polk elected president. Gold discovered In California. Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo signed. Cayuse War begins. Treaty of Fort Laramie signed. Ir X " 1 v I T i i T i Gadsden — Purchase negotiated. 1840 1850 1855 Juan Nepomuceno Cortina begins rebellion in Texas. Writing to Persuade Imagine you are Juan Nepomuceno Seguin, mayor of San Antonio in 1842. Write a letter to Sam Houston, president of the Republic of Texas, trying to persuade him to prevent Anglo Texans from taking land and property from Tejano families. In Mountain of Cold: The Story of the Chinese in America (1967), Betty Lee Sung presents the following account of the leader of a Chinese miners' organization addressing a group of newly arrived Chinese forty- ntners. What advice and support does the leader offer the new arrivals? u When we set foot on these shores,... we were bewildered and lost. We did not know where to turn for shelter or food. Fortunately, there were enough of us so that some set to putting up these houses while others looked for food. . .. One valuable lesson we have learned and which you will soon appreciate is that we must stick together and help one another, even though nr are not kin. That is why we have formed this organization. . .. You will always find food and shelter here among us. Any needed supplies can be purchased from the shops on IChinese / street. No doubt you will want to send a letter home to let your families know of your safe arrival. Cider brother Leong is a learned man, and he will help you write your letters. When you have earned money from your diggings or from your wages, you will pay dues into the company fund. This fund helps us to maintain the company headquarters and helps us set up an orderly system to lake care of our own. 99 Study the map on page 313. Then write a paragraph summarizing the general strategy of American forces in the Mexican War and the way the strategy was affected by geography. American soldier, 1846 Mexican soldier, 1839 Complete the following projects independently or cooperatively. I. EXPANSION In Chapter 7 you wrote an article about U.S. expansionist policies. Building on that material, now imagine you are a U.S. government representative in Texas. Interview a Tejano. a Mexican government official, and an Anglo settler to obtain their views about U.S. annexation of Texas. 7. IMMIGRATION In chapters 8 and 9 you portrayed an immigrant Building on that material, now imagine you are a Chinese immigrant working in the goldfields. Write four diary entries that describe your reasons for coming to the United States, your life in a multicultural mining camp, and your hopes for the future. >Vsr food and doth, but few southerners believed slaves would work without constant supervision. The exemptions caused much resentment in Null the North and the South. In the North, poor whites, many of them recent immigrants, rioted in protest. Draft riots did not break out in the South, but many whites openly criticized the draft, claiming it proved the conflict was a "rich man's war and a poor man's light.'' But resisting the war was not typical of either side. Estimates of how many men fought for the North vary because many men enlisted more than once. The U.S. government places the official wartime enlistment in the Union army at 2.672.341. with another 105,963 men enlisted in the navy or marines. Of the army's total, the government holds thai some 180.000 enlistees were African Americans (of whom some 7.000 were noncommis- sioned officers and about 100 were commissioned officers) and that 3.530 were American Indians. Estimates of the number of Confederate enlistments stir even greater debate, but probably some 750.000 men enlisted in the Confederate army. Included in this number arc some 5,500 Cherokees. Creeks. Chickasaw s, and Choctaws, many of them slaveholders lured by the promise of an all-Indian state following the war. Mexican Americans farm New Mexico and Texas fought on both sides during the war. ■■Both sides relied on volunteers and draftees to fight the war. Most soldiers were poor farmers and laborers. Women and thewar___________________ Women in the North and in the South threw themselves into the war effort. Some women even dressed like men so that they could light. Cuban- bum Lorela Janela Velazquez (vay-tAHS-kays) disguised herself as a man and enlisted in the j Confederate army. When she was found out for the third time and discharged, she became a spy for l the South. A few other women also served as spies Rose O'Neal Greenhow was imprisoned by the North for supplying information to the Confederacy. Elizabeth Bowser, a maid in Confederate president Jefferson Davis's home, and Hamel Tubman both supplied information to the Union from behind enemy lines. ▲ African American soldiers joined the Union cause in order to "assert their claim to freedom." Recruitment posters often were directed specifically to African Americans. The banner of the Third United States Colored Troops (bottom left) contains the slogan "Rather die Freeman than Live to be Slaves." (Image of soldier is detailed from the original photograph.) Many more women served in medical roles. The first group of women to volunteer for medical duty were Catholic nuns, who transformed their convents into emergency hospitals throughout the North and South. Most of these neutral "nuns of the battlefield" were Irish or German immigrants. They treated all victims of the war, becoming the only group recognized by both Union and Confederate forces. In the North. Elizabeth Blackwell, America's first professionally licensed female doctor, helped run the U.S. Sanitary Commission. The commission worked to battle the diseases and infections that killed twice as many soldiers as bullets alone. Approximately 3,000 women served in the Union army as nurses. Some, like Clara Barton, ministered to the wounded on the battlefield. After the war. Barton founded the American Red Cross, which today serves disaster victims and others in need of assistance all over the world. Who moved to the West? Migration westward after the Civil War differed from earlier migrations. The U.S. government now played a more active role in encouraging westward migration. The methods of transportation differed as well. Unlike earlier western settlers who traveled in large groups by covered wagon, these later migrants journeyed by themselves or with their families on the newly built railroads. The train rides to the West were quicker, safer, and more Changing the transcontinental railroad Wags In the mid-1800s chere was no easy way to get from the East Coast to the West Coast. Both the overland journey from New York to San Francisco and the boat trip around the tip of South America could last several months. To help open up the West to settlers, Congress passed the Pacific Railway Act in 1862. The act awarded contracts to build a transcontinental railroad to two companies: the Central Pacific Railroad and the Union Pacific Railroad. The track had to be laid across some 1.500 miles of wilderness—over and through mountains and across steep ravines. The Central Pacific would lay track eastward from Sacramento. California, over the towering Sierra Nevada. The Union Pacific would work westward from Omaha. Nebraska, and cross the rugged Rockies. To encourage the companies to take on the overwhelming job, the federal government gave them land. The project soon became a contest of which company would lay more track. The railroad companies recruited thousands of workers for the backbreaking and often perilous work. Work crews competed against nature as well as each other as they blasted, shoveled, and pickaxed their way across the North American continent- During the frigid winters huge snowdrifts and avalanches blocked mountain passes. Some laborers died doing the dangerous blasting work. Railway gangs also faced attacks by Plains Indians, who attempted to prevent the invasion of their hunting grounds by "the wagons which make a noise." Most of the Union Pacific's 10,000 workers were Irish immigrants. After the Civil War, veterans from both sides, many still wearing remnants of their uniforms, also signed on. The Central Pacific's slightly larger work force consisted mostly of Chinese laborers. One observer called the sound of the crews' progress "a grand Anvil Chorus ... playing across the plains and mountains, in triple time: three strokes to the spike: ten spikes to the rail; 400 rails to the mile." After seven years of exhausting labor, the railroad crews met at Promontory. Utah, on May 10, 1869. Railroad officials, political dignitaries, infantry soldiers, and proud workers looked on as the last railroad tie—made of laurel wood, a symbol of victory in a contest of strength—was slipped into place. Leland Stanford, the president of the Central Pacific and former governor of California, then drove a golden spike to complete the railroad. The telegraph built alongside the tracks flashed the news from coast to coast that East and West were permanently linked. 4 Laborers from different ethnic backgrounds helped build the transcontinental railroad. This 1886 photograph shows members of a Northern Pacific Railroad crew. A Free black settlers moved west to escape persecution and violence in the South. The Shores family lived in Custer County, Nebraska, when this photograph was taken in the late 1880s. comfortable than the journeys on the Oregon Trail had been. Economic motives, the search for racial tolerance, and the promise of a better life drew three main groups of people to the West: (1) white Americans from the Hast; (2) African Americans from the South; and (3) immigrants from Europe and Asia. White newcomers came from more-settled areas of the United States. Because of the high cost of transporting supplies, it was mainly mid- dle-class farmers and businesspeople who could afford to move to the W'est. New England farmers went west searching for more-fertile soil. Civil War veterans, especially those from the South, came to make a new start. The majority of white settlers, however, moved from states in the Mississippi Valley, where populations were growing rapidly. A Nebraska settler explained simply: "lam well satisfied that I can do better here than lean in Illinois." For African Americans, moving west had a I special appeal. In the South, blacks faced violence I and persecution after the withdrawal of federal I troops at the end of Reconstruction. African Amencan settlers w ho ventured onto the Plains in the 1870s sent letters to their friends and families, urging them to move west. Often these letters were read aloud in black churches. Kansas, where John Brown had first fought igainst slavery, especially appealed to African American settlers. The biggest rush of black settlers occurred during the Kansas Fever Exodus of 1879. From 20.000 to 40.000 African Americans fled the South, where violence had broken out during elections in 1878. Seeking economic and political freedom, these black settlers, known as Exodusters, trekked west. With the help of established black settlers, the poor and ill-equipped Exodusters eventually settled some 20.000 acres. European immigrants also flocked to the western United States. "America Fever" infected thousands of Norwegians, Swedes, and Danes. In 1882 alone more than 100.000 left their homes for the American West. Ln addition, many Irish who had helped build the railroads and a great number of Germans who had settled in the Mississippi Valley decided to move to the Plains. These Europeans were joined by Mennonites, Protestant pacifists who fled persecution in Russia. Their experience in farming wheat on the Russian steppes, or grasslands, was especially useful on the Great Plains. Many of the Chinese immigrants who had come to California during the gold rush of 1849 had also turned to farming by 1880. In California alone some 3.200 Chinese raised crops in 1880. Throughout the West, many Chinese immigrants ▲ Shown here is a Chinese agricultural worker tending an irrigation ditch in a California orchard. worked as farm laborers, sharecroppers, or produce vendors. Some owned large farms. In 1870 a Chinese farmer in Sacramento County. California, earned $9,500 from farming—an enormous profit for the time. ■ ■ Farmers moved onto the Great Plains for a variety of motives, but the main incentive was readily available land. Western environments_________________ Although some 80 million acres of public land in the (Jrcat Plains were homesteaded between 1862 and 1900. the settlers did not immediately create a prosperous region. Though the land was free, supplies and transportation were expensive. In addition, the environments of the Southwest, the Far West, and the Great Plains posed problems for farmers. In the Southwest and the Far West, the new settlers had to learn irrigation techniques. To carve out farms from the Great Plains, the settlers relied on their resourcefulness, government support. innovative farming practices, and new technologies. In parts of the Southwest. Hispanic and American Indian farmers had developed effective irrigation systems that used canals, sloping fields, and dams to control water flow. They had also established farms that fanned out in thin strips from water sources so that all community residents had access to water. The new settlers had to adopt these methods to surv ive. The Great Plains also had few water sources In addition, trees that could provide fuel or building materials were scarce. The climate was also difficult: bitterly cold in the winter, blazing hot in the summer, and w indy much of the time. Plains farmers w orked out clever solutions to some of these problems. To cope with the lack of wood, for instance, they built houses and bams of sod chunks cut from the prairie and stacked like bricks. A few scarce pieces of wood formed the roof, topped off w ith a layer of sod. Building with sod was difficult, however. Wrote a Kansas settler in 1877: "The sod is heavy and when you lake 3 or 4 bricks on a litter or hand barrow, and cam it 50 to 150 feet. 1 tell you it is no easy work." Nor was it pleasant to live with the insects that dwelled in the sod. The U.S. Department of Agriculture, created in 1862. helped farmers adapt to the Plains environment. Department experts sought out and publicized new varieties of wheat suitable for the Great Plains environment. (The cold winters of the northern Plains could not support traditional w inter wheail These new wheat crops, along with the weeds introduced with the wheat seeds, soon replaced the grasses that had once covered the Great Plains. Department of Agriculture agents also taught dry farming techniques, planting and harvesting ▼ Between 1830 and 1910 some 90 percent of alt pioneers west of the Missouri River lived in sod houses. Shown here is the Scott family, photographed outside their Nebraska home in 1889. Because ranches were lar apart, loneliness Kxik its toll. Susan Newcomb, a Texas ranch wife, described the loneliness of ranch life: M A man that is cowhunting with a lively crowd has no idea how long and lonesome the time passes with his wife at home.... A man can see his friends, hear the news and pass time .... while his wife is at home and sees and hears nothing until he returns from a long trip tired and worn out. 9 9 A Vaqueros of California Roping Horses in a Corral is the title of this 1877 painting by James Walker. Ranch children often look on adult responsibilities at a young age. In addition to doing chores around the house, some children, both boys and girls, broke horses and herded cattle. Many enjoyed the freedom, though. Raila Banta. who spent her childhood on a Texas ranch, remembered. "When we returned home in the evening we enjoyed telling where we had been, to what creek, up what branch and what we had seen." Others hated the boredom. John Norton, a young cowboy, noted that he and his brother "leaped with joy" when the cattle they were herding were finally shipped for slaughter. Ranch life centered on the roundup. Each spring and fall, ranchers, with the help of hired cowboys, drove their cattle from the open range to some central spot. Here cowboys from each ranch "cutout." or separated, the cattle, identified by each [inch's distinctive brand. The cattle would then be rounded up for the long drive to a railhead. Later, books, movies, and radio and television programs romanticized the life of the cowboys. Actually, their life was difficult: they worked hard in all kinds of weather and made little money. The long drives also kept them away from their families for long periods. Most cowboys worked the range for col) about seven years before feev settled down in towns or B farms. ► Ex-slave Nat Love, also toown as Dead wood Dick, (filmed to have carried the mirks of 14 bullet wounds on his body, "any one of which would wflicient to kill I ordinary man." Many of the white cowboys were Confederate veterans of the Civil War. About a third of the some 35,000 cowboys were African American, Mexican, or Mexican American. Some of the African American cowboys had been brought west as slaves before the Civil War. With their experience handling longhorns, they got jobs as ranch hands after emancipation. Other black cowboys moved west after the war. In an era when most African Americans faced harsh segregation, life for a black cowboy was relatively free of discrimination. He worked, bunked, and ate alongside fellow cowboys and received the same wages they did. Long before ihe days of ihe cattle boom. Mexican vaqueros had developed many ranching practices. In ihe 1880s most Mexican and Mexican American cowboys worked on South and West Texas ranches. They were often sons of ranchers or farmers, and sometimes owned their own ranches. Although they were paid higher wages and treated better than those who handled menial ranch jobs. Mexican cowboys faced discrimination. Many Anglo ranchers considered them inferior to Anglo cowboys. Mexican cowboys were not allowed to supervise non-Mexicans, and they worked and lived separately from Anglo cowboys. ■ ■ Ranch life was difficult for cowboys, who worked long hours outdoors in all kinds of weather. Ihe end of the cattle boom The cattle boom lasted only about 20 years. Several factors led to its early end. First, ranchers eager to make large profits filled the open range with too many cattle. This led to overgrazing, which damaged the grasslands. The vast herds also :: 447 fe.vv-'-' ▲ Barbed wire not only helped cattlemen protect their land, but also kept homesteaders away from valuable sources of water. This I88S photograph shows a group of homesteaders cutting down wire fences. increased ihe supply of beef, driving down prices—and profits. Prices crashed in 1885. as supply far exceeded demand. Second, open-range ranching declined after ihe invention of barbed wire. Joseph Glidden patented this cheap method of fencing in 1874. By the 1880s farmers and cattle ranchers had erected miles of spiky networks across the open range to control access to land and water. As overgrazing thinned the grass cover, cattle needed access to more pasture lands to survive. But fencing limited the amount of open land available. Bad weather dealt the final blow. On the southern Plains a severe winter in 1885-86 and a drought in 1886 diminished many herds. The following year, terrible blizzards struck the northern Plains. When cowboys could finally venture out of their hunkhouses. they found the remains of thousands of starved and frozen cattle. Ranchers suffered devastating losses, some losing as much as 90 percent of their herds. ■ ■ Boom times for cattle ranchers came to an end because of over* grazing, fencing of the open range, and bad weather. By the 1890s ihe open-range cattle hoom was over. Some of the big corporations went broke. With the end of the open range, ranchers had to buy their own range kind. They also had to invest more in their operations. Learning from the blizzards of the mid-1880s. they began to raise hay to feed to their cattle during the harsh winters. Sheep ranching expanded, since sheep could survive on ihe weeds that replaced the native grasses. The long drives ended, and the cattle towns settled down. So did many of the cowboys. A popular song of the time ended with these words: " Good-by. old trail boss, I wish you no harm; I'm quirtin' this business to go on the farm. I'll sell my old saddle and buy me a plow; And never, no. never will I rope another cow. 99 IDENTIFY and explain the significance of the following: Texas longhorn, long drives, railhead, open range, Basques. Joseph Glidden. LOCATE and explain the importance of the following: Abilene, Kansas; Dodge City, Kansas; Cheyenne, Wyoming; Ogallala. Nebraska. 1. MAIN IDEA What factors allowed cattle ranching to be so profitable during the boom period! 2. MAIN IDEA What was cowboy life like? 3. MAIN IDEA What factors caused the decline of the cattle boom in the West in the late 19th century? 4. WRITING TO INFORM Imagine you grew up on a cattle ranch in the 1890s. Write a brief narrative about the joys and difficulties of ranch life. 5. SYNTHESIZING What contributions did the Spanish and Basques make to cattle and sheep ranching? Section 4 ■ Where did important mining discoveries take place in the late 1800s? ■ How did early mining camps differ from more-developed mining towns? ■ Why did mining become big business? t ver since the forty-niners had flocked to California after the discovery of gold in the Sierra Nevada, miners from all over the world had been drawn to the American West. After the richest California diggings were claimed, hundreds of forty-niners moved eastward and northward into the Rockies and beyond. A few individuals prospered from new mineral discoveries. But large mining companies reaped the greatest profits. Western mining The first promising mining discoveries after the California gold rush were made in Colorado. Prospectors found gold near Pikes Peak late in 1858. By early 1859 thousands of people flocked to Colorado. Many of them, however, left in disappointment by midsummer. Another center of frantic prospecting in 1859 was the Carson River Valley in present-day Nevada. In addition to gold, the area contained the famous Comstock Lode, one of the world's richest siher veins. Over 20 years its mines yielded more than S500 million worth of precious metals. Some miners turned south into Arizona, where Hispanics had been mining silver since the mid- 1700s. Hispanics introduced mining methods that hail been developed in Mexico and South icrica. These included a mill for separating gold from quartz and the patio process—which used mercury to extract silver from the ore. The newer arrivals used these methods to mine the Comstock Lode and in the region around Tucson. Others, trekking northward, made strikes in Idaho and Montana. By the late 1850s others had pushed even farther north, into the Fraser River Valley of British Columbia. This movement into Canada had important consequences for Russia and the United States. Russia, which at the time owned Alaska, feared a territorial dispute with the United States. To avoid this, the Russians offered to sell Alaska to the Americans. U.S. Secretary of State William H. Seward negotiated the purchase of Alaska in 1867 for $7.200,000—about two cents an acre. Many Americans considered Alaska worthless, calling the purchase "Seward's Folly." VANCOUVltl tSlAHO | Chicago iladelphia ^Virginia City £ Canon City merrto ■ .Oenvei leadvil Vfipple Creek region Or learn June! OCtAN Gulf of Mexico Mining equipment The Mining tfoom BONANZAS! Some present-day U.S. cities—such as Boulder. Colorado, and Canon City, Nevada— started out as mining camps. Other camps, such as Virginia Gty. Nevada, turned into ghost towns when mining was no longer profitable. PLACE In what kind of terrain were most of the gold or silver strikes made? But Seward's confidence that Alaska "pos- sesses treasures . . . equal to those of any other region of the continent" w'ould prove correct. In 1896. prospectors discovered gold in the Klondike district of Canada's Yukon Territory, which bordered Alaska. This discovery launched the Klondike Gold Rush. By the summer of 1897, Yukon miners had extracted gold deposits worth more than a million dollars. From 1897 to 1899 almost 100.000 people traveled through Alaska to seek their fortunes in the Klondike. Gold discoveries in Alaska in 1898 and 1902 attracted settlers, who later established fish canneries, lumber companies, and coal and copper mining enterprises. ■ ■ Mining booms attracted prospectors to present-day Colorado, Nevada, Arizona, Idaho, Montana, and Alaska. jCife in mining communities Mining camps grew up almost overnight wherever news of possible wealth brought prospectors together. Most mining communities started out inhabited almost entirely by men. Unlike ranching or farming, prospecting generally was not a family enterprise. Mining camps drew a wide range of settlers In the mining zones of southern California in the 1860s. Mexicans. Californios. Chileans, and Peruvians formed their own separate settlements In other mining regions, the sometimes uneasy mixture of prospectors included U.S. citizens from all parts of the country. Irish and Chinese men who had come to work on the railroads, and miners from the Cornwall region of F.nglan<l Some were drawn by the lure of quick wealth; others were fleeing difficult circumstances. A The lure of gold and silver drew many men and eventually families to the mining camps of the West. This photograph of a mining family in Colorado was taken in the late 19th century. At first, life in the mining camps was crude and:comforts were few. J. Ross Browne described the first shelters of Virginia City. Nevada: u Frame shanties, pitched together as if by accident; tents of canvas, of blankets, of brush, of potato sacks and old shirts, with empty whisky-barrels for chimneys; smoky hovels of mud and stone; coyote holes in the mountain side forcibly seized and held by men. 9 9 Moreover, the atmosphere in most camps was one of intense competition. Prospector William Parsons remembered a... a mad, furious race for wealth, in which men lost their identity almost, and coiled and wrestled, and lived a fierce, riotous, wearing, fearfully excited life; forgetting home and kindred; abandoning old. steady habits. 9 9 Competition sometimes led to violence in the mining camps. Conflicts arose between different ethnic groups. Miners in the Cripple Creek camp m Colorado forcibly excluded eastern and southern Europeans as well as Hispanics. In other camps. Cornish miners fought with Irish, German, and Chinese miners. Gamblers and swindlers sw armed in. unit conflicts over claims set off brawls and Sunlights. The mining town of Deadwood in South Dakota gained a reputation as an especially rough Mn. An outlaw's haven, Deadwood became the final resting place til lawman Wild Bill Hickok, shot dead as he played cards. But stability eventually came to the mining camps as they grew into towns. Mining towns attracted a host of businesses eager to feed and clothe the miners. In fact, owners of saloons and stores were more apt to strike it rich than miners. Cooking, cleaning, and providing lodging were especially lucrative. One industrious woman "eamt . . . nine hundred dollars in nine weeks, clear of all expenses, by washing!" Elizabeth Collins, who later became known as the "cattle queen of Montana." was offered a job as cook for 18 men at a Montana mining camp. She later wrote: "Prompted by kindness and a desire to see these hardworking men as comfortable as possible—also craving for the $75 per month—1 promptly accepted the offer." The few children in the camps had unique roles. They hunted for gold dust and stray nuggets under sidewalks or panned and scavenged for gold dust after the miners were done for the day. Much more profitable, however, was selling fresh food to the miners, who quickly grew tired of eating canned food. One brother and sister made $800 one summer selling butter and bacon to the miners. As more families moved into the camps, many settlements turned into permanent communities. With prosperity came law' and order and the establishment of schools, hospitals, churches, newspapers, and even debating societies and singing clubs. Denver and Boulder. Colorado: Carson City, Nevada; Boise, Idaho; and Helena, Montana all started out as mining camps. ■ ■At first, mining camps were crude and often violent. With prosperity, however, came families, community life, and law and order. i EU'lkK | 1 a E VLj % Ij* ▲ As settlement grew in the West, so did the need for schools. Blanche Lamont posed with members of her school at Hecla, Montana, in October 1893. : r: Fantastic stories about the untamed western lands of the United States could be heard far from America's shores in the late 1800s. Fascination with outlaw gangs, shoot-outs, and man-eating wild animals lured many European travelers to America to see for themselves. But the "Wild West" rarely lived up to its reputation. Windham T. Dunraven, a British earl, wrote about what he did not find in the American West: •J never have an adventure worth a cent; nobody ever scalps me; / don't get 'jumped' by highwaymen. It never occurs to a bear to hug me, and my very appearance inspires feelings of dismay or disgust in the breast of the puma or mountain lion. It is true that I have often been horribly frightened, but generally without any adequate cause. 99 /Wining as big business___________________ Individual prospectors roaming the West with their pack horses and hand tools made the earliest mining discoveries, or strikes. But the day of the lone miner did not last long. Within a few years after a strike, most of the easily accessible mineral deposits were "worked out." To get at the hidden ore. miners had to use one of two methods: (1) hydraulic mining, which used water pressure to wash away mountains of gravel and expose the minerals underneath: or (2) hard-rock mining, which involved sinking deep shafts to get at ore locked in veins of quartz. Both of these methods required considerable sums of money—far beyond the resources of individual prospectors. Thus mining became the province of large, well-financed companies. These companies relied on science rather than on instinct or luck. Corps of college-educated engineers helped locate the ore and instructed the companies on how' best to extract the minerals in demand by eastern factories—zinc, lead, copper, and iron. The federal government also helped develop mineral resources. It sent out several western expeditions in the 1860s. In 1879 the government organized the U.S. Geological Survey, which gathered and coordinated data about new' mines. :: As mineral deposits became harder and more expensive to locate and extract, big business dominated mining. Big mining companies also changed working conditions in the mines. The big companies used new* machinery and hired armies of laborers to carry out the dirty, dangerous work. These laborers sank the shafts, built the tunnels, drilled, and processed the ore. Miners, no longer spurred on by the hope of sudden riches, grew dissatisfied with wages and working conditions. In some communities miners formed unions. Dues paid to the unions often helped workers injured in the dangerous mines or assisted the families of miners killed on the job. Unions also negotiated with or fought against owners who tried lo cut wages. Many also fought against the hiring of Chinese miners, who received lower wages. I nion resistance to wage cuts proved most effective during boom times. In the early 1880s. union miners at the Comstock Lode successfully maintained their four-dollar-a-day salaries and eight-hour workdays. ▼ New mining techniques removed ore quickly from the ground, but also eroded entire hillsides. Chapter 15 New technologies and new forms of business organization helped usher in a second industrial age in late—19th- century America. Millions of immigrants came to the United States in this period, lured by the prospect of work. By 1900 these developments had transformed the United States into an urban nation and an industrial power. How might technological change affect a nation's economy? SOCIETY What role might technology play in social change? What challenges might an influx of people with different ways of life present to a community? 1867 Christopher Sholes invents typewriter. 1865-1910 Alexander Graham Frank W; Woolworth Congress passes Bell patents founds first of his Chinese Exclusion telephone. chain stores. Act. Industrialization and immigration helped fuel the growth of the United States in the first half of the 1800s. However, the United States remained primarily a rural nation whose people continued to depend on agriculture for a living. n 1 n the second half of the 1800s. the United Slates underwent another wave of industrialization. To many this process seemed almost a natural outcome of American life. "The American mechanizes as an old Greek sculptured, as the Venetian painted," the London Times noted in 1878. A debate quickly developed, however, over whether the negative side effects of industrialization—such as grinding poverty existing side-by-side with great wealth—were natural outcomes as well. Critical of the new industrial order, economist Henry George condemned the growing contrast "between the House of Have and the House of Want." He argued that the poor should not have to suffer so that a few could be rich. Yale professor William Graham Sumner took the opposite view, claiming that the rich and the poor were just where nature intended and that any change would slow progress and harm society. Not all industrialists agreed with Sumner. Some proposed that they use part of their wealth to benefit all of society. But social reformer Frederic Howe argued that if industrialists really had the well-being of society at heart, they "would stop the twelve-hour day . . . increase wages and put an end to the cruel killing and maiming" of workers. Although this debate produced no solid answers about how to reconcile the existence of poverty in the midst of great wealth, it did lead to efforts to reform the worst abuses of the industrial order. The Edison phonograph Section 2 ■ How did immigration change in the late 1800s? ■ What institutions helped new immigrants adapt to American life? ■ Why did some native-born Americans object to the new immigrants? q immigration is one of the dynamic forces that has shaped the United States. Immigrants fleeing persecution or poverty or seeking a better life had founded the first colonies, and immigrants had continually added to the country's population. As the 19th century drew to a close, a wave of new immigrants came to America's shores in search of opportunity. Handbill supporting immigration. 1909 From 1800 to 1880 more than 10 million immigrants came to the United States. Often called die old immigrants, many of them were Protestants from northwestern Europe—Great Britain. Ireland. Germany, and the Scandinavian countries. Then, a new wave of immigrants swept over the United States. In less than two decades, between 1891 and 1910, some 12 million immigrants came to the United States. The increase was so great that by the early 1900s. about 60 percent of the people living in the nation's 12 largest cities either were foreign-born or had foreign-born parents. About 70 percent of these new immigrants were from southern or eastern Europe. They wot Italians, Greeks, Poles, Czechs. Slovaks, Hungarians, and Russians. In contrast to the old immigrants, most new immigrants were Catholic. Jewish, or Greek Orthodox. French Canadians, Armenians, Arabs. Chinese, and Japanese also arrived by the thousands. "■Immigration soared in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Most new immigrants were southern or eastern Europeans. Like the old immigrants, many new immigrants came to the United States to escape povotj or persecution. Most of the Italian and Slavic immigrants were male and sought economic This immigrant mother and her children arrived at Ellis Island, New York, around 1910. in the poorest accommodations, called steerage. One Italian immigrant asked: 1860-1900 Source: Hitforico/ SloUsIkrj of Ok United States COMING TO AMERICA Immigration increased during (he late 19th century, mainly due to an influx of people from southern and eastern Europe. H BUILDING GRAPH SKILLS What was the ire rage number of immigrants arriving in the United States from 1870 to 1900' opportunities in the United States that were scarce in their home countries. Most hoped to make ctHHtgh money in the United States to return home and buy land. Many did just that. Others, however, put down roots and stayed. The eastern European immigrants included Hungarian and Polish farmers and Jews Imm many countries. Most of the Jew ish families and Armenian families fled their homelands to escape religious or political persecution. Many immigrants learned of the opportunities available in the United States from railroad and steamship companies. In fact, convincing foreigners that the United States was the land of opportunity became a major business activity in the late 1800s. The agents of steamship companies ind railroads swarmed over Europe, one observer anted, "as the locusts covered Egypt!" They painted a tempting—and often false—picture of America. Some railroad companies exaggerated the employment opportunities available in the United States. And the steamship lines charged rod-bottom fares to attract passengers. Most of the millions who yielded to this hard sell found the journey to the "Promised Land" difficult and dangerous. The ocean voyage, though faster, safer, and more comfortable than in the past, was no pleasure trip for those traveling How can a steerage passenger remember that he is a human being when he must first pick the worms from his food ... and eat in his stuffy, stinking bunk, or in the hot and fetid atmosphere of a compartment where 150 men sleep? 9 9 As with earlier immigrants, the vast majority of newcomers did not find paradise at the end of the voyage. Confined to dingy slums, they worked at menial jobs for low- wages. Taken advantage of and harassed by some native-born Americans, newcomers often expressed disappointment. Reports about America, a Polish immigrant complained, were "all bluster | with| not a word of truth." Others, however, saw the United States as a great improvement over their home countries. Immigrant communities. Many industrial cities of the Northeast and Midwest became a patchwork of ethnic neighborhoods as new immigrants settled among others from their homelands. Social reformer Jacob Riis (himself an immigrant from Denmark) suggested that an 1890s map of New York City, colored according to nationality, "would show more stripes than ... a zebra, and more colors than any rainbow." A The store signs in this 1910 photograph of a New York neighborhood reflect the ethnic diversity of the city. THE TRANSFORMATION Of AMERICA SS 467 Changing COMING TO AMERICA Wags Ellis Island in New York Harbor or Angel Island in San Francisco Bay was the first sight of America for millions of newcomers in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Both islands served as immigration stations during this period. Ellis Island opened in 1892 to receive record numbers of European immigrants. Like many other immigrants. Italian Edward Corsi arrived full of hope: 44 My first impressions of the new world will always remain etched in my memory, particularly that hazy October morning when I first saw Ellis Island.... All of us ... clustered on the foredeck for fear of separation and looked with wonder on this miraculous land of our dreams. Passengers all about us were crowding against the rail. Jabbered conversation, sharp cries, laughs and cheers—a steadily rising din filled the air. Mothers and fathers lifted up the babies so that they too could see, off to the left, the Statue of Liberty. 9 ? For most immigrants, however, these first feelings of joy were dampened by the confusion of the examination process. With thousands of newcomers arriving daily— many of whom spoke no English—processing at Ellis was hurried at best, impersonal and frightful at worst. Amid the noise and bustle, overworked officials sometimes misunderstood and changed immigrants' names: for example, Gardashian became Arness, and Mastroianni became Mister Yanni, ▲ After it opened on January 21, 1910, Angel Island served as an immigration station on the West Coast. All newcomers who passed through Ellis were subjected to a physical exam. Those who had serious health problems, mental disorders, or contagious diseases like tuberculosis were deported. Those who passed the physicals entered a maze of crowded aisles where inspectors questioned them about their backgrounds, relatives, and job skills. Those with prison records, or without means to support themselves in America, were sent back. Buc the vast majority— about 99 percent in 1905—were allowed to stay. Thousands of Asian newcomers. mostly from China, underwent similar processing on Angel Island, which opened in 1910. But many were not as fortunate as their Ellis Island counterparts. Chinese applicants faced strict immigration laws, which limited entrance to certain groups—such as students, teachers, and mer- chants—or to individuals who could show they were the children of American-born parents. Some who could not meet the restrictions were deported. Others were detained on the island—some for months or even years—as they awaited a determination in their cases. Some, while imprisoned there, carved poems into the barracks' walls recording their despair: 44 Who would have expected joy to become sorrow: Detained in a dark, crude, filthy room? What can I do? Cruel treatment, not one restful breath of air. Scarcity of food, severe restrictions—all unbearable. Here even a proud man bows his head low. 99 But for most immigrants, the anxiety they experienced on the islands soon gave way to a renewed sense of hope as they finally set foot on their adopted homeland to begin a new life. 468 !• CHAPTER is powerful political party leaders. Bosses headed big-city political machines—party organizations that used patronage, or appointments to government jobs, to control elections. Machine politicians often welcomed immigrants at dockside or at railroad stations, ready to offer assistance. One observer described a boss's methods: M To this one he lends a dollar, for another he obtains a railroad ticket without payment: he has coal distributed in the depth of winter:... he sometimes sends poultry at Christmas time; he buys medicine for a sick person: he helps bury the dead. 99 Of course, the bosses expected something in return for their help—the immigrants' votes. Getting party candidates elected allowed bosses to control local government. Once in power, most bosses used any means necessary—the rigging of elections, bribery, even violence—to keep it. Many also ransacked city treasuries, lining their own and their friends' pockets. ■ ■Ethnic neighborhoods, foreign- language newspapers, benevolent societies, and political machines helped immigrants adapt to American life. Political bosses urged new immigrants to adopt American ways. However, the Americanization process often pitted parents against children. Many older immigrants cherished their lies to the old country. Children, however, tended to view their parents' old-world language, dress, and customs as old-fashioned. A second- generation Polish immigrant expressed bittersweet feelings about his parents' way of life. It was, he process began soon after they arrived in the United States. This photograph shows the children's playground at Ellis Island. s: 469 A Jewish immigrants strived to maintain their religious heritage after arriving in the United States. By studying the Torah, boys learned the ancient wisdom and laws of Jewish Scripture. In these close-knit neighborhoods, residents spoke the same languages and followed the customs of the old country. Neighborhood churches and synagogues helped immigrants maintain a sense of identity and belonging. Foreign-language papers, too. eased immigrants' transition. In the early 1900s. more than 1.000 foreign-language papers were printed in the United Stales. The largest, with a peak circulation of 175.000 a day. was the Jewish Daily Forward. Published in Yiddish—a German dialect spoken by eastern European Jews—it primarily served New York's Jewish community. Most cities also had benevolent societies, or support organizations, to aid newcomers. Some organizations offered new immigrants loans to start businesses. Others set up insurance plans that provided money for families whose breadwinners were sick or had died. "We visit our sick and bury uur dead" was one society's slogan. Aid from politicians. Newly arrived immigrants also received help from political bosses— For immigrant children, the Americanization UmucasA* VAvWCv. noted, "a slowly decaying world of aged folks living largely in a dream. One day it would pass and then there would remain only Americans whose forebears had once been Poles." The immigrant worker. Whether they adapted to American ways or remained lied to the old world, new immigrants had a common work experience. Many did the country's "dirty work"— or. as one observer put it. "the shoveling." Certain ethnic groups gravitated toward certain jobs, mainly because earlier arrivals had established themselves in those lines of work. For example, many Italian and Polish men worked in the building trades. Eastern European men worked in mines or steel mills. French Canadians worked in New England textile mills. Many Jewish men and women and Italian women worked in the garment industry. Most Greeks and Chinese opened businesses such as laundries and restaurants, largely because discrimination closed off other opportunities. Whatever they did. most immigrants found working life hard. The work itself was physically exhausting, hours were long, and wages low. Contract laborers—who, in return for passage to the United Slates, worked for a set period—were virtual prisoners of their employers. These workers. mostly young women laboring in the sweatshops of New York's garment industry, were literally locked in until diey had finished the day's required work. Some immigrants worked as many as 15 hours a day to earn a living wage. Even the best-paid workers made little more than enough to support themselves and their families. Che nativist response While most immigrant workers enjoyed few of the rewards of their labor, they helped staff the factories that were responsible for the vibrant U.S. economy. Yet many native-born Americans saw immigration as a threat. They agreed with Thomas Bailey Aldrich, who in his poem "The Unguarded Gales" warned against a "wild motley throng" bringing "unknown gods ant! rites" and speaking "accents of menace." Many felt that these newcomers were just too different ever to lit in. Others went further, blaming immigrants for all society's ills. Nativisis also opposed immigration for economic reasons. Many charged that the immigrants' willingness to work cheaply robbed native-born Americans of jobs and pushed dow n w ages for all. With the support of labor unions, nativist workers began pressing for restrictions on immigration. They gained the most supporters and achieved the most success in the West. For years Chinese laborers had been toler- ated—and exploited—on the West Coast, especially in California. But as unemployment mounted during the Panic of 1873. the new Workingmen's Party of California angrily cried, "The Chinese must go." Party leader Dennis Kearney, who was himself an Irish immigrant, addressed crowds all over the state, working them into a frenzy. White mobs attacked the Chinese, killing some and burning the property of others. Leaders of California's Chinese community appealed to the authorities for protection. But help was not forthcoming. In fact, the state's political leaders responded by amending the state constitution to forbid Chinese residents to own property nt work at certain jobs. ► Chinese immigrants formed their own communities and businesses after arriving in the United States. These two photographs are of San Francisco's Chinatown district. Then in 1882 the U.S. Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act. which denied citizenship to people horn in China and prohibited the immigration of Chinese laborers. This act made conditions worse for the Chinese in America. In 1885 a mob in Rock Springs. Wyoming Territory, murdered 28 Chinese and drove away hundreds more. Neither the act nor the violence kept Chinese immigrants from coming to the United Slates. After 1906. some men—dubbed "paper sons" by the Chinese—entered the country by falsely claiming to be sons of Chinese American citizens. Immigration authorities could not disprove many of the claims because the 1906 San Francisco earthquake and fire had destroyed most of the Chinese community's birth records. But even with the proper documents, Chinese arriving in the United Stales were held for months while their cases were investigated. One immigrant wrote this poem on the wall of his cell: a The day I am rid of this prison and attain success. I must remember that this prison once existed. ... All my compatriots [fellow citizens] please be mindful. Once you have some small gains, return home [to China] early. 9 9 Other immigrants faced discrimination as organizations took up the anti-immigration banner. The Immigration Restriction League, founded in 1894 by a group of well-to-do Bostonians, sought to impose a literacy test on all immigrants. Congress passed such a measure, but President Grover Cleveland vetoed it in 1897, calling it ▲ This 1870 cartoon appeared in Harper's Weekly and satirizes the nativist reaction to Chinese immigration. A wall surrounds the United States that prevents immigrants from entering the country. "illiberal, narrow, and un-American." Over the next 30 years, however. Congress tried several times— without success—to pass a similar measure. Despite efforts to impose restrictions, immigration continued. Contrary to nativists' arguments, the new immigrants contributed to American society. America's rapid industrialization would have been impossible without immigrant workers. Their varied cultures, too. added new dimensions to American life. ■ ■Prejudice and fear prompted nativists to try to restrict immigration. IDENTIFY and explain the significance of the following: old immigrants, new immigrants, benevolent societies, bosses, political machines, Chinese Exclusion Act, paper sons. Immigration Restriction League. 1. MAIN IDEA What changes occurred in immigration in the late 1800s? 2. MAIN IDEA What helped ease the new immigrants' adjustment to American life? 3. ANALYZING Why did nativists oppose the new immigrants? How did nativists demonstrate their bias against the new immigrants? 4. WRITING TO EXPLAIN Imagine you are a Chinese American citizen in 1906. Write a letter to a relative explaining how paper sons were able to come to the United States. 5. EVALUATING How were the new immigrants affected by new legislation? business created a whole new range of jobs, such as stenographer, salesclerk, and secretary. Business owners increasingly hired young, single middle- class women to fill these positions, paying them lower wages than men. As a result, by 1910 nearly 35 percent of the more than 1.9 million clerical workers were women. However, most married middle-class women worked at home. Smaller families, greater reliance on purchased goods, and new household technology such as running water, water closets, and home canning changed middle-class women's domestic- work. For example, ready-made clothing lightened the sewing loads of many middle-class women. The advent of hot and cold running water meant that doing laundry no longer required pumping, hauling, and heating the water. Some middle-class families could also afford to hire servants to handle many household chores. In such families, women had more free time to take part in the city's growing number of cultural events. Many women joined leading and social clubs. Others participated in and led the reform movements of the late 1800s and early l9(K)s (see Chapter 17). How the poor lived. The servants who toiled in middle-class homes and the workers who labored in factories lived worlds away from the comfort of the middle class or the luxury of the wealthy. To make ends meet, working-class families often had to rent out parts of their homes or tiny apartments to boarders. The dark, airless tenement buildings sometimes housed as many as 12 families per floor. Jacob Riis described a tenement family of "honest, hard-working Germans": fi All nine lived in two rooms, one about ten feet square that served as parlor, bedroom, and eating room, the other a small hall room made into a kitchen. The rent was .. more than a week's wages for the husband and father.... That day the mother had thrown herself out of the win- dow____She was "discouraged," said some of the other women. 99 In New York City, a magnet for hundreds of thousands of immigrants and migrants from the countryside, some 43.000 tenement buildings housed mute than 1.6 million poor people in 19(X)—nearly one half of the city's population. ▲ Crowded tenements, such as these lining Hester Street in New York City, sprang up as urban populations swelled. Outside the tenements, raw sewage and piles of garbage fouled unpaved streets and alleys. Worse still, the slums usually adjoined industrial areas where factories belched pollution. "The stink is enough to knock you down." one New York resident complained. In such an environment, sickness and death were common. In some cities respiratory diseases like tuberculosis spread rapidly through lightly packed slums, killing many residents. While the conditions faced by residents of poor neighborhoods were far from pleasant, those who experienced the greatest difficulties were African Americans. Because of widespread discrimination, most of them could get only poor-paying jobs. Moreover, African Americans had to pay outrageous rents for the most appalling apartments, and they frequently faced police harassment. Yet many preferred the North to the South. As one African American journalist explained: 44 They sleep in peace at night; what they earn is paid them, if not they can appeal to the courts. They vote without fear of the shot-gun. and their children go to school. 9 9 ■ ■ The rich lived in grand style; the middle class in respectable comfort. But many city dwellers faced grinding poverty. : 475 CiHE late 19th century was a period of massive population shifts for the United States. Between 1860 and 1910 some 23 million immigrants crossed the Atlantic and Pacific oceans to reach America. Many of these immigrants joined the migration across country as millions of people settled the American West. This westward migration was aided by railroad lines and improved systems of communication. These means of transportation and communication linked numerous western cities together, forming the basis of a modem transcontinental economy. Conquering Distance Overseas 1860-1910 Other 28% \ _ Ruiua ( Balnct 10% ■ Italy 13% Ireland 10% Great Britain 12% C ompared to European immigrant, immigrants from Asia had to travel twice os far to reach the United States. The vast majority of Chinese immigrants m the late 19th century came from the province of Guangdong. Although most initially settled along the Paafic coast, particularly in the San Francisco area, some eventuaty journeyed across the United States. In 1870 a Massachusetts foctory owner began to recruit Chinese laborers from California to take the place of striking workers. As this practice caught on. more Chinese Californians made the trek to the east coast Today the thriving Chinatowns of Boston, New York, and San Francisco are all the results of the 19th century journeys from Guangdong. Jrom Across the pacific to the Atlantic Coast H foONG / Canton T? Hong*' Kong San franutco _San Irancnu fJO Urn ol CAv-~ 'Ini ol CA BestoICA 66% 1870 Ini ol CA ^totrtw to** CTY J.US'AH-ES Non rod California 77 y'/C V All fl other \ / / Honk1 areai Atlantic 482 ■■ unit s Conquering Distance Across the West CVttH Wn :t Smith claimed by Tfcxas /SHAWNf? Houston*. Portland Oes Maine Nt ;aCH |,1 K* ^ ^SQrmhi XlV CEDi * yv; "?rjoiiw sXL; ■■■■ | I Railroad p**~j Cattle trail | | Other trail Area settled by 1890 t ■| Ethnic settlement area P*** Indian reservation 400 Kilomrtrrs As the railroads and western population increased, many small towns grew into thriving cities within a few short years. Many followed the pattern of Omaha, Nebraska. The small settlement of Omaha, which was o popular stopping point for settlers headed to Colorado, officially become a town in 185 7. After the first tracks of the Union Pacific Railroad were laid there in 1865. Omaha's population soared. Located in the heart of cattle country, the city developed a thriving meat- processing industry in the 1880s. This new industry attracted many settlers, particularly poor immigrants from southern and central Europe. I860 H I nr | tILMO iouI 1870 m j ] 991.000 total 1880 M-liL.il 1.801,000 total 3,134.800 total 4,309,000 total H* Foreign born [ ns. j % Native born 7,081000 total Workers who lived in a company town, a town where a company owned the housing and the businesses, faced special problems. These workers usually received their wages in scrip—paper money that could be used only to pay rent to the company or to buy goods at company stores. Prices at company stores were usually much higher than at regular stores, and workers often spent whole paychecks on necessities like food and clothing. ■■ For most industrial laborers, working life meant long hours of toil for little pay and few benefits. The knights of labor___________________________ As conditions worsened, workers clamored for change. They knew that alone they could do little. Bunt they handed together, the factory owners, the politicians, and the capitalists on New York's Wall Street would have to listen. Workers formed a number of local unions in the first half of the 1800s. but after 1850. organizing efforts went national. One of the earliest national unions was the Knights of Labor, founded in 1869 by nine Philadelphia garment workers led by Uriah ▼ Terence V. Powderly is shown here surrounded by other influential leaders of the Knights of Labor. Stephens. 11 remained largely a w hite male organization until 1879. when Terence V. Powderly, an Irish Catholic machinist and mayor of Scranton, Pennsylvania, became its leader. Under his leadership the Knights' membership mushroomed. Powderly wanted the Knights of Labor to attract workers who were often excluded from other unions. He therefore opened the union's doors to both skilled and unskilled laborers. He also welcomed thousands of women into the union's ranks. A number of women, such as Mary Harris Jones, played prominent roles in the Knights of Labor. Born in Cork. Ireland, in 1830, Mary Harris came to the United States as a young child. She married George Jones, a union supporter, in 1861. Widowed six years later, she devoted herself to the labor movement. In the 1870s, at the invitation of Powderly, she became an organizer for the Knights of Labor. Declaring that her place was "wherever there is a fight," she organized strikes, marches, and demonstrations. Her activities canted her the title "the most dangerous woman in America." But because she looked more motherly than radical, most people called her Mother Jones. Jones was sentenced to 20 years in jail for her part in a 1912 West Virginia strike, but a public- outcry caused the governor of the stale to free her. Mother Jones continued fighting for the rights of America's working people until her death, at age 100. in 1930. Powderly also opened the union to African Americans. By the mid-1880s the Knights claimed some 60.1KK) black members. At the Knights' 1886 national convention in Richmond. Virginia, African American delegate Frank Ferrell told the crowd: One of the objects of our Order is the abolition of these distinctions which are maintained by creed or color.... My experience ... [has] taught me that we have worked so far successfully toward the extinction of these regrettable distinctions. 9 9 :3 Not all African American Knights, however, agreed with Ferrell's assessment. "The white Knights of Labor prevent me from getting employ- mem because I am a colored man." complained a mason from North Carolina, "although I belong to the same organization." Still, the Knights did more than other early unions to try to meet the needs of African American workers. The Knights were not equality-minded w hen it came to every one, however. Although Powderly welcomed some European immigrants to the union, he. like many working-class Americans, actively opposed Chinese workers, claiming they stole jobs from white Americans. At his urging, for instance. West Coast branches of the Knights of Labor vigorously campaigned for passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act. Powderly led the Knights of Labor for 15 years. Under his leadership, the union fought for temperance, the eight-hour workday, equal pay for equal work, and an end to child labor. By 1886. the union boasted a membership of more than 700.000. The great upheaval________________ The Knights' phenomenal growth was due in part to the great railroad strike of 1877 and to a successful strike that the Knights had launched against railroad baron Jay Gould in 1884. Both strikes made T Printed in both English and German, posters asked workingmen to "appear in full force" at Chicago's Haymarket Square on May 3, 1886, to protest the killing of two strikers. When an unknown person threw a bornb, violence quickly erupted. workers more willing lo press for the better working conditions being championed by the Knights. In 1886. as the nation entered a year of intense strikes and violent labor confrontations that would become known as the Great Upheaval, the Knights were riding the crest of immense popularity. By 1886, American workers were primed for action. An economic depression in the early 1880s had led to massive wage cuts. Workers needed—and demanded—relief. When negotiations with management failed, many workers took direct action. By the end of 1886. some 1.500 strikes, involving more than 400.000 workers, had swept the nation. Many of these strikes turned violent, as angry strikers clashed head-on with their employers and the police. Perhaps the most notorious of these confrontations was the Haymarket Riot. The seeds for the Haymarket Riot were sown when some 40,000 Chicago workers struck on May 1. 18X6. The strike was launched by the local craft unions, hut it soon fell under the leadership of a group of political radicals and anarchists i people who oppose all forms of government). On May 3 a confrontation between the police and the strikers picketing the McCormick harvester plant left two strikers dead. In protest, the strikers called a meeting for the next day in Chicago's Haymarket Square. Peaceful and sparsely attended, the rally was about to break up when nearly 200 police officers appeared. Suddenly a bornb exploded in the midst of the police. The police responded with gunfire. When the smoke cleared, more than 70 people lay wounded. The day's rioting also resulted in the deaths of seven police officers and one civilian. The police arrested eight well- known anarchists—only one of whom had attended the meeting—charging them with incitement to murder. AH eight k Standard Oil's practice of swallowing up independent oil companies is sharply criticized in this editorial cartoon. as a writer. By ihe I X4()s she was writing a popular biographical series for McClure's. In 1900 the magazine's reform-minded founder. Scotcll-lrish immigrant S. S. McClure, assigned her to investigate Standard Oil. "Out with sou Look, see. report," he urged. "Don't do it." warned her lather, knowing too well the power of Standard Oil to punish its enemies. But she went ahead, publishing her findings in a series of 18 articles. Month after month she attacked Standard Oil's business practices: M One of the most depressing features ... is that instead of such methods arousing contempt, they are more or less openly admired.., . There is no gaming table in the world where loaded dice are tolerated, no athletic field where men must not start fair. Yet Mr. Rockefeller has systematically played with loaded dice.... Business played in this way loses all its sportsmanlike qualities. It is fit only for tricksters. 9 9 McClure's readers shared Tarbell's outrage, hailing her as "a modern Joan of Arc" and "the Terror of the Trusts." One reader even called her senes "the Uncle Tom j Cabin of today." Later. Rockefeller biographer Allan Nevins would call it "the most spectacular success of the muckraking | school of journalism, and its most enduring I Khicvcmcnt." Meanwhile, muckraking books poured off the j presses. In The Octopus (1901) Frank Norris etposed the ways in which railroads misused their vast power. Lincoln Steffens continued to document political corruption in urban America in The Shame of the Cities (1904). Jack London wrote The Iron Heel (1907) to w arn that bloody revolution might result if something was not done to curb capitalism's abuses. Only a few progressives, however, concerned themselves with racial justice. One who did was Ray Stannard Baker. Baker traveled around the nation in 1904. examining the plight of African Americans. He found that African Americans were segregated, routinely robbed of their right to vote, and otherwise discriminated against. Worst of all, lynchings still took place. In Follow inf' the Color Line (1908), Baker described a lynching in Springfield, Ohio: The worst feature of all in this Springfield lynching was the apathy of the public. No one really seemed to care. A "nigger" had been hanged: what of it? But the law itself had been lynched. What of that?... If ever there was an example of good citizenship lying flat on its back ..., Springfield furnished an example of that condition. 99 5 a Muckrakers exposed political and corporate corruption, difficult working conditions, crowded slums, and racial injustice. (exploring social Like [he muckraking journalists. novelists and intellectuals explored the darker side of the new industrial order's effect on people's behavior and values. Theodore Dreiser, in novels such as Sister Carrie ( 1900) and The Financier (1912). ▲ Slum life was a frequent target of muckrakers. This 1910 photograph shows a Jewish immigrant in the home he has made in a coal cellar. _ ■4 AFL seal, about 1890 closed simp—a workplace where the employer hires only union members. Most union members favored "working within the system." They wanted to change how workers were treated, but they did not want to threaten capitalism's very existence. Some union members wanted to replace capitalism with an economic system that workers controlled. Many in this group favored socialism, the system under which the government or worker cooperatives. not private interests, own factories, utilities, and transportation and communications systems. The AFL. The major labor organization in these years remained the American Federation of Labor (AFL). The AFL stood Firmly for working within the system. Under Samuel Gompers' leadership. AFL membership grew from some 500.000 in 1900 to about 2 million in 1914. But the AFL excluded most unskilled workers—the majority of whom were Eastern European immigrants or African Americans. This left most urban workers without organized support. regressive reformers won shorter workdays, better working conditions, and other improvements for many U.S. workers. But such changes were unknown to the immigrants who crossed the border from Mexico to work the railroads, mines, and fields of the southwestern United States. These immigrant workers experienced both poor working conditions and prejudice. In 1910 the Mexican newspaper Diario del Hogar wondered what drove "our workingmen, so attached to the land, to abandon the country [Mexico], even at the risk of the Yankee contempt with which they are treated on the other side of the Bravo [Rio Grande]." Indeed, some Mexican laborers were assaulted or lynched. Venustiano Carranza, Mexico's president from 1917 to 1920, claimed that 114 Mexicans had been murdered across the border. One AFL union that Uu ' did try to assist unskilled workers was the International Ladies' Garment Workers Union (1LGWU). Established in 1900 in New York City, it sought In unionize workers—mainly Jew ish and Italian immi- grani women—employed in sewing shops like the Triangle Shirtwaist Company. In order to organize workers, union leaders generally planned a strike to establish the union's power to negotiate for workers. The International Ladies' Garment Workers Union used this tactic in November 1909 when it staged the "Uprising of the Thirty Thousand." Thousands of women garment workers heeded the union's call and walked off their jobs to demand that their companies recognize the 1LGWU as their union. The strike lasted through the bitter winter. Hard-pressed strikers received generous aid from progressive groups such as the Women's Trade Union League, an organization of well-to-do women w ho supported the efforts of working women to form unions. The strike's results were mixed. Most employers agreed to many of the ILGWUS demands. The employers, however, were determined to run open shops—or nonunion workplaces. Thus, they refused to recognize the union—the ILGWU's most important demand. The IWW. While Gompers and his AFL trade unions negotiated w ith business owners for worker gains, a new' union emerged with a different agenda. The Industrial Workers of the World (IWW). founded in Chicago in 1905. opposed capitalism. Its leader, "Big Bill" Haywood, proclaimed IWW's aim. Referring to the Continental Congress that had declared Amencan independence, Haywood asserted: M Fellow workers, this is the continental congress of the working class. We are here to confederate the workers of this country into a working-class movement that shall have for its purpose the emancipation of the working class from the slave bondage of capitalism. 9 9 blacks. One of its chief goals was to help African American migrants from the South adjust to life in northern cities. Today the National Urban League carries on its efforts to end racial discrimination and to aid the disadvantaged. The NAACP and the National Urban League made possible some important gains for black citizens. Nevertheless, most African Americans still faced discrimination and denial of equal rights. The long struggle to eliminate racism continued. 55 Black leaders and organizations such as the NAACP and the National Urban League fought for racial justice. But racism continued to haunt American life. American Indian progressives. Most Indian rights advocates initially supported the Dawes Act of 1887 (see Chapter 14). which encouraged American Indians to abandon reservation life and become private landowners. By the early 20th century, however, it was clear that this policy had led mans Indians to lose their property to land speculators and fall deeper into poverty. Thus, many progressives argued for a more gradual approach: slowing down land allotment and maintaining the reservation system for a time. In 1911 a group of 50 American Indians, most of them middle-class professional men and women, formed the Society of American Indians to address the problems facing Indians. One of its members. Seneca historian Arthur C. Parker, urged Indians "to strike out into the duties of modern life and . . . find every right that had escaped them before." While some members supported strengthening tribal values, most favored complete assimilation. The Society publicized the accomplishments of famous Indians such as Olympic gold medalist Jim Thorpe and lobbied against the use of such derogatory terms as "buck" and "squaw." They also discussed ways to improve Indian health, education, civil rights, and local government. But the Society's moderate positions on most issues led to disputes among members, thus weakening the organization. One member. Dr. Carlos Montezuma, a Yavapai-Apache. urged the Society to criticize the Bureau of Indian Affairs for mismanaging ▲ As a founder of the Society of American Indians, Gertrude S. Bonnin fought to protect Indians in Oklahoma from exploitation. There, land speculators used every possible tactic to secure oil leases to valuable Indian property. reservations. Most Society members refused to take such a strong antigovemment stand, and the group's influence dwindled after 1923. While the Society did not last long, it provided a forum for Indian leaders and a basis for later attempts to improve conditions for Indians. 55 The Society of American Indians worked to improve the image of American Indians and to solve the problems they faced. Immigrants and assimilation For immigrants the Progressive movement also had mixed results. On the one hand, many reformers sympathized with the plight of the newcontcn crowded into urban factories and tenements. These reformers lobbied for laws to improve immigrants' lives and to belter conditions in the workplace and in city slums. At the same time, progressives criticized immigrants, accusing them of immoral behavior— of drinking, gambling, and other vices. They also denounced immigrant support for big-city political machines. As a result, some native-born Americans with progressive ideals also favored restricting immigration. Madison Grant was a case in point In 19lb Grant, a prominent New' Yorker, published The Passing of the Great Hare. In this b*x>k he expressed racist opinions about African Americans. Jews, and immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. Yet Grant was also a progressive who supported urban planning and other reforms. Many progressives believed immigrants should be "Americanized" as quickly as possible. Americanizing, though, often meant trying to reshape them in the mold of the native-born Protestant majority. Russian immigrant Eugene Lyons described the effects of this process in Assignment in Utopia: U We sensed a disrespect for the alien traditions in our homes and came unconsciously to resent and despise those traditions ... because they seemed [impossible] barriers between ourselves and the adopted land. 99 A In 1890 Arnold Genthe photographed this Chinese immigrant family on an outing in San Francisco. Not all progressives viewed immigrants with suspicion, however. Some, like Jane Addams, welcomed the diverse culture that immigrant groups were helping to create. The philosopher Horace Kallen in his 1924 book on culture and democracy also envisioned a nation that would be home to a number of distinctive cultures. In addition, the immigrant poor and the political bosses who represented them supported middle-class progressives when they fought for practical reforms such as worker protection and public-health programs. On such issues the big- city political machines sometimes played a key role. For example, a New York State legislative committee set up to investigate factory conditions after the Triangle lire won strong backing from New York City's immigrant-based democratic machine. ■ 5 Immigrants supported progressive reformers on practical health and welfare issues. IDENTIFY and explain the significance of the following: Lawrence Veiller, Woman's Christian Temperance Union, Frances Willard, Eighteenth Amendment, W.E.B. Du Bois, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. Society of American Indians. 1. MAIN IDEA What approach did progressives use to clean up American cities? 2. MAIN IDEA How did reformers attempt to improve American morality? 3. MAIN IDEA How did African Americans and Native Americans attempt to fight racism and discrimination? 4. WRITING TO EXPLAIN Imagine you are an immigrant. Write a brief pamphlet for other immigrants that attempts to explain why you do or do not support the Progressive movement. 5. ANALYZING Why did progressives support prohibition and the elimination of saloons? troops left. But a U.S. presence remained at the naval base at Guantanamo Bay. which was leased in 1903. Over the next three decades, the United Stales intervened in Cuba several times. It pressured Cuba into accepting policies favorable to U.S. investors and sent in troops when it decided that the Cuban government could not keep order. The Platt Amendment remained in force until 1934, when America renounced its right to intervene in Cuba. Even then, however. U.S. influence over Cuban affairs remained great. For Puerto Rico, U.S. policy followed a different course. No Teller Amendment guaranteed independence for Puerto Rico, so the United States ruled the island as a territory like Samoa or the Philippines in the Pacific. But just how these new territories were to be governed raised a thorny legal question for the United States. Were the people of these territories entitled to all the rights of U.S. citizens? No, ruled the Supreme Court in 1901. The Court argued that the new territories were not fully part of the United States. Therefore, Congress could choose which rights to extend them. The Court affirmed the Foraker Act of 1900. which called for Puerto Rico's governor and upper house of the legislature to be appointed by the United Slates and a lower house to be elected by Puerto Ricans. The Jones Act of 1917 made Puerto Ricans American citizens and gave them the right to elect both houses of their legislature. In 1952 Puerto ▲ After Puerto Rico became a U.S. territory, the government built new public schools such as the one shown here. ► The Panama Canal was built by the United States between 1904 and 1914. Shown here are laborers who helped construct the canal. Rico became a self-governing commonwealth of the United States, which retains ties of citizenship and trade with the mainland. ■ ■ After the Spanish-American War, the United States retained a strong influence in Cuba, and Puerto Rico became a U.S. territory. *lHE PANAMA CANAL_____________________ With such vital interests in both the Caribbean and the Pacific, the United Slates looked for a way too# the travel time between the seas. The long and hazardous voyage around Cape Horn ai the southern lip of South America took several weeks. In response the United States proposed digging a canal through a narrow neck of land in Central America to allow the U.S. Navy to police both seas. Early steps toward a canal. The idea for such a canal was not new. As far back as 1517, Vasco Nunez de Balboa had proposed that a canal be dug across the 50-mile-wide Isthmus of Panama. In 1850 the United States and Great Britain had drawn up the Clayton-Buiwer Treaty, proposing an equal partnership to build and run a Central American canal, but they never acted on it. In the 1880s a French company actually worked on a canal across the Isthmus. But after less than 10 years and the loss of some 20,000 lives and more than $280 million, the French abandoned the effort. Deadly tropica) diseases, repealed landslides, and bankruptcy killed the project. Finally, in 1901 President Theodore Roosevelt decided that "after four centuries of conversation" by other countries, it was time for the United States to act. He instructed Secretary of State John Hay to negotiate with Great Bnlam western front. From 1915 to the sprint: of 1917, both armies launched offensives that gained them a few miles of territory, which more often than not they quickly lost. As the months passed, many people wondered whether the fighting would ever stop. They began to suggest that only the intervention of the United Slates could bring the war to an end. American neutrality____________________ At the outbreak of the war. most Americans had expressed surprise and horror. After the initial shock, however, Americans tended to look on the war as a faraway conflict that did not involve the United States. As one American diplomat wrote: "Again and ever 1 thank Heaven for the Atlantic Ocean." Not surprisingly, then. President Wilson received strong support when he announced a policy of neutrality. All Americans, he urged, ought to he "neutral in fact as well as in name ... impartial in thought as well as action." Wilson thought that by taking a neutral stance, the United States might help to negotiate a settlement to the conflict. He pursued this goal throughout 1915 and 1916. but without success. As the war dragged on, most Americans remained neutral in action, hut few could claim to he impartial in thought. Some 28 million Americans—almost 30 percent of the population— were immigrants or the children of immigrants. Many men and women of German. Austrian, Hungarian, or Turkish background sympathized with the Central Powers. So did many Irish Americans anxious to free Ireland from Great Britain's rule. Most Americans, however, backed the Allies. Tics of ancestry, language, and culture bound many Americans to Britain. Strong, long-established links to France also existed. After all. the French had I helped Americans w in their War of Independence. I The British also bolstered American support for the I Allies through a skillful propaganda campaign. I which painted Germans as brutal warmongers. Iii The U.S. government remained neutral, but most Americans— because of ancestral ties or national sympathies—favored one side or the other. Challenges to American neutrality. Despite its policy of neutrality, the United States could not remain untouched by the war. When the war began, the British navy blockaded the German coast and planted explosive mines across the North Sea. The British even stopped American ships hound for ports in neutral countries and examined cargos—including the mail—for goods that might ultimately be destined for Germany. The United States protested, charging that British actions violated American neutrality. American hostility toward Great Britain faded, however, in the face of German submarine, or U-boat, warfare. Early in 1915 the Germans established a "war zone" around Great Britain. Any ships entering this zone, even those from neutral nations, were liable to U-boat attack. In response, Wilson warned that the United States would, in accordance with international laws of neutrality, bold Germany accountable for any injury to American tives or property on the high seas. On March 28. 1915. a U-boat sank a British liner in the Irish Sea. killing more than 100 people. including an American. While the United States debated its response, a far more serious incident occurred. On May 7. 1915. a U-boat patrolling off the Irish coast torpedoed the British passenger liner Lusitania. The dead included 128 Americans. The New York Herald accused the Germans of "piracy on the high seas," and the New York Times called the Germans "savages drenched with blood," Outraged Americans agreed. German leaders justified their actions, declaring that they had placed advertisements in U.S. newspapers warning Americans against sailing into the war zone. They also charged that the Lusitania was carrying ► The Luiitonio's 1915 voyage announcement carried a warning from the German Embassy against Atlantic sea travel. Born in Missoula, Montana, in 18X0. Rankin was a committed pacifist, social worker, and leader of the women's suffrage movement. In 1916 she became the first woman elected to Congress, and in 1918 she played a key role in the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment. However, with Allied victory only days away. Rankin lost her bid for a Senate seat in the November 1918 elections. Elected to the House again in 1940. Rankin continued to speak out against the draft and military spending, casting the only vole against the United States' entry into World War II. That vote cost her reelection in 1942. She did not give up her pacifism, however. In January 1968, at age 87. Rankin led a march on Washington, D.C., to protest the Vietnam War. /Mobilizing American In his war message on April 2. President Wilson pledged all the nation's "material resources" to the Allied war effort. But what the Allies most I urgently needed were fresh troops. Few Amer- I icans. however, rushed to volunteer for military I service. On May 18. 1917, Congress responded by passing the Selective Service Act. which required I men between ages 21 and 30 to register with local I draft boards. (The age range was later changed to 18-43.) By the end of the war. some 24 million men had registered, and some 2.8 million had I been drafted. In fact, more than half of the almost 4.8 million Americans who served in the armed forces were draftees. Many who supported conscription argued 11 that the draft would help build a more democratic I America by bringing together soldiers from different backgrounds. In reality. Native Americans, African Americans, Mexican Americans, and I many foreign-born soldiers faced discrimination. Most foreign-born soldiers, for example, were assigned to segregated units where they were taught civics and English. Congress did. however, offer citizenship to the some 10.000 Native Americans who served during the war. The more than 370.000 African American recruits experienced particularly harsh discrimination. They were blocked from service in the marines and limited to kitchen duties in the navy. Most African Americans in the army were confined to all-black support units commanded by white officers. And African American draftees sent to army training camps in the South often faced harassment from local whites. Pressure from the NAACP and other African American organizations convinced the army to open up more opportunities for black soldiers. A school was established to train African American officers, and more blacks were assigned combat duty. The army, however, made no effort to integrate blacks and w bites in the same units. ■ ■The United States instituted the draft to bring the armed services up to full force. A Approximately 1,400 African American officers served during World War I. This officer was stationed in Saint-Dizier, France. A merican /betters ■Lhe Spanish—American War As a result of the Spanish-American War. the United States won territories in the Caribbean and the Pacific. In the following selections. Cuban poet and essayist Jose Marti. Puerto Rican poet Lola Rodriguez de Tib. an anonymous Mexican American poet, and American writers Mark Twain and Edgar Lee Masters explore the meaning of the war for the Caribbean and the United States. A Lola Rodriguez de Tio Diary Entry by Jose Marti [April 25, 1895.] Day of combat. Straight through the woods we are drawing close, already in the claws of Guantanamo--The breast swells with fond reverence and overpowering affection at the sight of the vast landscape of the loved river. We cross it, near a ceiba tree, and after greeting a patriot family, overjoyed to see us. we enter the open wood, with sweet sun. rain-washed leaves. As over a carpet go our horses, so thick is the grass. All is garland and leaf, and through the openings, to the right, the green of the cleared fields is visible on the other bank, sheltered and compact. ... Here as everywhere I am touched by the affection with which we are received, and the unity of soul which will not be allowed to coalesce [grow together], and which will not be recognized, and which will be overridden, harming, at least with the harm of delay, the Revolution in the impulse of its first year. The spirit I sowed, is that which has borne fruit, and that of the Island, and with it, and guiding ourselves by it, we will soon triumph, and with a better victory and for a better peace. "J* Awake from your sleep for it's time to fight! Come! The sound of cannon will be dear to us. At that patriotic clamor doesn't your heart burn? Look! The Cuban will soon be free, the machete will give him freedom. The drum of war announces in its beating that the thicket is the place, the meeting place! Most beautiful Borinquen, we have to follow Cuba; you have brave sons who want to fight! Let us no more seem fearful! Let us no more, timid, permit our enslavement! We want to be free already and our machete is well sharpened! Why should we, then, remain so asleep and deaf, asleep and deaf to that signal? ▼ General Toro/ surrenders the city of Santiago to General Shaftner in 1898. 'The Song of tforinquen by Lola Rodriguez de Tio Awake. Borinquenos,1 for they've given the signal! 614 rS unit 6 _____________________________________________ There's no need to fear, Ricans, the sound of cannon, for saving the homeland is the duty of the heart! We want no more despots! Let the tyrant fall! Women, likewise wild, will know how to fight! We want freedom and our machete will give it to us! Let's go, Puerto Ricans, let's go already, for LIBERTY is waiting, ever so anxious! *5* I Bohnqucfiiis arc Puerto Ricans. The won! is adapeed from Bonnquen. the Native Amcncan name for Puerto Rico. have turned against the weak and the friendless who trusted us; we have stamped out a just and intelligent and well-ordered republic; we have stabbed an ally in the back and slapped the face of a guest; we have bought a Shadow from an enemy that hadn't it to sell; we have robbed a trusting friend of his land and liberty: ... but each detail was for the best. *J* "Harry Wilmans'' From Spoon River Anthology by Edgar Lee Masters The Voice of the Hispano Anonymous Many are the opinions Against the Hispanic people And they accuse them of betraying The American government. Making an experiment. They will be disillusioned. Our brave native men Do not refuse to be soldiers. It matters not what is said Or how our fame is insulted. As they will fight with pleasure For the American eagle. They accuse our native people Of being rabble, But they have not proven to be so On the battlefield. Like good countrymen And faithful Americans, We will free them from that yoke The humble Cubans. ---- I was just turned twenty-one. And Henry Phipps, the Sunday-school superintendent. Made a speech in Bindle's Opera House. "The honor of the flag must be upheld,'' he said, "Whether it be assailed by a barbarous tribe of Tagalogs1 Or the greatest power in Europe." And we cheered and cheered the speech and the flag he waved As he spoke. And I went to the war in spite of my father, And followed the flag till I saw it raised By our camp in a rice field near Manila. And all of us cheered and cheered it. But there were flies and poisonous things; And there was the deadly water. And the cruel heat. And the sickening, putrid food.... Following the flag, Till I fell with a scream, shot through the guts. Now there's a flag over me in Spoon River! A flag! A flag! *J* I it people of central Luzon. Philippines from To the Person Sitting in Darkness by Mark Twain There have been lies; yes, but they were told in a good cause. We have been treacherous; but that was only in order that real good might come out of apparent evil. True, we have crushed a deceived and confiding people; we 1. Jose Marti had just returned to Cuba from his exile in New York when he wrote this diary entry. Which phrases show that he missed Cuba in his absence? 2. Like Marti, Lola Rodriguez de Tio lived in New York and wrote in support of independence from Spain. Whose model does she urge Puerto Ricans to follow? 3. In the anonymous poem, what does the author believe Mexican American soldiers will prove? 4. Mark Twain's controversial essay and Edgar Lee Masters's poem use irony to express the authors' views of the war. Describe both authors' perspectives on the war. prices fell. Demobilization was one of the factors behind the recession. During the war millions of Americans worked in war industries. But at war's end the government canceled more than $2 billion in war contracts. Factories responded by cutting back production and laying off workers. By 1921 some 5 million workers—more than 10 percent of the tabor force—were unemployed, and the economy was shrinking. A farm crisis contributed to the economic problems. Farmers had benefited from wartime markets in Europe. As European farm production revived, however, these markets dried up and farm prices fell. According to the Department of Agriculture, wheal, for example, dropped from $2.16 a bushel in 1919 to less than a dollar a bushel in 1922. Burdened with debt, hundreds of thousands of American fanners lost ownership of their land during the 1920s. ■ ■ After the war the cost of living soared, but prices soon fell as a recession took hold and unemployment increased. £abor STRIFE In 1919. however, Americans were still struggling with rapidly rising prices for food, clothing, and shelter. Workers watched in dismay as runaway inflation ate up their wartime financial gains. Angry and frustrated, they asked for higher wages and shorter hours. But management ignored labor's picas. In response, many workers walked off the job. In 1919 alone, unions called more than 2.6(H) strikes—involving more than four million workers. The Seattle general strike. The first strike of 1919 occurred in January, when some 35.000 shipyard workers in Seattle. Washington, walked off the job. demanding higher wages and a shorter workday. Within two weeks 110 local unions voted to join the shipyard workers in a general strike. The general strike began on February 6 at 10 a.m. An eerie calm fell over the city as 60.0(H) workers left their jobs. "It was." declared one shipyard worker. "the most beautiful thing I ever seen!" Alarmed at such a show of unity, Seattle newspapers blamed immigrants, calling the strikers "muddle-headed foreigners" and "riffraff from Europe intent on terrorizing the community." Mayor Ole Hanson denounced the strike as the work of Bolsheviks and called in troops to prevent unrest. But no violent incidents occurred. Instead, the well-disciplined strikers took steps to preserve order and to make sure that food and essential serv ices were available to the community. Nevertheless, the strikers came under increased public pressure to go back to work. After five days they ended the strike without winning any of their demands. Although the strike had been peaceful, antilabor forces tried to convince the public that Seattle had been on the brink of revolution. Mayor Hanson told the national press: M Revolution ,. . doesn't need violence. The general strike ... is of itself the weapon of revolution, all the more dangerous because quiet. To succeed, it must suspend everything. ... That is to say, it puts the government out of operation. And that is all there is to revolt—no matter how achieved. 99 Many people believed these charges. In the end the Seattle strike helped turn public opinion against organized labor. •4 Strikes became commonplace in the years after World War I, as workers demanded better wages and conditions. Here, mounted policemen break up a group of Philadelphia strikers in 1919. ~rrr^~>STRIKE EDITION! ? . i Seattle I 'nion Record J^—lwWiURNING ▲ The Seattle Union Record published a special edition on February 6, 1919, announcing the beginning of the general strike. Uittv The steel bosses also brought in thousands of African Americans and Mexican Americans as replacement workers, and they hired armed thugs to attack the strikers. Strikers were jailed, beaten, or shot. Faced with such tactics, union leaders called off the strike on January 9. 1920. Labor had suffered a crushing defeat. It would be 15 years before unions again tried to organize workers in heavy industry. ■ a Workers responded to hard times by striking for higher pay and better working conditions, but their efforts largely failed. The red scare______________________________ The 1919 strikes were prompted primarily by labor's desire for a fair deal. However, many Americans saw labor unrest as proof that Russia's Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. with its caU for a worldwide revolution of workers, was spreading to American shores. This fear of communism reached fever pilch in 1919 and 1920. a period of anticommunist hysteria known as the Red Scare. Although Communists and Socialists comprised only a tiny fraction of the country's population, some Americans saw "Reds" everywhere. They even implied that Communists controlled many women's organizations. Peace groups, such as the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, came under particularly strong attack. Antiradical fears reached such heights that several elected members of the New York State Assembly were expelled because they were members of the Socialist party. As journalist Walter Lippmann sarcastically noted: ▲ This cartoon entitled Put Them Out <fi Keep Them Out appeared in the Philadelphia Inquirer in 1919 and expressed the fear that Bolshevism was creeping into American society. The Palmer raids. In 1919 a rash of bornb scares seemed to justify Americans' fears. In April, alert postal clerks discovered 36 bornbs in the mail addressed to such prominent citizens as John D. Rockefeller. Supreme Court justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, and Postmaster General Albert Burleson. Then less than a month later, several bornbings occurred, one of which damaged the front of Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer's house. The assailant, an Italian anarchist, died in (he blast. Newspapers began demanding harsh action against radicals. One paper even called for "a few free treatments in the electric chair." Attorney General Palmer, hoping to further his presidential ambitions, responded hy launching an anti-Red crusade. He created a special government office to u The people are shivering in their boots over Bolshevism, they are far more afraid of Lenin [the Bolshevik leader] than they ever were of the Kaiser [Wilhelm II. who ruled Germany during World War I]. We seem to be the most frightened lot of victors that the world ever saw. 99 !! The Bolshevik Revolution and the strikes of 1919 led many Americans to fear that a Communist revolution was at hand. The Granger Coll#ctk"n. N*w York gather information on radical activities and put J. Edgar Hoover, the future head of the FBI. in charge. Palmer's most dramatic action was a series of raids to capture alleged radicals. The Palmer raids began in November 1919 and peaked on January 2, 1920. w hen federal officials arrested thousands of suspected radicals in 33 cities nationwide. As journalist Frederick Lew is Allen wrote: (i Over six thousand men were arrested in all__often without any chance to learn what was the explicit charge against them. ... In Detroit, over a hundred men were herded into a bull-pen measuring twenty-four by thirty feet and kept there for a week. ... In Hartford, while the suspects were in jail the authorities took the further precaution of arresting . . . all visitors who came to see them. 9 9 Most of those arrested were poor immigrants newly arrived in the country. In most cases, there was no real evidence against them. In fact, although the government claimed that radicals were "armed to the teeth." only three pistols were seized in the raids. Emma Goldman. During the Red Scare hundreds of foreigners suspected of radical activities were deported to Russia. Among the deportees was Emma Goldman, a noted feminist, writer, and speaker. Goldman was born in 1869 in Lithuania, a nation that was then part of Russia. Raised in a traditional Jewish family. Goldman was an independent. determined girl who often clashed with her authoritarian father. When she was 15, her father arranged for her to marry a man she did not love. But as she later wrote. "I would not listen to his schemes; I wanted to study, to know life, to travel. Besides. I never would marry for anything hut love." So at age 16. Goldman immigrated to the United States. The young Goldman settled in Rochester. New York, where she took a factory job. Gradually she grew disillusioned with the treatment of foreigners and workers in the United States. In 1889 at age 20, she moved to New York City and entered the world of radical politics. She soon became famous for her fiery speeches. After one such speech in 1893, she was convicted of inciting a riot and sent to prison for a year. In 1906 Goldman started a radical monthly called Mother Earth. In its pages she presented articles on a wide range of topics, from birth control to modern art and literature. Above all. she used the magazine as a forum to defend freedom of speech. In 1917 Goldman was arrested again, this time for opposing the draft. Two years later, at the height of the Red Scare, she was released from prison and deported to Russia. Like many other radicals, she was eager to see revolutionary Ruwia up close. "At last...," she wrote. "I would behold . . . the land freed from political and economic masters." Instead of a free land, however, die found a country w here freedom of expression wav severely limited. Disenchanted. Goldman left Russia in 1921 and spent the rest of her life speaking and writing in Europe. By mid-1920 public hysteria over radicalism was dying down. The fearful predictions of A. Mitchell Palmer and others that a Communist revolution was close at hand proved to be unfounded. Furthermore, many Americans had never supported the witch-hunting tactics employed by many of the anti-Communist crusaders. Sacco and vanzetti________________________ Although the Red Scare passed, hostility toward foreigners and radicals persisted. This hostility w" evident during the 1921 trial of two Italian anarchists. Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti Accused of committing murder during a payroll robbery at a factory outside Boston, they were convicted and sentenced to death. The verdict outraged defenders of civil liberties. They argued that the two men had been ► In the early 1930s immigrant artist Ben Shahn created a series of paintings about the events surrounding the Sacco and Vanzetti trial. called for a new Irial, but all these pleas failed. On August 23. 1927, Sacco and Vanzetti were executed. Many Americans believed that radicals like Sacco and Vanzetti deserved to be punished for their views, while others saw them as heroes and martyrs. Historians still debate whether Sacco and Vanzetti were guilty or innocent. All agree, however. that the case reflected the deep divisions tearing at American society in the postwar era. ■ ■ The Sacco and Vanzetti case underscored a hostility in the United States toward foreigners and radicals following the war. ■4 American poet Edna St. Vincent Millay was one of many protesters during the Sacco and Vanzetti trial. grounds for conviction. The verdict and subsequent appeals drew worldwide attention. In Paris, New York City, and elsewhere. thousands of people marched in protest. Noted writers and artists rallied to the cause. Calling them "victims of race and national prejudice and class hatred." labor unions contributed to Sacco and Vanzetti's defense fund. The protesters convicted not because of the evidence presented but because they were immigrants and radicals. Even the trial judge had shown bias by declaring that the men's anarchist beliefs were Shahn. Ben fiorrafantn Vantctti and Nicola Sacco from the Sacco-Vanzetti verms at twenty-three pointings (1931-12} Temper* on piper over compaction board 10 1/2 * 14 (36 7 ■ 36 B cm) The NUMMJRi of Modern An. New York Grfl of Abby Aldrich Rockefdtef Photograph <0 IV97 The Museum of Modem Art. New York C 1997 Estate of Ben Sicilia licensed by VAGA. New York. NY - ■ IDENTIFY and explain the significance of the following: demobilization, Ole Hanson, Edwin Curtis, Red Scare, A. Mitchell Palmer. Palmer raids, Emma Goldman. Nicola Sacco. Bartolomeo Vanzetti. LOCATE and explain the importance of the following: Seattle, Washington; Boston, Massachusetts. 1. MAIN IDEA How did the end of World War I affect the economy? 2. MAIN IDEA How did workers respond to deteriorating economic conditions after the war? Were their efforts successful? 3. IDENTIFYING CAUSE AND EFFECT What events led to the Red Scare? What were some of the Red Scare's consequences? 4. WRITING TO INFORM Imagine you are a reporter covering the Sacco and Vanzetti case. Write an article exploring the public debate surrounding the anarchists' arrest and conviction. 5. ANALYZING Why can it be said that international events had a strong impact on American society in the postwar years? Immigration During the 1920s the Klan also played on anti-immigrant feelings. Many Americans feared that the country was being overrun by immigrants—in 1920 nearly a quarter of the population was foreign-born or nonwhite. Furthermore, the number of immigrants, which had declined during the war. was once again rising, increasing from some 140,000 in 1919 to some 805.000 in 1921. This dramatic growth, coupled with the widespread belief that immigrants held radical views and took jobs from native-born Americans, led to demands for limits on immigration. In 1921 Congress passed a law limiting the number of immigrants from each country allowed into the United States. The quota was set at 3 percent of each nationality already in the country in 1910, except for Asians, who were excluded altogether. (Immigration from nations in the Western Hemisphere was not limited.) The Immigration Act of 1924 reduced the quota to 2 percent of the 1890 figures for each national group. This change worked against southern and eastern Europeans because in 1890 most Americans traced their origins to England, Ireland, or northern Europe. While the 1924 law did not exclude Asians, it set the annual quota at only 100 Chinese and 100 Japanese immigrants. In 1925 the restrictions reduced the total number of new immigrants from Europe. Africa. Asia, and Australia to some 153,000. ■ ■ The revival of the Ku Klux Klan and new limits on immigration revealed continued hostility toward racial and ethnic groups. ▲ "Ellis Island Blues" was one of many songs written in the 1920s about the Rood of immigrants to the United States after World War I. Many ol the some 37,000 Puerto Ricans who immigrated before World War II became agricultural laborers in Arizona, the Midwest, or the East Timp4 Key West Mexican Americans: Percentage of State Population. 1930 More than 10.0H 1 1-5.0% 0 S-l 0% Less than 0.5* Total Mexican America* population: 1,42258 Hispanic Population, 1930 MASS MIGRATION Between 1920 and 1930 some S00.000 Mexicans immigrated primarily to the southwestern states where many found jobs as agricultural, mining, and railroad maintenance laborers. Qi MOVEMENT Which state's population had the highest percentage ol Mexican Americans? Mexican American migration In ihc Southwest, employers, particularly in agriculture. railroad construction, and mining, encouraged Mexican immigration, which was not affected by the restrictive legislation of the 1920s. Few people were arriving from Europe and Asia, and southwestern employers were eager to keep a steady flow of workers to till low-wage jobs. As a result, during the 1920s some 500,000 immigrants arrived from Mexico, where wages were far tower. Those who look agricultural jobs not only had to accept low pay but many also had to live in ramshackle labor camps. One observer noted: ii Shelters were made of almost every conceivable thing—burlap, canvas, palm branches. . .. We found one woman carrying water in large milk pails from the irrigation ditch.... This is evidently all the water which they have in camp. 9 9 In the 1920s many Mexican immigrants also moved into urban areas. Some were drawn to well- paying factory jobs in cities such as Chicago and Detroit and established new centers of Mexican population in the Midwest. Most, however, migrated to cities in the Southwest—particularly Los Angeles, El Paso, and San Antonio (see map on page 638). Usually the men came alone, and once established, they sent for their wives and children. Many brought other relatives as well, reestablishing extended family netw'orks. These networks helped new arrivals find jobs and housing. Because of economic hardship, many families allowed their young, unmarried daughters to work outside the home. Many found employment in bakeries. hotels, and laundries, while others worked as maids. Their newfound independence, as one Mexican immigrant woman sadly noted, brought young women "into conflict with their parents. They learn__about the outside world, leant how to speak English, and then they become ashamed of their parents who brought them up here." Despite such conflicts. these new immigrants contributed to the mosaic of cultures that helps define American life. ■ ■The promise of jobs drew Mexican immigrants, who were not subject to restrictive quotas, to cities in the Southwest and Midwest. ▲ Mexican American Victor Villasenor wrote Rain of Gold, a book about his family's experiences as immigrants to California in the 1920s. Shown here is the 1929 wedding of his parents, Juan Salvador and Lupe. IDENTIFY and explain the significance of the following: A. Philip Randolph, Marcus Garvey, Immigration Act of 1924. 1. MAIN IDEA In what way did Native Americans fight government attempts to take tribal land? 2. MAIN IDEA What factors contributed to the rise of black nationalism? 3. MAIN IDEA What events in the 1920s revealed continued hostility toward racial and ethnic groups? 4. WRITING TO EXPLAIN Imagine you are a Mexican immigrant in the 1920s. Write a diary entry that explains why you moved to the Southwest or to the Midwest. 5. EVALUATING What effect did the migration of African Americans have on the North? ▲ Langston Hughes Tomorrow, I'll be at the table When company comes. Nobody'll dare Say to me, "Eat in the kitchen," Then. Besides. They'll see how beautiful I am And be ashamed— I. too. am America. 99 ■ ■African American musicians, actors, and writers in the 1920s flourished, creating a cultural movement known as the Harlem Renaissance. ^Lhe LOST GENERATION___________________ The creative spirit of the 1920s expressed itself not only in jazz, hut also in the literature of the decade. Many younger writers of the time were haunted by the death and destruction of World War I and scornful of middle-class consumerism and the superficiality of the postwar years. "You are all a lost generation." said poet Gertrude Stein to one such writer. Ernest Hemingway. The label stuck, and scholars refer to writers of the era as the Lost Generation. Ernest Hemingway spent much of his life in France. Spain, and Cuba. During World War I. he and several other young writers became ambulance drivers as a way to experience and develop an understanding of war. Hemingway was seriously wounded while serving at the Italian front. Later, he expressed his anger at war's futility in such novels as The Sun Also Rises (1926) and 1 Farewell lo Arms (1929). In a famous passage from the latter book, a war veteran explains what the war means to him: it I was always embarrassed by the words sacred, glorious, and sacrifice and the expression in vain. We had heard them .. . and had read them ... now for a long time, and I had seen nothing sacred, and the things that were glorious had no glory and the sacrifices were like the stockyards at Chicago if nothing was done with the meat except to bury it. 9 9 Disillusionment with World War I echoed in the works of other Lost Generation wTiters, including John Dos Passos's Three Soldiers (1919) and Manhattan Transfer (1925). Another Lost Generation writer. F. Scott Fitzgerald, was the foremost chronicler of the youthful Jazz Age. In his first novel. This Side if Paradise (1920), Fitzgerald described the life of rich college students bored by fast living and hard liquor. In The Great Gatsby (1925). Fitzgerald portrayed the emptiness of life devoted to a frenzied struggle lo make money and win social status in Prohibition-era America. Sinclair Lewis, another writer who criticized American society, satirized middle-class life in Main Street {1920) and Babbitt (1922). The journalist and critic Henry L. Mencken championed the new wTiters. In his magazine Tk American Mercury. Mencken publicized novelists who satirized middle-class Americans, whom he ridiculed as "the booboisie." Mencken made fun of Republican politicians, fundamentalist Christians, rural southerners, residents of small towns, and many other groups. ■ ■Gertrude Stein called Ernest Hemingway and other postwar writers "a lost generation" because of their anger and sense of loss. A Diego Rivera painted many murals that focused on workers and their relationship to industrial production. Shown here is Entry to the Mine. Other currents in art The artistic vitality of the 1920s can also be seen in the work of U.S. arlisls and designers as they confronted the machine age and reflected its influence on American society. They chronicled factories, new technology, workers, and urban landscapes. Painting and photography. Many American painters of the 1920s depicted urban, industrial settings. Edward Hopper's New York City scenes convey a sense of loneliness. Early Sunday Morning (1930) shows a row of darkened stores and a street empty of people. New York City intrigued Georgia O'Keeffe, too. In the 1920s she painted pictures of its factories and tenements. Later she would move to | New Mexico, paint dramatic- pictures of flowers, and capture the stark beauty of the Southwest. Photography came into its own as an art form in the early 1900s. Alfred Stieglitz (STEEG-luhts), more than anyone else, gave it new status. Stieglitz's New York gallery influenced many other American artists. In addition to striking portraits of people, his own subjects included airplanes, skyscrapers, and crowded city streets. Charles Shecler. a photographer and painter, won fame for the "portraits of machinery" he produced for the Ford Motor Company, which commissioned him to photograph its plant near Detroit. Michigan, in 1927. Another renaissance of the 1920s took place in Mexico and was later brought to the United States by its major artists. This artistic movement stressed American Indian lradilions and the ideals of the Mexican Revolution of 1910. The artists emphasized the nobility of ordinary people—peasants and other workers— and the tyranny of wealthy capitalists. Their favorite medium was the monumental public mural because, in the words of artist Jose Clemente Orozco (oh-rohs-koh). "it cannot be hidden away for the benefit of a certain privileged few It is for the people. It is for AU~" T he movement's three major artists—known in Mexico as los ires grandes. or "the big three*'— were Orozco. David Alfaro Siqueiros tsee-KAY- rohs), and Diego Rivera. Each first became known in Mexico in the 1920s and painted murals in the United States in the early 1930s. Orozco Adddor Gallery of American An. Phillips Academy. Andover. MA This 1928 painting by Edward Hopper is called Manhattan Bridge Loop. THE JAZZ AGE ml 663 Chapter 23 In 1929 the stock market crashed, causing financial ruin for millions of Americans. The collapse of the stock market was one of several factors that gave rise to the Great Depression. When President Hoover's efforts to revive the economy failed, Americans elected a Democratic president, Franklin D. Roosevelt, to reverse the country's economic decline. m What factors might cause an economic depression? How might an economic crisis affect people's choices of where to live? How and why might various ethnic groups be affected differently by an economic depression? 1929 Stock market crashes. Smoot-Hawley T ariff passed. Scottsboro Boys case begins. The economic boom of the 1920s gave most Americans tremendous faith /n the future. For many Americans, prosperity seemed limitless; however, the prosperity was unevenly distributed. The life-style of the Jazz Age also led to enormous debt. phursday, October 24. 1929, dawned windy and cool in New York City. Employees of the New York Stock Exchange buttoned their overcoats as they hurried dow n Wall Street to work. In the first few hours of stock trading, share prices fell sharply. At first, investors remained calm. The market had been shaky in recent weeks but had always resumed its upward trend. Today was different, though. As prices continued to fall, panic struck. Frantic orders to sell stock came pouring in. All across America, grim-faced investors watched as stock tickers reported the alarming news. The plunge in prices was wiping out the life savings of millions of Americans who had invested in stocks. "One saw men looking defeat in the face," said an eyewitness. "[ It was | the smash-up of the hopes of years." The economic prosperity of the 1920s was over, and the worst economic depression in U.S. history had begun. Over the next several years the American people faced widespread unemployment and poverty. By the time of the 1932 election, they were desperate for a change. Ticker ape machine Unemployment Relief DOUBLE TROUBLE In the early 1930s a disastrous drought struck the agricultural states of the Great Plains, adding to the difficulties caused by the depression. Q PLACE Which state had the highest percentage of its people receiving unemployment? Rl Percentage ot Total State Population Receiving Unemployment Relief ■ More than 25 percent ■ 21 25 percent H 16 20 percent 11-15 percent Less than 11 percent [-3 Less American women actually fell because of increased competition in domestic and agricultural work. Some unemployed workers took to selling apples on the street, w here on a good day a seller might earn SI. 15, causing President Hoover to claim, "Many people have left their johs for the more profitable one of selling apples." But few people in the depression had any choice over how or where they worked. Some even hitchhiked or hopped freight trains across the country to find jobs. ■ ■ During the depression one fourth of the work force lost their jobs. Many had to seek work wherever they could find it. massive unemployment. Without regular w-ork. many would stand on street corners and try to obtain work as maids. Two black women, Ella Baker and Marvel Cooke, referred to this method of hiring as the "Bronx Slave Market." In an investigative article they wrote for The Crisis, they described a typical scene: 44 Rain or shine, cold or hot, you will find them there—Negro women, old and young—some- times bedraggled, sometimes neatly dressed ... waiting expectantly for Bronx housewives to buy their strength and energy. 9 9 Since many employers could hire women more cheaply than men. the percentage of women in the work force actually increased in the 1930s. Most were employed as office workers or domestic servants. But as the percentage of women in the work force rose overall, the percentage of employed African A. In the 1930s many couples participated in dance marathons to win money. Some marathons would last for days, until all but one couple dropped from exhaustion. The impact of the depression spread all across America, hitting people in cities and on farms and disrupting family life. Some of themosl- lasling images of the period came from urban America, as the depression hit many cities hard. During the early 1930s the federal government did little to aid local communities. City governments, religious groups like the Salvation Army, and charitable organizations such as the Red Cross tried to take on the burden of providing direct relief to the needy. Neighbors also helped one another One African American woman told a visitor: "My neighbors helps me. by ** bringin' me a little to eat. when they knows I ain't got nothin' in the house to cook." Mexican American communities formed mutualistM, nt mutual-aid societies, to help local residents. Some Chinese American arrive and bid absurdly low prices, such as 25 cents for a plow. In a particularly noteworthy example, a farm with an $800 mortgage was sold for $1.90. After the auction they would then give the goods back to the farm family. Furthermore, farmers quickly warned off anyone who made serious bids. This tactic was so successful that several farm states, beginning with Iowa in 1933, passed foreclosure moratorium laws. Conditions were especially bleak for tenant farmers in the South, where most rural residents already faced crippling poverty. As cotton prices fell from 16 cents per pound in 1929 to below 6 cents in 1931. many tenant farmers, mostly African Americans, were virtually ruined. Some were even forced off the land they had lived on all their lives. While farmers in the Midwest faced an overabundance of food, southern cotton farmers faced scarcity due to poor soil and lack of money to buy food. Grade Turner, a sharecropper's wife, testified to the hardships of tenant life in the 1930s: t* That's all there is to expect—work hard and go hungry part time. ... This year's been so hard we had to drop our burial insurance.... All it costs is twenty- five cents ... but they don't come many twenty-five cents in this house. 9 9 Migrant farm workers in the Southwest, most of them recent immigrants, also encountered difficulties. As relief costs soared, local authorities chose the cheaper policy of paying Mexican migrants to return to their native land. During the 1930s some 500.000 people of Mexican descent—some of them U.S. citi- zens—were pressured into leaving the states. Those who remained often faced discrimination and poor working conditions. A Shown here is a meeting in Los Angeles, around 1940, of the group known as El Congreso, which helped organize Hispanic migrants to fight for better conditions. Some of the Mexican American families who stayed during the depression helped organize resistance to discrimination in the Southwest. One such organizer was Josefina Fierro de Bright, the daughter of migrants who had lied revolution in Mexico to settle in California. The experience of growing up during the depression in the midst of poverty and ethnic discrimination had a profound effect on her. As with many children of the depression. Fierro's life was very unstable. Her family had to move often, causing Fierro to change schools eight times. But throughout the hard times her mother always encouraged her to strive for success. "Rely on yourself, be independent.' Mrs. Fierro advised. She also etnphasi/ed the importance of getting an education. In 1938. at age 18, Josefina Fierro entered the University of California at Los Angeles. She planned to study medicine, but activism on behalf of the Mexican American community soon took up most of her time. With the aid of her husband, activist Hollywood Josefina Fierro de Bright 678 aS CHAPTER 23 screenwriter John Bright, she began to lead boy* coils of companies that did business in Mexican American communities but did not hire Mexican American workers. Enlisting financial support from a few well-known movie stars. Fierro de Bright also started a radio program for Spanish- speaking audiences. These activities brought her to the attention of a Mexican American group called F.l Congreso. which was organizing Hispanic migrants to resist oppressive conditions. In 1939 El Congreso leaders asked Fierro de Bright to help them establish a branch in Los Angeles. Over the next few years, she worked tirelessly, leading marches and hunger strikes. lobbying for expanded relief programs for Hispanic Americans, and encouraging bilingual education for migrant children. "I used to work so hard it used to kill me." she recalled. But throughout her life she never forgot the lessons her mother instilled in her during those early years of the depression. Those memories spurred her efforts to improve the lives of all working people. ■■ •" Rural farm workers faced increased hardship during the depression. Some were forced to leave their land. AMILY LIFE IN THE 1930s On farms and in cities, family members often pulled together and helped one another cope with their difficulties. They shared food and money and provided the support and encouragement their relatives needed to get through hard times. In many cases, relatives doubled up in small houses, and young adults moved back in with their parents. ▼ Life was difficult for many families during the depression as they struggled to make ends meet. The strain is clearly evident in the faces of these migrant children and their mother. : -1) Economic hardship took its toll on families, however. Some eventually broke apart under the strain. The divorce rate Rise during the depression. Many young people put off getting married and starting their own families, which caused marriage and birthrates to decline, especially during the early years of the depression. Looking back on those years, a Chicago schoolteacher remarked: M Do you realize how many people in my generation are not married?... It wasn't that we didn't have a chance. I was going with someone when the Depression hit. We probably would have gotten married.... Suddenly he was laid off. It hit him like a ton of bricks. And he just disappeared.99 Life was certainly not easy for women during the depression. In the face of economic hardship, the mothers of hard-hit depression families often played roles of quiet heroism. Such daily challenges as putting food on the table and making clothes and shoes last for one more year brought constant worry. As one woman remarked: "I figured every which way I could to make ends meet . . . but some of [those] ends just wouldn't meet. They just couldn't be stretched far enough to meet." In rural and small-tow n households, women revived old crafts such as soap making and bread making. Others took jobs outside the home to help support their families. Commentary_________________________ The Psychological Impact of the Depression The Great Depression affected Americans in countless ways. Some of these effects—such as hunger and homelessness—were temporary for most people. When the depression ended, most Americans got back on their feet. Other effects, though, were longer lasting. In fact, the depression had a major long-term impact on the behavior and the outlook of the millions of Americans who struggled through hard times. The term depression could just as easily describe the mood of the country as well as the economy in the 1930s. More than 20.000 Americans committed suicide in 1932. a 28 percent increase over 1929. For middle-class and well-to-do Americans, many of whom had never 706 : Brigade to picket outside the plants in support of the union. Many women felt their lives were changed hy this experience. They soon took up the cause of equal pay for men and women in the auto industry. Said one female activist: ii I'm living for the first time with a definite goal.... Just being a woman isn't enough anymore. I want to be a human being with the right to think for myself. 9 9 ► These members of the Southern Tenant Farmers' Union are shown attending a union meeting. Both African Americans and European Americans belonged to the STFU. Finally, after six weeks. General Motors gave in and granted the UAW the right to organize GM workers. Within eight months the UAW membership grew to some 400,000. Owing in part to the Wagner-Connery Act. total union membership shot up from about 4 million in 1936 to some 9 million in 1939. ■ ■ The Wagner-Connery Act guaranteed the rights of labor, increasing union membership and activity. The second new deal The Second New Deal also brought relief for farmers. When the Supreme Court struck down the Agricultural Adjustment Act in January 1936, Congress created another program to replace it. Like the AAA. the new program aimed to keep farm prices high by cutting crop production. To avoid opposition from the Supreme Court, however. Congress combined crop reduction with a soil conservation plan—a legitimate governmental activity. The Second New Deal also sought to help tenant farmers, sharecroppers, and migrant farm workers. The rise of the Southern Tenant Farmers' Union had brought a backlash of violence against sharecroppers by landowners and authorities in the South, forcing some union members to conduct their activities in secrecy. Then in 1936 the union organized A The depression left many African Americans struggling to find work. This photograph shows people from Memphis, Tennessee, being transported to Arkansas for a day's work in the cotton fields. a series of strikes by cotton pickers in five stales In 1937 Congress created the Farm Security Administration (FSA) to make low-interest, long- term loans to tenant farmers and sharecroppers to buy farms. The FSA also established camps where migrant farm workers could find shelter and medical care. The Roosevelt administration recognized that the soil conservation program did not do enough to limit farm production. So in 1938 Congress passed a second Agricultural Adjustment Act. The government continued to pay farmers to withdraw land from production and to practice conservation, hut it also authorized the Department of Agriculture to limit the amount of specific crops that could he brought to market each year. When harvests exceeded these limits the government stored the surpluses until prices rose. Farmers cooperating in this program could get government loans based on the value of their stored crops. in the /Waking BV Oft. PAUL ROYER photographing the Depression any Americans at first were suspicious of the New Deal programs. The tradition of self-reliance ran deep in the United States. President Roosevelt believed that opponents of federal relief programs might change their minds if they saw the frightful conditions under which migrant farm workers and city dwellers lived. With Roosevelt's encouragement numerous federal agencies, including the Department of the Interior, the Works Progress Administration (WPA), the Department of Agriculture, and the Farm Security ► Russell Lee photographed these carrot field workers in Santa Maria, Texas, waiting to begin their day. Administration (FSA), hired photographers in the 1930s to travel across the country and document the lives of ordinary Americans. No agency used photography more effectively than the FSA. whose staff amassed more than 250,000 images of American life during the depression. Roy E. Stryker, head of the FSA historical section, assembled an all-star team of photographers that included Walker Evans, Ben Shahn, Arthur Rothstein, and Dorothea Lange. M In Missouri, 1939, Arthur Rothstein captured the mood of this sharecropper's child after the boy's family had been evicted from their land. ■ programs. From 1936 to 1941, FSA photographs were widely published in government pamphlets and in Time. Life, and other magazines. The pictures prompted an outpouring of congressional and public support for federal relief. Today, the FSA photographs are housed in the Library of Congress and provide an invaluable source of information for historians. They are a detailed visual record of the 1930s that allows researchers today to "see" life in depression America. These photographs have thus enabled historians and citizens alike to step back in time to a crucial period in our history. ^ Ben Shahn photographed these rural West Virginia residents heading into Scotts Run to obtain food from relief workers in I93S. To make sure his photographers were prepared. Stryker often tutored them before sending them out on assignment. For example, former print journalist Carl Mydans was set to "go South and 'do cotton"' for the FSA. Learning that Mydans knew virtually nothing about the subject, Stryker postponed the trip. Mydans recalled what happened next: u We sat down and we calked almost all day about cotton. We went to lunch and we went to dinner, and we talked well into the night. He [Stryker] talked about cotton as an agricultural product, cotton as a commercial product, the history of cotton in the South, what cotton did to the history of the U.S.A. and how it affected areas outside the U.S.A. By the end of that evening, I was ready to go off and photograph cotton! 99 ► Migront Mother is one of Dorothea Lange's most famous photographs of the depression. Other photographers, such as Dorothea Lange, were already well grounded in understanding the social and economic forces that shaped rural Americans' lives in the 1930s. Lange often traveled for weeks at a time, working up to 14 hours a day. One of her most famous photographs, Migrant Mother, showed an exhausted single mother whose children subsisted chiefly on vegetables they scavenged from California fields. When it appeared in 1936, Migrant Mother inspired Californians to defy powerful growers' associations and insist on decent, government- sponsored housing for seasonal harvesters. Migrant Mother was not the only photograph to fulfill Roosevelt's goal of gaining support for government ▲ Many Japanese Americans on the West Coast were also among those who competed for work as migrant field laborers. These men labored in sugar fields. lost their land. Packing their meager belongings into battered old cars or trucks, they headed west on Route 66. bound for what they saw as a land of promise—California and other parts of the West Coast. There they hoped to find work picking crops. Thousands of them made the trek, and since many came from Oklahoma, they picked up the nickname Okies. Once they reached the West Coast, however, they found themselves in desperate competition with other farm laborers looking for work. Competition for migrant work. Even before the Dust Bowl refugees started arriving. Mexican Americans had been having a hard lime finding work in the West. Like African Americans. Mexican Americans often found themselves the victims of discrimination in many New Deal programs. For example, although the CCC did not segregate Mexican Americans, some complained that they were harassed by camp officials, denied clothing, and assigned to kitchen duty more often than non-Hispanics. Many families continued to seek what little work they could rind as migrant farm laborers. A 1935 California survey found that the average income of Mexican American families had fallen below $300 a year. C£sar Chavez, who later became a noted labor leader, recalled growing up in a depression-era migrant family: 44 When we moved to California, we would work after school. Sometimes we wouldn't go. "Following the crops." we missed much school. Trying to get enough money to stay alive the following winter, the whole family picking apricots. walnuts, prunes_ We were taken advantage of quite a bit by the labor contractor and the crew pusher. 99 Mexican Americans also faced job competition Iron) Filipino laborers. During the 1920s the Filipino population of California had grown to more than 30.000. Like Mexican American migrants, most Filipinos worked in agriculture. When the depression hit, both groups faced tough economic times, but the Filipino workers attempted to com hat decreasing wages by organizing. Throughout the early 1930s the Filipino Labor Union launched a series of strikes to protest wage reductions. In 1936 the American Federation of Labor sponsored the Field Workers Union, a combined organization for Mexican American and Filipino laborers. The unions were able to keep wages from falling too much. However, as more Okies arrived, competition for migrant work increased. Thus life for all migrants remained difficult. ■ ■ Dust Bowl refugees moved to the West, where they competed with Mexican Americans and Filipinos for migrant farm work. /Picturing the face of The grim experiences of migrants and others in rural America provided rich subject matter for documentary filmmakers and photographers. These artists created a memorable visual record of the New Deal era. Belter than any words could do. their images of the slumped shoulders uf ▲ FSA photographer Carl Mydans captured the devastation of soil erosion in Kentucky in 1936. unemployed men, the staring faces of children, and the worried expressions of prematurely aged women conveyed the human suffering of the era. In 1936 and 1937 the filmmaker Pare Lorentz directed two documentary films on the era. The River depicts the TVA and its effect on the surrounding regions, while The Plow Tluu Broke the Plains portrays the devastation of the Dust Bowl. Using few images of people, the films rely heavily on background music and an unseen narrator to enhance the visual images of the depression's impact on the landscape. In the late 1930s the Farm Security Administration recruited a group of photographers to record American rural life. These photographers included Walker Evans, who depicted life among The Granger Coflecoon. New York sharecroppers in rural Alabama; African American Gordon Parks, who later became a filmmaker; international photojournalist Margaret Bourke- White; and Dorothea Lange, probably the best-known of the FSA photographers. Lange was one of the most talented photographers of the depression era. Born in Hoboken. New Jersey, she decided in her late teens to become a photographer. After studying the craft for several years, she set out to tour the world and record her impressions. Lange was out of money by the time she reached San Francisco, however, so she stayed and opened a portrait studio. When the depression struck. Lange began to take pictures of the homeless men wandering the streets of San Francisco. Soon the federal government hired her to photograph migrant farmers in California. Her pictures, which carry captions in the farmers' own words, revealed the migrants' poverty and suffering, as well as their great dignity. Lange's most famous picture. Migrant Mother (see page 713). is considered a masterpiece. During World War 11. Lange continued her documentary work by taking pictures of Japanese Americans in California internment camps. Later she produced photo essays for Life magazine and traveled the world taking pictures. By the time of her death in 1965, she ranked as one of the world's foremost photographers. IDENTIFY and explain the significance of the following: Marian Anderson, Robert C. Weaver. Mary McLeod Bethune, Antonio Luhan, John Collier, American Indian Defense Association, Indian Reorganization Act, Okies. Dorothea Lange. LOCATE and explain the importance of the following: Dust Bowl. 1. MAIN IDEA How did the New Deal affect African Americans during the 1930s? 2. MAIN IDEA How did the Indian Reorganization Act benefit Native Americans? 3. LINKING HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY What factors caused the Dust Bowl during the 1930s? 4. WRITING TO DESCRIBE Imagine you are an Okie migrating west in 1939. Write a diary entry describing your experiences on the West Coast. 5. ANALYZING How did filmmakers, such as Pare Lorentz, and photographers, such as Dorothea Lange, serve as social critics during the 1930s? Margaret Mitchell's Gone with the Wind published. FDR reelected president. FDR tries to "pack" Supreme Court. Farm Security Administration created. GM strike begins. Second AAA passed. Aaron Copland composes Billy the Kid. Thornton Wilder's Our Town opens. i 1937 Writing to Classify Create a chart that classifies the programs of the New Deal according to whether they were designed primarily to help banks, farmers, labor, or business. Mexican American Jesse Perez worked for the meatpacking industry in Chicago in 1939, during a time when the CIO was attempting to organize workers in the stockyards. Read the following statement, which comes from an interview Perez did at that time with a member of the Federal Writers' Project What does Perez have to say about the company's treatment of workers who joined the union during this time? How does Perez view the CIO? H I was Just to wear CIO button; ever since I start wearing the button they start to pick. I can butcher, but they don 7 give me job. ... So when / start telling the boys we have a union for them, almost all join right away. We talk all the time what the union going to do for us, going to raise wages, stop speed-up. The bosses watch and they know it's a union coming. So even day they start saying we behind in the work. They start speeding up the boys more and more even day. .. . We told bosses we working too fast, can't keep up. The whole gang, thirteen men, all stop. Bosses say, we ain 7 standing J'or nothing like this. Four days later they fire the whole gang, except two. IV<' look the case in the labor board and. . . now all who was fired got work. Now the bosses try to provoke strike before CIO get ready. .. . We know what they do. we don't talk back, got to watch out they don i play tricks like that. 99 John Steinbeck's The Gropes of Wroth published. Lillian Heilman's play The Little Foxes opens. | 1939 Richard Wright's Not/ve Son published. Describing the effects of the Dust Bowl, John Steinbeck wrote: "The Western States are nervous under the beginning change. ... A half-million people moving over the country; a million more, restive [restless] to move; ten million more feeling the first nervousness." How did the Dust Bowl influence population shifts in the Southwest? Scene from the film The Crapes of W rath. 1939 Complete the following projects independently or cooperatively. 1. THE ECONOMY In chapters 21, 22, and 23, you examined the U.S. economy in the 1920s. Building on that experience, imagine you are a New Deal legislator. Write a proposal for a new public works project. Your proposal should describe what the project is, how workers and businesses will benefit, and why your project will be useful to society in terms of relief, recovery, or reform. 2. CULTURE AND SOCIETY In chapters 21 and 22 you explored U.S. society in the 1920s. Building on that experience, imagine you are an author in the 1930s. Write a short, realistic passage for your novel that describes the Dust Bowl's effect on your main character. The German invasion of Poland in 1939 launched World War II. By 1940, much of Western Europe had fallen to Germany, while Japan expanded its hold on Asia. For a time, the United States maintained its neutrality. Lend-lease aid to the Allies, beginning in 1941, however, marked an important step In U.S. Involvement in the conflict. s hortly before 8:00 a.m. on December 7. 1941, the message "Torn! Tom! Tom!" was radioed to Japanese carrier ships approaching Hawaii. The signal "Tora." meaning "tiger." launched the long- planned Japanese air-and-sea attack on the U.S. naval base at Pearl Harbor. The heart of America's Pacific Fleet was anchored there, and more than a hundred U.S. planes lined nearby airfields. Within seconds alter the attack began, explosions from bornbs and torpedoes turned Pearl Harbor into a blazing inferno. When the assault ended less than two hours later, almost 20 American warships and nearly 200 aircraft had been destroyed. Among some 2.400 American dead were 1.103 sailors entombed on the Arizona when the battleship sank. The bornbing shocked and united Americans. Ann Hoskins, a Connecticut newspaper owner, noticed that before the attack "there was great tension and feelings between people not to intervene. But the minute Pearl Harbor happened, there was utter unity." The next day. a somber President Roosevelt described December 7 as "a date which will live in infamy" and called on Congress for a declaration of war against Japan. Air Force officers. Hawaii. 1941 :: 743 Movie stars advertised war bonds and traveled overseas to entertain the troops. Hundreds of war movies poured out of Hollywood. Some patriotic films, such as So Proudly We Hail—about army nurses in the Philippines—built support for the war. Striking a lighter note were comedies like Bob Hope's Caught in the Draft. A few films, such as Wake Island and Report from the Aleutians, offered realistic views of combat. Most, however, romanticized American and other Allied soldiers and stereotypically portrayed the Japanese as treacherous, the Germans as fanatical, and the Italians as cowardly. Radio stations broadcast both war news and entertainment. Radio correspondents such as Edward R. Murrow and Eric Sevareid gave on-the- scene accounts of war-ravaged Europe. A new federal agency, the Office of War Information (OWI), controlled the How of war news at home. Wartime musical hits included "Remember Pearl Harbor" and "Praise the Lord and Pass the Ammunition!" But the biggest hits of the period did not deal directly with the war. African American musicians—including trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie, sax player Charlie Parker, and piano player Thelonious Monk—popularized a new form of jazz, called bebop, or bop. Also popular were such sentimental songs as "White Christmas," which expressed Americans' longing for a return to peace. The war also affected popular radio serials. Radio stations abandoned spy and sabotage programs for the duration of the war. Some even banned certain sound effects, such as wailing sirens, to avoid alarming listeners. On the whole. World War 11 enjoyed broad support. Convinced that the cause was just, most Americans put up with shortages, planted "victory gardens" to conserve food, and bought millions of dollars worth of war bonds. Many families proudly displayed window banners with a star—a blue one for a loved one in the service, a gold one to commemorate a death in combat. By and large. World War II did not produce the kind of home-front intolerance that erupted during World War I. One tragic exception was the forced relocation and imprisonment, or internment, of Japanese Americans living on the Pacific coast. In September 1945, U.S. State Department adviser Eugene Rostov, called internment "a tragic and dangerous mistake" and argued that "its motivation and its impact on our system of law deny every value of democracy." When Pearl Harbor was bornbed, about 119,000 people of Japanese ancestry lived in Washington, Oregon, and California. Of these, about a third, the lssei (EE-say). had been born in Japan and were regarded by the U.S. government as aliens ineligible for U.S. citizenship. The rest, the Nisei (nee-say), had been born in the United States and were thus American citizens. People of Japanese ancestry had long suffered racial discrimination in the United States. Laws prevented Japanese immigrants from becoming citizens, and prejudice restricted the kinds of jobs they and their descendants could hold and the neighborhoods where they could live. ► This painting of the internment camp at Heart Mountain, Wyoming, was done by Japanese American artist Estelle Ishigo. rr* ■4 Toyo Miyatale photographed this scene in Los Angeles in the early days of World War II. With their belongings piled high on the sidewalk, Japanese Americans wait for the buses that will take them to a relocation assignment center. m More th,in 10.000 1,000 to 10,000 □ Less than 1,000 * Relocation camp About two thirds of the 127,000 people of Japanese ancestry living in the continental United States were Amencan-born and thus U.S. citizens ^Japanese American Relocation INTERNEES By September 1942 some 100,000 Japanese Americans were interned in 10 amps located in relatively isolated, undeveloped areas. Kfl LOCATION population in 1940? Which two states had the largest Japanese Amerian When war came, prejudice turned into near hysteria. There was no evidence of disloyalty on the part of any Issei or Nisei. Strong anti-Japanese sentiments among some vocal politicians and residents of western states, however, persuaded the federal government to remove people of Japanese descent from the West Coast. In February 1942 they were ordered to detention camps in Wyoming, Utah, and other states. Here most were imprisoned until 1945—an action upheld by the Supreme Court in 1944. ■ ■ Because of prejudice and war hysteria, Japanese Americans living on the West Coast were interned in relocation camps. Relocation profoundly disrupted tfie lives of Japanese Americans. They were forced to leave hurriedly, abandoning or selling their homes and businesses at rock-bottom prices. A government estimate later put Japanese American property losses at $400 million. One imprisoned Japanese American was Norman Mineta. a Nisei from San Jose. California. On the day of the Pearl Harbor bornbing, the young Mineta fearfully watched his neighbors being taken away for questioning by the FBI. He recalled bitterly that "'they had done nothing; the only thing that they had done was to be born of Japanese ancestry." Ten years old when his family was uprooted, Mineta wore his Cub Scout uniform on the train, hoping that it would show his loyalty to the United States. After six months in a barracks at the Santa Anita racetrack in southern California. Mineta's family was interned with some 10.000 others at a hastily built camp at Heart Mountain. Wyoming. 'These camps were all barbed wire, guard towers, searchlights," recalled Mineta. "They were concentration camps. There's no question about it." After the war Mineta attended college, became an insurance agent, and went into local politics in San Jose. In 1974 he was elected to the House of Representatives, where he served on several committees and introduced legislation seeking reparations for Japanese American internees. Like most other internees, Mineta deplored what had happened, but his patriotism never wavered: 4 4 Despite the color of our hair and skin, despite the shape of our eyes, the U.S. was our country. I remember how my parents reminded us of that fact. Just before our family was evacuated, my father ... said, "No matter what happens, this is your home." 9 9 Patriotism, and the desire to disprove accusations of disloyalty, inspired many young men in the camps to volunteer for military duty (in segregated units). One Nisei combat team, the 442nd, fought in Europe and became one of the most decorated units in the armed services. Several thousand Japanese Americans also served in the Military Intelligence Service as interpreters and translators in the Pacific. The march on Washington For African Americans, World War TT brought both continued discrimination and greater opportunities. Many blacks moved into better-paying industrial jobs and played a key role in the military effort. About a million black soldiers served in the armed forces, including several thousand women in the Women's Auxiliary Army Corps. However, despite their protests. African Americans continued to serve in segregated units and until 1943 were kept out of combat. Blacks were usually restricted to menial work. The millions of black Americans in the labor force in the 1940s also played an important home- front role in die war effort. But they had to struggle to gain acceptance. Many war plants would not hire blacks or w ould employ them only as janitors. And despite labor leaders' no-strike pledge, some white workers staged strikes, called "hate strikes," to keep black workers out of high-paying factory jobs. In 1941. before the United Slates entered the war, African American labor leader A. Philip Randolph planned a march on Washington. D.C.. to protest discrimination against black workers. A African Americans served with distinction during the war. These pilots at a training center in Tuskegee, Alabama, study a map before going aloft in 1943. President Roosevelt wanted to prevent the march, which Randolph predicted would bring 100.000 protesters to the Capitol. Randolph called il off after Roosevelt issued an executive order forbidding racial discrimination in defense plants and government offices. To enforce the order, the government created the Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC). The FEPC investigated companies to make sure that all qualified applicants, regardless of race, were considered. The committee, however, lacked enforcement powers and could not prevent the widespread abuses. In addition, African Americans still had to struggle for equality in pay and promotion. As in World War 1, many blacks moved northward to work in war plants. In crowded cities, they laced discrimination in housing. Resulting tensions sometimes led to outbursts of violence against African Americans. In Detroit in 1943, some 25,000 white workers violated the wartime no-strike pledge and staged a hale strike to protest the promotion of African American workers. White residents of one Detroit neighborhood tried to prevent blacks from moving into the newly constructed Sojourner Truth Housing Project. In June of the same year. 25 blacks and 9 whites died in several days of rioting after a fight between blacks and whites at Belle Isle, a popular Detroit park, spread to other parts of the city. Despite these incidents, most African Americans supported the war. Educator and civil rights activist Mary McLeod Bethune noted that African Americans "led that the fight against fascism is their fight loo," because they realized "that their persecution would be even worse under Hitler." The zoot-suit riots___________________ For Mexican Americans, as for blacks. World War II brought both opportunities and problems. More than 300.000 Mexican Americans served in the military, and 17 earned the Congressional Medal of Honor. The 88th Div ision, an elite combat unit known as the "Blue Devils." consisted mostly of Mexican Americans. Mexican Americans also helped meet home- front labor needs. University of Texas history professor Carlos E. Castaneda served as assistant to the chairman of the FEPC and worked to ■ ■ African Americans and Mexican Americans won better factory jobs during the war but continued to face widespread discrimination. A These Mexican American infantrymen are being trained to use the rapid-firing Garand rifle at a U.S. Army camp. Because many of these soldiers spoke Spanish, army trainers gave instructions in both English and Spanish. improve working conditions for Mexican Americans in Texas. In 1945 ihe FEPC ordered a major Texas oil company to discontinue its hiring and promotion practices that discriminated against Hispanics. As a result of similar FEPC' actions, and the pressing need for workers, many factories opened up jobs to Mexican Americans. Many Mexican Americans moved from the Southwest to industrial centers in the Midwest and on the West Coast. Under a 1942 agreement between the United States and Mexico, thousands of Mexican farm and railroad workers—known as braccros—came north to work in the Southwest during World War II. Bui prejudice and discrimination against Hispanics in jobs, housing, and recreation facilities caused bitter resentment. Relations grew especially hostile in Los Angeles. Mexican American youths had adopted the fad of wearing zoot 'Uits—long jackets, pegged trousers, and wide- brimmed hats. In the summer of 1943, sailors roamed the city attacking zool-suiters in what came to be known as the zoot-suit riots. The government eventually clamped down on the sailors, but not before they had viciously beaten many Mexican Americans. A citizens' committee later determined that the attacks were motivated by racial prejudice. The committee also placed partial responsibility on the police, who had responded to the riots by arresting Mexican Americans, and on biased newspaper reports. During the depression, the government discouraged women, especially married women, from working. The government now urged them to enter the job market to replace departing servicemen and to help win the war against fascism. One government poster showed a woman worker in bandanna and overalls. The caption read: "I'm Proud . . . my husband wants me to do my part." Advertisements and a popular song promoted "Rosie the Riveter." the symbol of patriotic women defense workers. From 1940 to 1944 the number of women in the labor force increased by more than four million. Women worked in war plants and replaced men in a host of jobs ranging from newspaper reporting to truck driving. Many of these new workers were married women who were taking jobs outside the home for the first time. Many women already in the paid work force left traditional "women's work" as domestics and other service jobs to work in factories. SS World War II increased women's participation in the paid labor force and allowed them to move into traditionally male jobs. Women's participation in the war effort gave many of them a new sense of pride and self- worth. One woman aircraft worker finally felt a sense of achievement after feeling "average" at other jobs: *< Foremen from other departments come to my machine to ask me to do some work for them if I have time because they say I'm the best countersinker in the vast building! At forty-nine I've at last become not better than average, but the best! 9 9 ; % itx (Lhf NcU) jjork Games. s Valued armies land is francs k The New York Tima announced the Allied invasion of France on June 6, 1944. After landing at Normandy, these American members of the invasion force rest under a cliff before advancing inland. 44 Units were mixed up, many of them leaderless, most of them not being where they were supposed to be. Shells were coming in all the time; boats burning; vehicles with nowhere to go bogging down, getting hit: supplies gening wet; boats trying to come in all the time, some hitting mines, exploding. 99 The Germans had fortified the Normandy beaches with concrete hunkers, tank traps, and mines. But the Allied disinformation campaign had done its job. Hitler refused to send reinforcements, believing that the main invasion would occur elsewhere. Although the Allies met determined opposition, ihey penetrated 15 miles into France in less than a week. Aided by the French Resistance, the Allies drove steadily eastward. They liberated Paris on Augusi 25. 1944. By early September they had landed over two million troops in western Europe. Another Allied force drove northward through France from the Mediterranean. Meanwhile. Soviet troops pressed Germany from the east. A German counterattack. Although Germany's situation was grave. Hitler would not gin1 up. In September 1944 the Germans launched their first V-2s. long-range rockets aimed at cities in F.ngland and Belgium. Once launched, these bornbs could not be shot down without causing considerable damage. By September 1944 the Allies had crossed the German border. As they paused to bring in supplies and to regroup, the Germans launched their last counterattack. In heavy snow, they drove against the Allies in the thickly wooded Ardennes region of Belgium and northern France, pushing them westward to create a dangerous bulge in the Allied lines. In the resulting Battle of the Bulge, some 2(X),(XX) Germans attacked an initial American force of around 80.(XX). Because many of the regular troops had been transferred to other areas, much of the fighting was done by "cooks, clerks, mechanics, and radio operators." one American soldier remembered. Allied generals rushed reinforcements to the front, and the Allies pushed the Germans back. Artillery-man Francis Tsuzuki, whose Japanese American battalion pursued the Germans, remembered that "the Germans were retreating so fast. At times we were moving . . . more than 100 miles a day." By January 1945 it was clear that the German offensive had failed. In February Roosevelt. Churchill, and Stalin met at the Yalta Conference to plan for the postwar peace. At the conference the leaders agreed to divide and occupy Germany and outlined plans fora new international peace organization. Last days. During the early months of 1945. Allied bornbers continued to blast German industrial and population centers, including Dresden. Leipzig, and Berlin. One of the most devastating— and controversial—attacks hit Dresden in February. This beautiful old city, of little strategic value, was packed with refugees fleeing from the war-torn areas. In one massive two-day attack. Allied bornbers caused the worst firestorms of the war. Total civilian deaths have been estimated at between 30.0(H) and 6().()<H>. ▲ The Allied bornbing of Dresden. Germany, killed many civilians and left many lamous buildings in ruins. Shown here is the damage to the Zwinger Museum, which housed a priceless art collection. _ The mist took pity on the fretted [eroded] structures of earlier generations: the Post Office with its shingle-tortured mansard,1 the red brick minarets [towers] of hulking old houses, factories with stingy and sooted windows, wooden tenements colored like mud. The city was full of such grotesqueriesbut the clean towers were thrusting them from the business center, and on the farther hills were shining new houses, homes—they seemed—for laughter and tranquillity. Over a concrete bridge fled a limousine of long sleek hood and noiseless engine. These people in evening clothes were returning from an all-night rehearsal of a Little Theater play.... Below the bridge curved a railroad, a maze of green and crimson lights. The New York Flyer boomed past, and twenty lines of polished steel leaped into the glare. In one of the skyscrapers the wires of the Associated Press were closing down. The telegraph operators wearily raised their celluloid eye-shades after a night of talking with Paris and Peking. Through the building crawled the scrubwomen, yawning, their old shoes slapping. The dawn mist spun away. Cues [lines] of men with lunch-boxes clumped toward the immensity of new factories, sheets of glass and hollow tile, glittering shops where five thousand men worked beneath one roof, pouring out the honest wares that would be sold up the Euphrates1 and across the veldt.J The whistles rolled out in greeting a chorus cheerful as the April dawn; the song of labor in a city built—it seemed—for giants. *$► 1 * sloping roof 2 things that arc not harmonious } river in Southwest Asia 4 sr.ivslami of southern Africa from Cir yokohama by foshio Mori In LiF Yokohama, as the youngsters call our community, we have twenty-four hours every day ... and morning, noon, and night roll on regularly just as in Boston, Cincinnati, Birmingham, Kansas City. Minneapolis, and Emeryville. When the sun is out, the housewives sit on the porch or walk around the yard, puttering with this and that, and the old men who are in the house when it is cloudy or raining come out on the porch or sit in the shade and read the newspaper. The day is hot All right, they like it. The day is cold. All right, all right. The people of Li I' Yokohama are here. Here, here, they cry with their presence just as the youngsters when the teachers call the roll. And when the people among people are sometimes missing from Li I' Yokohama's roll, perhaps forever, it is another matter; but the news belongs here just as does the weather. Today young and old are at the Alameda ball grounds to see the big game: Alameda Taiiku vs. San Jose Asahis. The great Northern California game is under way. Will Slugger Hironaka hit that southpaw from San Jose? Will the same southpaw make the Alameda sluggers stand on their heads? It's the great question.... It is Sunday evening in Lil' Yokohama, and the late dinners commence. Someone who did not go to the game asks, "Who won today?" "San Jose," we say. "Oh, gee." he says. "But Slugger knocked another home run," we say. "What again? He sure is good!" he says. "Big league scouts ought to size him up." "Sure," we say. Tomorrow is a school day, tomorrow is a work day, tomorrow is another twenty-four hours. In Lil' Yokohama night is almost over. On Sunday nights the block is peaceful and quiet. ... Something is happening to the Etos of the block. All of a sudden they turn in their old '30 Chevrolet for a new Oldsmobile Eight! They follow this with a new living-room set and a radio and a new coat of paint for the house. On Sundays the whole family goes for an outing. Sometimes it is to Fleishhacker Pool or to Santa Cruz. It may be to Golden Gate Park or to the ocean or to their relatives in the country.... They did not strike oil or win the sweepstakes. Nothing of the kind happens in Lil' Yokohama, though it may any day.... What then? *J" 1. What features of the city does Claude McKay describe? Why do you think he wants the moon to shine somewhere else? 2. What are the three things Jean Toomer wishes city dwellers to aspire to? 3. How does Sinclair Lewis describe Zenith's buildings? What do you think he means to show by contrasting the old and new buildings? 4. Why does Toshio Mori describe the daily activities of the Japanese American neighborhood of Lil' Yokohama? A A. Philip Randolph and Eleanor Roosevelt are shown here at a 1946 rally at Madison Square Garden to save the Fair Employment Practices Committee. Congress later abolished the committee. Not all was rosy on the economic front, how - ever. Government measures encouraged employers to give priority in hiring to veterans. The fears of many women, African Americans, and Mexican Americans were realized as they lost their jobs to returning veterans. During the w ar these workers had been encouraged to take jobs in vital defense factories. African Americans had been protected from job discrimination by the Fair Employment Practices Committee. Soon alter the war. however. Congress abolished the committee. Many workers were also hit hard by inflation, With the lifting of most wartime price controls in 1946. prices soared. Meat prices zoomed so high that some markets (vegan selling horsemeat. Blaming the Trutnan administration, angry consumers called the president "Horsemeat Harry." ■ ■ Despite fears of a depression, the American economy prospered after the war, though inflation hurt many workers. Labor unrest. As inflation worsened, people took matters into their own hands. Workers who had sacrificed during the depression and the war now craved a better standard of living. Freed of their Wartime no-strike pledge, millions of workers walked off the job to win wage increases and to preserve some wartime price controls. In 1946—the most strike-filled year in U.S. history after 1919— ■most five million workers walked the picket lines. President Truman, though a backer of labor unions, opposed these strikes because he feared they would disrupt the economy. In April 1946, when some 400,000 coal miners went on strike. Truman ordered the army to establish government control of the mines. United Mine Workers' president John L. Lewis retorted: "You can't dig coal with bayonets." After the courts slapped heavy fines on the union, though. Lew is ordered the miners back to work. When confronted with striking railway workers. Truman threatened to end the strike by drafting the strikers into the army. Faced with Truman's threat, union leaders negotiated an end to the strike. To reduce the strength of organized labor. Congress—under Republican control since the 1946 elections—passed an antiunion hill in 1947. This law, known as the Taft-Hartley Act. allowed courts to end some strikes, outlawed closed-shop agreements (which required union membership for employment), restricted unions' political contributions, and required union officers to swear they were not Communists. President Truman vetoed die bill, but Congress passed it over his veto. The Taft-Hartley Act stirred angry debate. Conservative supporters argued that the law corrected unfair advantages granted to labor in the Wagner-Connery Act (see Chapter 24). Prolabor opponents denounced it as a "slave labor law." The act limited the tactics unions could use. Despite these restrictions, however, organized labor continued to make some gains in the postwar years. For example, in 1948 General Motors and die United Automobile Workers (UAW) signed a contract lying wage increases to cost-of-living increases. Union contracts also began to include provisions for such benefits as retirement pensions and health insurance. ■ ■ The Taft-Hartley Act placed a variety of restrictions on labor unions. ^ The cartoon Three Men on a Horse appeared on February 24. 19S3. Union leaders John L. Lewis, Walter Reuther, and George Meany ride toward the Taft- Hartley Act, hoping to axe some of its restrictions on labor unions. The end of World War II renewed Americans' optimism about the future. Soon, however, the country was caught up in a Cold War with the Soviet Union. President Truman's commitment to contain the spread of communism led the United States into the Korean War and heightened suspicion that there were Communist spies in America. - n 1952, after 20 years of Democratic rule in the White House. Americans chose Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower for president, echoing the campaign chant "We Like Ike." The Eisenhower era, which occupied much of the 1950s, saw continued conflict in many parts of the world. However, the emergence of new leadership in the Soviet Union raised hopes for a thaw in the Cold War. At home the 1950s brought widespread economic prosperity. The United States had long been the world's richest, most productive nation. Now millions of middle-class Americans enjoyed a rising standard of living, leading many to move away from cities and rural areas into suburbs. American life was not all rosy, however. Cold War tensions and nuclear-war fears disturbed much of the nation. Moreover, economic prosperity was not shared equally. Rural residents. African Americans. Hispanic Americans, and Native Americans continued to endure poverty and prejudice. By the mid-1950s, however, a new generation of African Americans started to achieve some successes in the long struggle for the equality of opportunity promised in the Fourteenth Amendment. Watching a 3-D movie, 1953 i 11 Only three of the eight budgets he presided over were balanced. Furthermore, during his years in office the federal debt grew by about 9 percent, to $291 billion. The "GOOD" YEARS For many Americans the 1950s was a decade of economic prosperity. The post-World War II spending spree that began in the late 1940s continued into the 1950s. Defense spending, triggered by the Korean War, also boosted growth in the early 1950s. Unemployment and inflation rarely edged above 5 percent. By the mid-1950s more than 60 percent of Americans were earning a "middle-class" income, at that time considered $3,000-$ 10.000 annually. Never before, the popular media declared, had so many people enjoyed such prosperity. "This is a new kind of capitalism." declared the Reader's Oiliest, "capitalism for the many, not for the few." Not everyone shared in the good times, however. A 1957 study found nearly 40 million Americans living below or near the poverty line of $3,000 for a family of four. Almost half of the nation's poor lived in rural areas, where they suffered from poor nutrition, inadequate medical care, and lack of education. ■ ■The 1950s saw rapid economic expansion and prosperity for many, but the prosperity was not evenly distributed. People on the move_________________ The 1950s was a decade of geographic mobility. Millions of newly prosperous whites, especially young couples, moved to the suburbs that developers built around the nation's cities. At the same time, many poor rural citizens migrated to the cities in search of a better life. The urban communities. Most of the rural residents w ho moved to the cities to escape poverty found little improvement in their economic status. By I960 more than 20 million city dwellers were living in poverty. While large numbers of poor rural whites flocked to the cities, African Americans consti- ▲ Puerto Rican immigrants developed strong community organizations in their New York neighborhoods. Here, Puerto Rican boys play in the game room of the Good Neighbor Church and Community Center located in Manhattan. luted the single largest group in the rural-to-urban movement. In a continuation of the Great Migration, which had begun during World War I (see Chapter 20), African Americans left the South for the industrial cities of the North. This northward movement peaked in the mid-1950s, with the African American population of some northern cities growing by about 2,000 each week. Wide-scale unemployment caused many Puerto Ricans to leave the island for the mainland. Some 40,000-50,000 migrated annually in the 1950s. About 70 percent of Puerto Rican migrants settled in New York City. Many Mexicans also moved to the United States in order to find work. While most immigrants from Mexico had previously settled in rural areas, the new immigrants tended to settle in cities such as Los Angeles, Denver, LI Paso. Phoenix, and San Antonio. By I960 about 80 percent of Hispanic Americans were living in cities. ill a fSS'A z* Saws Relocation under pressure. Thousands of American Indians also moved to the cities in the 1950s. But unlike other migrants, Indians did so under federal pressure. To promote the assimilation of American Indians into mainstream society, the Eisenhower administration supported passage of the Relocation Act of 1956. The act ► In 1958, American Indians protested when the federal government seized reservation land for a power project in Niagara Palls. This Tuscarora boy was photographed as he walked the picket line. Mrban renewal The changing work force also affected those moving to the cities. Automation had eliminated many of the semiskilled jobs traditionally taken by city newcomers. Skilled workers often found that their way U> better jobs was blocked by discrimination. Nowhere was discrimination more obvious than in housing. Prevented by poverty and by discriminatory real-estate practices from moving into newer neighborhoods, African Americans, Hispanics. and Native Americans were generally limited to crowded tenements and old housing in the poorest neighborhoods. Eventually, however, these neighborhoods provided a sense of community for those who lived there. Local stores, churches, and social clubs gave structure to the lives of those struggling to adjust to the cities. As one resident of El Barrio, New York's Puerto Rican neighborhood, observed: 44 This is our neighborhood.... We consider this part of the city to be ours.... The stores, barbershops, restaurants, butcher shops, churches, funeral parlors.... everything is all Latino. 99 Government officials, however, saw only neglected, shabby buildings. To improve inner-city housing, the federal government proposed urban renewal programs to replace old. run-down inner- city buildings with new ones. Across the country the government bulldozed older urban neighborhoods to ▲ A poor family crowds into the kitchen of a small tenement in Harlem, New York City. make way for some 417.000 low-income public housing units. Most of these units were cramped apartments, so small, one resident said, "You feel like you can't breathe." The new high-rise buildings also had a cold, impersonal atmosphere. The sense of community that people had felt in the old neighborhoods was gone. IDENTIFY and explain the significance of the following: Oveta Culp Hobby, modern Republicanism. Relocation Act, termination, Highway Act, baby boom, automation, George Meany, Landrum-Griffin Act, urban renewal. 1. MAIN IDEA How did the American population shift during the 1950s? 2. MAIN IDEA What changes occurred in the work force during the 1950s? 3. IDENTIFYING CAUSE AND EFFECT Why are the 1950s considered boom years? How were American values affected by the economic boom? 4. WRITING TO EVALUATE Imagine you are a television critic during the 1950s. Write an article for TV Guide that assesses the portrayal of ethnic groups, women, and families on television. 5. HYPOTHESIZING What effect did discrimination in housing have on ethnic groups? Why were some ethnic communities upset with urban renewal programs? A To halt the flow of refugees into West Berlin, East Germans set up blockades along subway and elevated rail lines and cut off key crossing points between both sectors. This photograph shows one view of the Berlin Wall in October 1961. When Kennedy look office, a plan lo overthrow Casiro was already in the works. The plan called for an invasion of Cuba by a group of anti-Castro Cuban refugees trained and financed by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). Kennedy gave the green light for the plan to proceed. The invasion was a disaster. When the nearly 1,500 rebels came ashore at Cuba's Bay of Pigs on April 17, l%l. they were quickly pinned down by Cuban forces. The US. naval and air support that the rebels expected never materialized—at the last minute Kennedy vetoed any direct U.S. involvement. Equally damaging, the invasion failed to spark a popular uprising among the Cuban people. It took Cuban military forces less than 72 hours to crush the invasion and take some 1.200 surviving rebels prisoner. Kennedy accepted full responsibility for the failed invasion, but his gesture did little to quiet criticism. One American journalist complained that the Bay of Pigs had made the United Slates look "like fools to our friends, rascals to our enemies, and incompetents to the rest." The invasion also drove Cuban leaders closer to the Soviets. *lHE BERLIN CRISIS______________________ The Bay of Pigs convinced Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev that Kennedy was weak and could be intimidated. During a summit meeting in June 1961. Khrushchev issued an ultimatum: the West must recognize the sovereignty of Communist East Germany and remove all troops from West Berlin. Kennedy refused, saying that he intended to honor the United States' commitment to defend West Berlin. The situation worsened in mid-August, when the East Germans threw up a barbed-wire barrier across Berlin, cutting off traffic between East and West Berlin. Kennedy responded by sending more American troops lo the city. The Soviets also bolstered their military forces there. For a few days American and Soviet soldiers eyed each other nervously across the barbed w ire. Tensions gradually eased when it became clear that the real goal of Khrushchev's ultimatum had been fulfilled. The barrier had halted the exodus of East Germans, who during the summer of I%1 had lied to the West through Berlin at a rate of some 1.000 per day. In time the East Germans replaced the barbed wire with a wall of gray concrete and watchtowcrs. The Berlin Wall became the most recognizable symbol of the Cold War. After Berlin. Khrushchev continued to try lo test America's commitment to containment, leading lo the Cold War's greatest crisis. To ward off another invasion, Fidel Casiro asked the Soviet Union lo provide him with defensive weapons. The Soviets complied and also offered offensive weapons— nuclear missiles that could reach major cities of the eastern United States. CIA officials monitored the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba throughout the summer of l%2. But they did not grasp the full extent of the buildup until October 14. when an American U-2 spy plane photographed numerous missile launching pads near the Cuban town of San Cristobal. Additional lJ-2 flights over the island located obscure the movement's gains. It also inspired other groups, such as Mexican Americans and American Indians, to demand better treatment. During the 1960s a group that would become the United Farm Workers (UFW). led by Cesar Chavez, began to organize Western migrant workers, most of whom were Mexican Americans, to win better wages and working conditions. In 1965 Chavez called a strike of California grape pickers and launched a nationwide boycott of grapes picked by nonunion workers. By 1970 the UFW had won most of its demands. As in the African American civil rights movement, many younger members of the Mexican American movement began demanding more- radical action. Young Mexican American college students organized the Chicano movement, which emphasized pride in Mexican culture and heritage. Such pride was reflected in the numerous Mexican American political parties that sprang up around the country, most notably La Raza Unida ("the united race"), founded in 1970. Some American Indians organized into the Red Power movement, which demanded, among other things, that the U.S. government pay tribes for lands that had been taken from them illegally. In 1968 three Minnesota Chippewas organized the American Indian Movement (AIM), which would become the major force in the Red Power movement during the 1970s (see Chapter 31). In 1969 a group of Red Power advocates occupied the abandoned federal prison on Alcatraz Island near San Francisco. The protesters offered to buy the island from the government with beads and cloth—the same price paid by the Dutch for Manhattan Island. The occupation of Alcatraz lasted for many months, until federal authorities finally removed the protesters by force. All these movements emphasized ethnic pride and group loyalty. Popular culture in the 1950s had promoted the message that to be truly "American" meant to be white and middle class. In the 1960s. African Americans. Hispanics. American Indians and other groups insisted that the meaning of American must expand to include all citizens equally, not just one favored group. The rise of these movements also raised a central question: Could oppressed groups discover their own identities and promote their own interests yet at the same time retain a sense of citizenship and belonging to the larger American society? This important question still confronts us today. ■ 5 The civil rights movement inspired other groups, such as Mexican Americans and American Indians, to fight for their rights. IDENTIFY and explain the significance of the following: Southern Christian Leadership Conference, nonviolent resistance, sit-in. Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, Congress of Racial Equality, Freedom Riders, March on Washington, Civil Rights Act of 1964, Freedom Summer. Voting Rights Act. Black Power. Malcolm X, Kerner Commission, United Farm Workers, Cesar Chavez, Chicano movement, American Indian Movement. LOCATE and explain the importance of the following: Greensboro, North Carolina; Birmingham, Alabama; Albany, Georgia; Selma, Alabama; Memphis, Tennessee. 1. MAIN IDEA What tactic did members of the early civil rights movement use to fight for equal rights? What effect did this tactic have on public opinion? 2. MAIN IDEA What event helped bring about passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964? What incidents helped expand African American voter registration? 3. MAIN IDEA How did the African American civil rights movement affect other ethnic movements? 4. WRITING TO EXPRESS A VIEWPOINT Imagine you are a Freedom Rider. Write a letter to the editor of a southern newspaper explaining why you feel it is necessary to complete the rides. 5. TAKING A STAND Take a stand in support of either Martin Luther King, Jr.'s method of negotiation and nonviolent resistance or Malcolm X's method of separation and self-defense. State the strengths and possible effects of that method on the civil rights movement. warned: "1 believe lhat history will record we have made a great mistake. . . . We arc in effect giving the President war-making powers in the absence of a declaration of war." In other words, in passing the resolution. Congress had given up its constitutional power to declare war. ■ ■ The Tonkin Gulf Resolution allowed American presidents to fight an undeclared war in Vietnam—contrary to the intent of the U.S. Constitution. American forces in Vietnam With the Tonkin Gulf Resolution in his pocket. President Johnson responded to his advisers' call for a buildup, or escalation, of American military forces in Vietnam. He ordered the Selective Service, the agency charged with carrying out the military draft, to begin calling up young men to serve in the armed forces. In April 1965 the Selective Sen ice notified 13.700 draftees, and by December some 4().(XX) had received "greetings" from their local draft boards. During the war more than 2.6 million Americans served in Vietnam. In the beginning most were professional soldiers, already enlisted in the armed forces. But as the demand for troops grew, more and more draftees were shipped to Vietnam. At the height of the war. American soldiers in Vietnam were, on average, younger (19), poorer, and less educated than those w'ho had served in World War II or in the Korean War. All young men who registered for the draft did not have an equal chance of serving in Vietnam. One out of four was excused from service for health reasons. Another 30 percent received non-health-related exemptions or deferments (postponements of service), most often for college enrollment. Mainly because of college deferments, young men from higher-income families were the least likely to be drafted. As a result, the poor served in numbers far greater than their proportion in the general population—as they had in most of the previous wars. African and Hispanic Americans served in combat in especially high numbers, particularly during the early years of the w ar. Some of these soldiers protested that black and Hispanic soldiers were being asked to do more than their share of the fighting—and dying. In 1965. for example. African Americans accounted for almost 24 percent of all battle deaths, even though they made up only 11 percent of the U.S. population. 600.000 0. 500.000 - h 400.000 - | 200.000 - 100,000 - 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 Year U.S. Battle Deaths Year Killed 1964 279 1965 1.432 1966 5.047 1967 9.463 1968 14,623 1969 9.426 1970 4.230 1971 1.376 1972 361 Source: National Archives and Records Administration INVOLVEMENT DEEPENS U.S. military involvement in Vietnam increased sharply following the 19(4 Tonkin Gull Resolution. Q BUILDING GRAPH SKILLS Between what two years was the increase in troop levels the greatest? In what year were troop levels and battle deaths the highest? Commentary Why Did the North Prevail? Though some people argue that the United States did not lose the Vietnam War, the nation obviously did not achieve its goal—an independent, non- Communist South Vietnam. What contributed to this failure, one that haunted the nation and countless Americans for decades to come? People have put forward many reasons to explain why the Communists prevailed against ARVN and U.S. forces. Without doubt the Communists* fierce desire for a united Vietnam gave them the will to fight on in the face of overwhelming military opposition. Like the French, American strategists underestimated the strength of this nationalist feeling among the Vietnamese people. For the Vietnamese, the war against America was a continuation of their decades-long anticolonial crusade. As one North Vietnamese general commented of the Americans. "They can't get it into their heads that the Vietnam War has to be understood in terms of the strategy of a people's war. that it's not a question of men and materiel, that these things are irrelevant to the problem." At the same time, ineffective South Vietnamese leadership undercut the Americans' war effort. A succession of U.S.- sponsored political leaders, most of whom were generals, failed to inspire popular support among the South Vietnamese. As the war dragged on, a growing number of Americans began doubting that the fall of South Vietnam to communism would seriously threaten America's interests or standing in tire world. The ever climbing death toll and the failure of American leaders to admit the lack of progress resulted in a loss of public trust in the government and a steep decline in support for the war. Some analysts claim that political and military strategies were at fault. Some of these analysts charge that the United Slates was not aggressive enough in pursuing its war aims. Others point out that U.S. advisers trained the South Vietnamese forces in conventional warfare rather than in tactics belter suited to Vietnam's geography. Furthermore, these analysts charge, the tactics of conventional war cannot effectively counter the skillful use of guerrilla tactics. Still other critics go so far as to argue that any use of military power to solve an essentially political problem was doomed to failure. ■ ■A determined foe, ineffective South Vietnamese leadership, and inappropriate military strategy and tactics all contributed to America's inability to win the war. Vietnam after the war The war ravaged the Vietnamese people. According to Saigon government figures, some 185.000 ARVN soldiers died in combat. Estimates put the number of South Vietnamese civilian dead at nearly a half million. The exact number of Vietcong and North Vietnamese Army war casualties is unknown, but estimates place the total at nearly I million dead. In addition, approximately 879,000 Vietnamese were orphaned and 181.000 were disabled. Among the disabled were those exposed to Agent Orange. These people have been plagued by high rates of liver cancer and other illnesses. Nearly 1.5 million Vietnamese fled Vietnam after the fall of Saigon. Desperate to escape economic and social hardships, many braved the mugh South China Sea and Gulf of Thailand in tiny, crowded boats. They were joined by thousands of other Southeast Asian refugees, such as the Hmong A Many Vietnamese were forced to flee their homes following the Vietnam War. This photograph shows a small boat packed with Vietnamese refugees arriving in Hong Kong. (muhng) of Laos, also fleeing grave postwar conditions. More than 730,000 of these refugees have settled in the United States since the war. Vietnam veterans after More than 2.6 million Americans were involved in the Vietnam War. More than 58.000 of them died; over 300,000 were wounded, and nearly 2,300 are missing and presumed dead. Improved emergency medical services saved many soldiers with severe wounds that in previous wars would have been fatal. As a result, there are an unprecedented number of paralyzed and otherw ise severely disabled Vietnam veterans. More than 600 Americans were prisoners of war iPOWs). Some POWs spent six years or more in North Vietnamese jails, where they endured long periods or solitary confinement and torture. One of the most visible tragedies of the war was the fate of its veterans. No ticker-tape parades celebrated the return of soldiers from the Vietnam conflict. On the contrary, veterans often became lightning rods for the anger, guilt, or shame of fellow citizens frustrated by the war; other Americans met them with stony silence. The public's negative reaction enraged and demoralized many veterans. They had faced a life-and-death struggle, obeying orders in what they trusted was their country's national interests. In the book Horn on the Fourth of July (1976), Vietnam veteran Ron Kovie recalled his pain over this lack of support; if I didn't want to believe it at first— people protesting against us when we were putting our lives on the line for our coun- try... . How could they do this to us? Many of us would not be coming back and many others would be wounded or maimed. 99 From Born on the Fourth of Jufy by Ron Kov"c ©1976 Thousands of Vietnam veterans turned to drugs or failed to kick the drug habits they had developed during ihe war. Many others had trouble Finding jobs or settling down and starting families. Some became homeless. Soldiers who were involved in the spraying of defoliants later developed certain forms of can- ▲ One of the legacies of the Vietnam War was the number of paralyzed and severely disabled veterans. Shown here are marchers in the Vietnam veterans parade held in New York City on May 7, I98S. eer at an unusually high rale, and children of these veterans had a very high rate of birth defects. Research in the 1970s linked their medical problems to Agent Orange. In 1984 the manufacturers of the chemicals created a relief fund for the veterans and their families, and in 1991 the federal government extended permanent disability benefits to these veterans. ■ ■The war left economic, emotional, and physical scars on the people of Vietnam and on many of the Americans who served there. Public policy legacies________________ The war shook Americans* confidence in their government. Many were shocked to discover that their leaders had misled them during the war. The actions of Johnson and Nixon raised a crucial constitutional question: tinder what authority can Throughout the 1960s the United States increased its involvement In the Vietnam War. As the war escalated, so did criticism of the conflict. A weary and unpopular Lyndon Johnson decided not to run for reelection in 1968. Republican Richard Nixon won the election, promising to end the war in Vietnam and to restore "law and order" to society. ood evening. This is the thirty-seventh time I have spoken to you from this office." President Richard Nixon's voice cracked with emotion as he addressed the American people on August 8, 1974. Less than two years earlier, he had won reelection in a landslide victory. Now he was announcing his resignation. Facing impeachment for his role in the Watergate affair, the most serious scandal ever to hit the White House, Richard Nixon became the first U.S. president to resign. Vice President Gerald Ford served out the remainder of Nixon's term. In 1976 the nation elected a Democratic president. Jimmy Carter—a Washington outsider whose promise of honesty in government appealed to many Americans. Carter's popularity soon plummeted. however, and he was voted out of office after one term. Amid these political twists and turns, American society changed rapidly as many people moved to the Southwest and new waves of immigrants arrived from Latin America and Asia. In civil rights movement continued to influence other groups seeking equal rights—particularly women. Hispanic Americans, people with disabilities, and American Indians. No CrhS ft F- NS> Gas station sign. 1973 /924- in office 1977-1981 The common reaction to Georgia governor Jimmy Carter's announcement that he was running for president was "Jimmy who?" Few people outside of his home state were familiar with the peanut farmer from Plains. Soon, however. voters began to discover that there was much more to this southern politician than his large grin. A highly ranked graduate of the United States Naval Academy. Carter had worked as a nuclear engineer before entering politics. Carter had a balanced. modern relationship with his wife. Rosalynn Carter took an active and public role in political affairs, traveling around the world to represent her husband's views. Meanwhile Jimmy Carter shared the household chores, such as cooking, caring for their daughter, and grocery shopping. One interviewer was shocked to see the candidate sewing a button onto his own jacket during the presidential campaign. When asked if he always did his own sewing. Carter simply mumbled with thread in mouth, "Uh-huh." "town meetings" and radio and television call-in sessions to keep in touch with the people. Unlike Richard Nixoti. Jimmy Carter seemed determined to keep his administration open to public view. Carter's economic policy. One of Carter's first tasks was to stimulate the economy, which was just beginning to emerge from several years of recession. Some eight million Americans—7.8 percent of the work force—were unemployed. The unemployment rate among African Americans and Hispanic Americans was 13 percent. To revive the economy and create jobs. Carter implemented a series of economic measures, including a corporate tax cut. The Carter administration's policies helped reduce unemployment slightly, but they also fueled inflation, which reached 13.3 percent by 1979. To curb inflation. Carter called for voluntary wage and price controls, along with cuts in funding for social services But Carter's anti- inllalion program produced more unemployment. By the summer of 1980. the economy was once again mired in recession. Facing the energy crisis. A major cause of the nation's economic woes was the high cost of imported oil. To reduce the nation's oil dependence, Congress created the Department of Energy in 1977. The following year ii passed the National Energy Act to relax controls on the price of natural gas. Despite these efforts, world events continued to affect die nation's energy supply. In January 1979 a revolution in Iran disrupted world oil shipments. A few months later. OPEC raised the price of oil 50 percent, leading to another U.S. energy crisis (see the chart on page 902). As gasoline supplies dwindled, many gas stations closed or reduced their hours. Tempers Oared as frustrated drivers had to wait hours to fill ▼ High energy coses hurt many groups during the late 1970s, including farmers. On February 6, 1979, protesting farmers drove their tractors down Pennsylvania Avenue to demonstrate in front of the White House. Section 4 u m ■ How did the civil rights movement continue in the I 970s? How did some whites respond? ■ What did American Indian leaders fight for during the 1970s? ■ What issues both encouraged and divided the women's movement during the 1970s? ■ How did the new immigrants in the 1970s help shape society? u ring the 1970s American society underwent important social changes. African Americans made further gains, despite a growing white backlash. Hispanic Americans. American Indians, people with disabilities, and women also made legal and economic strides. Amid these changes, society as a whole was evolving as Americans were living longer and moving more often, and new immigrants were swelling the population. A woman with visual impairment demonstrating for civil rights The legacy of the civil The 1970s brought some progress in the area of civil righls. Though a 1975 Civil Rights Commission report found that many African Americans were still being kept from voting by various means, by the end of the 1970s over 4.5(H) African Americans held elective office—three times the number in 1969. The roster of elected black officials in 1978 included 16 members of the House of Representatives and 170 mayors, including those of Los Angeles, Atlanta. Detroit, and Washington. D.C. As new African American leaders gained political experience, they formed strong alliances and effective lobbies. They also worked hard to get out the black vole, a key factor in Jimmy Carter's electoral victory in 1976. As president. Carter helped open the doors of the federal government to African Americans, naming more blacks to federal jobs than any previous president. In addition to his choice of Andrew Young as UN ambassador. Carter appointed the first African American woman to a cabinet post Patricia Harris as secretary of Housing and Urban Development. During the 1970s Hispanic Americans also began to reap some rewards for their political struggles of the previous decade. Between 1974 and 1987 the number of elected Hispanic officials in the United States more than doubled. Growing numbers of Hispanic Americans were appointed to federal jobs, while Hispanic groups such as LULAC—League of United Latin American Citizens—mounted lobbying efforts and helped raise national awareness of Hispanic concerns. In California the United Farm W'orkers won a key victory in 1975 with the passage of a state law extending legal protection to migrant farm workers. In addition, the Southwest Voter Registration Education Project helped Hispanic Americans register to vote. Americans with disabilities also made their voices heard in the 1970s. Why. they asked, should 918 ■! CHAPTER 3i < Phyllis Schlafly was one of the most vocal critics of the ERA during the 1970s and the 1980s. the 1982 deadline set by Congress, the ERA was slill three states short of ratification. As a result, it failed to become law. The women's movement made many political gains: however. it also alienated many women who viewed it as a movement primarily for privileged white women. Many women from working-class and ethnic communities felt that the leaders of NOW could not identify with the problems they faced every day. The movement also alienated many middle- class women who felt that it downgraded the family and condemned women who chose to be full-time homemakers. These women viewed Roe v. Wade and the ERA as threats to traditional family life. Critics warned that the ERA would "nullify any laws that make any distinction between men and women." Eventually, they claimed, men and women would even be forced to share public restrooms! When the ERA failed to win ratification, conservative critic Phyllis Schlafly proclaimed: "The defeat of the Equal Rights Amendment is the greatest victory for women's rights since the woman's suffrage movement of 1920." ■ ■ The women's movement was encouraged by legislation such as the ERA, but the issues alienated many women from the movement. As different groups in American society worked for change, the society itself was evolving. Thanks to medical advances. Americans were living longer, a phenomenon referred to as the "graying of America." At the same time, the birthrate was dropping sharply, to an average of two births per woman. For years, experts had been promoting this level of zero population growth (ZPG)—a birthrate that replaces the existing population hut does not increase it—in hopes of preventing overpopulation. The divorce rate continued to rise during the 1970s. In 1979. 5.3 divorces were registered per 1,000 Americans, up from 2.2 in 1960. Increasingly, many Americans were abandoning the idea that marriage was necessarily a lifelong commitment. Americans also moved more often in the 1970s than in the past. During the decade a growing number of Americans migrated from the Nonh and the East to the Sunbelt states of the South and the West, seeking a warmer climate and a more suburban life-style. This migration caused the population grow th of California. Texas, and Florida to outpace that of the rest of the nation. Another key factor in America's evolution during this period was continued immigration, mostly from Asia and Latin America. Most Latin American immigrants came from Mexico, hut a sizable number also came from the Caribbean. In 1980, for example, nearly 12().(XK) Cubans lied the ▲ Many multigenerational Asian families, such as the one pictured here, immigrated to the United States in the 1970s. ■ a CHAPTER 3 I ▲ The Bilingual Education Act of 1974 encouraged public schools, such as the one shown here, to provide students with instruction in their primary languages while they learned English. Communist island for the United States, settling mainly in the Miami area. Economically successful, Cuban Americans became an important interest group in American politics. Of the 1.6 million immigrants from Asia in the 1970s, most came from the Philippines and South Korea. China, which opened the way for emigration after President Nixon's visit, supplied some of the new Asian population as well. Many of these Chinese immigrants were highly skilled and well-educated professionals fleeing political persecution. Despite their backgrounds, however, some of these immigrants found when they arrived that their inability to speak English, as well as discrimination, kept them from obtaining well-paying jobs. The experiences of Wei- Chi Poon, a biology professor from China, and her husband, a skilled architect, were not unique. Neither knew any English when they immigrated to the United States. As a result, she worked in a laundry for $1.85 an hour, while he took on two low-paying jobs. Congress tried to aid such immigrants by passing two new laws. The Voting Rights Act of 1975 required states and communities with large numbers of non-English speakers to print voting materials in various foreign languages. The Bilingual Education Act of 1974 encouraged public schools to provide instruction to students in their primary languages while they learned English. Although some critics opposed bilingual education—charging that it slowed llie assimilation of immigrants into American life—there was little question that the United Slates was becoming an increasingly multicultural society. Coping with new immigrants, both legal and illegal, would remain an important issue for America. ■ ■ Large-scale Asian and Latin American immigration during the I 970s prompted support for bilingual education. IDENTIFY and explain the significance of the following: Patricia Harris, League of United Latin American Citizens. Rehabilitation Act, Education for All Handicapped Children Act, affirmative action, University of California v. Bokke, Russell Means, Education Amendments Act. Roe v. Wade, Equal Rights Amendment, zero population growth. Sunbelt, Voting Rights Act of 1975, Bilingual Education Act. 1. MAIN IDEA Why did American Indians begin to organize during this period? 2. MAIN IDEA What influence did the Asian and Latin American immigrants in the 1970s have on American society? 3. IDENTIFYING CAU5E AND EFFECT How did the impact of the civil rights movement continue into the 1970s? How did some whites respond to this legacy? 4. WRITING TO EXPRESS A VIEWPOINT Imagine you are a political observer of the women's movement. Write an essay that summarizes the impact of Roe v. Wade and the ERA on the movement. 5. LINKING HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY Why did many Americans move to the Sunbelt states during the 1970s? What effect did this migration have on population patterns? supply-side economics argument that lowering the top income tax rates would spur economic growth. Supporters of Reaganomics claimed that people would invest their tax savings in businesses, thereby creating jobs, increasing consumer spending, and generating higher tax revenues. Congress responded to Reagan's program by passing a three- year plan to cut federal income taxes by 25 percent. Congress also supported another part of Reagan's economic plan—drastic cuts in government regulation of industries such as television, trucking, airlines, and banking. The Reagan administration's probusiness, antiregulation stance was typified by the Department of Interior's handling of public lands. Against the objections of environmentalists, Secretary of the Interior James Watt leased huge areas of the seafloor to private companies searching for oil and gas. He also leased federal lands to coal companies. At first, Reaganomics seemed to work. By 1983 the inflation rate had dropped to a manageable 4 percent. Americans went on a shopping spree similar to those in the 1920s and 1950s. Business revived, the stock market soared, and the future looked bright. Critics were quick to point out that not all Americans benefited equally from the recovery. Deep cuts in social programs—an important element in Reaganomics—hurt the poor. And although employment rose overall, joblessness remained high among African Americans and Hispanic Americans, especially unskilled workers in the inner cities. Unemployment among factory workers in the Midwest, once America's industrial heartland, also remained high. As a result, homelessness increased dramatically. Critics also charged that Reagan's tax cuts favored the wealthy and that spending cuts and deregulation weakened programs that protected consumers, the needy, and the environment. They also warned that big tax cuts combined with increased military spending (another important element of Reaganomics) would produce enormous deficits in the federal budget. ■ ■ Reaganomics stimulated the economy by cutting taxes and industrial regulations, but critics claimed the policies hurt the poor and increased the federal deficit. f?EAGAN AND THE COLD WAR The Reagan administration's emphasis on increased military spending was in part a reflection of Ronald Reagan's strong anti-Communist views. He took a hard line against the Soviet Union, even branding it an "evil empire." To counter the Soviet threat. Reagan called for new weapons systems and an increased U.S. presence in such areas as the Indian Ocean and the Persian Gulf. * 1911- One of Reagan's political gifts was a sharp wit. After his first debate with Jimmy Carter in the 1980 election, a reporter asked if he had been nervous appearing on stage with the president. "No. not at all," Reagan replied, then referred to his past career as an actor: "I've been on the same stage with John Wayne." Reagan's wit helped reassure the nation after a / ^ lone gunman shot him on in office 1981-1989 March 30. 1981. As the wounded president was wheeled into the operating room, he looked around at the surgeons and quipped. "Please assure me that you are all Republicans!" While he was recuperating in intensive care, Reagan sent several humorous notes to his staff members, including one that read, "If I had had this much attention in Hollywood, I'd have ■s. stayed there!" Section 3 AMERICA IN THE 1990s ■ How did immigration patterns of the 1990s affect the United States? ■ What were some problems urban Americans confronted? ■ How did government and businesses attempt to help working parents? ■ What health challenges did the nation face? caving behind the 1980s, Americans faced both promising trends and pressing social problems. The 1990 U.S. census revealed a population that was increasingly urban, southern and western, and immigrant. Americans worked to overcome the economic problems and racial divisions that fractured many cities in the 1990s. Meanwhile, the rising costs of health care and the spread of AIDS contributed to the nationwide health-care crisis. Rally supporting AIDS research In November 1991, U.S. Coasi Guard vessels intercepted boatloads of Haitians bound for the United States. A military coup had ousted Haiti's first democratically elected president. Jean-Berlrand Aristide. As political and economic chaos spread, thousands of Haitians sailed to the United States. However, bound by a 1981 agreement with Haiti and facing economic troubles of its own, the United States began to return the Haitians to their home country. Many politicians criticized the government's policy. "Returning Vietnamese. Russian Jews. Cubans. Nicaraguans and others back to the repressive countries from which they were fleeing would have been unthinkable." declared Senator ► The U.S. Coast Guard intercepted Haitian refugees, such as the family shown here, and took them to a temporary "tent-city" at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base. Some 2,500 refugees were housed at this base before being returned to Haiti. Connie Mack of Florida. "How can we justify it for Haitians?" The Haitian issue underscored the continuing debate within the United States over immigration. The 1990 census revealed lhat more immigrants had come to the United States in the 1980s than in any decade since 1910. and more than 80 percent 946 : of them came from Asia. Latin America, and the Caribbean. This influx of immigrants alarmed many native-born Americans. Many blamed immigrants for taking jobs from native-born residents. Some also argued that the presence of large numbers of immigrants willing to work for lower wages serv ed to keep wages dow n for all workers. Supporters of immigration offered a different view. They argued that immigrants created new businesses that revitalized urban areas and helped the economy. In addition, supporters of immigration noted that many recent immigrants, most notably those from India, the Philippines. China, and Korea, on average had more schooling than either native-born Americans or European immigrants. Asian immigrants, they pointed out. made up about one third of all engineers in California's center of computer technology, the Silicon Valley. ■ ■ Opposition to immigration increased in the I 990s, although immigrants made many contributions to U.S. businesses and industries. President Bush recognized these benefits and signed the Immigration Act of 1990. The new law changed U.S. immigration policy by increasing the number of immigrants and doubling the number of skilled workers allowed into the United States each year. The act also authorized special visas for foreign investors interested in establishing businesses in economically depressed areas of the country. In 1996 during Clinton's first term. Congress passed an immigration bill to fight the continuing problem of illegal immigration by strengthening control of the borders. Much of the Immigration and Naturalization Service's increased control efforts focus on the area around San Diego. California—a point where almost half of all illegal immigrants enter the United States. The 1996 immigration bill also contained provisions aimed at keeping new immigrants off welfare rolls. For example, sponsors of immigrants must have incomes at least 125 percent above the poverty level. The bill also prevents legal immigrants who are not U.S. citizens from receiving most forms of welfare benefits. Many believe this provision will encourage immigrants to become citizens. Already the number of naturalizations has increased from some 5(X),(MX) in 1994 to 1.000.000 in 1995. If current trends hold, the United States will w itness increased immigration in the coming years Thus. Americans will continue to grapple with the question of whether to welcome immigrants. Cities of diversity____________________ Conflicts experienced by immigrants included the riots that erupted in April 1992 in south central Los Angeles. The area exploded in violence after the acquittal of four white police officers accused of beating Rodney King, an African American Most of the violence affected neighborhood residents and businesses as many people were beaten and robbed. Some looters specifically targeted Korean-owned businesses. The riots disheartened people who had worked to improve relations among African ► Tension flared between the African American and Cuban American communities in Miami after Nelson Mandela, shown here, spoke favorably of Fidel Castro. Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Asian Americans in Los Angeles. Sylvia Castillo, a Mexican American community activist who was a target of the violence, noted. "I was outraged by the verdict and had always struggled against racism. All I could think was: 'Why are they [rioters] doing this to me?"' Rodney King himself urged people to "try to work it out" peacefully, asking, "Can we all get along?" Most residents in south central Los Angeles did not take part in the riots, and many people braved the violence to rescue victims. Miami. Florida, deemed the "new Ellis Island" by psychologist Marvin Dunn, also experienced increased immigration and racial tensions. In 1992 Miami had more foreign-born residents— including Cubans, Haitians, Nicaraguans, and Peruvians—than any other city in the United States. Boosted by a thriving tourist industry, the city's economy had boomed in recent years, but it had also seen three riots since 1980. Tension in Miami was particularly strong between Cuban Americans and African Americans. In 1990, black leaders began a national boycott of Miami's convention facilities after Cuban American city officials snubbed South African leader Nelson Mandela. Mandela had made favorable remarks about Fidel Castro. Cuba's Communist leader whose regime many Cuban Americans had tied. After Hispanic American businesspeople agreed to hire more African Americans and patronize black-owned businesses, black leaders ordered an end to the boycott. Economic problems compounded many urban problems. Some analysts argued that bad economic conditions contributed to the Los Angeles riots. Once home to major companies such as Bethlehem Steel and Goodyear, Los Angeles lost over 200.000 jobs in 1991 alone. Such loss of inner-city jobs was repeated across the country. Many of the companies that left the inner cities relocated to the suburbs, changing the faces of both the cities and the suburbs. Many suburban areas now contain more office space than midtown Manhattan. While this development means more jobs for suburban areas, inner-city residents despair of again attracting the industries that could reduce unemployment in their communities. ■ 5 Inner cities experienced racial conflicts and lost jobs to the suburbs in the I 980s and I 990s. IVoRK AND FAMILY____________________________ Many observers expressed concern about the growing number of single-parent families in the 1980s and 1990s. From 1970 to 1991 the number of children living in single-parent households more than doubled. In 1991 some 20 percent of alJ white children. 60 percent of all African American children, and 30 percent of all Hispanic children lived with one parent, usually their mothers. Most single parents faced serious financial burdens. Patricia Mull, a Los Angeles seamstress who stretched her income to send her daughter to private school, described the stress she faced: "I worry about the rent. 1 worry if 1 can make the payment in time. I worry if I have enough money White children African American children Hispanic American children 1970* 1980 Year 1991 * Data not available for Hispanic children. Note Hispanic children can be of any race. Source: Stotisticoi Abstract of the United Stales POVERTY RATE Single-parent families are more likely to live in poverty. In 1990 the poverty rate for single-parent Hispanic families was 68 percent, for single-parent African American families about 67 percent, and tor single-parent white families nearly 45 percent El BUILDING GRAPH SKILLS What was the percent increase m African American children living in single-parent families from 1970 to 19807 What percent of Hispanic Amencan children lived below the poverty line in 19907 left for other things. I worry about money every day. every night." Many two-parent families shared Mull's concerns as they struggled to balance job and family responsibilities. More than 60 percent of married women worked outside the home in 1995. up from about one third in I960. The increase in single-parent families and in families with both parents in the work force created the need for affordable day care. Employers increasingly began to realize that family concerns affected the job performance of their employees. To help employees balance work and family, a coalition of businesses in 1992 announced a program to build more day-care and elder-care centers across the country. The U.S. government also recognized the need to help working families. In February 1993, two weeks after his inauguration. President Clinton signed into law the Family and Medical Leave Act. which President Bush had twice vetoed. The legislation requires large companies to provide workers up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for family and medical emergencies without losing their medical coverage or their jobs. This legislation reflected the significant changes in attitudes toward work and family that have occurred in the 1990s. Florence Skelly, the vice chairperson of a market-research firm, noted in 1993 that "rather than trying to climb the economic ladder, people are becoming more concerned with relationships and family and community involvement." ■ ■ Government and businesses issued new policies to help working parents juggle home and work life. Health in the mos_______________________ Between 1970 and 1993. U.S. spending on health care rose from more than $74 billion to some $884 billion. The aging population, soaring physicians' fees, higher insurance costs, and more-expensive medical equipment accounted for much of this increase. Rising medical costs hit the poor and those without health insurance especially hard. Fueling the health crisis in the 1990s was the alarming spread of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, or AIDS. This is the final ▲ The rising costs of health insurance, doctor's fees, and improved medical equipment created a health-care crisis during the 1990s, deadly stage of an illness caused by the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV. By March 1993 some one million people had been infected with HIV. and by 1996 AIDS had claimed the lives of more than 320,000 Americans. In 1993 AIDS was the leading cause of death among men ages 25-44 in 64 U.S. cities. New AIDS cases reported for women more than tripled between 1986 and 1990. AIDS has left almost no continent untouched In the African nation of Zambia. President Kenneth Kaunda's son died of AIDS. In 1991, basketball star Earvin "Magic" Johnson of the Los Angeles Lakers announced that he had tested positive for HIV. Other celebrities struck by the disease have included movie star Rock Hudson and tennis legend Arthur Ashe. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimated in 1995 that some 1.3 million persons worldwide had full-blown AIDS. The organization predicts that some 40 million people will he carriers of HIV by the year 2000. Some activists accused the United States government of responding too slowly and with too little research money to the AIDS crisis. The Food and Drug Administration responded to these criticisms by speeding up the approval of several drugs for the treatment of AIDS. A major step forward for disabled citizens came in July 1990. when President George Bush signed into law the Americans with Disabilities Act. The act prohibits discrimination against people with menial or physical disabilities—including diseases such as AIDS—in employment, transportation. telephone services, and public buildings. America's Predominant ethnic background, 1980s V E N before the founding of the United States, immigrants flocked to America from around the world. The origins of the immigrants have changed over time, however. The original Native Americans emigrated from Asia across Beringia. In colonial times the vast majority of immigrants came from Europe and Africa. Although Europe continued to provide the bulk of immigrants throughout the 19th century, more and more of them were from southern and eastern Europe. After World War 11, immigration patterns changed dramatically as more people began to come from Latin America and from Asia. All of these immigrant groups have contributed to the diversity of American culture. j Percentage of I contribution to U.S. immigration, 1820-1979 I Political boundaries I as of 1993 HONDURAS A v = .1* y.j ~ It has been said that America resen,bles a patchwork quilt of colors representing all races and ethnic groups. How does the ethnic map of the United States support that statement? According to the map, what ethnic background is most heavily represented in your area? — ISOO 3000 Kilometers PfO^KtUWl Veal* rt accurate only along tt" equator. Contributions to IA.S. immigration a Every day new residents arrive in the United States from throughout the world. In recent years many very small countries, such as Jamaica and El Salvador, have been huge contributors to U.S. immigration. Between 1981 and 1990, some 213,800 Jamaicans immigrated to the U.S.—dose to 10 percent of Jamaica's total population in 1982! itrw itrc loot 120'[ Country Percentage of U.S. Immigration 1*1 Mexico 23% |"| Philippines 7% a Vietnam 5% | HI China 5% Q m Korea 5% J India 4% ~T~ ■ m Dominican 3% Republic El Salvador 3% 63 Jamaica 3% |^ Cuba 2% Iron The Wortt Afcranoc <rd Boo* of fata 1993 ■a bfftigfc €> IW2 by tom Uoks 5% The U.S. Census Bureau did not begin to keep track of immigrant origins until 1820. Since this was after the dosing of the African slave trade, census figures on foreign arrivals do not account for the large numbers of Afncans who arrived before 1820. The first U.S. census, conducted in 1790, counted African Americans as representing roughly 20 percent of the population. NEW it ALAN In recent years immigration to the United States has become much more diverse. Whereas Europe contributed 90 percent of immigrants in the 1880s, it only contributed 10 percent in the 1980s. Germany, Ireland, Scandinavia, and Great Britain alone accounted for 68 percent of immigrants in the / 880s, more than the top ten countries combined in the 1980s! Asia 1% All,! < 1% S. America <1% N America 8% Africa<l% Other pr Z J% unknown 1821-1830 Other or unknown <1% N. America 8% Africa < I % S. America<l% Europe' 1881-1890 Asia 3% S. America 3% Africa<l% Other or unknown <1% N. America 28% 1931-1940 Due to rounding, percentages do not total 100% Uwt Idofmitwi lr"n Suuocdtf Atutnxl of the Oturd Sou 1991 ad Mature tfAtaem Iftl IS ^---Europe I ®'/° xCSSJrs. .^^EuropeX Jjftno Xn < i % 38''* 5 ■ v ' • i\ J S America 6%^^ N. America 42%^^^^^^ 1981-1990 A merican j£etters Stones of Diversity More than 10 million immigrants arrived on American shores between 1970 and / 9S9, most of them from Asia or Latin America. In the following selections, Chinese American author Gish Jen. Mexican American poet Jimmy Santiago Baca, and Philippine-hom novelist Jessica Hagedorn explore the struggles of characters who are fully American yet retain ties to their country of origin. From Typical American by Gish Jen "We are family," echoed Helen. "Team," said Ralph. "We should have name. The Chinese Yankees. Call Chang-kees for short." "Chang-kees!" Everyone laughed. Ball games became even more fun. Theresa explained how the ▼ Portrait of a Chinese Family (1985), by Tomie Arai Yankees had lost the Series to the Dodgers the year before: they rooted for a comeback. "Let's go Chang-kees!" This was in the privacy of their apartment, in front of their newly bought used Zenith TV; the one time they went to an actual game, people had called them names and told them to go back to their laundry. They in turn had sat impassive as the scoreboard. Rooting in their hearts, they said later. Anyway, they preferred to stay home and watch. "More comfortable." "More convenient." "Can see bet- ter," they agreed. These were the same reasons Ralph advocated buying a car. "Seems like someone's becoming1 one-hundred-percent American- ized," Theresa kidded. "What's so American? We had a car, growing up. Don't you remem- ber?" Ralph argued that in fact this way they could avoid getting too Americanized. "Everywhere we go. we can keep the children inside. Also they won't catch cold." "I thought we agreed the children are going to be American," puzzled Helen. Ralph furrowed his brow. When Callie turned three they had decided that Mona and Callie would learn English first, and then Chinese. This was whatjanis and Old Chao were planning on doing with Alexander, Janis didn't want him to have an accent For Ralph and Helen, it was a more practical decision. Callie had seemed confused by outside people sometimes understanding her and sometimes not. Playing with other children in the park, she had several times started to cry, and once or twice to throw things; she had lost a doll this way, and a dragon. Also, one grabby little boy had, in an ensuing ruckus, lost some teeth.... Now Ralph drummed his fingers. He stopped and smiled. "And what better way to Americanize the children than to buy a car!" *J" I Italics indicate words spoken in Chinese from "JVlartin IV," Martin and Meditations on the South Valley by Jimmy Santiago Baca On visiting days with aunts and uncles, I was shuttled back and forth— between Chavez bourgeois in the city and rural Lucero sheepherders, new cars and gleaming furniture and leather saddles and burlap sacks, noon football games and six packs of cokes and hoes, welfare cards and bottles of goat milk. I was caught in the middle— between white skinned. English speaking altar boy at the communion railing, and brown skinned, Spanish speaking plains nomadic child with buffalo heart groaning underworld earth powers, between Sunday brunch at a restaurant and burritos eaten in a tin-roofed barn. between John Wayne on the afternoon movie rifle butting young Braves, and the Apache whose red dripping arrow was the altar candle in praise of the buck just killed. Caught between Indio-Mejicano rural uncles who stacked hundred pound sacks of pinto beans on boxcars all day. and worked the railroad tracks behind the Sturgis sheds, who sang Apache songs with accordions, and Chavez uncles and aunts who vacationed and followed the Hollywood model of My Three Sons for their own families. sweeping the kitchen before anyone came to visit, looking at photo albums in the parlor. "£una Moth " from Dogeaters by Jessica Hagedorn Without warning, [my mother] cheerfully announces she is sending me to school in America and moving there with me for an indefinite period. I am ecstatic, at first. Everyone else is stunned. My father cannot stop her—my mother has inherited money from her father and pays for our passage to America. We settle first in New York, then Boston. I convince myself I am not homesick, and try not to bring up my father or brother when I speak. My mother actually sells a few paintings. The months turn into years. "Are we going to stay here forever?" I finally ask her. She looks surprised. "I don't know about you. but I love the cold weather. Go back to Manila if you want. Tell Raul I miss him more than he could ever imagine." She smiles one of her cryptic smiles. "But he'll have to visit me here if he wants to see me—" her voice trails off.... When I finally come home to Manila to visit, my father warns me not to bother visiting our old house. "You'll be disappointed. Memories are always better." Smiling apologetically, he tells me reality will diminish the grandeur of my childhood image of home. I take his picture with my new camera, which later falls in the swimming pool by accident. The camera is destroyed, along with my roll of film. I decide to visit our old house . .. anyway, borrowing a car from Mikey. Pucha goes with me; she loves riding around in cars and doesn't need any excuse.... My father is right. The house with its shuttered windows looks smaller than I remember, and dingy. The once lush and sprawling garden is now a forlorn landscape of rocks, weeds, and wild ferns. The bamboo grove has been cut down. "Let's go," Pucha whispers, impatient and uninterested. An old man with bright eyes introduces himself as Manong Tibo, the caretaker. He unlocks door after door for us. pulling aside cobwebs, warning us to be careful. Rotting floorboards creak under the weight of our footsteps. "My bed- room." I say to the old man. who nods. I am overwhelmed by melancholy at the sight of the empty room. A frightened mouse dashes across the grimy tiled floor. *J" 1. How do Gish Jen's characters become "Americanized"? What aspects of Chinese culture do they retain? 2. In Baca's poem, what two different ways of life do the two sides of the speaker's family represent? Which do you think he prefers? Why? 3. Why is Jessica Hagedorns character disappointed when she sees her old home? Do you think she is happy in the United States? 983 