HiSTorV of Theunited States Daniel J. Boorstin Brooks Mather Kelley Ruth Frankel Boorstin Heritage College Library 3240 Fort Rd. Toppenish, WA S3S48 Needham, Massachusetts ■ Upper Saddle River, New Jersey Half Title: Childe Hassam, "The Fourth of July," (detail). Courtesy Berry-Hill Galleries, New York Title Page: Childe Hassam, "The Fourth of July," Courtesy Berry- Hill Galleries, New York Table of Contents Credits: 1. "Mrs. Elizabeth Freake and Baby Mary," (detail), Worcester Art Museum, Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Albert W. Rice 2. "Boston Massacre," American Antiquarian Society 3. "Seminole Chief Osceola," (detail), by George Cat- lin. National Portrait Gallery, Smithsonian Institution, on loan from the National Museum of American Art 4. "The Battery," (detail). Museum of the City of New York 5. "The Emancipation Proclamation," (detail). A.A. Lamb; National Gallery of Art. Washington, D.C., Gift of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch 6. "Canon of the Rio Las Animas," by William Henry Jackson, Colorado Historical Society 7. "Dewey? We do!" (detail). Art Resource, NY 8. "Flappers," (detail), by John Held, Jr., Culver Pictures 9. "Cologne in Ruins," Wide World Photos 10. "The Atom Bomb." Department of Energy 11. "Martin Luther King, Jr., at Lincoln Memorial 1963," Wide World Photos 12. "Brandenburg Gate Celebrations," Anthony Swan/ Black Star © Copyright 1999 by Prentice-Hall, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permission in writing from the publisher. Printed in the United States of America Making Connections Text Credit: "First Fig" (p. 616) from Collected Poems, by Edna St. Vincent Millay. Copyright © 1950 by Harper & Row Publ. Reprinted by permission of Harper & Row Publishers, Inc. Making Connections Credits: 73TL "London Bridge." by John Visscher, The British Library; 73TR "The Spanish Mission and Presidio," by Louis Choris, The Bancroft Libraiy, University of California, Berkeley: 173TL "The Second Continental Congress approves the Declaration of Independence," Historical Society of Pennsylvania (detail); 173TR "Alexander Hamilton." by Charles Willson Peale, Independence National Historical Park Collection; 247TL "Wooden figure of Andrew Jackson," Museum of the City of New York; 247TR "Webster replies to Robert Hayne," by G.P.A. Healy, City of Boston Art Commission, painting located at Faneuil Hall, Boston; 328B "Geese in Flight," Leila T. Bauman: National Gallery of Art, Washington: Gift of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch (detail); 329TL "Slaves Dancing," Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Center, Williams- burg, Virginia: 329TR "Original Cover Sheets for Music dedicated to Cyrus W. Field," Library of Congress: 409TL "The Emancipation Proclamation," A.A. Lamb: National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., Gift of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch; 409TR "Chief Joseph." Smithsonian Institution; 479TL "The Grand Opening of the Brooklyn Bridge," by Currier and Ives. Art Resource. NY; 479TR "Adver- tising Improved Farm Machinery," The Oakland Museum; 573TL "Ida Tarbell," Culver Pictures; 573TR "World War I shipyard," Library of Congress: 617TL "Henry Ford's Assembly Line," Brown Brothers; 617TR "Flappers." by John Held, Jr., Culver Pictures; 703TL "Destroyer Shaw exploded in Pearl Harbor Attack." Wide World Photos: 703TR "New Deal Opponents." The Conde Nast Publications. Inc.; 771TL "Republican nomination in 1952." Wide World Photos; 771TR "Martin Luther King," Bob Fitch/Black Star; 841TL "Desperate refugee in Vietnam," Philip Jones Griffiths/Magnum: 841TR "President and Mrs. Nixon's Visit to China," Magnum; 943TL "U.S.M.C. Troops in Operation Desert Storm," Peter Turnley/Black Star; 943TR "Bill Clinton and A1 Gore Campaigning," Cynthia Johnson/Gamma Liaison A Division of Simon & Schuster Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 03 02 01 00 99 98 iv To All Americans present and future Who explore the past To rediscover the New World w "It may be said. That in a Sort, they began the World a New. " Jared Eliot, 1748 "The Eagle has landed!" Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. July 20, 1969, from the Moon About the Authors Daniel J. Boorstin, Pulitzer Prize-winning historian, educator, and author, and now The Librarian of Congress Emeritus, directed the nation's library from 1975 to 1987. He had previously been Director of the National Museum of American History and Technology, and then Senior Historian of the Smithsonian Institution. Before that, he was the Preston and Sterling Morton Distinguished Service Professor of History at the University of Chicago, where he taught for twenty-five years. Born in Atlanta, Georgia, and raised in Tulsa, Oklahoma, Dr. Boorstin received his undergraduate degree with highest honors from Harvard College and his doctorate from Yale. As a Rhodes Scholar at Balliol College, Oxford, he won a coveted "double first" in two degrees in law and was admitted as a barrister-at-law of the Inner Temple, London. He has served as a visiting professor at many leading universities throughout the world, and has lectured widely here and in many other countries. Dr. Boorstin is an active author and editor whose books include the trilogy The Americans. The first volume of this work. The Colonial Experience (1959), won the Bancroft Prize. The second volume. The National Experience (1965), received the Parkman Prize, and the third, The Democratic Experience (1973). was honored with the Pulitzer Prize for History, and the Dexter Prize. Dr. Boorstin is editor of the 27-volume Chicago History oj American Civilization. The Discoverers (1983) is a history of man's search to know his world and himself. Dr. Boorstin is currently completing a companion volume. The Creators. about the arts. Brooks Mather Kelley is currently Research Affiliate in History at Yale University, where he has held a variety of teaching and research posts since 1961. He was University Archivist and Curator of Historical Manuscripts at Yale from 1964 to 1967; he has also taught American History at the Illinois Institute of Technology and has been a visiting professor at Brown University. Dr. Kelley was born in Lake Forest, Illinois, and attended school there and at Deerfield Academy. He received his B.A. from Yale University and his M.A. and Ph.D. from the University of Chicago. His publications include Yale: A History and New Haven Heritage: An Area of Historic Houses on Hillhouse Avenue in addition to numerous articles and book reviews. In 1983 he was historical consultant for the WQED/Pittsburgh PBS television series "Freedom to Speak." Dr. Kelley also serves as president of the Connecticut Fund for the Environment. Ruth Frankel Boorstin, a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Wellesley College, went on to receive an M.A. in Social Science from the University of Chicago, where she ranked first in her class. She has worked at promoting the readability of technical literature in history and economics on the staff of the Cowles Commission, the Committee for Economic Development, and the National Opinion Research Center. Her publications include The Peacetime Uses of Atomic Energy, which she edited, and a weekly syndicated newspaper column for young people. Mrs. Boorstin has been an active collaborator on all her historian husband's books. For her assistance as researcher, typist, and editor, we wish to express our deep appreciation to Suzanne Gray Kelley. Contents List of Maps xiv List of Charts and Graphs xv List of Primary Sources xv A Note on American Pictorial Art xvi Prologue xix The Making of Americans....................................... Chapter 1 What Europeans Found: The American Surprise Christopher Columbus: Who he was and why he came Before discovery Why Europeans went exploring Spanish adventurers French and English exploration Chapter 2 An Assortment of Colonies The Spanish Empire A great and victorious England The planting of Virginia The Puritans come to New England Other Europeans in North America The proprietary colonies Chapter 3 New Ways in a New World Many kinds of Americans The colonists govern themselves Britain against France vii Forming a New Nation 1763—1800 Chapter 4 The Road to Revolution and Victory The British take a collision course Declaring independence How British power was overthrown Chapter 5 From Confederation to Nation New state governments The Continental Congress A weak confederation Writing a nation's constitution The states ratify The American discovery The making of America Forming a new nation, 1763—1789 Chapter 6 The United States Begins The nation in the 1790s George Washington sets the course Foreign affairs for a new nation John Adams and the rise of parties E pluribus unum: One Made from Many 1800—1840 . Chapter 7 Jefferson in Power The man and his policies Buying Louisiana Jefferson, Marshall, and the courts Trouble on the seas Chapter 8 Struggles of a Young Nation The War of 1812 Madison and Monroe The Missouri Compromise The Monroe Doctrine A national spirit Chapter 9 The Jacksonian Era A second Adams in the White House The new politics Jackson takes command Banks and money viii KfM A Nation Growing and Dividing 1800-1860 .249 Chapter 10 The Flourishing Land Drawing the people together The Industrial Revolution America's leading import: People The rise of the West The cotton kingdom Chapter 11 Reforming and Expanding An age of reform The abolition movement Westward ho! Texas and Oregon War with Mexico Chapter 12 The Failure of the Politicians The Compromise of 1850 How the compromise collapsed The nation comes apart The election of 1860 The Rocky Road to Union 1860—1890. .331 Chapter 13 The Civil War A new kind of war The first year: 1861-1862 The widening conflict Gettysburg to Appomattox, 1863-1865 Chapter 14 To Punish or to Forgive? "With malice toward none" Andrew Johnson and the Radicals "Black Reconstruction" The North withdraws The divided South Chapter 15 The Passing of the Frontier Indian wars and resettlement Seeking gold and silver The cattle kingdom The farmers' frontier The New Industrial Age 1865—1900 Chapter 16 The Nation Transformed Railroads and big business Rock oil lights up the world City goods for country customers Buyers' Palaces Things by the millions Labor begins to organize Chapter 17 The Challenge of the Cities The growth of an urban nation Reformers and self-helpers The spread of learning Bridge-building heroes Going up! elevators and skyscrapers New towns in the country Chapter 18 Politics in the Gilded Age Parties in balance The Democrats come and go The farmers' revolt Our money: Gold versus silver 1789-1898 A new nation A nation expanding, reforming, and dividing The nation transformed Democratic Reforms and World Power 1890—1920 Chapter 19 The United States and the World Looking outward Expanding on the seas War with Spain Chapter 20 The Progressive Era Theodore Roosevelt's Square Deal Middle-class reformers Taft in the White House Woodrow Wilson and the New Freedom Seeking a world role Chapter 21 The United States and World War I A spark ignites Europe Helping to win the war The home front Losing the peace From Boom to Bust 1918-1932 . 575 Chapter 22 Return to Normalcy, 1918-1929 576 The postwar reaction 577 Searching for the good old days 583 "Keeping cool with Coolidge" 588 Life in the Jazz Age 592 Chapter 23 The Coming of the Great Depression 598 A prosperous nation 599 The big crash 601 Foreign affairs in a gloomy world 609 The election of 1932 613 Depression at Home and Aggression Abroad 1933-1945 ............................ Chapter 24 "Nothing to fear but fear itself" 620 Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal 621 From recoveiy to reform 631 The end of the New Deed 637 Chapter 25 Reshaping American Life 642 Problems on the farm 643 The problems of black Americans 646 The New Deal and women 649 The struggles of labor 652 Chapter 26 Clouds of War 656 Foreign Affairs, 1933—1939 657 The battlefield is everywhere 664 War comes to the United States 670 Chapter 27 A World Conflict 674 Mobilizing for defense 675 "The end of the beginning"—1942 679 Victory in Europe 685 The war in the Pacific 695 xi Postwar Problems 1945—1960 Chapter 28 Truman: Neither War nor Peace 706 Beginnings of the cold war 707 Dealing with a new world 711 President in his own right 721 Chapter 29 Eisenhower, Moderate Republican 728 The Republicans return 729 Everybody's New Deal 734 The fight for equality 738 Difficulties abroad 742 Chapter 30 Mobile People and Magic Machines 750 A changing people 751 Everyday life transformed 756 Education and religion 763 Art and the machine 766 Turbulent Times 1961-1974 Chapter 31 Years of Hope and Promise 774 John F. Kennedy wins 775 Learning hard lessons 778 Facing Communist challenges 783 A New Frontier 788 The tragic end 792 Chapter 32 LBJ: From the Great Society to Vietnam 796 Taking the reins 797 The Great Society 801 Black revolt and youth rebellion 804 Vietnam: "The most unpopular war" 809 Chapter 33 The Rise and Fall of Richard Nixon 816 Electing the President, 1968 817 Nixon's first term 820 The fall 830 xii The United States Looks Ahead . 843 Chapter 34 In Pursuit of Civil Rights for All 844 The two ideals 845 Dealing with racism 850 Women seek equality 855 Spanish-speaking peoples 860 New waves of immigration 865 The American Indians 867 New vistas of equality 870 Chapter 35 Changing Leaders in Washington 876 Gerald Ford becomes President 877 Carter: A campaigner as President 882 The United States and the world 888 New foreign initiatives by Carter 892 New directions 896 The changing economy 900 Chapter 36 The Emergence of a New World 906 Troubles abroad 907 Successes and failures 912 New problems for "the Teflon President" 917 The end of the Reagan years 921 The end of the cold war 924 A dangerous world 930 The State of the Nation 933 The Clinton Presidency 939 Epilogue: The Mysterious Future 948 Appendixes Atlas of Today's World 950 Presidents and Vice-Presidents of the United States 958 The Declaration of Independence 959 The Constitution of the United States 965 1000 Glossary 1012 Index xiii Yale University Art Gallery Versatile Samuel F. B. Morse painted this portrait of inventor Eli Whitney in 1822. Whitney was then 56 years old and. after many struggles, at last a successful businessman. climax of his months of planning. Three years before, when he had first begun to figure out his new plan, he had promised the government to make 10.000 muskets. That was a fantastic number. Whitney was not a gunsmith and had never made even one gun before. Still, the government decided to finance his scheme. Even though it was a new way, it seemed quite logical. The nation was so much in need of arms— and quickly—that it seemed worth taking chances. Before Whitney could make any muskets in his new way, he had to make the machinery for making the muskets. He spent more than two years inventing and perfecting the tools that would make precise copies of the single part that was used as a pattern. Since Whitney had spent so much time making the new machinery, he had been able to make very few muskets. Even his friends began to wonder whether his system was only a pipe dream. Would it work? Now he had a chance to show. He had an appointment in the nation's capital with President John Adams, Vice-President Thomas Jefferson, the Secretary of War, the Secretary of the Treasury, and other members of the Cabinet. When they met. Whitney laid out separate piles of all the pieces needed to make ten muskets. The nervous Whitney watched while they followed his simple instructions: take any piece from each pile, fit them easily together, and you have a complete working musket! To do that you didn't have to be a gunsmith with years of experience behind you. Almost anybody could do it. To the astonishment of the nation's leaders in that room, the ten muskets took form in a few minutes. By this little drama the revolutionary system of interchangeable parts was proven to a doubting world. On the battlefield there was another great advantage for guns made in this way. Since all their dimensions were uniform, if one part broke during combat it would not be necessary to send the whole gun back to the gunsmith. With a stock of standard parts you would do the job right then. It was more difficult than Whitney had expected to make the machines to make the uniform parts of the guns. But by 1809 he had succeeded in delivering all the promised 10.000 muskets. Whitney's system soon was called the "Uniformity System " because each part in one gun was uniform (precisely the same in shape and size) with that same part in any other gun of the same design. Some called it the "Inter- changeable System." Mass production. Whitney's system came at just the right place and at the right moment. The growing United States had drawn an energetic, eager-to-learn population from all over. But there was a scarcity of immigrants who had been highly trained in the ancient skills (like gunsmithing). Oddly enough that proved to be an advantage. For if the United States had attracted thousands of gunsmiths, Whitney might never have been prodded to design his new way of manufacturing. Soon the Interchangeable System was used to make all sorts of things. Even before the Civil War, locks and watches were actually cheaper in the United States (where they were made by this system) than they were in countries blessed by many skilled locksmiths and watchmakers. This is what we mean by "mass production." It means producing masses of items of exactly the same kind. It means, as Whitney explained, using the skill of the machine instead of the skill of the worker. In France, for example, a young man had to work for years as an apprentice before he finally became a master gunsmith. But in America the machine became specialized, not the worker. Here what you needed was general intelligence so you could handle complicated machinery. Here the worker had to be quick to learn new ways. Since things produced in this way were cheaper, more people could afford to buy them. When there was a wider, more prosperous market, other people were encouraged to make still more inexpensive things to sell. Each worker's time was worth more, for now he could produce more of anything—guns or locks or watches— in a single day. The employer could afford to pay him more and still make a profit. Almost anything could (and would) be manufactured in this new way. Out of all this grew an American Standard of Living that astonished an envious world by giving more things to more people than ever before. Section 2 Review 1 How were the Industrial Revolution and the Transportation Revolution linked? 2. What contributions did Lowell and his associates make to the development of the factory system? 3. What role did Eli Whitney play in the development of mass production? 4 Critical Thinking: Drawing Conclusions. How did the Industrial Revolution bring about a national economy? ______________________________________265 3. America's leading import: People To occupy the land, to build the roads, canals, turnpikes, and railroads, to staff the factories, the United States needed people. It was not surprising, then, that the United States became a nation of immigrants. Reasons for coming to America. While Europe became more and more crowded, America offered open air and cheap land. When families in Europe could not find food or places for their children in school or as apprentices, they naturally thought of America. In Europe, too. it was an age of turmoil. Between the time of the American Revolution and the American Civil War, there were revolutions and dictatorships in France, Spain, Germany, Greece, Italy, and Belgium. And it was an age of floods and famines. There were lots of reasons why people in Europe might want to get away from their old world. The disasters of Europe made refugees by the millions. And there were plenty of reasons why someone would want to come to America. Of course. Samuel Waugh painted this colorful scene of immigrants debarking from a ship in New York Harbor around the year 1855. New York Public Library 266 __________________________________________ the old legends started in the early advertising brochures had enticed people to the colonies. These still brought people to the new nation. Now there were lots of new legends—of rich land, undiscovered mines, and fast-growing cities. And there was the real-life romance of a new nation with its doors open and its people's eyes on the future. When you had so little to lose, why not go to America? During the 1820s only about 500.000 people migrated to the United States. But then the pace quickened. In the 1830s and 1840s. 2.5 million men, women, and children arrived, and in the 1850s. 2.7 million. It was lucky that the United States had so much unfilled land. The overflow of the Old World could find a place in the New. Peoples who did not know one another or who had fought against one another could now live side by side. America would be called the "last best hope of earth." The story of European hopelessness is a story of American hope. In the years between the American Revolution and the Civil War, the two great sources of new Americans were Ireland and Germany. Events in those countries far across the Atlantic Ocean helped make the United States a world nation. The Irish and the potato famine. Potatoes were the main food of the Irish poor. But suddenly in the fall of 1845 a blight hit the potato crop and spoiled a third of it. In 1846 the blight destroyed the whole crop all over the country. The potato blight continued until 1850. Tens of thousands died of starvation. Weakened by hunger, hundreds of thousands died of disease. Death haunted the land. Even before the famine, the Irish had been coming to America by the thousands. Downtrodden by English rule, they had tried to revolt many times, but they were not able to throw off their English masters. So some Irish had come to America. The United States, in the phrase of the time, was "a sort of half-way stage to Heaven." To many Irish it seemed almost as hard to get here as to reach heaven, because the cost of a steerage ticket across the ocean (be- tween $12.50 and $25) then seemed so high. Letters written back to Ireland made everyone want to come. "This is the best country in the world," wrote one Irish girl from New York City in 1848. One new arrival wrote back with glee that the Irish here "eat the pig themselves, and have plenty of bread to their potatoes." "Every day is like a Christmas Day for meat." And now the Irish came by the hundreds of thousands. Through the port of New York City alone, between 1847 and 1860, from Ireland there came over a million. That was nearly half of all the Europeans who landed in New York in those years. The Irish in America. But once the Irish had landed in Boston or New York or some other port city, they had very little choice about where to go. Few had the money or the desire to move to a lonely western farm. The farming they knew in Ireland did not make them lovers of the land. So most of them stayed in the port cities of the eastern seaboard where they could enjoy the fellowship of others recently arrived from the old country. Many of those who did move westward in the early years used their strong arms and sturdy backs to dig canals and build railroads. When the digging of the Erie Canal began in 1817, there were not many Irish around. But before it was completed eight years later, the Irish were arriving by the thousands. On the canal they were well known for their strength, courage, and willingness to work. Irish contractors organized teams of their fellow immigrants. When the Erie Canal was finished in 1825, the enterprising and industrious Irish immigrants moved on to help build other canals and then the railroads. They helped bring life to many new western cities. Soon people could say that "of the several sorts of power working at the fabric of the Republic—water-power, steam- power, and Irish-power," none had worked harder than Irish-power. The Germans emigrate. The other large group of new arrivals in the years before the Civil War was the Germans. Nobody planned it that way, but whenever and wherever the people of Europe suffered, the United States The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Harris Brisbane Dick Fund. 1941 Many Irish immigrants helped to build the Erie Canal. This lithograph shows the excavation process at Lockport, New York. A horse drives the treadmill that powers the primitive crane. somehow gained. Over there, 1816 was the terrible "year without a summer." The Rhine River flooded, floating away barns and livestock. Autumn storms uprooted fruit trees. Hunger and misery cursed the farmer. We cannot be surprised then that during the following year about 8000 Germans arrived in American ports. Again in 1829—1830, the winter was one of the worst in the history of Europe. People froze because there was not enough wood to burn in fireplaces. Food was scarcer than ever, and prices went up. By 1832, more than 10,000 Germans were coming to America in a single year. As suffering in the German countryside deepened, it became plain that their government was not going to help. Then Germans started coming to America by the tens of thousands. They continued to arrive in vast numbers till nearly the end of the 1800s. In 1854 alone (when Germans were half of all immigrants to the United States) they numbered nearly a quarter-million. The move to America became a craze. Overnight, people would decide to leave Germany, and they would depart the next morning. A 13-year-old boy with a pack on his back walked ,300 miles to the French port of Le Havre in order to find passage to America. The Germans revolt. Throughout these years, revolutions were brewing in Germany. In 1815 at the end of the Napoleonic Wars the rulers of Europe met at the Congress of Vienna to shuffle boundary lines and restore the old monarchies. Nearly 40 German states were organized into a loose German Confederation dominated by Austria. Wanting democratic rule and freedom from Austria, students formed secret societies and studied new constitutions. Peasants refused to pay taxes and roughed up tax officials. In central Europe, Prince Metternich, the clever and calculating Austrian foreign minister, was in charge. He had seen the terror of the French Revolution of 1789. and he hated democracy, which he imagined was always government by a mob. He organized tyranny in Germany. But even Metternich could not prevent protests like that in May 1832 when 25,000 people gathered in a small German town to drink the health of Lafayette (the hero of the American Revolution) and to demand a republic. Metternich's policies created a rising flood of refugees. By 1848 there was civil war and a full- fledged revolution in Germany. The land was in turmoil, and many had to flee when the rebellion collapsed. The political refugees. These political refugees from Germany were not many—perhaps only a few thousand. But they included some, like the daring Carl Schurz, who became eminent here and helped to build in the United States the democracy they could not build in Germany. Back in Germany he had joined the rebel forces against the government. When the leader of his movement was put in prison, at the risk of his own life he helped his friend escape. When the German Revolution failed, Schurz came to the United States. His career covered the whole country. After becoming a lawyer in Milwaukee, he campaigned for Lincoln in 1860 and fought as a general on the northern side at Gettysburg. He was minister to Spain, senator from Missouri, and then served in the Cabinet as Secretary of the Interior. As the career of Carl Schurz and many other liberty-loving Germans showed. Germany's loss was America's gain. New Americans from Germany built whole cities like Milwaukee, and helped make Milwaukee a brewing center for American beer. They spread all over the country, becoming farmers, teachers, professors, lawyers, doctors, and journalists. They built prosperous businesses. Many others besides The Huntington Library. San Marino. California The flags of the United States and Germany decorate the menu cover for a party on March 2. 1899, honoring Carl Schurz. Carl Schurz fought on the Union side in the Civil War. The Germans brought with them some new ideas for schools. They believed in physical education, and many early physical education teachers were German. They persuaded Americans to build gymnasiums attached to schools. Until the Germans came, it was not usual to send children to school before they were old enough to read. The Germans brought over the Kindergarten (a German word meaning "gar- den for children") where children as young as four years old could learn by playing. The idea caught on, and soon there were American kindergartens everywhere. The great migration. In the half-century before the Civil War, although the largest numbers came from Germany and Ireland, immigrants were coming from other places, too. Thousands came from the Scandinavian countries, from the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, France, Italy, and elsewhere. The nation was growing by a great migration. And these other new Americans, like the Irish and the Germans, worked in factories and on farms. They, too, helped dig the canals and build the railroads which transformed the United States from a land of farmers into an industrial giant, a leader of the world. Section 3 Review 1. Name some factors that led 5 million immigrants to enter the United States between 1820 and 1860. 2. What part did the Irish play in the Transportation Revolution? 3. Critical Thinking: Recognizing Cause and Effect. How was civil unrest in Europe related to immigration to the United States? 4. The rise of the West Between 1815 and 1850 the lands west of the Appalachian Mountains became the nation's breadbasket. American workers would eat better than ever before. The farmers of the American West also fed the factory laborers of Europe. Though the South did not realize it, wheat— not cotton—was king. The moving American. "In the United States," the young French traveler Alexis de Tocqueville noted during his visit in the 1830s, "a man builds a house in which to spend his old age, and he sells it before the roof is on." The people of the United States had become Americans by moving from other lands. They continued to move after they reached the New World. Over the next hill, round the next bend, in the next state, there they hoped to find the will-o- the-wisp "success." In their constant movement these migratory people transformed half a continent. They cleared the forest and broke the thick turf of the prairies with the improved steel plows of the Industrial Revolution. They cut the grain with new mechanical harvesters. In 1810 only one American in seven lived west of the Appalachians. By 1840 more than one in every three lived there. Most of these Westerners still lived on farms in the forest or on the prairies, where they grew com and wheat and raised meat for home and market. To serve them and handle their crops, new cities sprang up and began to dot the land. Instant cities. In places where people still alive could remember the sound of the Indian war whoop and the shadow of the virgin forest, there sprouted cities. On riverways and the joining of rivers appeared Pittsburgh. Cincinnati, St. Louis, Louisville, Memphis, Minneapolis and St. Paul, Davenport, Des Moines, Omaha, and hundreds of others. On the Great Lakes and at the river entrances to the Lakes, men and women created Rochester, Buffalo, Cleveland. Toledo. Detroit, and Chicago. An astonishing crop of cities sprang up quickly in the lands west of the Appalachians. When before had so many cities grown so fast? In the years between the Revolution and the Civil War, Americans went west to start new cities. Many hoped to make their living out of city-building. Some hoped to make money out of selling the land. The wilderness was worth very little, but once a city was there, land became valuable. Then some people would want to buy land for houses, others for farms to raise vegetables and chickens and eggs Tor the people of the nearby city. The great cities of the Old World had been built on their rich past. People had come first, and then there followed newspapers to give them news, inns to house the travelers, theaters and opera houses to entertain the crowds, colleges and universities where learned men could gather and the young could be educated. But that was much too slow and haphazard for impatient, purposeful Americans. Western city-builders wanted their city first. They wanted to see it even before the people were 276 _ Robert Brammer and Augustus A. Von Smith "Oakland House and Race Course, Louisville. (Kentucky]," painted in 1840, gives a sense of the pleasant life of many white Southerners and suggests why they resisted all talk of change. "In northern vessels [the Southerner's] products are carried to market, his cotton is ginned in northern gins, his sugar is crushed and preserved by northern machinery: his rivers are navigated by northern steamboats,. . . his land is cleared with a northern axe, and a Yankee clock sits upon his mantle-piece; his floor is swept by a northern broom, and is covered with a northern carpet; and his wife dresses herself in a northern looking-glass." This was only a slight exaggeration. How had this come about? How had the home of Jefferson's small farmer become a backwater? No wonder that many Southerners, looking for someone to blame, decided to make Northerners the enemy. They began to think the backwardness of the South had been a product of a northern conspiracy. It seemed that somehow nort hern businessmen had been able to use the federal government for their own selfish purposes. The government subsidized northern shipbuilding. The tariff protected northern manufacturers so they could charge higher prices to southern planters. Had not the southern states been pioneers in colonial days? They gave the nation its Washington, Jefferson, Madison, Monroe, and Jackson—its leaders in war and in peace. Now that the United States was prospering, must the South remain a colony within a nation? Section 5 Review 1. What was the "middle passage"? How did it come to be called that? 2. Show how the treatment of slaves differed. How did some slaves resist the will of their owners? 3. What were some effects of slavery on the South? 4. Critical Thinking: Drawing Conclusions. Why did Southerners turn from calling slavery a "necessary evil" to calling it a "positive good"? (^hapter 10 T^eview Focusing on Ideas 1. Describe the role of federal, state, and local governments in the development of roads, canals, and railroads. Why did people seek such help from the government? 2. Identify at least three people who played major roles in the early stages of the American Industrial Revolution. Show how each contributed to the growth of industry. 3. What "favorable conditions" awaited immigrants to the United States? 4. What arguments would you expect an abolitionist to use in condemning slavery? What arguments did some white Southerners use to defend the institution of slavery? Taking a Critical Look 1. Identifying Central Issues. Explain how the completion of the Erie Canal might have benefited each of the following: a wheat farmer in northern Ohio; a merchant in Buffalo; a Dutch immigrant family headed for Michigan Territory; an Albany hotel owner. 2. Making Comparisons. Compare pre-Civil War Irish and German immigration with regard to: motives for coming; dates; numbers; settlements; and contributions. 3. Demonstrating Reasoned Judgment. How was the birth of western cities a testament to American optimism? Your Region in History 1. Geography. Identify major roads, canals, and railroads built in your state or region between 1820 and 1860. How did these transportation developments affect where people in your state or region chose to settle? 2. Culture. What immigrant groups settled in your state or region between 1820 and 1860? When and where did they settle? What contributions did they make? 3. Economics. What kinds of manufacturing, if any, developed in your area in the period 1820- 1860? Why did they develop there? Historical Facts and Figures Synthesizing Information. Look at the table below to help you complete the following exercises: (a) Summarize the overall immigration trend between 1820 and 1855. (b) Summarize the changes in the overall immigration trend that occurred between 1856 and 1860. (c) Using information from this chapter, write a hypothesis that explains the immigration trends between 1820 and 1860. u 1821-25 1826-30 1831-35 1836-40 1841-45 1846-50 1851-55 1856-60 Origins of Immigrants to the United States, 1820-1860 Ireland 16,540 37,798 72,257 135,124 187,095 593,624 645,056 219.436 Scotland, England, Wales Germany All Other 11,300 16,189 32,182 43,628 80,186 186,858 235,981 187,993 2,362 5,367 45,593 106,862 105,188 327,438 647,273 304,394 18,686 43,582 102,462 62,107 57,867 174,995 220,114 137,967 48,888 102,936 252,494 347,721 430,336 1,282,915 1,748,424 849,790 Source: US. Immigration and Naturalization Service Free States and Territories Slave States and Territories Open to Slavery under Compromise of 1850 Open to Slavery under Kansas-Nebraska Act Angry rallies were held across the North in protest over the Kansas-Nebraska Act. The question of slavery in the United States had now been transformed into a battle over whether slavery should be allowed to spread into the territories. Expansion and slavery. There was one odd but significant truth about the bitter congressional battle over the spread of slavery into the territories. It was a battle over slavery where it did not exist and might never go. This did not make the struggle any less heated. Yet it did conceal an important fact. Many Northerners, of course, were against the expansion of slavery because they hated the "peculiar institution." But many others opposed its spread into the territories not so much because they disliked slavery as because they did not want to live near or compete with blacks. Several midwestem states such as Illinois and Indiana had even put in their constitutions a ban against blacks moving into their states. These restrictions were seldom enforced. Many Northerners would have been willing to guarantee slavery where it already existed in order to be sure they would never run into blacks—slave or free—in the western territories. Southerners failed to recognize the extent to which the opposition to the spread of slavery was actually opposition to blacks. They saw it as an attempt to bar them and their property (slaves) from the territories. To them it appeared to be just one more way the power of the North was being used to injure the South and prevent it from growing. The new Republican party. The Kansas- Nebraska bill was greeted by anger in the North. Public meetings were held in many states. At one such meeting at Ripon, Wisconsin, the members decided to organize a new party to resist the extension of slavery. To show their connection to Jefferson's Democratic-Republican party, they now chose the name "Republicans," which had been dropped by the Democrats. On July 6, 1854, the party was launched at a meeting in Jackson. Michigan. Its platform (1) declared that slavery was "a great moral, social, and political evil," (2) demanded the repeal of the Kansas-Nebraska Act and the Fugitive Slave Act, and (3) resolved to sink all political differences and unite in the battle against the extension of slavery until the fight was won. During the summer and fall of 1854, conventions in Maine, Vermont, Massachusetts, Ohio, and New York organized units of this new Republican or "Anti-Nebraska" party. The congressional elections in November 1854 produced a revolution in American politics. The old Whig party—which in recent years had been held together by nothing but the desire for office—was shattered. Its northern members deserted and moved into the ranks of other parties. The Democratic party staggered but did not collapse. Of the 42 northern Democrats who had voted for the Kansas-Nebraska Act, only 7 were reelected to Congress in 1854. The Democrats had held a substantial majority in the 1852 Congress, but in 1854 there were only 83 Democrats to face 108 of these new Republicans and 43 representatives of another new party—the Know-Nothings. The Know-Nothing party. Numerous parties quickly appeared and as quickly disappeared during the active year of 1854. Only two of these new parties proved significant—the — 315 Republicans and the Know-Nothing party. The Know-Nothings were a reaction to the ever- increasing flood of immigrants into the country. The party grew out of the Order of the Star- Spangled Banner. This was a secret association formed in 1849 to combat the political influence of "foreigners." especially Roman Catholics. Its real name was the American party, but everyone called it the Know-Nothing party because its members evasively replied, "I don't know." when asked about the party's activities. Ever since then, "Know-Nothing" has been a name for people who refuse to face the real issues of their day and instead seek refuge in hate and prejudice. In the election of 1854 the Republicans and the Know-Nothings together won enough seats to control Congress. It was not always clear, in fact, who was a Republican and who a Know- Nothing, since the Know-Nothings were still partly secret. It appears that nearly a majority of the members of the House were both Republican and Know-Nothing. Bleeding Kansas. When the Kansas- Nebraska bill became law, Douglas boasted that "the struggle over slavery was forever banished from the halls of Congress to the western plains." He was wrong about the halls of Congress but right about the western plains. For the Kansas-Nebraska Act would bring bloodshed to Kansas. The major problem with the doctrine of "pop- ular sovereignty" was that it did not say when a territory could decide about slavery. As a result, there was a race for Kansas from South and North. The first to gain control, the first to create a majority—of Northerners or South- erners—would decide the fate of slavery in the territory. Antislavery New Englanders organized and raised money to rush Free-Soil emigrants to During the 1850s Kansas was known as "Bleeding Kansas." Point, a village about 25 miles north of Lawrence, is shown, cannon, are attacking the settlement of Free-Soilers. In this lithograph, the Battle of Hickory A band of proslavery men. armed with a Anne S. K. Brown Military Collection, Providence, RI (detail) r"jT JfeLGb Qiapter 17 The Challenge of the Cities In 1873, two years after the fire that had destroyed Chicago, architect Louis Sullivan visited the center of the city. He found it magnificent and wild: a crude extravaganza, an intoxicating rawness, a sense of big things to be done. For "big" was the word . . . and "biggest in the world" was the braggart phrase on every tongue. . . . [The men of Chicago) were the crudest, rawest, most savagely ambitious dreamers and would-be doers in the world . . . but these men had vision. What they saw was real. This, too. was the spirit of the years between the end of the Civil War and the turn of the century. It was called the "Gilded Age" to describe its vulgar, cheap, and gaudy aspects. But though it was sometimes ruthless, corrupt, and destructive, for the most part it was moving, building, expanding, reforming, and dreaming. In 1837 Chicago had just 4200 people. This -Bird's-Eye View" shows the busy city in 1898. Chicago Historical Society 1. The growth of an urban nation During the years after the Civil War there was not only a movement westward to settle the Great Plains, but also another great movement of people from the country to the cities. When the Civil War began, only one American in five was living in a city. By 1915, cities held half of ail Americans. Between 1860 and 1915 the nation's rural population just about doubled, but the urban population grew more than 700 percent. Farmers move to the city. The new cities grew mainly in the East, the Middle West, and the Far West, but they could be found wherever industry was developing. The new city-people came from everywhere. Railroad builders sent salesmen overseas to boast the wonders of the American farms and persuade immigrants from European cities and farms to come settle along their tracks in the West. At the same time, many American farmers in the East and Midwest were moving away from the land to the city. Behind them in the countryside they left ghost villages. One such village in New England had a population of two inhabitants, one living on each side of the broad street. The abandoned church and the dilapidated schoolhouse were being taken apart for lumber and for kindling wood. Some of the farmers had gone west, but most had gone to the cities. By 1910 more than a third of the people living in American cities had moved in from American farms. Immigrants come to the cities. Of the 25 million immigrants who came to the United States between the Civil War and World War I, most settled in the cities. Outside of cities many of them would have felt lonely and lost. They loved the friendly bustle and wanted to be close to people like themselves. And some of them had no choice. They had spent everything to cross the ocean and had no money left for a trip west. Within the big American cities there sprouted little immigrant cities. By 1890 New York City held as many Germans as Hamburg, twice as many Irish as Dublin, half as many Italians as State Historical Society of Wisconsin Immigrant women gather in the market square of a middlewestern town in the 1890s. One (far left) has adopted an American-style hat. Naples. And besides, there were large numbers of Poles, Russians, Hungarians, Austrians, Norwegians, Swedes, and Chinese. Four out of five New Yorkers either were born abroad or were the children of foreign parents. The Germans and Irish who had come before 1880 were found nearly everywhere in the United States. There were also lots of Canadians in Boston and Detroit, Poles in Buffalo and Milwaukee, Austrians in Cleveland, and Italians in New Orleans. The urban mixture. Cities were sometimes called the nation's "melting pots." Perhaps they should have been called "mixing bowls." The adult immigrant sometimes became Americanized only slowly. But very quickly a whole colony found its special place in American life. Just as the new United States had first been made from thirteen different colonies, now a great nation was being made from countless colonies of immigrants. Wherever you came from, you could find a neighborhood in New York or in the other big cities where you could feel at home. Whether you were from Germany, Italy, Hungary, or Poland, you could shop in your own old-country The Museum of the City of New York On tenement back porches, like those shown in this photograph by Jacob Rils about 1900, clotheslines stretched from post to post and from porch to backyard alley. Notice the flowerpots and plant boxes on the railings. language, buy familiar old-country foods, and attend a church offering your old-country services. By 1892 nearly a hundred newspapers in German were published in American cities. And there were dailies in French, Italian, Japanese, Polish, Yiddish, and a dozen other languages. Although these immigrant colonies tried to keep separate, they could not stay separate forever. The people from different colonies became more and more alike. Children went to school and learned English. They stopped speaking their parents' language and sometimes stopped going to their parents' church. They were afraid to seem foreign. Then, too, a young man from the Italian colony might marry a young woman whose parents spoke German. In the city, people could not help feeling closer to one another. City slums. If the crowds were the joy of the city, crowding was the curse. New York—the nation's biggest city and busiest seaport and the magnet for the world's immigrants—was where the problem was worst. And in New York, American know-how, which at the same time was building grand cast-iron palaces for department stores, produced another, but unlucky, American invention. This was the "tenement house." New Yorkers, of course, did not invent the slum. European cities had their streets of ancient rickety buildings and evil-smelling hovels where the poor were tumbled together. But in the years after the Civil War. New York City produced a new kind of slum—the tenement- house slum. Most newcomers to the city could not afford to pay much rent. Back in the early years of the 1800s the poorer people of New York had lived in shacks on the swamps at the edge of Manhattan Island. But as the island filled with people, specially designed buildings went up for the city's new poor. Tenement houses were buildings six or seven stories high designed to hold the largest possible number of families. They were solid blocks of deep buildings whose inside rooms had no windows or ventilation. There were also helter-skelter buildings of many other kinds. The dumbbell building. Then in 1878, to help find something better. The Plumber and Sanitary Engineer, a builders' magazine, announced a contest for architects. The editors offered a $500 prize for the best plan for tenement apartments for the poor. The winning plan was the "dumbbell'' tenement. It was called that because the whole building, looked at from above, was thin in the middle and bulged at both ends like the dumbbells used in gymnasiums. This plan had a good deal to be said for it compared with the plan of the flimsy firetraps that were common before. The dumbbell tenement, usually built of brick, was supposed to be fireproof. It was designed to fit on a narrow lot. On each of the seven floors there were four sets of apart- ments—two in front and two in back. Since the r~- IDAHO l TERR, t- "7" / -~i r i r i ——4____ Growth of Cities, 1870-1900 1870 . 5,000 to 100,000 Inhabitants . 100,000 Inhabitants and Over / ------i-J It /—" t l— / vW • / -~1 i' ~r———- ; r j —-4________ 1900 s'°°0 to 100,000 Inhabitants 10°,000 Inhabitants and Over ATa carnegie institution of Washington The Museum of the City of New York The Museum of the City of New York The tenement kitchen was a multipurpose room. It was a second bedroom (top) for many poor families. It also provided a workshop (bottom) for others. The sewing machine provided a livelihood for thousands of immigrant families. Both photographs are by Riis. stairway ran up the middle, the front and back rooms got some light and air from their windows on the street. Many people could be crammed into a small space. What was new about the plan was that the inside rooms were also supposed to get some light and air. When another tenement like it was built alongside, between them there was a narrow air shaft on which each inside room had a window. This became the standard plan for tenements. By 1900 on the island of Manhattan alone there were more than 40.000 buildings of this type, holding 1,500,000 people. A prizewinning plan had produced the world's prize slum! The air shaft between the buildings was only 56 inches wide—so narrow that it did not really bring in light. Instead the foul air brought up smells from the garbage piling up at the bottom. If there was a fire, the air shafts became flues which quickly inflamed all the rooms around. Up the air shaft resounded the noise of quarreling neighbors. There was no privacy. Dirt, disease, and crime. The primitive plumbing in the hallway on each floor was shared by four families. It bred flies and germs. Sometimes the toilets became so disgusting that the tenants would not use them but depended on the plumbing at work or at school. There were no bathtubs with running water. Nearly every one of these tenement houses had at least one sufferer from tuberculosis, and sometimes there were many more. When Theodore Roosevelt was governor of New York, he appointed a commission in 1900 to report on the tenement-house slums. They were not at all surprised that these buildings festered with poverty, disease, and crime. But they were surprised that, in spite of it all. so many of the people raised there managed to become decent and self-respecting. And the commission reported that the slums were even worse than they had been 50 years before. Slum neighborhoods were given names like "Misery Lane" and "Murderers' Alley." This was hardly the America that the thousands of hopeful immigrants were looking for. Boss rule. Under the influx of people and the pressures of rapid growth, the governments of big cities broke down. Streets were unrepaired, sewers nonexistent, garbage uncollected. Big cities were described as the worst-governed units in this democratic nation. In New York City during the days of Boss Tweed between 1866 and 1871, the city was looted of some $100 million by the boss and his underlings. Other political groups, "rings" as they were called at the time, robbed Philadelphia, Pittsburgh. and other cities. Many reformers blamed this state of affairs on the immigrant who, they said, was "a European peasant whose horizon has been narrow, whose moral and religious training has been meager and false, and whose ideas of life are low." But Philadelphia, where 47 percent of the population was native born of native-born parents, was as corrupt as New York, where 80 percent of the residents were of foreign birth or foreign parentage. The immigrant and the politician. Immigrants did tend to vote for the boss and the followers of his political "machine." But this was because the machine members—often aider- men, or city councillors—provided friendly help. They supplied government jobs and money and advice. A new arrival who was arrested for a petty crime could turn to the aider- man of his ward to find him a lawyer or to persuade the judge to let him off. The alderman Everett Shinn, who began his career as a newspaper artist, painted "Cross Streets of New York" in 1899. He was one of the group of painters known as the "ashcan school" because they chose scenes from everyday city life as subjects for their canvases. The collection of the Corcoran Gallery of Art. Gift of Margaret M. Hitchcock 442 _______________________________________ organized benefit dances. The money paid for dance tickets would go to some worker who had been crippled at his work or to a widow who had no way of supporting her children. The aider- man found doctors for the sick and brought groceries to the poor. He reached into his pocket to give a few dollars to needy orphans or to men wanting a new start in business. He was a one-man United Fund. No wonder immigrants voted for him and for the machine again and again. The disappearing frontier. The problems of the Gilded Age—corruption in government and business, strikes, and labor violence—worried Americans. Why was it all happening? One bright young historian, Frederick Jackson Turner, who had been raised in the backwoods of Wisconsin, thought he knew the reason. The Census of 1890 had announced that the United States no longer had an unbroken line of wilderness frontier. Turner proposed the theory that this disappearance of the frontier explained many of the country's troubles. According to Turner, what had made America the Land of Promise was not cities but the frontier. The free land out west, he said, had also been a safety valve. In earlier times if a family in an eastern city wanted a second chance, they could move out west. But now that the country Austrian-born J. Keppler's lithograph cartoon from the magazine Puck shows a group of well-to-do Americans barring the entry of a new immigrant. The Newcomer sees what the Oldcomers cannot— the shadows looming behind them of their own immigrant fathers. Culver Pictures was being filled up. it was no longer possible to find a second chance by going out to the edge of civilization. Now if you were an unlucky newcomer in a slum, there appeared to be no escape. Oldcomers versus Newcomers. For a while it seemed that the country might be divided between Oldcomers and Newcomers. Oldcomers themselves, of course, had come from immigrant families, but their families had been here for a long time. Among them were the rich and famous. Few of them were crowded into slums. In the older eastern states that still controlled Congress, the Oldcomers were in charge. They were most of those who had money and education and power. But the Oldcomers did not agree on how to cure the country's ills. Some tried to help the immigrant learn new ways, but some were simply frightened. They wanted to keep the country the way it was. They blamed the troubles on the Newcomers. Their answer was to slam the door. Simply because their families had been here longer, they felt that the whole nation belonged to them. At Harvard College a group of New England blue bloods thought that their world was coming to an end. Three young men in the class of 1889, Charles Warren. Robert DeCourcy Ward, and Prescott Farnsworth Hall, had been taught by their professors that there was an "Anglo- Saxon" race superior to all others. The race was supposed to be separated from other races not by color but by their homeland. The "superior" people were supposed to be from England and Germany. And that just happened to be where the families of Warren and Ward and Hall had come from! These young men had been raised near Boston. Their parents were horrified by the hordes of "vulgar" immigrants and especially by those with unfamiliar ways from Ireland and from southern and eastern Europe. These New England aristocrats said that the nation's problems could be solved by keeping out all people who were not like themselves. Five years after their graduation. Warren and Ward and Hall formed the Immigration Louis Stein Collection/Californla Historical Society Chinese immigrants, dressed in traditional clothes and with their hair in long pigtails, walk down a street in San Francisco's crowded Chinatown about 1880. Restriction League to persuade Congress to pass laws to keep out all "undesirable" immigrants. In their League they enlisted famous professors and writers. Their real object was to keep out the "new" immigrants—the Newcomers. These new immigrants, they argued, were the main cause of the increasing crime, the strikes, and most of the troubles of the country. The literacy test. To keep out "undesirables" they proposed a "literacy test." According to their proposed law persons over fourteen years of age who wanted to come into the United States would have to prove that they could read 444 _ and write. They did not have to know English, provided they could read and write their own native language. At first sight the test seemed harmless enough. Actually it was aimed against people from certain countries, such as Italy and Greece, where poor peasants had no chance to go to school. The Boston blue bloods believed that because Newcomers from such countries were not "Anglo-Saxons'' they must be "inferior." But in their proposed law they did not dare list particular countries. There already were many people in the United States from those countries. They would be insulted—and they, too, elected members of Congress. Year after year the Immigration Restriction League tried to persuade Congress to pass a literacy test. But even when they finally pushed their bill through Congress, they did not manage to make it into a law. One President after another vetoed the bill. President Grover Cleveland called the law "underhanded," because it did not say what it really meant. President William Howard Taft said the United States needed the labor of all immigrants and should teach them to read. President Woodrow Wilson agreed. All three Presidents said the law was un- American. The United States had always been "a nation of nations." It made no sense to keep out people simply because they had been oppressed. America was a haven for the oppressed. Here the starving could find bread, and the illiterate could learn to read. In 1917, however, when the war in Europe was frightening Americans, the literacy test finally had enough votes in Congress to pass over President Wilson's veto. Out on the West Coast, Oldcomers feared Newcomers from Asia. They worried about imaginary hordes that might come across the Pacific. And they had persuaded Congress to pass a Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882. Then, in 1907, President Theodore Roosevelt without the use of any law against the Japanese persuaded the Japanese government to stop their people from emigrating. This un-American agreement came to be called the "Gentlemen's Agreement." And this became the slang expression for any agreement to discriminate against people when you were ashamed to admit what you were really doing. Section 1 Review 1. Identify or explain: "melting pots" and "mixing bowls," dumbbell building, Tweed Ring, political machines, aldermen, Turner's frontier thesis, Immigration Restriction League, Chinese Exclusion Act, Gentlemen's Agreement. 2. What movements accounted for the growth of cities after the Civil War? 3. Describe a typical tenement house. 4. Why and how was a start made on limiting immigration? 5. Critical Thinking: Recognizing Cause and Effect. Why did immigrant colonies form in the cities? Why did they lose their separateness? 2. Reformers and self-helpers Not all the Oldcomers were frightened. Some became reformers. If the country had too many strikes and too much crime, they said, that could not be blamed on those who had just arrived. It was mainly the fault, they said, of the Americans who had been here longest and who had had the most chance to make the country better. Who had built the cities and the slums where the poor were condemned to live? Who were the members of Congress and the leaders of business and the police officers? It was not the immigrants' fault if the nation was not prepared to receive them. Jane Addams. One of the most remarkable of the reformers and one of the most original Americans of the age was Jane Addams. She was born with a deformity of the spine which made her so sickly that after graduating from college in 1882 she had to spend two years in bed. When she was well enough to travel, her wealthy family sent her abroad to study art and architecture. What she really learned in Europe was something quite different. In June 1888. when she happened to visit the famous Toynbee Hall in London, she discovered her life's purpose. There in the poorest section of the city lived a group of Oxford and Cambridge graduates helping the people of the neighborhood. Why not try something like that in the United States? Jane Addams's plan was simple. In the poorest, most miserable city slum she would settle a group of educated young men and women from well-to-do families. Like Toynbee Hall, the place would be called a "settlement house." The well- bred young men and women newly "settled" in the midst of a slum reminded her of the early colonial "settlers" who had left the comforts of English life to live in an American wilderness. The young men and women who came to live in the slum, seeing the struggles of the poor, would learn things they could never learn from books. At the same time, the people of the slum would use the settlement house as a school, a club, and a refuge. Hull House. Since she knew Chicago, she decided to do her work there. In the neediest neighborhood she persuaded the owner of a large old house to let her have it free. That became her settlement house—between an undertaker's parlor and a saloon. She called it "Hull House" after the man who had built it for his home years before. In the neighborhood of Hull House there were Newcomers from all over Europe—Italians, Germans. Polish and Russian Jews, Bohemians, French Canadians, and others. For the young, Jane Addams set up a kindergarten and a boys' club. And she paid special attention to the very old people whom nobody else seemed to care about. Jane Addamss work became famous. All sorts of unexpected projects started at Hull House. The Little Theater movement, of amateur actors putting on plays to entertain themselves and their friends, developed there and Culver Pictures Jane Addams was a kind and gentle woman whose concern for needy newcomers led her to open Hull House settlement in Chicago. Many others were later to follow her example. spread all over the country. She started a book bindery and a music school. Settlement houses on the Hull House model appeared in big cities everywhere. Future playwrights, actors, composers, and musicians who had happened to be born into poor slum families now found their chance. Thousands of lonely immigrants discovered that somebody else cared about them. Jane Addams—without the aid of governments or politicians—had helped make America the promised land. and for all other officers in all elections on the same terms as men in Wyoming, Colorado, _____Utah and Idaho The Bancroft Library. University of California. Berkeley A women's suffrage amendment was sent to a narrow defeat by California's voters in 1896 after a strenuous campaign. Other reformers. In Hull House and other settlement houses the first social workers—many of them women—were trained, and they became a growing force for change. They moved beyond private charity to use the power of the state to improve conditions. Their first activities produced laws limiting child labor and governing the hours and conditions of labor for women. Frances Willard was an Oldcomer who fought for reform in another way. In the Wisconsin wilderness. where she grew up. she became a good hunter. The only schooling she received came from her mother, but she learned enough to attend a college in Illinois and become a teacher. Then she was caught up by the temperance movement. Abstinence in the use of alcoholic beverages, she felt, would protect the home and Christian life. With her talent for organization and for oratory, in 1874 she was made president of the Women's Christian Temperance Union in Chicago and five years later was elected national president. From that position Frances Willard worked also for women's right to vote. It was not surprising that the first progress came on the western frontier. There it was plain that new communities depended on pioneer women. Why shouldn't they be allowed to vote? Wyoming came into the Union in 1890 with women s suffrage. Then other western states gave women the right to vote—Colorado (1893), Utah (1896). and Idaho (1896). But the movement stalled, and little progress was made for over a decade. Out of the South, too, there came other women reformers. Ida B. Wells-Barnett, who had been born a slave in Mississippi, became a newspaper writer in Tennessee. But when she wrote fearless stories exposing the facts about a lynching, she was driven out of the state. Then she went to New York City where she helped set up black women's clubs which became the foundation of the National Association of Colored Women in 1896. In 1909 she helped to organize the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. And in 1913 she established a settlement house in Chicago to help black newcomers from the South find jobs and homes in the big city. Secti°n 2 Review 1. How did settlement houses help immigrants? 2. Critical Thinking: Making Comparisons. Compare the reform work of Frances Willard and Ida Wells-Barnett. 3. The spread of learning In the city and on the countryside the public schools helped make Americans. They were free, and the states passed laws requiring all children to attend. There the children of Irish, German, Italian, and all sorts of other families learned and played—and sometimes fought— together. They came to know one another better than their parents knew people from other countries. And some of these young people went on to study at new colleges and learned to become leaders. The schools make Americans. At home many families spoke Polish or Italian or some other language, but in school everybody spoke English. Even if the parents spoke English with a foreign accent, soon the children sounded like other Americans. At home the children taught their parents English and all kinds of American customs. One little girl in New York City who had learned to use a toothbrush brought it home from school. She showed it to her mother, who had been born in a peasant hut in Poland and had never seen such a thing. Her mother, too, was soon brushing her teeth in the American manner. Now many children could go on to the free public high school, which was an American invention. After 1870 these new public high schools spread across the country. By 1900 there were 6000 high schools attended by nearly 520,000 students, more than two and a half times the number attending only ten years before. The flourishing schools made the United States one of the world's first literate nations. Thousands of the peasants and poor city workers who arrived from Europe had never learned to read. But in the United States the proportion of people who could read and write steadily increased after the Civil War. Unfortunately in the South the promising start made during Reconstruction was not followed by the Old Confederates when they took office. Growth of the colleges. America had always been a land of help-yourself. But it was not easy for Newcomers to become leaders. So many respectable institutions remained in the hands of the Oldcomers whose families had been here for a century or more. For example. Harvard Col- lege—our oldest college, where young blue bloods had learned their ideas of Anglo-Saxon superiority—was ran by Oldcomers. It was State Historical Society of Wisconsin This photograph taken at the end of the 19th century shows pupils from a school near Black River Falls, Wisconsin, assembled with their teacher for their annual school picture. The Museum of the City of New York Jacob Riis, a Danish immigrant, helped to improve the lot of New York City's poor with his books and striking photographs. This one showed Christmas Eve at a settlement house. hard even to become a student there if you were not one of them. New institutions offered the best chance for Newcomers who wanted to become leaders. Among the most remarkable and most American were the scores of new colleges and universities. 448 ____ At the outbreak of the Civil War there were only seventeen state universities. Then, in 1862 an energetic Republican congressman, Justin S. Morrill from rural Vermont, secured the passage of the Morrill Act. This act granted lands to the states from the public domain—30,000 acres for each of the states' senators and representatives in Congress—to support new state colleges. In these "land-grant" colleges students would be taught to be better farmers. The land- grant colleges also often offered solid courses in engineering, science, and literature. So here Newcomers, too, found an opportunity to learn. After the Civil War. hundreds of other colleges and universities were founded. In the later years of the 1880s, some of the wealthiest Go- Getters gave millions of dollars to found and endow still more institutions of higher learning. In 1876 Johns Hopkins University was established from the fortune left by a Baltimore merchant. In 1885 a railroad builder, Leland Stanford, in memory of his son, set up Leland Stanford, Jr., University. In 1891 John D. Rockefeller, the Go-Getting oil millionaire, created the University of Chicago. And there were scores of others. Many of these college founders had themselves never gone to college. But they shared the American faith in education. Even before the end of the 1800s, the United States had more colleges and universities than there were in all western Europe. And a larger proportion of the citizens could afford to go to college here than in any other country. The children of poor immigrants, along with millions of other Americans, now had a better chance to rise in the world. Frances Benjamin Johnston, a prominent turn-of-the-century photographer, caught this senior American history class at Booker T. Washington's Tuskegee Institute. Library of Congress! The Museum of the City of New York Jacob Riis took this picture of immigrant children saluting the flag at the Moss Street Industrial School in New York City in the early 1900s. In rural areas the one-room schoolhouse was usual. Women's colleges multiplied rapidly in the years after the Civil War. In 1861 Matthew Vassar, who had been born in England and had made his fortune as a brewer and in whaling, founded Vassar College. When Vassar advertised to attract students to his college, he also publicized the importance of higher education for women. Before long there were more women's colleges, including Wellesley (1870), Smith (1875), and Bryn Mawr (1880). Many other new colleges, especially in the Middle West, were open to women as well as men. And the number of women in college grew from 9000 in 1869 to more than 20,000 in 1894. Education for black Americans. Wealthy men and women, mostly from the North, also gave millions of dollars to help educate black people. By 1900 there were already about 30.000 black teachers. John D. Rockefeller, for example, had contributed over $50 million, most of it to train more teachers for black schools. The South spent less money than other parts of the country on education of all kinds. And blacks there had to attend separate, and inferior, schools. How then were they to get ahead? Black leaders could not agree. One way was proposed by Booker T. Washington. Born a slave, Washington worked his own way upward until he was famous throughout the world. His own story of his life, Up from Slavery (1901), was read by millions. In 1881 Washington founded Tuskegee Institute in Alabama. There he trained thousands of blacks to be better farmers and mechanics, to make a good living, and to help build their communities. He believed in a step-by-step way "up from 450 ___________________________________________ slavery." He did not want blacks to spend their efforts learning history and literature and foreign languages and science and mathematics. Instead, he said, they should train quickly for jobs—and mostly for jobs they could do with their hands. The vote, which had been taken away from them in the 1890s (p. 646), could wait. Self-respect, self-education, and self-help, he said, would bring blacks the opportunities they desired. Many who admired Booker T. Washington still did not agree with him. Why should blacks have to wait for their rights? Twenty-five years after Booker T. Washington started his Tuskegee Institute in Alabama, a group met at Niagara Falls. Their black leader was W. E. B. Du Bois. His life had been very different from that of Booker T. Washington. Born in Massachusetts after the Civil War. he studied at the University of Berlin in Germany and then received a Ph.D. degree from Harvard in 1895. Du Bois was a poet and a man of brilliant mind and vast learning. Why should anyone try to tell Du Bois and others like him to be satisfied to work with their hands? In 1905 the declaration by Du Bois's Niagara Movement expressed outrage. It demanded for blacks all their human rights, all their rights as Americans, and at once. It opposed all laws and all customs that treated blacks as if they were different from other people. And of course, it demanded the right to vote. Section 3 Review 1. Identify or explain: Justin Morrill, Matthew Vassar, Tuskegee Institute, Niagara Movement. 2. How did public schools help to Americanize the immigrants? 3. What was the importance of the Morrill Act? 4. Trace the growth of colleges for women and for blacks. 5. Critical Thinking: Recognizing Ideologies. Contrast the views of Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. Du Bois. 4. Bridge-building heroes Many of the fast-growing American cities were on the banks of rivers—the highways of the pioneers. As immigrant families and farm families pressed in, the cities had to expand. They had to find ways of carrying thousands of daily passengers out beyond the old city limits. This meant that in order to hold their citizens together they had to span the neighboring waterways. Go-Getting engineers transformed the ancient art of bridge building to reach out to the new city frontiers. Bridging the Mississippi. Something about bridge building attracted and inspired the American inventive genius. James Buchanan Eads, the man who would build the bridge for St. Louis, had proven himself during the Civil War. In 1861, as an adviser to the Union navy, he proposed a fleet of ironclad gunboats to control the Mississippi River. Then, when the government took up his suggestions, he built the needed ships in 65 days. After the war the people of St. Louis, which was on the west bank of the Mississippi, saw that they had to bring the railroad across the wide river and into their city if St. Louis was to grow'. Many schemes were offered. But all were rejected until Eads appeared. As a boy he had worked on a river steamboat. When only 22 years old, he had invented a diving bell to salvage ships that had sunk in the river. And then he had done a lot of walking underwater on the very bottom of the Mississippi. He knew that river bottom almost as well as other men knew the city streets. What Eads had learned was important. Building a bridge across the Mississippi depended first on finding solid support under the sandy river bottom. As Eads had moved along 65 feet below the surface of the water, he had seen the currents churning up the sands. He knew that the supports for his bridge would have to go far below those river sands all the wray dowm to bedrock. In 1867, when Eads began construction, his first problem was to lay the foundations of the tw'o stone towers that would hold up the arches of the bridge in midstream. The towers would rise 50 feet above water level. The foundation of one would have to go down 86 feet below water level, and the other, where bedrock was deeper, would have to go down 123 feet. But was this possible? Working underwater. Eads's plan was to use his own diving bell together with some new caissons—watertight working chambers—that had recently been perfected in England. The 75- foot-wide caissons would keep out the water while the men dug beneath the river sands to reach solid rock. When Eads's men finally reached bedrock, they were working ten stories below the surface of the water! Because of the great pressures at that depth, the men could stay down only 45 minutes at a time. They had to come up slowly, and they rested long periods between shifts. Despite all precautions thirteen men died of "caisson disease" (sometimes called "the bends") from too rapid change in air pressure. The bridge completed. Steel had never been used in such a large structure, but Eads decided to use it for the three vast arches of the bridge. When the standard carbon steel did not meet his tests, he ordered large quantities of the new chromium steel, and then supervised its production. While chromium steel was more costly, it was rustproof and needed no covering. It took Eads seven years to bridge the Mississippi. Finally in 1874 in a grand ceremony the former Union general, William T. Sherman, pounded the last spike of the double-track railroad crossing the bridge. Then fourteen locomotives. two by two, chugged triumphantly across the river. President Grant came to St. Louis to proclaim Eads an American hero. A bridge to Brooklyn. And there were other heroic bridge builders who helped open ways to the suburban frontiers. Few cities were quite so hemmed in by water as New York. Manhattan Island, heart of the city, was surrounded by the East River, the Hudson River, and the Atlantic National Portrait Gallery. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. Bridge-builder John A. Roebling's vision and drive seem to come through in this photograph. He suffered an accident and died not long after this picture was taken. Ocean. For a half-century there had been proposals for a bridge across the East River, connecting lower Manhattan Island to Brooklyn. When the fierce winter of 1866—1867 stopped all ferry service and isolated Brooklyn from Manhattan for days, it was plain that something had to be done. John Roebling was ready with a plan. When he came to the United States from Germany as a young man, he opened the first factory for making wire rope out of many strands of wire twisted together. This new material was wonderfully suited for reaching over wide rivers where it was difficult or impossible to build masonry towers in midstream. From high towers on both ends you could suspend the strong wire rope to hold up the bridge. If the Niagara River, for example, was to be spanned near the Falls, it would have to be by The Carnegie Steel Company's enormous plant at Homestead. Pennsylvania, in the 1890s. Library of Congress the winding Des Plaines River. Olmsted and Vaux had also helped bring the country to the city when they designed and created Central Park in New York during the 1850s. Soon other towns followed the pioneer garden cities. Some rich families who owned summer houses in the country near cities began living out in the suburbs year-round. For example, some businessmen who worked in New York City preferred living in Old Greenwich, Connecticut, forty-five minutes away on the railroad. These rich suburban pioneers set up their own country clubs and tried to keep their communities "exclusive"—for Oldcomers only and not for any of the Newcomer immigrants. The push for new garden cities was encouraged by an English reformer. Ebenezer Howard had come to America as a young man and had spent five years around crowded Chicago. Then in his book, Garden Cities of Tomorrow (1898), he offered his blueprint for a suburban utopia. He urged people to group together to build garden cities—new small towns out in the country. These towns, he said, should be planned with a garden belt all around. Then, if the garden city was connected to the big city by a railroad, it gave its residents the best of both worlds. Other Americans followed Howard's advice and built garden cities. These were no longer only for the very rich, but they were not yet for people of modest means. Lake Forest outside Chicago and Shaker Heights outside Cleveland tried to make the garden city more romantic than the big city. Instead of the monotonous parallel streets of checkerboard city blocks, the garden city streets wound across the countryside. Wide lawns separated the houses from the roads and from one another. Before long, garden cities like Radburn. New Jersey, were being specially planned for people of modest income. In 1910 a New York architect made a new design for space-saving "garden apartments" with "kitchenettes" (a new American word for a compact kitchen and pantry). Now you no longer needed to be rich to live out in a garden suburb. Section 6 Review 1. Identify some early suburbs. 2. Critical Thinking: Identifying Central Issues. What were good and bad aspects of company towns? Qiapter 17 T^eview Focusing on Ideas 1. While some rural villages almost vanished in the farm-to-city movement, the number of rural towns and villages (places with fewer than 2500 residents) increased decade after decade until about 1930. How did the rural village serve the farm population? What additional services were provided in American towns and cities? jumped about 700 percent. How did the growth of cities help to bring about this rapid rise in educational attainment? Your Region in History 1. Geography. To what big city or cities does your community have close ties? When did those cities grow most rapidly? 2. Rapid city growth required expansion of public services. What were some of these services? How was the expansion of such services linked to political corruption? 3. The "Gilded Age" of American history was a time when things appeared shiny and new from the outside, but a closer look at the under layers revealed decay and corruption. What are some examples of this paradoxical image? Taking a Critical Look 1. Expressing Problems Clearly. Suppose that you were an Oldcomer in a big city in the 1890s. What changes taking place might upset you? Which of these changes might be easy to blame on the Newcomers? 2. Recognizing Cause and Effect. Between 1870 and 1910, total U.S. population increased about 230 percent, high school graduates per year rose 950 percent, and college enrollment 2. Culture. Identify a college or university in your area and research its origin. Who or what was it named after? Was it a product of the Morrill Act? What type of students would have attended this institution in 1900? 3. Economics. What economic developments after the Civil War led to the rapid growth of cities in your state? Historical Facts and Figures Testing Hypotheses. Use the graph below to answer the following questions: (a) Approximately what percentage of the population lived in cities in 1850? in 1880? in 1900? (b) How much did the total population grow between 1850 and 1900? (c) About how many immigrants came to the United States during this same period? (d) What hypothesis, or educated guess, can you make about where most immigrants chose to live during this period? (e) Does the information in this chapter support your hypothesis? Explain your answer. United States Demographics, 1851-1900 1851-60 E Urban Q Rural | 1861-70 1871-80 1881-90 Immigrant I I Population Growth ^ear 1891-1900 Sources Bureau of the Census; U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service Following his example, excitable citizens were roused to vent their fears and their hates against any Americans who seemed "different." These included blacks. Jews, and Catholics, along with all reformers. Somehow, forgetting that the nation had been built by immigrants. Palmer and his followers aimed their blasts against all "foreigners." The fear of foreigners. During the war the Immigration Restriction League had finally obtained passage of the law that every immigrant must be able to read to be admitted to the United States (p. 443). But they were not interested just in literacy. They had strong racial, religious, and ethnic prejudices. In fact, they wanted to cut down immigration from Russia. Poland. Italy, and the other countries of eastern and southern Europe. The nation had been enriched by the thousands who had come here from those countries between 1890 and 1910. But the restrictionists had an odd theory of their own about "superior" and "inferior" races. They pretended that it was a science. Really it was only a way of dressing up their prejudices. Their own ancestors happened to come from northern and western Europe. They liked to think, therefore, that all the best people came from there. The restrictionists included university presidents and were led by eminent New Englanders. It would take many years to remove the stain they left on our immigration laws. The nation seemed to have forgotten its own origins! Free immigration had made the United States a free nation. Then in 1921 national quotas for immigrants were introduced. The National Origins Act of 1924 reduced quotas until, in 1929, only 150,000 immigrants were allowed to enter the United States each year. The quota from each country was based on the "national origins" of the people of the United States in 1920. This favored northern and western Europe, since the large immigration from other parts had come more recently. The National Origins Act barred all Chinese, Japanese, and other Asians. It is not surprising that in Japan there were "hate America" meetings held on "Humiliation Day," July 1, 1924. On the other hand, Canadians and Latin Americans were exempt from the law's provisions. The 1920s saw the first large immigration to the United States of Mexican Americans. The "new" Klan. While the Immigration Restriction League used the laws, another group was using terror and violence to enforce their prejudices. A new Ku Klux Klan appeared in the South and the West. It pretended to be in the old southern tradition to defend the rights of the "best" people. But in fact it was led by a collection of roughnecks and human dregs, with some respectable followers, who made a career of harassing blacks, Jews, Roman Catholics, and all "foreigners." Somehow they were able to enroll about 4.5 million "native born, white, gentile Americans." These included many who wanted someone to blame for lack of jobs and many who were worried by the turmoil of postwar Europe. Somehow the Klan came to dominate the politics of several states. To enlist and keep its members, the Klan shrewdly used all sorts of hocus-pocus. They had passwords, marched about in white sheets, and held secret meetings. But they were no laughing matter. They whipped and killed innocent citizens. They burned buildings and brought terror to whole communities. Yet they seldom went to jail for their crimes, because they bullied sheriffs and judges into joining them. The conviction in 1925 of the Indiana Grand Dragon for murdering his secretary marked the beginning of the end of the "new" Klan. The newspapers then began to expose the crimes of the Klan. and respectable Americans avoided it like the plague. Sacco and Vanzetti. Every' epoch of American history has had its martyrs. Their names enter the folklore. John Brown was a willing martyr of the fight against slavery. In this later age Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, two Italian- born immigrants, became unwilling martyrs in the struggle for equal justice for all. In 1920 a holdup took place at a South Brain- tree. Massachusetts, shoe factoiy. A paymaster Collection, The Museum of Modem Art, New York. Gift of Abby Aldrich Rockefeller. Ben Shahn's grim 1930s painting of Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti shows them handcuffed together as they stoically await their fate. and guard were killed. Shortly afterward Sacco and Vanzetti were arrested. They were both gentle men with no criminal record. But they believed the philosophy of anarchy. They were tried, found guilty, and sentenced to die. There was no solid evidence against them. It was widely thought that they were really victims of the frenzied fear of radicals and aliens. The belief in the innocence of Sacco and Vanzetti was so widespread that in 1927 the governor of Massachusetts finally had to appoint a committee to review the fairness of their trial. But the committee itself was loaded with prejudice. The author of its report was Harvard President A. Lawrence Lowell, long an officer of the Immigration Restriction League, who wras well known for his belief in the "superiority" of the Anglo-Saxon peoples. It is not surprising that this committee reported that the trial had been fair. When Sacco and Vanzetti were executed, millions of Americans mourned. They believed that the two gentle Italian immigrants were victims of fear and prejudice. The disillusioned writers. Some of the brightest American writers did not like w'hat they saw. The brilliant H. L. Mencken, a Baltimore journalist, used his acid pen to ridicule American follies in phrases that would not be forgotten. He laughed at democracy and called the American people the "Booboisie." The University of South Carolina at Aiken During the 1930s the number of women working increased from 10.6 to 13 million. Many worked in factories and were able to join the CIO. Firestone Rubber, General Electric, and some major textile firms signed CIO contracts. Unions would play a strong new role in American industrial life. As never before, workers would look to them to hear their grievances and protect their rights. The power of factory owners over their workers was much reduced. Through the NLRB, the federal government supported the unions. Challenged by the success of the CIO, the AF of L swung into action to expand its membership. Between 1936 and 1938 membership in all unions increased from 4 million to 6 million. Soon big labor would face big business. New union members. The membership of the old-line craft unions of the AF of L had been mostly Americans of the older immigration— English, Scots. Germans, Irish, and Scandinavians. Out of fear and from prejudice these unions commonly excluded the later comers from southern and eastern Europe in addition to blacks and women. The new CIO unions welcomed all these groups with their theme song, "Solidarity Forever." Women found new openings in the factory because the CIO began to recruit workers without regard to sex. Within a few years nearly a million women joined the unions. But even in the unions women were not yet quite equal. For example, the liberal Amalgamated Clothing Workers still allowed women to be paid less than men for the same work. The unions themselves showed dramatic changes. The International Ladies Garment Workers Union, whose members had been largely Jewish at the end of World War I, now in the mid-1930s was nearly half Italian. Before 1940 many of its members were Puerto Ricans. By opening their doors the unions had the power to open opportunity for new immigrants and the children of immigrants. The labor movement continued to harbor large pockets of prejudice. Despite the example of the CIO, certain unions—especially in building trades—continued to exclude blacks, Puerto Ricans, Mexicans, and others whom they considered "different." Farm laborers, migratory workers, and domestic servants remained outside the ranks of organized labor. Neither the unions nor the New Deal could bring an end to unemployment. Even after the mobilization for war in 1940 had provided thousands of new jobs, there were still 6 million out of work in 1941. Not until 1943 would the nation reach full employment. Secti°n 4 Review 1. Identify: John L. Lewis, Samuel Gompers, William Green, CIO. 2. How did some employers try to break strikes? 3. What gains did American labor unions make in the years 1936-1938? 4. What groups formerly left out of unions made big gains through the efforts of the CIO? 5. Critical Thinking: Making Comparisons. How did an industrial union differ from a craft union? Qiapter 25 1^eview_ Focusing on Ideas 1. What economic problems were sharecroppers facing in the 1930s? Did the New Deal benefit these farmers? 2. What New Deal laws or other actions of the Roosevelt administration helped black Americans of the 1930s? Explain how these laws and actions improved black people's lives. 3. What tactics did labor use to improve its position in the 1930s? Which tactics were the most successful? Why? 4. How did Eleanor Roosevelt represent the "spirit" of the New Deal? Taking a Critical Look 1. Recognizing Bias. How would you expect a leader for women's rights in 1940 to assess the decade of the 1930s—the progress and setbacks for women? 2. Making Comparisons. Who were the "forgot- ten Americans" of the 1930s? What groups, if any, would you call "forgotten Americans" today? What are the similarities and differences between the two groups? Your Region in History 1. Geography. Using a state map. locate the areas of your state that benefited from the Rural Electrification Administration during the New Deal. How did electricity change the way people in your state lived? 2. Culture. The 1930s were rich with musical diversions for those suffering from the depression. Interview people in your community to learn the titles and lyrics of songs made popular during the period. Ask them whether the music of the period made it easier to bear the difficult conditions of the depression. 3. Economics. Some older women in your community probably obtained their first jobs in the 1930s. Find out from them—and from other sources—what kinds of jobs were available for women in the 1930s. Ask women who did find their first job during these years how employment outside the home changed their lives. Report your findings to the class. Historical Facts and Figures Synthesizing Information. Study the graph below to help answer the following questions: (a) How many American workers were members of labor unions in 1900? In 1920? In 1940? (b) By what percentage did the number of union members increase during the period 1900-1940? (c) If the 8,500.000 union members in 1940 represented 15.5% of all workers, what was the approximate size of the total labor force? (d) What information in the chapter helps explain why the number of union members increased so dramatically during this period? Statistical Abstract of the United States Henri CarUcr-BressoiVMagnum Chinese Communist troops had just taken Nanjing from the forces of Chiang Kai-shek in 1949 when famed French photographer Henri Cartier-Bresson took this picture. The world situation worsens. In September 1949. several years earlier than expected, the Soviet Union exploded an atomic bornb. No longer did the United States have its monopoly. Then in February 1950, Klaus Fuchs, a scientist who had helped to make the first atomic bornb, was arrested by the British as a spy. He confessed that from 1943 to 1947 he had given the Russians important secrets about the bornb. Our former ally Chiang Kai-shek was driven from the vast mainland of China to the small island of Taiwan (Formosa). By October 1949 the Chinese Communists, led by Mao Zedong, were in control of the Chinese mainland. At first the United States had given Chiang large amounts of aid. We had tried to mediate between him and Mao to form a single government. But neither of them had been willing to compromise. When fighting broke out between them, the United States had backed Chiang. Many Americans who did not want to see communism come to China still were only lukewarm supporters of Chiang. They saw him as another dictator and disliked the corruption in his government. But his fall and the loss of mainland China to the Communists seemed one more defeat for the United States. The rise of McCarthy. At this moment a clever and unscrupulous politician began to play upon the fear and helplessness felt by Americans. It was hard to explain how the strongest nation in the world had reached such a pass. Was this the fault of traitors inside the United States? Joseph R. McCarthy, Republican senator from Wisconsin, gave them the answer they wanted to hear. On February 9, 1950, in a speech in West Virginia he charged that the State Department was infested with Communist agents. He waved a piece of paper on which he said were listed their names. His charge, repeated over and over, increased the alarm. Even after McCarthy was unable to find a single Communist in the State Department, many troubled Americans still listened to him. McCarthy became the strongest political power in the country outside of the major party leaders. Even Presidents feared to cross him. Protecting the United States. Members of Congress, too, seemed panicked by the internal threat for which there was so little proof. But most of all they wanted to prove that they were not soft on communism. In 1950 Congress passed the McCarran Internal Security Act. It required Communist or "Communist-front" organizations to register with the Attorney General. These included groups that were not Communist at all but which, it was suspected, might harbor some Communists. Of course, it was impossible in practice for any large organization to prove that it had no Communists. The suspect groups had to provide membership lists and financial statements. Membership in the Communist party itself was not made a crime, but employment of Communists in defense plants was forbidden. In case of an internal security emergency, the act gave the President sweeping powers to round up and detain anyone who might even possibly commit espionage or sabotage. President Truman vetoed the McCarran Act. He said that it was worse than the Sedition Act of 1798 (p. 167) and that it took a "long step toward totalitarianism." But the law was passed over his veto. Using the excuse of "internal security," in 1952 Congress passed a new immigration law. the McCarran-Walter Act. Again Truman vetoed the bill, but again it was passed over his veto. The law kept the quota system, which favored immigrants from northern and western Europe. It provided a complicated and insulting system of loyalty checks for foreigners who wished to visit the United States. It also gave the Attorney General the power to deport immigrants for being members of Communist and Communist-front groups even after they had become citizens. The law did include one small victory for the American tradition. It finally allowed Asians living in the United States to become citizens and set a quota permitting about 2000 to enter the country each year. The fears of Communist subversion were heightened by the arrest of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg and Morton Sobell, on the report of Klaus Fuchs that they had passed key secrets about the atomic bornb to the Russians. In March 1951 the Rosenbergs. after a lengthy trial, were sentenced to death for a crime "worse than murder." Sobell was sentenced to 30 years. The Rosenbergs were executed in 1953. As with Sacco and Vanzetti back in the 1920s, many citizens doubted that the Rosenbergs were guilty. Or they believed that even if they were guilty, the nation was not well served by inflicting this drastic penalty in peacetime. Civil war in Korea. Troubled by these problems at home, Americans soon discovered that from the other side of the globe the Soviets could find ways to threaten the American peace of mind. Civil war exploded in Korea in June 1950. Korea was an ancient country (the size of Mississippi and Indiana together) on a peninsula in East Asia, opposite Japan. Its borders touched Communist China and the Soviet Union. It had been annexed by Japan in 1910 and was surrendered to the Allies in 1945. At the end of the war Russian troops had moved into the country as far as the 38th parallel. American troops had freed the country south of that line. Korea was supposed to be united under a government chosen by free elections ordered by the UN in 1947. But the Soviet Union prevented the vote from taking place. Instead the Soviets set 848 _________________________________________ It would take a long time to make opportunity equal for all Americans. There would never be perfectly equal opportunity, even with a whole system of free education for all. There would always be differences between families. Naturally. some parents would be more anxious than others for their children to go on with their education. And, of course, better-educated parents in homes where there were lots of books would be able to give their children a head start in the competition. Still, a great deal could be done to make opportunities more equal. In the southern states where slavery had flourished and where blacks continued to be treated as second-class citizens, the public schools were not equal at all. And in big cities in the North, segregated black neighborhoods tended to leave their children at a real disadvantage. When the Supreme Court of the United States in 1954 outlawed segregation in the public schools, it took a big step to insure that educational opportunities would be more equal. The 1962 law against segregation in federally funded public housing helped. After the anti-poll tax amendment to the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) was finally adopted in 1964 and the Voting Rights Act was passed in 1965, blacks in the South were able to use their votes to elect officials who would protect their rights and improve their opportunities. The years after World War II saw these and other strenuous efforts to fulfill the American dream of equal opportunity. Immigrant problems and immigrant inequality. The blacks were not the only Americans whose opportunities had not been equal. Eveiy immigrant group except the English had their painful problems. They had been kept out of the best schools, the best colleges, the best neighborhoods, and the best jobs. With only a few exceptions, there had been no civil rights laws or constitutional amendments to protect them. In fact, as we have seen (p. 443), some of the most respectable, richest, and best- educated Americans actually formed organizations purposely to discriminate against new immigrants. When the Irish came here in the 1840s as refugees from the potato famine and from religious persecution, they were treated as intruders by some of New England's oldest residents. Factories and offices needing employees displayed the sign saying, "No Irish Need Apply." The Know-Nothing party, beginning as a secret society in New York City in 1849, organized discrimination against Catholics and immigrants. Its special targets were the new Irish Americans and the many German Americans who had been moving into the Middle West. Hatred against Catholics was again organized in 1887 in a group that called itself the American Protective Association. Its members poured slanders on the thousands of recent Italian and Polish immigrants. In 1894, when the flood of immigrants came from central, eastern, and southern Europe, many leading Bostonians (whose parents had immigrated some time before) joined with professors and university presidents from Harvard, Wisconsin, and California to form the powerful Immigration Restriction League. Among the groups most discriminated against were the Jews. Seeking refuge from ghettos and persecution in Germany, Poland, and Russia, Jews brought with them a tradition of learning and a reverence for books and education. Many were eager to pursue their studies in the best universities and medical schools. But the best universities, like Harvard and Yale, set up shameful restrictive quotas, which deprived Jews of their equal chances. Chinese, Japanese, and Korean immigrants, too, suffered discrimination—simply because they also wanted their full opportunities as Americans. The school board in San Francisco even tried to force their segregation in the public schools until President Theodore Roosevelt made them stop. At the dawning of the twentieth century there were 76 million people in the United States. Of these, more than 10 million had been born outside the country, and more than one-third of all Americans—26 million—had at least one for- eign-born parent. Although people boasted that this was a nation of immigrants, nearly A. Ramey/Woodfin Camp Nearly two thirds of all Spanish-speaking people in the United States are of Mexican origin. These people at a Mexican Independence Day parade in Los Angeles, California, are celebrating their cultural heritage. every kind of immigrant at some time had suffered some sort of discrimination! The social disease of discrimination lasted violently into the modern century. In the 1920s the Ku Klux Klan. along with its hocus-pocus and its costume of white sheets, terrorized Catholics, Jews, and blacks in the South and the Midwest. When the able A1 Smith ran for President in 1928, he lost votes merely because he was a Catholic. During World War II. FDR gave in to panic and put thousands of innocent Japanese and Japanese Americans into concentration camps. And when John F. Kennedy was nominated for President in 1960, political leaders wondered whether the time had yet come when a Catholic could be elected. Prejudice and discrimination, then, were not the monopoly of any one part of the country or of any one period in our history. Perhaps they would never be entirely cured. But the United States had made a good start. The traditional American open door policy at home gave refuge to oppressed people from the whole world. The Emancipation Proclamation and the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth amendments to the United States Constitution were long- overdue steps. In World War II the United States had fought the discrimination, barbarism, and racial superstitions of the German Nazis. Now Americans were ready again to move ahead. Civil rights laws, supported by Presidents of both parties beginning with Truman, signaled that the American conscience had been reawakened. In our land the twentieth century would be another century of progress for human equality. 5. Spanish-speaking peoples After women and blacks, the largest group to organize for equal rights in the 1960s and 1970s was the Spanish-speaking people, whom the census bureau called Hispanics. They had come from many places and at many times. Some of their ancestors came to America with the Spanish conquerors in the century after Columbus, and their families had lived here for more than 400 years. Others emigrated to the mainland United States from Spain, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and other Caribbean islands, as well as from Latin American countries. The Mexican Americans. Nearly two-thirds of all Spanish-speaking people in the United States are Mexican Americans. They are both the newest of the new immigrants and the oldest of the old. The ancestors of many of them settled in the Southwest and California in the 1600s and 1700s (p. 29). Those early settlers were followed by millions of others. By 1990 there were over 13 million Mexican Americans in the United States and thousands more were entering the country every year. By far the largest number of them have continued to settle where their first settlements lay—in California, Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, and Texas. Their language and their culture give a special rich flavor to the food and shape the music, the architecture, and the literature in the whole region. Many Mexican Americans are descended from the intermarriage of Spanish and Indian peoples. They proudly trace their heritage back to the great Aztec and Mayan civilizations. They generally call themselves by a variety of names: Mexican or Mexicano, Mexican American, Chicano (a form of Mexicano), Hispano, Latino, mestizo, and sometimes just La Raza (meaning "the people"). Mexican Americans are largely Roman Catholic, with strong family ties, and they cling to the Spanish language. Cesar Chavez organized migrant workers in California into a union and led them in a long and finally ......... i .1 , . ,—...--l TV-1 He then tried to help other farm workers. Although originally a rural people, now, like the whole nation, they are mainly urban. Fully 80 percent have settled together in city neighborhoods, which they call barrios. From the very beginning the differences of religion, language, skin color, and culture between the Mexican Americans and white Americans (whom they call "Anglos" or "gringos") created conflicts. Each group tended to think its own way of doing things was better. But in most areas Anglos were the majority, in control of government, courts, and schools. Mexican Americans were often discriminated against. Great numbers of them ended up in low-paying jobs where no training was needed. The rise of a ''Brown Power" movement. The Mexican Americans organized to voice their needs. Their first civil rights group, founded in 1929, was the League of United Latin American Citizens. The thousands of veterans who had fought in World War II formed the Mexican G.I. Forum. Then, in the tumultuous 1960s, Mexicans began to speak out more loudly. During the 1960s there developed a Chicano or "Brown Power" movement. Among its most outspoken leaders was the feisty Reies Lopez Tijerina, or El Tigre. Bom in Texas, he led a fight in New Mexico for the return of the lands he said the Anglos had stolen from the first Spanish-speaking settlers. But many of the conservative Mexican Americans, like Senator Joseph Montoya of New Mexico, disapproved of Tijerina's radical program. And instead of "Chi- cano," which some of the young had begun to use as a symbol of pride, they preferred to be simply Americans. Another high-spirited leader was Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales of Colorado. He was a former prizefighter and once director of a war-on- poverty youth program. In 1965 his Crusade for Justice in Denver began to build Chicano pride by providing jobs and social services in Chicano communities. Organizing farm laborers. Many Mexicans and Mexican Americans worked as poorly paid farm laborers. Some of these braceros (a Spanish word meaning laborers) came north under _________________________________________865 contracts to work in the fields. Others entered the country illegally by slipping across the long and difiicult-to-patrol border between Mexico and the United States. They were called "wet- backs" because some of them swam or waded across the Rio Grande. Farm workers had always been the most difficult laborers to organize into a union. Since they came to work only for a season, and were spread across the countryside, it was hard to bring them together for meetings. But the shrewd and eloquent Caesar Chavez decided to try. He had worked as a farm laborer himself. In 1962 he began to organize the migrant la- borers—brown, white, and black—into a union. In 1965, when 900 Filipino grape pickers in another union went out on strike, Chavez's union decided to go out, too. The following year, the two unions merged to form the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee. Chavez, like Martin Luther King, Jr., believed in nonviolence. He stuck to his principles through the long, painful years of the strike against the owners of the vineyards in Delano, California. This dedication won him public support from church groups, from other unions, and from political leaders like Robert F. Kennedy. A brilliant publicist, Chavez organized an effective nationwide boycott of California grapes. When some of his followers resorted to violence, he protested by fasting for 25 days—and badly injured his health. But nonviolence prevailed. Finally, the opposition of the vineyard owners started to crumble. In 1970, after five years, many of them signed with Chavez's union. He had actually organized farm laborers into a union and won better pay and working conditions for them. Chavez had done what seemed impossible. Chavez himself stayed out of politics, but other Mexican Americans won high office. Both New Mexico and Arizona have elected Mexican American governors. Other Mexican Americans have been chosen for the Senate and the House, or to be mayors of large cities, like Henry Cisneros of San Antonio, Texas, and Federico Pena in Denver, Colorado. A Mexican American woman, Romana A. Banuelos, was Wide World Photos Puerto Rican Day is a time for parades and celebration in New York City. named by President Nixon to be Treasurer of the United States. President Reagan appointed Lauro F. Cavazos as his Secretary of Education. President George Bush retained Cavazos and also appointed Manuel Lujan, Jr., Secretary of the Interior, and Antonia; C. Novello, Surgeon General. After Bill Clinton was elected President in 1992, he appointed Federico Pena as his Secretary of Transportation and Henry Cis- neros as his Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. Puerto Rico and the Puerto Ricans. The Puerto Ricans were different from most other Hispanics because all of them were citizens of the United States before they arrived on the mainland. The special relationship between Puerto Rico and the rest of the United States allowed them to go back and forth to their home island at will. The island of Puerto Rico had been visited by Columbus in 1493, even before any Spaniards had come to mainland America. When Columbus arrived, the Arawak Indians were already there. During the colonial period the island was settled by Spaniards and by black slaves imported from Africa. The land and the climate were ideal for raising sugar cane. And from the sugar was made the famous Puerto Rican rum. In 1898, after the Spanish-American War, the United States took over the island. One of FDR's braintrusters, Rexford G. Tug- well, was sent to Puerto Rico as governor in 1941. There he and Luis Munoz Marin, a poetic and inspiring Puerto Rican political leader, produced "Operation Bootstrap." It was a program to improve agriculture and attract industry to the island. In 1948 Munoz Marin became the island's first popularly elected governor. He led the way toward a special "Commonwealth" status for Puerto Rico within the United States. The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico was proclaimed on July 25, 1952. The following years showed how the resourcefulness and intelligence of people might make up for the lack of other natural resources. Under the ingenious "Commonwealth" plan, Puerto Rico became an independent, self- governing state in voluntary association with the United States. Puerto Rico is represented in Congress by a resident commissioner who can speak but has no vote, except in committees. Puerto Ricans do not pay federal income tax on money earned in Puerto Rico, and they do not vote in national elections. By 1970, with the aid of "Operation Bootstrap," Puerto Rico had the highest per capita income and the best standard of living in Latin America. Still, Puerto Rican incomes were low compared to those in the mainland United States. After World War II when the population grew rapidly, producing widespread unemployment, thousands of Puerto Ricans moved to the mainland. The emigration slowed in the 1970s, but by the late 1980s more than 2 million Puerto Ricans were living in the continental United States. About one-half lived in New York City, where many worked in the garment trades. The city now held more than twice as many Puerto Ricans as the island capital of San Juan. They were citizens, but in other ways they suffered many of the problems of earlier immigrants. Since they spoke another language, they felt strange and they formed their own neighborhoods where the signs were in Spanish. Strangers. without the advantages of money or education, they, too, joined the American quest for equal opportunity. Many Puerto Ricans were not satisfied. Some resorted to violence to tiy to win independence so that Puerto Rico could be a separate nation. Others wanted Puerto Rico to become a state in the Union. Still, in election after election the majority of Puerto Ricans voted to keep the unusual Commonwealth status. Meanwhile, Puerto Rico, with its delightful tropical beaches and its Spanish-American flavor, became a favorite vacation spot for thousands from the mainland. And Puerto Ricans, such as opera singers Martina Arroyo and Justino Diaz, guitarist Jose Feliciano, violinist Jose Figueroa, and actors Jose Ferrer, Rita Moreno, Chita Rivera, Raul Julia, and Hector Elizondo, were enriching the culture of the United States. The flight from Cuba. Throughout its history the United States has been a refuge for people fleeing turmoil and repression. After Fidel Castro seized power in Cuba in 1959 and began to create a Communist state, over half a million islanders fled to the United States. Some went on to settle in other lands, but nearly 400,000 chose to remain here. Many stayed in Florida, especially around Miami. Some of these newcomers dreamed and planned only for the day when they could return to their Cuban homeland. But others became Americans and began a new life. The Cubans who came to the United States in the first years after Castro's takeover were generally well educated, and over two-thirds were trained for white-collar jobs. Hardworking and ambitious, some of them soon rose to head banks and businesses. Large sections of Miami became almost as Cuban as Havana itself. This first wave of refugees was joined in 1980 by more than 100,000 Cubans who fled when Castro suddenly allowed dissatisfied citizens to leave. These new migrants were called "Marielitos" because they had come to the Olivier Rcbbot/Woodfin Camp & Associates In 1980 Fidel Castro suddenly allowed dissatisfied Cubans to sail from the port of Mariel for Florida. In a brief period 100.000 went by small boats across the dangerous waters to Key West. United States in a massive flotilla of boats that shuttled between the Cuban harbor of Mariel and Key West in Florida. These migrants, too, worked hard, built businesses, and often prospered. Once again the United States was a haven and a land of new opportunity. Section 5 Review 1. Identify or explain: La Raza, barrios, Joseph Montoya, Rodolfo Gonzales, Luis Munoz Marin, Operation Bootstrap. 2. What are the chief groups that make up the Spanish-speaking peoples of the United States? Locate at least three major areas of settlement. 3. How does the legal status of Puerto Ricans differ from that of other Hispanic immigrants to the United States? 4. Critical Thinking: Drawing Conclusions. How did the work of Caesar Chavez help bring about greater equality for all Mexican Americans? 6. New waves of immigration In the 1970s and 1980s. immigration continued. Refugees from war, revolution, persecution, poverty, and tens of thousands simply seeking a better life—all flocked to what they considered the New-World promised land. They, too, sought equality and freedom. They enriched the nation with their hopes and their efforts, but they added problems. In the 1990s. the United States sometimes decided to reduce the flow. Asians from many nations. The fall of South Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia to the Communists in 1975 set off a massive emigration by land, sea, and air. Refugees fled to Thailand, Malaysia, Hong Kong, the Philippines, and China. Many hoped to come to the United States. To help those who had aided the United States during the Vietnam War. 125.000 Vietnamese were allowed to enter the countiy right away. It seemed that this was enough relief at the time. With the rapid rise in the number of Asians in the United States, new Asian shops and restaurants catered to the tastes not only of the new immigrants but also of native-born Americans. Bari Bartholomew'/Black Star But thousands more continued to flee. They filled the refugee camps in Southeast Asia and overflowed to the United States and other nations. By 1985, 728.000 of them had come to the United States. These new immigrants from distant lands did well. They were eager to become Americans. They worked hard and added a delightful new Asian spice to the life (and food) of the United States. Many Asian young people overcame the language handicap and did exceedingly well in school. President Reagan, in his State of the Union message to Congress in 1985, pointed to Jean Nguyen, who was seated in the balcony beside Mrs. Reagan. Just ten years before she had fled Vietnam with her family, and now she was about to graduate from the United States Military Academy at West Point. In 1988. in New York City, eleven of the fourteen finalists in a nationwide science competition were Asians. From other parts of Asia—from India, Taiwan, Korea, and the Philippines—they came by the tens of thousands. In the 1980s Asian Americans were the nation's fastest-growing minority, and the visible success of so many Asian Americans led some observers to call them "the model minority." In fact, many Asian Americans, particularly South East Asian Americans, experienced severe economic hardship in America, with low incomes and high rates of dependence on welfare for survival. Refugees from Latin America and the Caribbean. Another wave of unhappy people arrived from troubled Central America, and from strife-tom Guatemala, Nicaragua, and El Salvador. Many came in haste and terror without passports or visas. A third wave came from the poverty-stricken and turbulent islands of the Caribbean. From Haiti, they were fleeing the brutal dictatorship of the Duvaliers, "Papa Doc" and his son "Baby Doc." Half the people had no jobs on that island of hunger. Even after the long Duvalier rule (1957-1986) ended, they still came. To check the flow, the government began to send back those who came without permits. Other refugees were detained in prisons and camps while courts decided whether they should be granted political asylum. -------869 After the Haitian military overthrew President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in 1991, the exodus increased so dramatically that President Bush ordered the immediate return of thousands of people fleeing by boat. In 1993 and 1994, President Clinton continued that policy, while working with the United Nations to impose a trade embargo that he hoped would force the military to reinstate President Aris- tide. The military responded to international pressure with repression, and more Haitians, with no sure destination, left that troubled country's shores. In 1994, a new flood of refugees left Cuba for Florida. Cuba's economy was in tatters, and since the breakup of the Soviet Union (p. 930), Cuban President Castro had no strong ally. By creating a refugee crisis, Castro hoped to pressure the United States to end the trade embargo on Cuba. But President Clinton refused to end the embargo, or allow Cuban refugees to enter the United States, until Castro reformed his Communist dictatorship. Immigration reform. Immigrants came from trouble-spots on all continents—from Afghanistan, South Africa, the Soviet Union, Ethiopia, and Ireland. They came for a job and for a better life. Even if they had entered illegally they often found work. They were willing to take jobs that other Americans shunned, and they worked hard. Their children who were born here were citizens of the United States, according to the Constitution. And if they became legal residents, their relatives would be admitted to join them. But illegal immigration became an item of increasing national concern. By 1986 there were millions of illegal aliens in the United States. More came from Mexico every day. Many Americans felt that illegal aliens, many of whom received government assistance, took too great a toll on the nation's resources. Others disagreed, pointing out that the United States had been built by those seeking asylum from poverty and tyranny. How were we to maintain our tradition of welcoming those in need while responding to genuine concerns about the costs of illegal immigration? Congress responded with the Immigration Reform and Control Act. Illegal immigrants who could prove that they had been in the country since January 1, 1982, were allowed to become legal residents. About 1.4 million illegal aliens became legal residents under this law. In 1990, Congress enacted the greatest reform of immigration laws in a generation. The Immigration Act of 1990 increased the number of immigrants allowed into the United States each year. It also created more openings for immigrants from Europe, and the number of skilled and wealthy immigrants allowed to enter the country. In 1996, Congress further modified immigration law, largely in response to public concern over illegal immigration. New laws doubled the number of border patrol agents and made it more difficult for illegal aliens to get jobs. To discourage immigration further. Congress restricted even legal immigrants' access to many government social programs. Section 6 Review 1. What major immigrant groups sought refuge in the United States in the 1970s and 1980s? Why did they leave their homes? 2. Why were many Americans in favor of reforming immigration laws in the 1970s and 1980s? 3. Critical Thinking: Making Comparisons. In what ways is the "sanctuary movement" of the 1980s like the "underground railroad" of the mid-1800s? In what ways does it differ? 7, New vistas of equality As other groups of people sought equal rights, Americans were forced to reexamine the meaning of the word equality. They discovered new opportunities and new problems. Gay and lesbian rights. This "minority" was not an immigrant group. It included Americans of all races, all religions, and both sexes. It was decoder would let the hearing impaired see the program accompanied by printed captions. Even in 1978, when Congress was cutting other costs, it authorized $5.2 billion to be spent over the next four years to provide equal opportunities and legal protection for the disabled. Mainstreaming. Mentally ill and mentally retarded people also gained. In 1965, community health centers were virtually unknown. Only ten years later they numbered more than a thousand. During these years, too, education of the mentally retarded was improved. By 1979 ten states had declared that their disabled students had a right to receive an equal education. Everywhere there were signs of concern. By a series of laws and court decisions during the 1970s the federal government insisted that education in the nation's schools and colleges should be opened to all qualified mentally and physically disabled. This was called "main- streaming"—taking the disabled out of special institutions and bringing them into the mainstream of American life. Homelessness is rapidly becoming a national problem. An increasing number of the homeless today are young children. Will Dent McIntyre/Photo Researchers But not all programs were successful. One approach had some unhappy results. This was the effort to take mentally ill persons out of state mental hospitals and return them to their communities. In the late 1960s and 1970s many people who were not dangerous were being locked away for years and yet received little treatment. The tragedy of their lives was dramatically presented by Ken Kesey in his novel and the engrossing movie One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest. But when they were sent out without help they created new problems for themselves and the community. The change was hastened when the Supreme Court ruled in 1975 that the mentally ill who were not dangerous to themselves or others could not be confined against their will. Meanwhile, new medicines and federal aid through Medicare and Medicaid seemed to provide support for the mentally ill if they were released from state hospitals. But often it did not work that way. Few local communities had planned for this new responsibility. Many of those released became homeless. They lacked skills and could not find jobs. Who would look after them? The result, as the American Psychiatric Institute noted in 1984, was a major tragedy for society. The mentally ill really needed "halfway houses." There—just halfway back into the community—they could be trained for jobs while they had medical help. Then when they were ready they would try to return to a normal life. Halfway houses were already helping convicts, alcoholics, and drug addicts. But few communities would pay for the urgently needed services. By the late 1980s the homeless, on the streets of the nation's cities, were attracting wide attention. In 1990 Congress passed and the President signed into law the Americans with Disabilities Act. It was the most sweeping civil rights legislation since the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (p. 798). It gave federal protection against discrimination to 43 million mentally and physically impaired Americans. Most businesses, restaurants, and public places were required by the new law to make employment and access available to all those who were severely Bob Dacmmrlch Photography. Inc. These Native American students are receiving instruction both in English and their tribal language. limited in "a major life activity," like walking or seeing, or by a physical or mental impairment. The United or disunited States of America? Never before had a nation tried so strenuously to give all of its people equality and pride in themselves. But by the 1990s, with so many groups of people going out of their way to distinguish themselves and to seek power by virtue of their racial and ethnic differences, many people worried that the United States of America was becoming disunited; that we were losing sight of what we have in common—the ideals and the heritage that we shared. Consider, for example, the debate about bilingual education. In Europe, Asia, and Africa, people had fought wars and killed each other to determine what language they would use in school. But the United States had always tried to be a nation of nations. Here people from everywhere found that they could all learn to speak the same language. Immigrant parents who knew only German or Polish or Italian learned English from their children who went to American public schools. Gradually one language helped to make one nation. The languages from the old country lived on at home, in churches, in clubs, and in special newspapers and magazines. But English was the language of the public schools. The English language took on a wonderful new life here. In the 1970s and 1980s, in the new quest for equality and pride, some groups began to demand that their children should use their own home language as well as English in the public schools. Bilingual education, they said, would make the Spanish-speaking, the Indians, and other Americans proud of their heritage. Of course, it was important that Americans of all groups should know their heritage and not forget the language of their parents. This approach would enrich the whole nation. Still, there was a danger. I; all Americans were not required also to lean and speak the English language well, they might lose their opportunity to compete for the best jobs. The one nation might be broken into small groups that could not speak to one another, could not read the same books, or understand the same TV programs. And there were other problems, too. In the crusade for equality some people objected to all examinations. They argued that it was unfair to 874 ______________________________________ give tests for entrance to colleges or to find the most qualified people for jobs. They wanted "open-admissions"—which meant admission for all whether or not they could pass a test. Others, who followed the tradition of Thomas Jefferson, continued to believe in a "natural aristocracy." They argued that all Americans must be given the opportunity to become prepared. Then the examinations would find those who could benefit most from the education or could do the job best. Equal opportunity had to begin with equal kindergartens and elementary schools and high schools for all. In the long run everybody would profit if all Americans could show their true abilities, could be tested impartially, and compete fairly. Equality among nations. Abroad, too, in the community of nations, Americans faced the challenge of equality. President Kennedy noted "a worldwide declaration of independence," which within 30 years had broken up a few old empires into 90 new nations. Each became a member of the United Nations. There in the General Assembly they would have an equal vote and an equal voice. This group had become a strange community of unequals. A few of these nations had populations of more than 200 million people spread across continents. Many others were tiny islands with populations of less than 100,000. Half the nations who are members of the United Nations have a smaller population than the single state of North Carolina. And four out of every five states in the United States have a larger territory than 30 of these newly independent countries. By 1998, there were 185 member nations in the United Nations, and new nations were being created with dizzying speed. This situation would make new problems for the community of nations. International law declared that all nations of the earth were entitled to equal treatment. That meant one thing when the community of nations was dominated by a few big nations. These nations usually had languages of their own, and long and separate histories. In those times the voices of the smallest nations were hardly heard. Now a small nation with an atomic bornb was the equal in terror to any other. Large nations would have to show a new self-restraint. Small nations, too, would have to learn the ways of the world and show new respect for others. Section 7 Review 1. Describe efforts in the 1970s to provide equality for the disabled. 2. What is "mainstreaming"? 3. Critical Thinking: Identifying Assumptions. Why do some groups want bilingual education in the public schools? Chapter 341^eview Focusing on Ideas 1. How does a society benefit when its people engage in lively competition for income and social status? What are the "costs" of such competition? 2. Why did the Old World aristocracy not become firmly established in most of colonial America? In which region here did a landed aristocracy thrive? Why? 3. List kinds of United States laws and government programs that are designed to promote the ideal of equality. List laws and programs designed to promote competition. Are these efforts too much, too little, or about right? Explain. Taking a Critical Look 1. Recognizing Cause and Effect. Analyze several recent federal laws or major bills now in Congress and show how they will promote or restrain competition; and advance or retard equality. 2. Drawing Conclusions. How is political equality linked to social and economic equality? 3. Making Comparisons. How has United States government policy regarding American Indians changed, if at all, since President Lyndon Johnson referred to the American Indian as the "Forgotten American"? Why has this change taken place? Your Region in History 1. Economics. Does your school district have an affirmative action program? What changes has it produced? How have people in the community responded to these programs? 2. Government. Have any Indian groups in your state or region taken legal action to obtain land, special fishing or hunting rights, or other compensation? What settlements or proposed settlements have been reached? 3. Culture. How has the drive for equality affected your community? Consider both costs and benefits. Historical Facts and Figures Predicting Consequences. Study the graph below to help answer the following questions: (a) What percentage of women worked outside the home in 1955? In 1965? In 1990? (b) What events or trends discussed in this chapter are related to this increasing percentage? (c) If the rate of increase remains constant, estimate the percentage of women who will be working outside the home in 1995. In 2000. (d) Do you think this trend will continue over the next 25 years? Explain your answer. 875 