TheAmericanNationTENTH EDITIONA History of theUnited StatedJOHN A. GARRATYGouverneur Morris Professor of History, EmeritueColumbia UniversityMARK C. CARNESProfessor of HistoryBarnard College, Columbia UniversityLONGMANAn imprint of Addison Wesley Longman, Inc.New YorkReading, MassachusettsMenlo Park, CaliforniaHarlow, EnglandDon Mills, OntarioSydneyMexico CityMadridAmsterdamFor Our ChilOren:Kathy, Jack, and SarahandStephanieEditor-in-Chief Priscilla McGeehonAcquisitions Editor: Jay O'CallaghanDevelopment Manager: Betty SlackExecutive Marketing Manager: Sue WestmorelandSupplements Editor: Joy HilgendorfFull Service Production Manager: Patti BrechtProject Coordination, Text Design, and Electronic Page Makcup: Nesbitt Graphics, Inc.Cover Design Manager: Nancy DanahyCover Designer: Keithley AssociatesCover Illustration: Granger, Charles Henry (American, 1812-1893) Muster Day, 1843 or after, oil on canvas, 559 x .839 (22 x 23).National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC. Gift of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch. 1980.62.32 (PA) 2821Photo Researcher: Photosearch, Inc.Senior Print Buyer: Hugh CrawfordPrinter and Binder: World Color Book ServicesCover Printer: The Lehigh Press, Inc.For permission to use copyrighted material, grateful acknowledgment is made to the copyright holders on pp. CI-C4, which are herebymade part of this copyright page.The author makes grateful acknowledgment to:New Directions Publishing Corporation for permission to quote "Hugh Selwyn Mauberley" by Ezra Pound. From Ezra Pound, Personae.Copyright C 1926 by Ezra Pound. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation. U.S. and Canadian rights.Liveright Publishing Corporation for permission to quote from "the first president to be loved by hisby e. e. cummings. Reprintedfrom ViVa, poems by e. e. cummings, edited by George James Firmage, by permission of Liveright Publishing Corporation. Copyright O1931, 1959 by e. e. cummings. Copyright © 1979, 1973 by the Trustees for the e. e. cummings Trust, Copyright C 1979, 1973 by GeorgeJames Firmage.Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataGarraty, John ArthurThe American nation : a history of the United States / John A.Garraty, Mark C. Carnes-10th ed.p. cm.Includes bibliographical references and index.ISBN 0-321-05287-01. United States-History.I. Title.Copyright © 2000 by John A. Garraty. Maps, graphs, and all illustration captions and related text copyright © by Addison WesleyEducational Publishers, Inc.All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher. Printed in the UnitedStates.Please visit our website at http://www.awlonline.com/garratyISBN 0-321-05287-012345678910-WCV-02010099African American Soldiers 417ther reflected nor triggered a revolution in whitewhite man." Nevertheless, Douglass described Lin-thinking about the race question. Its significance wascoln as "one whom I could love, honor, and trustsubtle but real; both the naive view that Lincoln freedwithout reserve or doubt."the slaves on January 1, 1863, and the cynical oneAs for the slaves of the South, after January 1,that his action was a mere propaganda trick are incor-1863, whenever the "Army of Freedom" approached,rect. Northern hostility to emancipation arose fromthey laid down their plows and hoes and flocked tofear of change more than from hatred of blacks, whilethe Union lines in droves. "We-all knows about it,"liberal disavowals of any intention to treat blacks asone black confided to a northern clergyman early inéquals were in large measure designed to quiet this1863. "Only we darsen't let on. We pretends not tofear. To a degree the racial backlash that the procla-know." Such behavior came as a shock to the owners.nation inspired reflected the public's awareness that"The slaves who loved us best-as we thought-1 change, frightening but irreversible, had occurred.were the first to leave us," one planter mourned. TalkMost white Northerners did not surrender theirof slave "ingratitude" increased. Instead of referringcomforting belief in black inferiority, and Lincoln wasto their workers as "servants" or "my black family,'10 exception. Yet Lincoln was evolving. He talkedmany owners began to describe them as "slaves" orabout deporting ex-slaves to the tropics, but he did"niggers.'not send any there. And he began to receive blackladers in the White House and to allow black groupsto hold meetings on the grounds.African American SoldiersMany other Americans were changing too. Thebrutality of the New York riots horrified many whiteA revolutionary shift occurred in white thinkingutzens. Over $40,000 was swiftly raised to aid the vic-about using black men as soldiers. Although they hadims, and some conservatives were so appalled by thefought in the Revolution and in the Battle of NewInsh rioters that they began to talk of giving blacks theOrleans during the War of 1812, a law of 1792vote. The influential Atlantic Monthly commented: "Itbarred blacks from the army. During the early stagessimpossible to name any standard that will give aof the rebellion, despite the eagerness of thousandsmote to the Celt and exclude the negro.of free blacks to enlist, the prohibition remained inforce. By 1862, however, the need for manpower wascreating pressure for change. In August Secretary ofThe Emancipated PeopleWar Edwin M. Stanton authorized the military gov-ernment of the captured South Carolina sea islandsIn blacks, both slave and free, the Emancipationto enlist slaves in the area. After the EmancipationInolamation served as a beacon. Even if it failedProclamation specifically authorized the enlistment ofamediately to liberate one slave or to lift the bur-blacks, the governor of Massachusetts moved to or-lens of prejudice from one black back, it stood as aganize a black regiment, the famous Massachusettspromise of future improvement. "I took the procla-54th. Swiftly thereafter, other states began to recruitmation for a little more than it purported," Freder-black soldiers, and in May 1863 the federal govern-ick Douglass recalled in his autobiography, "andment established a Bureau of Colored Troops to su-in its spirit a life and power far beyond its let-pervise their enlistment. By the end of the war oneLincoln was by modern standards a racist, butsoldier in eight in the Union army was black.ismost militant black contemporaries respectedEnlisting so many black soldiers changed the warim deeply. The Anglo-African, an uncompromis-from a struggle to save the Union to a kind of revolu-black newspaper (the position of which is re-tion. "Let the black manget an cagle on his but-in an 1862 editorial that asked: "Poor,ton and a musket on his shoulder," wrote Frederickticken-hearted, semi-barbarous Caucasians, whenDouglass, "and there is no power on earth which canvill you learn that "the earth was made fordeny that he has won the right to citizenship.'MAN?'") referred in 1864 to Lincoln's "many no-Black soldiers were segregated and commandedLacts" and urged his reelection. Douglass said ofby white officers. For example, the Massachusetts"Lincoln was noteither our man or our54th regiment was led by Colonel Robert GouldIn his interests, in his association, in hisShaw of Boston, called by one admirer "the verybits of thought and in his prejudices, he was atype and flower of the Anglo-Saxon race." At first

The Plains Indians 477came, until the negotiation of the Burlingame Treatythe treeless plains, dried buffalo dung was used forof 1868, the purpose of which was to provide cheapfuel. The buffalo was also an important symbol in In-bion for railroad construction crews. Thereafter thedian religion.annual influx more than doubled, although beforeAlthough they seemed the epitome of freedom,1882 it exceeded 20,000 only twice. When the rail-pride, and self-reliance, the Plains Indians had beguntoads were completed and the Chinese began to com-to fall under the sway of white power. They eagerlypete with native workers, a great cry of resentmentadopted the products of the more technically ad-ment up on the West Coast. Riots broke out in Sanvanced culture-cloth, metal tools, weapons, cheapFrancisco in 1877. Chinese workers were calleddecorations. However, the most important thing the"groveling worms," "more slavish and brutish thanwhites gave them had nothing to do with technology:the beasts that roam the fields." The California con-It was the horse.sotution of 1879 denied the right to vote to any "na-The geological record shows that the genustive of China" along with idiots, the insane, and per-Equus was native to America, but it had become ex-sons convicted of "any infamous crime."tinct in the Western Hemisphere long before CortésWhen Chinese immigration increased in 1882 tobrought the first modern horses to America in the six-nearly 40,000, the protests reached such a peak thatteenth century. Multiplying rapidly thereafter, the an-Congress passed a law prohibiting all Chinese immi-imals soon roamed wild from Texas to the Argentine.gration for ten years. Later legislation extended theBy the eighteenth century the Indians of the Plainsban indefinitely.had made them a vital part of their culture.Horses thrived on the Plains and so did theirmasters. Mounted Indians could run down buffalo in-The Plains Indianostead of stalking them on foot. They could movemore easily over the country and fight more effec-tFox 250 years the Indians had been driven backtively too. They could acquire and transport moreS.stadily, yet on the eve of the Civil War they still in-possessions and increase the size of their tepees, forarubited roughly half the United States. By the time ofhorses could drag heavy loads heaped on A-shapedHives's inauguration, however, the Indians had beenframes (called travois by the French), whereas earlieralsuttered as independent peoples, and in anotherIndians had only dogs to depend on as pack animals.ri-litade the survivors were penned up on reservations,The frames of the travois, when disassembled, servedn-the government committed to a policy of extinguish-as poles for tepees. The Indians also adopted modernhetheir way of life.weapons: the cavalry sword, which they particularlyeviIn 1860 the survivors of most of the easternadmired, and the rifle. Both added to their effective-oremhes were living peacefully in Indian Territory, whatness as hunters and fighters. However, like the whites'les.BOW Oklahoma. In California the forty-niners hadliquor and diseases, horses and guns caused problems.so-male short work of the local tribes. Elsewhere in theThe buffalo herds began to diminish, and warfare be-7 ofWest-in the deserts of the Great Basin between thecame bloodier and more frequent.sev-fierras and the Rockies, in the mountains themselves,In a familiar and tragic pattern, the majority ofI tond on the semiarid, grass-covered plains between thethe western tribes greeted the first whites to entere ofockies and the edge of white civilization in easterntheir domains in a friendly fashion. Lewis and Clarktheunsas and Nebraska-nearly a quarter of a millionand their handful of companions crossed and re-ossi-dians dominated the land.crossed the entire region without a single clash withit inBy far the most important lived on the Highthe Indians they encountered. As late as the 1830s,thanuns. From the Blackfeet of southwestern Canadawhite hunters and trappers ranged freely over most oftates.the Sioux of Minnesota and the Dakotas to thethe West, trading with the Indians and often marry-nt ofavenne of Colorado and Wyoming and the Co-ing Indian women. Settlers pushing cross-country to-se ofinche of northern Texas, the Plains tribes possessedward Oregon in the 1840s met with relatively littlein re-generally uniform culture. All lived by hunting thetrouble.cking American bison, or buffalo, which rangedAfter the start of the gold rush the need to link£ Chi-ler the plains by the millions. The buffalo providedthe East with California meant that the tribes wereem toIndians with food, clothing, and even shelter, forpushed aside. Deliberately the government in Wash-a yearTamous Indian tepee was covered with hides. Onington prepared the way. In 1851 Thomas Fitz-

502 Chapter 18 An Industrial Gianteign competition. Foreign capital, however, entered themarket freely, in part because tariffs kept out so manyRailroads: The First Bigforeign goods.BusinedsThe dominant spirit of the time encouraged busi-nessmen to maximum effort by emphasizing progress,In 1866, returning from his honeymoon in Europe,yet it also produced a generation of Robber Barons.30-year-old Charles Francis Adams, Jr., grandson andThe energetic search for wealth led to corrupt businessgreat-grandson of presidents, full of ambition andpractices such as stock manipulation, bribery, and cut-ready, as he put it, to confront the world "face tothroat competition and ultimately to "combinations inface," looked about in search of a carcer. "Surveyingrestraint of trade," a kind of American euphemism forthe whole field," he later explained, "I fixed on themonopoly. European immigrants provided the addi-railroad system as the most developing force and thetional labor needed by expanding industry; 2.5 millionlargest field of the day, and determined to attach myarrived in the 1870s, twice that number in the 1880s.self to it." Adams's judgment was acute: For the nestThese immigrants saw America as a land of opportu-25 years the railroads were probably the most signifinity, and for many, probably most, it was that indeed.cant element in American economic development,But for others emigrating to the United States meant arailroad executives the most powerful people in theconstant struggle for survival; dreary, often unhealthycountry.living conditions; and grinding poverty.Railroads were important first as an industry inIt was a period of rapid advance in basic science,themselves. Fewer than 35,000 miles of track existedand technicians created a bountiful harvest of new ma-when Lee laid down his sword at Appomattox. In 1875chines, processes, and power sources that increased pro-railroad mileage exceeded 74,000 and the skeleton diductivity in many industries and created new industriesthe network was complete. Over the next two decadosas well. In agriculture there were what one contempo-the skeleton was fleshed out. In 1890 the mature butrary expert called "an endless variety of cultivators,"still-growing system took in over $1 billion in passengerbetter harvesters and binding machines, and combinesand freight revenues. (The federal government's in-capable of threshing and bagging 450 pounds of grain acome in 1890 was only $403 million.) The value of railChicagominute. An 1886 report of the Illinois Bureau of Laborroad properties and equipment was more than $8.7 bilStatistics claimed that "new machinery has displacedlion. The national railroad debt of $5.1 billion W2St. Louisfully 50 percent of the muscular labor formerly requiredalmost five times the national debt of $1.1 billion! Byto do a given amount of work in the manufacture of1900 the nation had 193,000 miles of track.agricultural implements." Of course that also meantThe emphasis in railroad construction after 1865that many farm families were "displaced" from theirwas on organizing integrated systems. The lines hadPrimehomes and livelihoods, and it made farmers dependenthigh fixed costs: taxes, interest on their bonds, mainteBy 189on the vagaries of distant markets and powerful eco-nance of track and rolling stock, and salaries of officelines. Tnomic forces they could not control.personnel. A short train with half-empty cars requiredservice 1As a result of improvements in the milling of grain,almost as many workers and as much fuel to operate 25packaged cereals appeared on the American breakfasta long one jammed with freight or passengers. To cantable. The commercial canning of food, spurred by theprofits the railroads had to carry as much traffic as possilines rui"automatic line" canning factory, expanded so rapidlyble. They therefore spread out feeder lines to draw busi-mergedthat by 1887 a writer in Good Housekeeping could say:ness to their main lines the way the root network of 11873 h"Housekeeping is getting to be ready made, as well astree draws water into its trunk.Southerclothing." The Bonsack cigarette-rolling machine cre-Before the Civil War, as we have seen, passengengan Cerated a new industry that changed the habits of millions.and freight could travel by rail from beyond Chicagotral operGeorge B. Eastman created still another with his devel-and St. Louis to the Atlantic Coast, but only after thetween Nopment of mass-produced, roll photographic film andwar did true interregional trunk lines appear. In 186Lthe Midthe simple but efficient Kodak camera. The perfectionfor example, the New York Central ran from Albany toWhiof the typewriter by the Remington company in theBuffalo. One could proceed from Buffalo to Chicago,York Ce1880s revolutionized the way office work was per-but on a different company's trains. In 1867 the Nexroads toformed. But even some of these inventions were mixedYork Central passed into the hands of "Commodore"Chicagoblessings. The harm done by the popularity of ciga-Cornelius Vanderbilt, who had made a large fortune oPittsburgrettes, for example, needs no explanation.the shipping business. Vanderbilt already controlledline obta

536 Chapter 19 American Society in the Industrial AgeStainteEur-incrtheForcienmerin tiotheAn 1890s classroom with 40-plusforchildren, all about the same age,bettfrom the same economic and socialcircumstances, and set to the sameportassignment by a woman teacher.of /The urban public school hadnumarrived.workinvesnewlabormetalwork, sewing, and other crafts. Woodward"ruthless underconsumption," gradually accumulated1thought of vocational training as part of a broad gen-enough money to buy their own homes and provideway (eral education rather than as preparation for a specificfor themselves in their old age.Pupiroccupation, but by 1890, 36 cities had establishedUnivpurely vocational public high schools.was liBecause manual training attracted the backing ofThe "New" Immigrationcan liindustrialists, organized labor was at first suspicious ofers. Ithe new trend. One union leader called trade schoolsIndustrial expansion increased the need for labor, andto the"breeding schools for scabs and rats." Fortunately,this in turn powerfully stimulated immigration. Beon ththe usefulness of such training soon became evidenttween 1866 and 1915 about 25 million foreigners defessedto the unions; by 1910 the AFL was lobbying side bytered the United States. Industrial growth alone doohis naside with the National Association of Manufacturersnot explain the influx. The launching in 1858 of thetion-for more trade schools.English liner Great Eastern, which was nearly 700 fedBut hEducation certainly helped young people to risefrom stem to stern and weighed about 19,000 tonto livein the world, but progress from rags to real riches wasopened a new era in transatlantic travel. AlthougHungfar from common. Carnegies were rare. A study of themost immigrants traveled in steerage, which V2TIfamily backgrounds of 200 late-nineteenth-centurycramped and almost totally lacking in anything thehim. Abusiness leaders revealed that nearly all of them grewcould be considered an amenity, the Atlantic crossingtion atup in well-to-do middle-class families. They were faronce so hazardous, became safe and speedy with nbor Bbetter educated than the general run, and most wereperfection of the steamship. Competition betweeDelawmembers of one or another Protestant church.the great packet lines such as Cunard, North GermunreacherThe unrealistic expectations inspired by the rags-Lloyd, and Holland-America drove down the costBeto-riches myth more than the absence of real oppor-the passage, and advertising by the lines furthernese-tunity probably explains why so many workers, evenulated traffic.fectivewhen expressing dissatisfaction with life as it was,"Push" pressures as well as these "pull" facumcludedcontinued to subscribe to such middle-class values ashad much to do with this "new" immigration, Inunrestrhard work and thrift- is, they continued to hope.provements in transportation producedstates,Professor Thernstrom notes that hundreds of poorand disruptive changes in the economies of many Enever CKpeople in Newburyport, by practicing what he callsropean countries. Cheap wheat from the Unitidwhen f

The Old Immigrants and the New 537States, Russia, and other parts of the world pouredfunctory. Public health officials boasted that withinto Europe, bringing disaster to farmers throughout"one glance" at each arrival, the inspectors couldEurope. The spreading industrial revolution and the"take in six details, namely the scalp, face, neck,increased use of farm machinery led to the collapse ofhands, gait and general condition, both mental andthe peasant economy of central and southern Europe.physical." Only those who failed this "test" were ex-For rural inhabitants this meant the loss of self-suffi-amined more closely. On average, only 1 immigrantdency, the fragmentation of landholdings, unemploy-in 50 was ultimately rejected.ment, and for many the decision to make a new startPrivate agencies, philanthropic and commercial,nthe New World.served as a link between the new arrivals and employ-Political and religious persecutions pushed stillers looking for labor. Until the Foran Act of 1885others into the migrating stream, but the main reasonoutlawed the practice, a few companies brought infor immigration remained the desire for economicskilled workers under contract, advancing them pas-betterment. "In America," a British immigrant re-sage money and collecting it in installments fromported, "you get pies and puddings."their paychecks, a system somewhat like the inden-While immigrants continued to people the farmstured servitude of colonial times. Numerous national-ofAmerica, industry absorbed an ever-increasingity groups assisted (and sometimes exploited) theirsumber of the newcomers. In 1870 one industrialcompatriots by organizing "immigrant banks" thatsorker in three was foreign-born. When congressionalrecruited labor in the old country, arranged trans-investigators examined 21 major industries early in theportation, and then housed the newcomers in board-tow century, they discovered that well over half of theinghouses in the United States while finding themubor force had not been born in the United States.jobs. The padrone system of the Italians and GreeksedMost of the new millions entered the country bywas typical. The padrone, a sort of contractor whoideT2Y of New York City. A Serbian immigrant, Michaelagreed to supply gangs of unskilled workers to com-bapin, later a distinguished physicist at Columbiapanies for a lump sum, usually signed on immigrantsChiversity, has left a moving description of what itunfamiliar with American wage levels at rates that en-125 like. He arrived in 1874 on the Hamburg-Ameri-sured him a healthy profit.liner Westphalia amid a horde of other newcom-Beginning in the 1880s, the spreading effects ofn Disembarking at Hoboken, he was taken by tugindustrialization in Europe caused a shift in theandthe immigration reception center at Castle Gardensources of American immigration from northern andBe-T the southern tip of Manhattan Island. He con-western to southern and eastern sections of the Con-en-issed to the authorities that he had only 5 cents totinent. In 1882, 789,000 immigrants entered thedoesname and knew no Americans except-by reputa-United States; more than 350,000 came from Greatif thezn-Franklin, Lincoln, and Harriet Beecher Stowe.Britain and Germany, only 32,000 from Italy, and0 fectlit he explained in eloquent phrases why he wantedfewer than 17,000 from Russia. In 1907-the all-tons,in the land of liberty rather than in the Austro-time peak year, with 1,285,000 immigrants-Greatoughfungarian empire.Britain and Germany supplied fewer than half as many1 wasThe officials conferred briefly, then admittedas they had 25 years earlier, while Russia and Italyg thatm After a good breakfast, supplied by the immigra-were supplying eleven times as many as then. Up toassing,mauthorities, someone from the Castle Garden La-1880, only about 200,000 southern and eastern Eu-th theBureau offered him a job as a farmhand inropeans had migrated to America. Between 1880 andetweentaware. Within 24 hours of his arrival he had1910, approximately 8.4 million arrived.termanached his destination, ready to go to work.cost ofBefore 1882, when-in addition to the Chi-stim-and persons adjudged mentally de-The on Immigrantoand or liable to become public charges were ex-factorsdided. entry into the United States was almostand the Newon. Im-restricted. Indeed, until 1891 the Atlantic Coastxpectedto, not the federal government, exercised what-Of course Michael Pupin was not an ordinary immi-any Eu-controls were imposed on newcomers. Evengrant. Although he came from eastern Europe, heUnitedfederally imposed, medical inspection was per-preceded the flood of people from that part of Europe538Chapter 19 American Society in the Industrial Age1000Poverty, unemployment, female job holding outsideSouthern andthe home, and other traumas that might have been800Eastern Europeexpected to disrupt family relationships apparentlyhad little effect. Polish immigrants in Buffalo, havingAsia, North America,600and South Americadifferent traditions, found adjustment more difficultNorthern andGerman-American and Irish-American CatholicsWestern Europe400had different attitudes that caused them to clash ovesuch matters as the policies of the Catholic University200in Washington. Although (or perhaps because) theHaymarket anarchists were German-born, in 18870one prominent German-American denounced the186018701880189019001910Knights of Labor as a hotbed of radicalism-and W2said to have claimed that it was dominated by "InishImmigration, 1860-1910ignoramuses." Controversies erupted between CathIn this graph, Germany is counted as a part of north-olic and Protestant German-Americans, between Greekevn and western Europe. Note the tide of new immi-American groups supporting various political factionsgration from southern and castern Europe in the earlyin their homeland, and so on.1900s.Confused by such differences and conflicts, mam"older" Americans concluded, wrongly but understandably, that the new immigrants were incapable ofbecoming good citizens and should be kept out. Durand he was more sophisticated and better educateding the 1880s large numbers of social workers, econothan the general run. The "new" immigrants, like themists, and church leaders, worried by the problem"old" Irish of the 1840s and 1850s, were mostlythat arose when so many poor immigrants flocked intopeasants. They also seemed more than ordinarily clan-cities already bursting at the seams, began to beliennish; southern Italians typically called all people out-that some restriction should be placed on the incomside their families forestieri, "foreigners.' Old-stocking human tide. The directors of charitable organizaAmericans thought them harder to assimilate, and intions, which bore the burden of aiding the most unforfact many were. Some Italian immigrants, for exam-tunate immigrants, complained that their resourusple, were unmarried men who had come to thewere being exhausted by the needs of the flood./United States to earn enough money to buy a farmSocial Darwinists and people obsessed with pseaback home. Such people made hard and willing work-doscientific ideas about "racial purity" also found thers but were not much concerned with being part ofnew immigration alarming. Misunderstanding thean American community.findings of the new science of genetics, they attriseThe "birds of passage" were a substantial minor-uted the social problems associated with mass imastity, but the immigrant who saved in order to bring hisgration to supposed physiological characteristic anwife and children or his younger brothers and sistersthe newcomers. Forgetting that earlier Americans hitato America was more typical. In addition, thousandsaccused pre-Civil War Irish and German immigramof immigrants came as family groups and intended toof similar deficiencies, they decided that the peoplopremain. Some, like the eastern European Jewish mi-of southern and eastern Europe were racially (andWgrants, were refugees who were almost desperately ea-therefore permanently) inferior to "Nordic" n.11ger to become Americans, although of course they re-"Anglo-Saxon" types and ought to be kept out

intained and nurtured much of their traditional culture.Workers, fearing the competition of people wdthCultural differences among immigrants were of-low living standards and no bargaining power, spoisCEten large and had important effects on their relationsout against the "enticing of penniless and unapprix-with native-born Americans and with other immi-immigrantsto undermine our wages and SOCIbegrant groups. Italians who settled in the city of Buf-welfare." In 1883 the president of the Amalgams18falo, the historian Virginia Yans-McLaughlin hasIron and Steel Workers told a Senate committee didushown, adjusted relatively smoothly to urban indus-Hungarian, Polish, Italian, and other immignasilatrial life because of their close family and kinship ties."can live where I think a decent man would die: debaThe Old Immigrants and the New 539LIBERTYWALLLIMERTY NOTContemporary cartoonists reflected the "new nativist" attitude toward unrestrictedimigration. Frank Beard's 1885 drawing shows anarchists, socialists, and membersthe Mafia (indicated here as the Black Hand) arriving from the sewers of Europeand being resisted by Columbia and her watchdogs "Law" and "Order."20 live onfood that other men would not"Europe's human and inhuman rubbish,' of thetuch." A Wisconsin iron worker put it this way: "Im-"cutthroats of Beelzebub from the Rhine, theberants work for almost nothing and seem to beDanube, the Vistula and the Elbe" crowded the pagesbe to live on wind-something I can not do."of the nation's press. The Grand Army of the Repub-Employers were not disturbed by the influx oflic, an organization of Civil War veterans, grumbledtople with strong backs willing to work hard for lowabout foreign-born radicals.Nevertheless, by the late 1880s many of themThese nativists, again like the pre-Civil War vari-alarmed about the supposed radicalism of theety, disliked Catholics and other minority groupsmigrants. The Haymarket bombing focused atten-more than immigrants as such. The largest nativist or-con the handful of foreign-born extremists in theganization of the period, the American Protective As-antry and loosed a flood of unjustified charges thatsociation, founded in 1887, existed primarily to resistsurchists and communists" were dominating the la-what its members called "the Catholic menace.' Themovement. Nativism, which had waxed in theProtestant majority treated "new" immigrants as un-505 under the Know-Nothing banner and wanedderlings, tried to keep them out of the best jobs, andmg the Civil War, now flared up again, and for sim-discouraged their efforts to climb the social ladder.thasons. Denunciations of "longhaired, wild-eyed,This prejudice functioned only at the social and eco-ismelling, atheistic, reckless foreign wretches," ofnomic level. But nowhere in America did prejudice

540 Chapter 19 American Society in the Industrial Agelead to interference with religious freedom in the nar-60row sense. And neither labor leaders nor importantindustrialists, despite their misgivings about immigra-55tion, took a broadly antiforeign position.After the Exclusion Act of 1882 and the almost50meaningless 1885 ban on importing contract labor,45no further restrictions were imposed on immigrationRuraluntil the twentieth century. Strong support for a liter-40acy test for admission developed in the 1890s, pushedby a new organization, the Immigration Restriction35League. Since there was much more illiteracy in thesoutheastern quarter of Europe than in the north-30western, such a test would discriminate without seem-ing to do so on national or racial grounds. A literacy25Urbantest bill passed both houses of Congress in 1897, butPresident Cleveland vetoed it. Such a "radical depar-20ture" from the "generous and free-handed policy" ofthe past, Cleveland said, was unjustified. He added,15perhaps with tongue in cheek, that a literacy require-ment would not keep out "unruly agitators," who10were only too adept at reading and writing.50186018701880189019001910The Expanding City andItd ProblemoRural and Urban Population,1860-1910Americans who favored restricting immigration mademuch of the fact that so many of the newcomerscrowded into the cities, aggravating problems oftional transportation network. But by the finalhousing, public health, crime, and immorality. Immi-decades of the century, the expansion of industry hadgrants concentrated in the cities because the jobs cre-become the chief cause of city growth. Thus the uated by expanding industry were located there. So, ofban concentration continued; in 1890 one personcourse, did native-born Americans; the proportion ofthree lived in a city, by 1910 nearly one in two.urban dwellers had been steadily increasing sinceA steadily increasing proportion of the urbsabout 1820.population was made up of immigrants. In 1890 theIt is important to keep in mind that populationforeign-born population of Chicago almost equale!density is not necessarily related to the existence ofthe total population of Chicago in 1880; a third ofillarge cities. In the late nineteenth century there wereBostonians and a quarter of all Philadelphians wotareas in Asia as large as the United States that wereimmigrants; and four out of five residents of Noas densely populated as Belgium and England yetYork City were either foreign-born or the childrendoverwhelmingly rural. The United States by anyimmigrants.standard was sparsely populated, but well before theAfter 1890 the immigrant concentration becamCivil War it had become one of the most urban na-even more dense. The migrants from eastem =tions in the world.southern Europe lacked the resources to travel totaIndustrialization does not entirely explain theagriculturally developing regions (to say nothinggrowth of nineteenth-century cities. All the largethe sums necessary to acquire land and farmAmerican cities began as commercial centers, and thement). As the concentration progressed it feddevelopment of huge metropolises like New York anditself, for all the eastern cities developed many etsChicago would have been impossible without the na-neighborhoods, in each of which immigrants ofThe Urban Infrastructure 541eign" values and institutions, numbers of "natives"accused the newcomers of resisting Americanizationand blamed them for urban problems. The immi-grants were involved in these problems, but the rapid-ity of urban expansion explains the troubles associatedwith city life far more fully than the high percentageof foreigners.The Urban InfractructureThe cities were suffering from growing pains. Sewerand water facilities frequently could not keep pacewith skyrocketing needs. By the 1890s the tremen-dous growth of Chicago had put such a strain on itssanitation system that the Chicago River had becomevirtually an open sewer, and the city's drinking watercontained such a high concentration of germ-killingchemicals that it tasted like creosote. In the 1880s allEarly twentieth-century city life was anything butthe sewers of Baltimore emptied into the sluggishdamorous for many residential dwellers. Here,Back Basin, and according to the journalist H. L.insped slum houses and outhouses are visible from theMencken, every summer the city smelled "like a bil-milood tracks in Cincinnati, Ohio.lion polecats." Fire protection became less and lessadequate; garbage piled up in the streets faster than itcould be carted away; and the streets themselvescrumbled beneath the pounding of heavy traffic. Ur-stonality congregated. Lonely, confused, often un-ban growth proceeded with such speed that newNe to speak English, the Italians, the Greeks, thestreets were laid out more rapidly than they could bebish and Russian Jews, and other immigrantspaved. Chicago had more than 1400 miles of dirtnded to settle where their predecessors had settled.streets in 1890.1Most newcomers intended to become UnitedIPeople poured into the great cities faster thanates citizens, to be absorbed in the famous Ameri-housing could be built to accommodate them. Thein "melting pot." But they also wanted to maintainninflux into areas already densely packed in the 1840slor traditional culture. They supported "national"became unbearable as rising property values and theturches and schools. Newspapers in their native lan-nabsence of zoning laws conspired to make buildersages flourished, as did social organizations of alleutilize every possible foot of space, squeezing outints. Each great American city became a Europe indlight and air ruthlessly in order to wedge in a few ad-Arocosm. New York City, the great entrepôt, had aIlditional family units.the Italy; Polish, Greek, Jewish, and BohemianreSubstandard living quarters aggravated other evilsanters; and even a Chinatown,Wsuch as disease and the disintegration of family life,Although ethnic neighborhoods were crowded,ofwith its attendant mental anguish, crime, and juvenilestalthy, and crime-ridden, and many of the resi-delinquency. The bloody New York City riots of 1863,were desperately poor, they were not ghettos inthough sparked by dislike of the Civil War draft and ofneEuropean sense, for those who lived there werendblacks, reflected the bitterness and frustration of thou-compelled by law to remain. Thousands "es-hesands jammed together amid filth and threatened byyearly to better districts. American ghettosofdisease. A citizens' committee seeking to discover theEplaces where hopes and ambitions were fulfilled,causes of the riots expressed its amazement after visit-ip-the people worked hard and endured hardships inoning the slums "that so much misery, disease, andif to improve their own and their children's lot.nicwretchedness can be huddled together and hiddenObserving the immigrants' attachment to "for-oneunvisited and unthought of, so near our own abodes."

542 Chapter 19 American Society in the Industrial AgeNew York City created a Metropolitan HealthBoard in 1866, and a state tenement house law thefollowing year made a feeble beginning at regulatingcity housing. Another law in 1879 placed a limit onthe percentage of lot space that could be covered bynew construction and established minimal standardsof plumbing and ventilation. The magazine Plumberand Sanitary Engineer sponsored a contest to pickthe best design for a tenement that met these specifi-cations. The winner of the competition was James E.Ware, whose plan for a "dumbbell" apartment housemanaged to crowd from 24 to 32 four-room apart-ments on a plot of ground only 25 by 100 feet.The feat was accomplished [writes Oscar Handlinin The Uprooted] by narrowing the building at itsmiddle so that it took on the shape of a dumbbell.The indentation was only two-and-a-halt feet wideand varied in length from five to fifty feet; but,Impoverished immigrant families, like the one in thrsadded to the similar indentations on the adjoining1889 Jacob Riis photograph, often lived in tiny win-houses, it created on each side an air-shaft five feetdowless rooms in crowded tenement districts.wide.The stairs, halls, and common water clos-ets were cramped into the narrow center of thebuilding so that almost the whole of its surface wasavailable for living quarters.three quarters of the residents of New York Citv'sLower East Side lacked indoor toilets and had to useDespite these efforts at reform, in 1890 morebackyard outhouses to relieve themselves. One noxthan 1.4 million persons were living on Manhattanious corner became known as the "lung block" beIsland, and in some sections the population densitycause of the prevalence of tuberculosis among its inexceeded 900 persons per acre. Jacob Riis, a reporter,habitants. In 1900 three out of five babies born :captured the horror of the crowded warrens in hisone poor district of Chicago died before their firstclassic study of life in the slums, How the Other Halfbirthday.Lives (1890):Equally frightening was the impact of overcrowding on the morals of tenement dwellers. The numberBe a little careful, please! The hall is dark and youof prison inmates in the United States increased by 50might stumble.Here where the hall turns andpercent in the 1880s, and the homicide rate nearldives into utter darkness isa flight of stairs. Youtripled, most of the rise occurring in cities. Drivetcan feel your way, if you cannot see it. Close? Yes!into the streets by the squalor of their homes, slumWhat would you have? All the fresh air that entersthese stairs comes from the hall-door that is foreveryouths formed gangs bearing names like Alley Gang,slammingThe sinks are in the hallway, that allRock Gang, and Hell's Kitchen Gang. From pellthe tenants may have access-and all be poisonedthievery and shoplifting they graduated to housealike by their summer stenches.Here is a door.breaking, bank robbery, and murder. According toListen! That short, hacking cough, that tiny, help-Jacob Riis, when the leader of the infamousless wail-what do they mean?The child is dy-Gang, convicted of murder, confessed his sins 101ing of measles. With half a chance it might haveprison chaplain, "his father confessor turned palelived; but it had none. That dark bedroom killed it.though many years of labor as chaplain of the Tomishad hardened him to such rehearsals."The unhealthiness of the tenements was notori-Slums bred criminals-the wonder was that theous. No one knows exactly, but as late as 1900 aboutbred so few. They also drove well-to-do residentsin

Leisure Activities: More Fun and Games 545Sundays in the late nineteenth century, city people crowded into strectcars andmaged to the countryside. Enticed by this taste of bucolic splendor, many chose toTin the suburbs and take the streetcars to work downtown. Soon, the populationmity of the suburbs resembled that of the cities.The "White City," a magnificent evocation oftoilet. Ellen Collins developed a smaller project inudo-classical structures, built for the ChicagoManhattan's Fourth Ward in the 1890s. These modeland's Fair of 1893 by Daniel H. Burnham, with itstenements were self-sustaining, but of necessity theyad vistas and acres of open space, led to a nationalyielded only modest returns. The landlords were es-beautiful" movement, the most lasting result ofsentially philanthropists; their work had no significantwas the development of many public parks.impact on urban housing in the nineteenth century.landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, de-of New York's Central Park, was a leading fig-in the movement.But efforts to relieve the congestion in slum dis-Leisure Activities: More Fun- made little headway. In Brooklyn Alfred T.and Gamed- established Home Buildings, a 40-familyd tenement in 1877; eventually he expanded theBy bringing together large numbers of people, citiesriment to include 267 apartments. Each unit hadmade possible many kinds of social activity difficult orD of light and air and contained its own sink andimpossible to maintain in rural areas. Cities remainedA MERICANL I V E SThe Johnson Familyof NebrackaIens Johnson was 22 when hehad four children, three of themThat part of Nebraska was be-emigrated to the Unitedboys. For years the family lived al-ing settled by people of manyStates from Denmark inmost entirely on what their farmbackgrounds. First had come the1849. He made his way west toproduced. They grew wheat, corn,New Englanders, who had arrivedMadison, Wisconsin, where heand vegetables and raised cattle,during the struggle over slavery inworked at odd jobs while accumu-sheep, pigs, and chickens, as wellthe territories that resulted fromlating enough money to buy aas horses. They had plenty ofthe passage of the Kansas-Nebraskwagon, horses, and a plow. Hewood for the fire and for fencingAct. Many veterans had arrived,married a young Norwegianon their own property. Wildlike Jens Johnson, after the Civilwoman in Madison. They wereberries for jams grew in abun-War. One of his friends was aable to get a small farm in thedance.Swede who had come to AmericaFamilywestern part of the state, whereJohnson had his wheat groundto escape a jail term for killingthey began to raise a family. Whenat a nearby mill, the miller doingdeer that was eating his crops.the Civil War broke out, Johnsonthe job in exchange for a quarterThere was a group of Germans, inthe Johvolunteered. He fought allof the flour. He slaughtered an OC-cluding a rather odd former philobered stthrough the war without a scratch,casional cow or some pigs, keptophy professor named Winkhaus,lowing :serving under Grant at Shiloh andthe meat frozen in winter, thenwho was said to be "brain-brokeVicksburg, later under Shermansmoked or salted the rest when thefrom having spent too much time"from Atlanta to the Sea." John-warm weather came. He kept athinking. The district containedson thought Grant showed littlelarge store of wool from his sheep,settlers from Ireland too, as well'sregard for his men and dismissedwhich the women used to knita large Danish community.him as "a butcher." But he greatlystockings, mittens, and sweatersIt was by no means an idealadmired Sherman.for the family.community. The native-bom setShortly after he returned toOf course the Johnsons had totlers disliked the immigrants, forWisconsin his wife died of tubercu-have money to buy foods likesome reason especially the Daneslosis, leaving him with four youngsugar and coffee or manufacturedThe Protestants distrusted the Inschildren, all girls. He packed themgoods such as shoes, dishes, andbecause they were Catholics. Theinto a covered wagon with all hiswire for fences. To pay for theselocal Republican politicians wavedwordly goods and set out for Ne-things they sold some butter andthe bloody shirt, while most of thebraska, where in the northeasterneggs or perhaps a cow in thehard-working farmers expressedpart of the state he took up a quar-nearby town of Homer. It was acontempt for the politicians, claimter section under the Homesteadlife of hard, endless labor; even theing that they were being governedAct. They lived in a tent madesmallest children contributed. Butby "a wasp's nest of crooks andfrom the cover of the wagon untilthe Johnsons saw what they werescoundrels."he built a house.doing not as working but as living.The only public school in theIn 1867, Johnson met EdelTime was their money, a kind, af-area was open from DecemberMaria Bille, a recently arrived Dan-ter all, that had to be spent onethrough February. The teachersish woman who was living with herway or another. They had little realwere inexperienced. Much stressaunt on a nearby farm, and soonmoney but little requirement for it,was placed on memory, especiallypersuaded her to marry him. Theyand everyone felt needed.on learning to spell. The oldest.ifAcountry.te574

City Government 579teenth-century urban life: rapid, helter-skelterarranged summer boat rides and picnics for younggrowth; the influx of European immigrants; the needand old alike. At any time of year the victim of someto develop costly transportation, sanitation, and othersudden disaster could turn to the local clubhouse forpublic utility systems; and the crime and corruptionhelp. Informally, probably without consciously in-that the size, confusion, and anonymity incidental totending to do so, the bosses educated the immigrantsurban existence fostered.in the complexities of American civilization, helpingThe movement to the suburbs of large numbersthem to leap the gulf between the almost medieval so-ifmiddle-class city people who might have been ex-ciety of their origins and the modern industrial world.pected to supply the political leadership needed toThe price of such aid-the bosses were not altru-deal with these problems created a vacuum of sorts, aists-was unquestioning political support, which theracoum that was filled by political bosses, with theirbosses converted into cash. In New York, Sullivaninformal but powerful "machines."levied tribute on gambling, had a hand in the liquorThe immigrants who flocked into American citiesbusiness, and controlled the issuance of peddlers' li-the 1880s and early 1890s made up much of thecenses. When he died in 1913, he was reputedly"vast ignorant fluctuating mass" that Bryce was refer-worth $1 million. Yet he and others like him were im-nog to in his description of party alignments. Theymensely popular; 25,000 grieving constituents fol-were largely of peasant stock, and having come fromlowed Big Tim's coffin on its way to the grave.locieties unacquainted with the blessings of democ-Although he served a useful social function, theBcy, they had no experience with representative gov-typical boss was not a reformer. Surveying the role ofimment. The tendency of urban workers to move fre-the Irish in New York City politics, the sociologistquently in search of better jobs further lessened the(later senator) Daniel Patrick Moynihan noted thatthat they would develop political influencedespite their successes, the bosses "did not knowadependently.what to do with power.They never thought ofFurthermore, the difficulties of life in the slumspolitics as an instrument of social change."twildered and often overwhelmed newcomers, bothThe more visible and better-known city bossestative- and foreign-born. Hopeful, but passive andplayed even less socially justifiable roles than thethey could hardly be expected to take a broadward bosses. Their principal technique for extractingof social problems when so beset by personalmoney from the public till was the kickback. To getitts. This enabled shrewd urban politicians, most ofcity contracts, suppliers were made to pad their billstem in this period of Irish origin, the Irish being theand, when paid for their work with funds from theIncomers among the migrants and, according tocity treasury, turn over the excess to the politicians.moility studies, more likely to stay put, to take com-Similarly, operators of streetcar lines, gas and elec-und of the city masses and march them in obedienttricity companies, and other public utilities werebulanxes to the polls.compelled to pay huge bribes to obtain favorableMost city machines were loose-knit neighbor-franchises.cod organizations headed by ward bosses, notThe most notorious of the nineteenth-centurygeared hierarchical bureaucracies ruled by acity bosses was William Marcy Tweed, whose "Tweedrole leader. "Big Tim" Sullivan of New York'sRing" extracted tens of millions of dollars from Newnwer East Side and "Hinky Dink" Kenna ofYork City during the brief period 1869 to 1871.11were typical of the breed. People like Sulli-Tweed was swiftly jailed. More typical was Richardand Kenna performed many useful services forCroker, who ruled New York's Tammany Hall orga-they liked to think of as their constituents. Theynization from the mid-1880s to the end of the cen-and jobs for new arrivals and distributed food andtury. Croker held a number of local offices, but histhelp to all in bad times. Anyone in trouble withpower rested on his position as chairman of the Tam-could obtain at least a hearing from the wardmany Hall finance committee. Although more con-A and often, if the crime was venial or due to ig-cerned than Tweed with the social and economic ser-ance, the difficulty was quietly "fixed" and the cul-vices that machines provided, Croker was primarily aWAS sent off with a word of caution. Sullivan pro-corrupt political manipulator; he accumulated a largeuslet turkey dinners for 5000 or more homelessfortune and owned a $200,000 mansion and a stableherDic each Christmas, distributed new shoes to theof racehorses, one of which was good enough to winne- children of his district on his birthday, andthe English Derby.

580 Chapter 21 Polities: Local, State, and NationalYork socialite friends laughed in his face. They toldhim, Roosevelt wrote in his autobiography, "that pol-itics were "low'; that the organizations were not controlled by 'gentlemen'; that I would find them run bisaloon-keepers, horse-car conductors, and the like.Many so-called urban reformers resented the bossystem mainly because it gave political power to people who were not "gentlemen" or, as one reformerput it, to a "proletarian mob" of "illiterate peasants,freshly raked from Irish bogs, or Bohemian mines, ofINItalian robber nests." A British visitor in Chicagoo U N T IN (.struck at the root of the urban problem of the er2THERE 15"Everybody is fighting to be rich," he said, "and noSTRENGTHbody can attend to making the city fit to live in."MayRepublicano and DemocrateAs for national politics, with the Democrats invinciblein the South and the Republicans predominant IlCartoonist Thomas Nast's indictment of "Boss" Tweed.New England and most of the states beyond the MieNast's caricature was exaggerated but not inaccurate.sissippi, the outcome of presidential elections waWhen Tweed fled to Spain to evade arrest, Spanish au-usually determined in a handful of populous statothorities, on seeing a Nast cartoon, arrested Tweed andNew York (together with its satellites, New Jersey andextradited him to the United States. Tweed was con-Connecticut), Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. The fatvicted and died in prison; Nast was named consul tothat opinion in these states on important questionsEcuador, where he contracted yellow fever and died.such as the tariff and monetary policy was divided althat every imaginable religious and ethnic interestrepresented in the electorate goes far to explain atthe parties hesitated to commit themselves on issunIn every presidential election, Democrats and Repullicans concentrated their heaviest guns on theDespite their welfare work and their popularity,states. Of the 18 Democrats and Republicans nommost bosses were essentially thieves. Efforts to ro-nated for president in the nine elections betwedmanticize them as the Robin Hoods of industrial so-1868 and 1900, only 3 were not from New Yedciety grossly distort the facts. However, the systemOhio, Indiana, or Illinois, and all 3 lost.developed and survived because too many middle-Partisanship was intense in these states. A stoniclass city dwellers were indifferent to the fate of thetold of a Democrat from a town in Illinois who #poor. Except during occasional reform waves, fewtrying to persuade a doctor he knew to settle thestried to check the rapaciousness of the politicos.He admitted that the town already had five docusMany substantial citizens shared at least indirectlymore than enough to care for the medical needin the corruption. The owners of tenements were in-the populace. But all five were Republicans. "Ifmterested in crowding as many rent payers as possiblecome here you can commence all the Demorainto their buildings. Utility companies seeking fran-practice," he assured the doctor. There are, he addochises preferred a system that enabled them to buy fa-sagely, "a set of public men here that will do atsvors. Honest citizens who had no selfish stake in thethey can for you." Campaigns were conducted ilsystem and who were repelled by the sordidness of citycarnival atmosphere, entertainment being substitalgovernment were seldom sufficiently concerned to dofor serious debate. Large sums were spent on theanything about it. When young Theodore Rooseveltbands, barbecues, uniforms, and banners. Speakmdecided to seek a political career in 1880, his Newnational reputation were imported to attract crost"Radical" Progressives: The Wave of the Future603most exploited group in American society.A good example of the relatively limited radical-ism of most progressives is offered by the experiencesof progressive artists. Early in the century a number ofpainters, including Robert Henri, John Sloan, andGeorge Luks, tried to develop a distinctively Ameri-can style. They turned to city streets and the people ofthe slums for their models, and they depended moreon inspiration and inner conviction than on carefulcraftsmanship to achieve their effects.These so-called ashcan artists were individualists,yet they supported political and social reform andwere caught up in the progressive movement. Sloanwas a socialist; Henri claimed to be an anarchist. Mostsaw themselves as rebels. But artistically the ashcanpainters were not very advanced. Their idols werelong-dead European masters such as Hogarth, Goya,and Daumier. They were uninfluenced by the out-burst of postimpressionist activity then taking place inEurope. To their dismay, when they included can-(thksvases by European painters like Matisse and Picasso ina show of their own works at the Sixty-ninth Regi-ment Armory in New York City in 1913, the "ad-vanced" Europeans got all the attention.George Luks portrait of a coal miner (1924), an im-maive example of the ashcan school of Americanjunting, which typically combined working-class sub-with social conscience. (See also page 598.)"Radical" Progressives:The Wave of the FutureThere were, of course, some people whose views wereInve the public of its right to drink alcoholic bever-more fundamentally radical. The hard times of theFew progressives worked more assiduously than1890s and the callous reactions of conservatives tolingressman George W. Norris of rural Nebraska forthe victims of that depression pushed many towarddorms that would increase the power of the ordinaryMarxian socialism. In 1900 the labor leader EugeneCoter, such as the direct primary and popular electionV. Debs ran for president on the Socialist ticket. Heilyet Norris characterized the mass of ur-polled fewer than 100,000 votes. When he ran againinvoters as "the mob."in 1904 he got more than 400,000, and in later elec-1.The progressives never challenged the fundamen-tions still more. Labor leaders hoping to organize un-Wprinciples of capitalism, nor did they attempt a ba-skilled workers in heavy industry were increasinglyarorganization of society. They would have littlefrustrated by the craft orientation of the Americana-do with the socialist brand of reform. WisconsinFederation of Labor, and some saw in socialism a waythla the most progressive of states, but its leadersto win rank-and-file backing.X-cooperated with the Socialist party of Milwau-In 1905 Debs; William "Big Bill" Haywood ofn"e When socialists threatened to win control of Losthe Western Federation of Miners; Mary Harrisndin 1911, California progressives made com-"Mother" Jones, a former organizer for the Unitedm-incause with reactionary groups in order to defeatMine Workers; Daniel De Leon of the Socialist Laborualm Many progressives were anti-immigrant, andparty; and a few others organized a new union, thede-had anything to offer blacks, surely theIndustrial Workers of the World. The IWW was

604 Chapter 22 The Age of Reformopenly anticapitalist. The preamble to its constitutionthe militant feminist advocate of birth control, Marbegan: "The working class and the employing classgaret Sanger, Max Eastman, editor of their organ, Thehave nothing in common."Masses, and John Reed, a young Harvard graduateBut the IWW never attracted many ordinarywho was soon to become famous for his cyewitnessworkers. Haywood, its most prominent leader, wasaccount of the Russian Revolution, Ten Days Thatusually a general in search of an army. His forte wasShook the World.attracting attention to spontaneous strikes by unorga-Goldman, Haywood, Sanger, and a few others innized workers, not the patient recruiting of workersthis group were genuine radicals who sought basicand the pursuit of practical goals. Shortly after thechanges in bourgeois society, but despite much talk,founding of the IWW, he was charged with complic-most of the Greenwich Village intellectuals displayedity in the murder of an antiunion governor of Col-what their historian Leslie Fishbein calls "a highlyorado after an earlier strike but was acquitted. Inpersonalistic concern" for their own interests. The1912 he was closely involved in a bitter and at timesMasses described itself as "a revolutionary and not 3bloody strike of textile workers in Lawrence, Massa-reform magazinea magazine whose final policychusetts, which was settled with some benefit to theis to do as it pleases." Nearly all of them came fromstrikers, and in a strike the following winter andmiddle-class backgrounds. They found the far-differ-spring by silk workers in Paterson, New Jersey, whichent world of the Italian and Jewish immigrants ofwas a failure.the Village and its surrounding neighborhoodsOther "advanced" European ideas affected thecharming. But they did not become involved in thethinking and behavior of some important progressiveimmigrants' lives the way the settlement houseintellectuals. Sigmund Freud's psychoanalytical theo-workers did. Their influence on their own times,ries attracted numbers of Americans, especially aftertherefore, was limited. "Do as I say, not as I do" isG. Stanley Hall invited Freud and some of his disci-not an effective way to change minds. They are his-ples to lecture at Clark University in 1909. Nottorically important, however, because many of themmany progressives actually read The Interpretation ofwere genuinely creative people and because many ofDreams or any of Freud's other works, none ofthe ideas and practices they advocated were adoptedwhich was translated into English before 1909, butby later generations.many picked up enough of the vocabulary of psycho-The creative writers of the era, applying theanalysis to discourse impressively about the signifi-spirit of progressivism to the realism they had inher-The incance of slips of the tongue, sublimation, and infantited from Howells and the naturalists, tended toAmessexuality.adopt an optimistic tone. The poct Ezra Pound, forgle inSome saw in Freud's ideas reason to effect a "rev-example, at this time talked grandly of an AmericanKer'solution of manners and morals" that would haverenaissance and fashioned a new kind of poctryshocked (or at least embarrassed) Freud, who wascalled imagism, which, while not appearing to be TOpersonally quite conventional. They advocated easyalistic, abjured all abstract generalizations and con-Poldivorce, trial marriage, and doing away with the dou-centrated on concrete word pictures to converble standard in all matters relating to sex. They re-meaning. "Little" magazines and experimental theCitijected Victorian reticence and what they incorrectlyatrical companies sprang to life by the dozen, eachidentified as "puritan" morality out of hand, and theyconvinced that it would revolutionize its art. TheTo mecalled for programs of sex education, especially thepoet Carl Sandburg, the best-known representativeand indissemination of information about methods of birthof the Chicago school, denounced the local plutoAmeriecontrol.crats but sang the praises of the city they had madeefficierMost large cities boasted groups of these "bo-"Hog Butcher for the World,' City of the Bigcharachemian" thinkers, by far the most famous being theShoulders."compleone centered in New York City's Greenwich Village.Most writers eagerly adopted Freudian psycholnot flcThe dancer Isadora Duncan, the photographer Alfredogy without understanding it. Freud's teachingsthing,Stieglitz, the novelist Floyd Dell, several of the ashcanseemed only to mean that they should cast off the rewhichartists, and the playwright Eugene O'Neill rubbedstrictions of Victorian prudery; they ignored his essen-quatedshoulders with Big Bill Haywood of the IWW, the an-tially dark view of human nature. Theirs was an "innoand marchist Emma Goldman, the psychoanalyst A. A. Brill,cent rebellion," exuberant and rather muddleheadedFrancis

622 Chapter 22 The Age of Reformproper management of the money supply, but the na-play for anyone who had managed the faculty of a uni-tion finally had a flexible yet safe currency.versity. Responsible party government was his objec-In 1914 Congress passed two important laws af-tive; he expected individual Democrats to support thefecting corporations. One created the Federal Tradedecisions of the party majority, and his idealism neveCommission (FTC) to replace Roosevelt's Bureau ofprevented him from awarding the spoils of office toCorporations. In addition to investigating corpora-city bosses and conservative congressmen, as long 21tions and publishing reports, this nonpartisan boardthey supported his program. Nor did his career 25could issue cease and desist orders against "unfair"political theorist make him rigid and doctrinaire. Intrade practices brought to light through its research.practice the differences between his New Freedom andThe law did not define the term unfair, and the com-Roosevelt's New Nationalism tended to disappear.mission's rulings could be taken on appeal to the fed-The Underwood Tariff and the Clayton Antitrust Acteral courts, but the FTC was nonetheless a powerfulfitted the philosophy Wilson had expounded duringinstrument for protecting the public against the trusts.the campaign, but the FTC represented a step towardThe second measure, the Clayton Antitrust Act,the kind of regulated economy that Roosevelt advomade certain specific business practices illegal, includ-cated. So did the Federal Reserve system.ing price discrimination that tended to foster monop-There were limits to Wilson's progressivism, limitsolies; "tying" agreements, which forbade retailersimposed partly by his temperament and partly by hisfrom handling the products of a firm's competitors;philosophy. He objected as strenuously to laws grantand the creation of interlocking directorates as aing special favors to farmers and workers as to thosemeans of controlling competing companies. The actbenefiting the tycoons. When a bill was introduced inexempted labor unions and agricultural organizations1914 making low-interest loans available to farmen,from the antitrust laws and curtailed the use of in-he refused to support it. "It is unwise and unjustifiablejunctions in labor disputes. The officers of corpora-to extend the credit of the Government to a singletions could be held individually responsible if theirclass of the community,' he said. He considered thecompanies violated the antitrust laws.provision exempting unions from the antitrust lawsThe Democrats controlled both houses of Con-equally unsound. Nor would he push for a federal lawgress for the first time since 1890 and were eager toprohibiting child labor; such a measure would be unmake a good record, but Wilson's imaginative and ag-constitutional, he believed. He also refused to back thegressive use of presidential power was decisive. Heconstitutional amendment giving the vote to women.called the legislators into special session in April 1913By the end of 1914 the Wilsonian record, on bal-and appeared before them to lay out his program; heance, was positive but distinctly limited. The pres:was the first president to address Congress in persondent believed that the major progressive goals hatsince John Adams. Then he followed the course of ad-been achieved; he had no plans for further reformministration bills closely. He had a private telephoneMany other progressives thought that a great dealline installed between the Capitol and the Whitemore remained to be done.House. Administration representatives haunted thecloakrooms and lobbies of both houses. Cooperativecongressmen began to receive notes of praise and en-couragement, recalcitrant ones stern demands for sup-The Progressives andport, often pecked out on the president's own portabletypewriter. When lobbyists tried to frustrate his plansMinority Rightsfor tariff reform by bringing pressure to bear on keysenators, he made a dramatic appeal to the people.On one important issue, race relations, Wilson WB"The public ought to know the extraordinary exertionsdistinctly reactionary. With a mere handful of excepbeing made by the lobby in Washington," he told re-tions, the progressives exhibited strong prejudicosporters. "Only public opinion can check and destroyagainst nonwhite people and against certain caseit." The voters responded so strongly that the Senategories of whites as well. Many were as unsympatheticpassed the tariff bill substantially as Wilson desired it.to immigrants from Asia and eastern and southernWilson explained his success by saying, only halfEurope as any of the "conservative" opponents of imhumorously, that running the government was child'smigration in the 1880s and 1890s. The Gentlemen's

Black Militancy623Agreement excluding Japanese immigrants waslithic. In 1900 the body of a Mississippi black wasteached in 1907 at the height of the progressivedug up by order of the state legislature and reburiedmovement. In the same year, Congress appointed ain a segregated cemetery; in Virginia in 1902 thecommission headed by Senator William Dillingham ofdaughter of Robert E. Lee was arrested for riding inVermont to study the immigration question. Thethe black section of a railroad car. "Insult is beingDillingham Commission labored for more than twoadded to injury continually," a black journalist in AI-vears and brought forth a 41-volume report that ledabama complained. "Have those in power forgottenin 1913 to a bill restricting the number of newcomersthat there is a God?"to be admitted and reducing especially the influxMany progressive women, still smarting from thefrom castern and southern Europe. Only the outbreakinsult to their sex entailed in the Fourteenth and Fif-of war in Europe in 1914, which cut immigration to ateenth Amendments and eager to attract southernmickle, prevented the passage of this measure.support for their campaign for the vote, adopted racistAmerican Indians were also affected by the pro-arguments. They contrasted the supposed corruptiongressives racial attitudes. Where the sponsors of theand incompetence of black voters with their own "pu-Dawes Act had assumed that Indians were inherentlyrity" and intelligence. Southern progressives of bothapable of adopting the ways of "civilized" people, insexes argued that disfranchising blacks would reducethe progressive period the tendency was to write Indi-corruption by removing from unscrupulous whiteus off as fundamentally inferior and to assume thatpoliticians the temptation to purchase black votes!they would make second-class citizens at best. FrancisThe typical southern attitude toward the educa-Leupp, Theodore Roosevelt's commissioner of Indiantion of blacks was summed up in a folk proverb: "Whenfairs, put it this way in a 1905 report: "If nature hasyou educate a Negro, you spoil a good field hand." Inkt 3 different physical stamp upon different races of1910 only about 8000 black children in the entirenen it is fair to assume that the variation is mani-South were attending high schools. Despite the almostlisted in mental and moral traits as well.Nothingtotal suppression of black rights, lynchings continuedVSsgained by trying to undo nature's work. A leadingto occur; between 1900 and 1914 more than 1100Wmuckraker, Ray Stannard Baker, who was far moreblacks were murdered by mobs, most (but not all) inn-impathetic to blacks than most progressives, dis-the southern states. In the rare cases in which localhemissed Indians as pathetic beings, "eating, sleeping,prosecutors brought the lynchers to trial, juries almostn.ding, with no more thought of the future than awithout exception brought in verdicts of not guilty.al-shite man's child."Booker T. Washington was shaken by this trend,si-In 1902 Congress passed the Dead Indian Landbut he could find no way to combat it. The timesadAct, which made it easier for Indians to sell allot-were passing him by. He appealed to his white south-m.ments that they had inherited, and in 1906 anotherern "friends" for help but got nowhere. Increasinglyealaw further relaxed restrictions on land sales. Effortshe talked about the virtues of rural life, the evils of bigimprove the education of Indian children contin-cities, and the uselessness of higher education forjed, but most progressives assumed that only voca-black people. By the turn of the century a number oftonal training would help them. Theodore Roo-young, well-educated blacks, most of them Northern-evelt knew from his experiences as a rancher in theers, were breaking away from his accommodationistDakota Territory that Indians could be as energeticleadership.and capable as whites, but he considered these "ex-As for the rest, it would be many genera-before they could be expected to "move for-wasvard" enough to become "ordinary citizens,"Black Militancytep-bosevelt believed.icesTo say that blacks did not fare well at the handsWlliam E. B. Du Bois was the most prominent of theate-i progressives would be a gross understatement.militants. Du Bois was born in Great Barrington,eticboulist efforts to unite white and black farmers inMassachusetts, in 1868. His father, a restless wan-hernbe southern states had led to the imposition of fur-derer of Negro and French Huguenot stock, aban-im-her repressive measures. Segregation became moredoned the family, and young William grew up on theen's gid, white opposition to black voting more mono-edge of poverty. Neither accepted nor openly rejected

while she respected their motives,result would be world peace andEventually she was arrested, con-the disparaged their methods. Ituniversal prosperity.victed, and sentenced to a brief jaildad little good to teach the poorBy this time Emma Goldmanterm.and table manners, she said, ifhad become a celebrity. As Berk-Goldman's biographer Richardthey did not have enough food toman noted, she "had become aDrinnan has described her as "oneNext she studied nursing inwoman of the world." He was dis-of the significant women in theVienna for a year. When she re-turbed by what he called "the for-years before the First World War."tamed, she worked as a midwifeeign element in the circle she hadThe outbreak of that conflict, andmong the New York poor, an ex-gathered around her," but it wasespecially American entry in it,trience that made her an outspo-foreign only from his still narrowlyseemed to her a calamity beyonden advocate of birth control. SheRussian immigrant's perspective.measure. When Congress passed aso helped organize a theatricalOver the next decade Goldmanconscription act, she, Berkman,group, managed a touring groupcampaigned for freedom of speechand a few other radicals organizedif Russian actors, and lectured onall over the United States and inthe No-Conscription League, nottheatrical topics.Canada and lectured in support ofso much to persuade men to resistIn 1906 Goldman foundedbirth control. At one point she de-the draft as to provide aid andMather Earth, an anarchist journal.veloped a joint subscription plancomfort to anyone who did so.When Alexander Berkman was re-covering Mother Earth and theAfter American entry intolased from prison later that year,American Journal of Eugenics, aWorld War I, both she and Berk-the made him its editor. Mothermagazine that advocated the use ofman were convicted of conspiringEarth attacked governments, orga-contraception. In 1915 she delib-to persuade men not to register forazed religion, and private prop-crately courted arrest by describingthe draft. She was sentenced toGoldman believed in a primi-methods of contraception at publictwo years in federal prison and inthe form of communism in whichlectures before large audiences.1919 she and Berkman were de-would share equally and no oneMen, she reported, showed greatported to Russia.muld have power over anyoneinterest, but women "snicker andOf course, "Red Emma" Gold-de She was convinced that thegiggle and pretend to be shocked."man was not a typical American,but she was in many ways a typicalAmerican immigrant. She held onto the culture of the old country;most of her close friends in theUnited States were Russians. But atthe same time she learned Englishand quickly became familiar withAmerican ways. She worked hardand developed a number of valu-able skills. Gradually she moved upthe economic ladder: from sweat-shop laborer, to factory worker, torunning a shop, to nursing, to lec-turing, and to editing a magazine.And while she was critical of thegovernment and economic systemof the United States, she was a typ-ical immigrant also in insisting thatshe was an American patriot. "Therkind of patriotism we represent,"DEshe said during her trial in 1917,"is the kind of patriotism whichutGoldman in the 1890.loves America with open eyes.629The Isthmian Canal 649were placed under siege. For weeks, until an interna-blame on Roosevelt, who had supported the compro-tional rescue expedition (which included 2500 Amer-misc. Ill feeling against Americans increased in 1906ican soldiers) broke through to free them, the fate ofwhen the San Francisco school board, responding tothe foreigners was unknown. Fearing that the Euro-local opposition to the influx of cheap labor frompeans would use the rebellion as a pretext for furtherJapan, instituted a policy of segregating Asian chil-expropriations, Hay sent off another round of Opendren in a special school. Japan protested, and Presi-Door notes announcing that the United States be-dent Roosevelt persuaded the San Franciscans tolieved in the preservation of "Chinese territorial andabandon segregation in exchange for his pledge to cutadministrative entity" and in "the principle of equaloff further Japanese immigration. He accomplishedand impartial trade with all parts of the Chinese Em-this through a "Gentlemen's Agreement" (1907) inpire." This broadened the Open Door policy to in-which the Japanese promised not to issue passports todude all China, not merely the European spheres oflaborers seeking to come to America. Discriminatoryinfluence.legislation based specifically on race was thus avoided.Hay's diplomacy was "superficially successful. Al-However, the atmosphere between the two countriesthough the United States maintained no importantremained charged. Japanese resentment at Americanmilitary force in the Far East, American business andracial prejudice was great; many Americans talkedcommercial interests there were free to develop andfearfully of the "yellow peril."10 compete with Europeans. But once again Euro-Theodore Roosevelt was preeminently a realist inean jealousies and fears rather than American clever-foreign relations. "Don't bluster," he once said.less were responsible. When the Japanese, mistrust-"Don't flourish a revolver, and never draw unless young Russian intentions in Manchuria, asked Hay howintend to shoot." In the Far East he failed to follow

is intended to implement his policy, he repliedhis own advice. He considered the situation in thatmeekly that the United States was "not preparedpart of the world fraught with peril. The Philippines,enforce these views on the east by any demonstra-he said, were "our heel of Achilles," indefensible infon which could present a character of hostility tocase of a Japanese attack. He suggested privately thatdov other power." The United States was beingthe United States ought to "be prepared for givinganght up in the power struggle in the Far East with-the islands independencemuch sooner than Ijut having faced the implications of its actions.think advisable from their own standpoint.":In time the country would pay a heavy price forYet while Roosevelt did not appreciably increasethis unrealistic attitude, but in the decade followingAmerican naval and military strength in the Orient, nei-t900 its policy of diplomatic meddling unbacked byther did he stop trying to influence the course of eventshusonets worked fairly well. Japan attacked Russia inin the area, and he took no step toward withdrawing!quarrel over Manchuria, smashing the Russian fleetfrom the Philippines. He sent the fleet on a worldof1905 and winning a series of battles on the main-cruise to demonstrate its might to Japan but knew welloand Japan was not prepared for a long war, however,that this was mere bluff. "The 'Open Door' policy,' heignot suggested to President Roosevelt that an Ameri-advised his successor, "completely disappears as soon asidoffer to mediate would be favorably received.a powerful nation determines to disregard it." Never-e-Eager to preserve the nice balance in the Far East,theless he allowed the belief to persist in the Unitedbi-fich enabled the United States to exert influenceStates that the nation could influence the course of Farss,thout any significant commitment of force, Roo-Eastern history without risk or real involvement.mbelt accepted the hint. In June 1905 he invited thed-digerents to a conference at Portsmouth, Newofumpshire. At the conference the Japanese won titleThe Isthmian CanalRussia's sphere around Port Arthur and a free handtheKorea, but when they demanded Sakhalin IslandIn the Caribbean region American policy centered onna-da large money indemnity, the Russians balked.building an interoceanic canal across Central America.for-willing to resume the war, the Japanese settled forExpanding interests in Latin America and the Far EastRe-fof Sakhalin and no money.made a canal necessary, a truth pointed up during theoveThe Treaty of Portsmouth was unpopular inwar with Spain by the two-month voyage of USS Ore-nichand the government managed to place thegon around South America from California waters toOutbreak of the Great War 659professed to be willing to cooperate with the Unitedtwo great coalitions, the Central Powers (chiefly Ger-States, and Wilson, taking him at his word, gave himmany and Austria-Hungary) and the Allied Powershas support. However, Villa was little more than an(chiefly Great Britain, France, and Russia), wereimbitious bandit with no other objective than per-locked in a brutal struggle that brought one era insonal power. Carranza, though no radical, was com-world history to a close and inaugurated another.mitted to social reform. Fighting back, he drove theThe outbreak of what contemporaries were soonVillistas into the northern provinces.to call the Great War caught Americans psychologi-Wilson finally realized the extent of Carranza'scally unprepared; few understood the significance ofinfluence in Mexico, and in October 1915 he recog-what had happened. President Wilson promptly is-mided the Carranza government. Still his Mexicansued a proclamation of neutrality and asked the na-soubles were not over. Early in 1916, Villa, seekingtion to be "impartial in thought. Of course, no one,to undermine Carranza by forcing the United Statesnot even the president, had the superhuman self-TO intervene, stopped a train in northern Mexico andcontrol that this request called for, but the almosttilled 16 American passengers in cold blood. Then heunanimous reaction of Americans, aside from dismay,cossed into New Mexico and burned the town ofwas that the conflict did not concern them. TheyColumbus, killing 19. Having learned his lesson, Wil-were wrong, for this was a world war, and Americansvon would have preferred to bear even this assault inwere sure to be affected by its outcome.dence, but public opinion forced him to send Ameri-There were good reasons, aside from a failure toon troops under General John J. Pershing across theunderstand the significance of the struggle, why theforder in pursuit of Villa.United States sought to remain neutral. Over a third ofVilla proved impossible to catch. Cleverly heits 92 million inhabitants were either European-bornhew Pershing deeper and deeper into Mexico, andor the children of European immigrants. Sentimentalhis alarmed Carranza, who insisted that the Ameri-ties bound them to the lands of their ancestors. Ameri-stwithdraw. Several clashes occurred between Per-can involvement would create new internal stresses in aT:men and Mexican regulars, and for a brief pe-society already strained by the task of assimilating so11Sand in June 1916 war seemed imminent. Wilson nowmany diverse groups. War was also an affront to theleited bravely and wisely. Early in 1917 he recalledprevailing progressive spirit, which assumed that hu-eirforce, leaving the Mexicans to work outman beings were reasonable, high-minded, and capa-fieir own destiny.ble of settling disputes peaceably. Along with the tradi-enMissionary diplomacy in Mexico had producedtional American fear of entanglement in Europeanheaixed but in the long run beneficial results. By op-affairs, these were ample reasons for remaining aloof.rn-Huerta, Wilson had surrendered to his preju-Although most Americans hoped to keep out ofthebces, vet he had also helped the real revolutionariesthe war, nearly everyone was partial to one side or theasden though they opposed his acts. His bungling bredother. People of German or Austrian descent, about 8in Americanism in Mexico, but by his later restraintmillion in number, and the nation's 4.5 million Irish-ncethe face of stinging provocations, he permitted theAmericans, motivated chiefly by hatred of the British,ticoinstitutionalists to consolidate their power.sympathized with the Central Powers. The majoritytity,of the people, however, influenced by bonds of lan-asu-guage and culture, preferred an Allied victory, anddis-Outbreak of the Great Warwhen the Germans launched a mighty assault acrossssedneutral Belgium in an effort to outflank the French20,5 lune 28, 1914, in the austro-Hungarian provin-armies, this unprovoked attack on a tiny nation whosexicocapital of Sarajevo, Gavrilo Princip, a young stu-neutrality the Germans had previously agreed to re-mt, assassinated the Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heirspect caused a great deal of anti-German feeling.I butthe imperial throne. Princip was a member of theAs the war progressed, the Allies cleverly ex-Tranta Hand, a Serbian terrorist organization. He wasploited American prejudices by such devices as pub-

ownding to further the cause of Serbian nationalism.lishing exaggerated tales of German atrocities againsthimstead his rash act precipitated a general EuropeanBelgian civilians. A supposedly impartial study of: Within little more than a month, following athese charges by the widely respected James Bryce,Villaaplex series of diplomatic challenges and responses,author of The American Commonwealth, portrayed668 Chapter 24 Woodrow Wilsos and the Great WarPaying for the Warwere deluging the country with propaganda preparedby hundreds of CPI writers. They pictured the war 25Wilson managed the task of financing the war effec-a crusade for freedom and democracy, the Germans 35tively. The struggle cost the United States abouta bestial people bent on world domination.$33.5 billion, not counting pensions and other post-A large majority of the nation supported the warwar expenses. About $7 billion of this was lent to theenthusiastically. But thousands of persons-German-Allies,² but since this money was spent largely inAmericans and Irish-Americans, for example; people ofAmerica, it contributed to the national prosperity.pacifist leanings such as Jane Addams, the founder ofOver two-thirds of the cost of the war was met byHull House; and some who thought both sides in theborrowing. Five Liberty and Victory Loan drives,war were wrong-still opposed American involvementspurred by advertising, parades, and other appeals toCreel's committee and a number of unofficial "painpatriotism, persuaded the people to open their purses.otic" groups allowed their enthusiasm for the conver-Industrialists, eager to inculcate in their employees asion of the hesitant to become suppression of dissentsense of personal involvement in the war effort, con-People who refused to buy war bonds were often aducted campaigns in their plants. Some went so far asposed to public ridicule and even assault. Those withto threaten "A Bond or Your Job," but more typicalGerman names were persecuted without regard forwas the appeal of the managers of the Gary, Indiana,their views; some school boards outlawed the teachingplant of U.S. Steel, who published bond advertise-of the German language; sauerkraut was renamed "libements in six languages in order to reach their immi-erty cabbage. Opponents of the war of unquestiongrant workers.able patriotism were subjected to coarse abuse. A CarIn addition to borrowing, the government col-toonist pictured Senator Robert La Follette, who hadlected about $10.5 billion in taxes during the war. Aopposed entering the war, receiving an Iron Crosssteeply graduated income tax took more than 75 per-from the German militarists, and the faculty of his owacent of the incomes of the wealthiest citizens. A 65University of Wisconsin voted to censure him.percent excess-profits tax and a 25 percent inheritanceWilson, "a friend of free speech in theory,' Davidtax were also enacted. Thus although many individu-M. Kennedy has written, "was its foe in fact." Heals made fortunes from the war, its cost was distrib-signed the Espionage Act of 1917, which imposeduted far more equitably than that of the Civil War.fines of up to $10,000 and jail sentences ranging toAmericans also contributed generously to philan-20 years on persons convicted of aiding the enemythropic agencies engaged in war work. Most notable,obstructing recruiting, and he authorized the posperhaps, was the great 1918 drive of the United Warmaster general to ban from the mails any material thatWork Council, an interfaith religious group, whichseemed treasonable or seditious.raised over $200 million mainly to finance recre-In May 1918, again with Wilson's approval, Conational programs for the troops overseas.gress passed the Sedition Act, which made "sayinganything" to discourage the purchase of war bonds:crime, with the proviso that investment counselonPropaganda and Civilcould still offer "bona fide and not disloyal advice"clients. The law also made it illegal to "utter, pris,Libertieswrite, or publish any disloyal, profane, scurrilous, itabusive language" about the government, the ConsoWilson was preeminently a teacher and preacher, atution, or the uniform of the army or navy. Socialitspecialist in the transmission of ideas and ideals. Heperiodicals such as The Masses were suppressed, nexcelled at mobilizing public opinion and inspiringEugene V. Debs was sentenced to ten years in prustAmericans to work for the better world he hopedfor making an antiwar speech. Ricardo Flores Magitwould emerge from the war. In April 1917 he createdan anarchist, was sentenced to 20 years in jail for pubthe Committee on Public Information (CPI), headedlishing a statement criticizing Wilson's Mexican pulby the journalist George Creel. Soon 75,000 speakersicy, an issue that had nothing to do with the war.These laws went far beyond what was necessa2In 1914 Americans owed foreigners about $3.8 billion. By 1919to protect the national interest. Citizens were jaldAmericans were owed $12.5 billion by Europeans alone.for suggesting that the draft law was unconstitutiva

The Red Scare681persuaded many people that a tiny minority of ruth-less revolutionaries could take over a nation of mil--UNGRATEFULlions if conditions were right. Communists appointedSCUMthemselves the champions of workers; labor unrest at-tracted them magnetically. When strikes broke out,some accompanied by violence, many people inter-preted them as communist-inspired preludes to revo-lation. Louis Wiley, an experienced New Tork Timesreporter, told a friend at this time that anarchists, so-cialists, and radical labor leaders were "joining to-gether with the object of overthrowing the AmericanGovernment through a bloody revolution and estab-lishing a Bolshevist republic.Organized labor in America had seldom beentruly radical. The Industrial Workers of the WorldIWW) had made little impression in most industries.But some labor leaders had been attracted to social-ism, and many Americans failed to distinguish be-tween the common ends sought by communists andincialists and the entirely different methods by whichthey proposed to achieve those ends. When a generaltrike paralyzed Seattle in February 1919, the fact thatThe "red scare" that followed the Great War caused1 procommunist had helped organize it sent shiversdown countless conservative spines. When the radicalpanic and new racial violence throughout the nation.William Z. Foster began a drive to organize the steelParanoid delusions of "dangerous aliens" and "foreignsubversives" were prevalent, as this cartoon demon-industry at about this time, the fears became more in-strates.insc. In September 1919 a total of 343,000 steel-rorkers walked off their jobs, and in the same monththe Boston police struck. Violence marked the steeltrike, and the suspension of police protection inunionism, and questions of racial and national originsloston led to looting and fighting that ended onlycombined to make many Americans believe that theirthen Governor Calvin Coolidge (who might haveway of life was in imminent danger. That few immi-revented the strike had he acted earlier) called outgrants were radicals, that most workers had no inter-: National Guard.est in communism, and that the extremists themselvesDuring the same period a handful of terroristswere faction-ridden and irresolute did not affect con-aused widespread alarm by attempting to murderservative thinking. From all over the country cameirious prominent persons, including John D. Rocke-demands that radicals be ruthlessly suppressed. Thusller, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., and Attor-the "red scare" was born.ly General A. Mitchell Palmer. Although the terror-Attorney General Palmer was the key figure inẞ were anarchists and anarchism had little inthe resulting purge. He had been a typical progres-immon with communism, many citizens lumped allsive, a supporter of the League of Nations and suchtremists together and associated them with a mon-reforms as women's suffrage and child labor legisla-ous assault on society.tion. But pressure from Congress and his growingI What aroused the public even more was the factconviction that the communists really were a menaceit most radicals were not American citizens.led him to join the "red hunt." Soon he was saying oftime fear of alien saboteurs easily transformed it-the radicals: "Out of the sly and crafty eyes of manyfinto peacetime terror of foreign radicals. In placeof them leap cupidity, cruelty, insanity, and crime;Germany, the enemy became the lowly immigrant,from their lopsided faces, sloping brows, and mis-ally an Italian or a Jew or a Slav and usually an in-shapen features may be recognized the unmistakabletrial worker. In this muddled way, radicalism,criminal type."

682 Chapter 24 Woodrow Wilson and the Great WarIn August 1919, Palmer established within thehomes and meeting places produced mountains of in-Department of Justice the General Intelligence Divi-flammatory literature but only three pistols.sion, headed by J. Edgar Hoover, to collect informa-Palmer, attempting to maintain the crusade, antion about clandestine radical activities. In Novem-nounced that the radicals planned a gigantic terronstber, Justice Department agents in a dozen citiesdemonstration for May Day, 1920. In New York andswooped down on the meeting places of an anarchistother cities thousands of police were placed onorganization known as the Union of Russian Work-round-the-clock duty; federal troops stood by anx-ers. More than 650 persons, many of them uncon-iously. But the day passed without even a rowdynected with the union, were arrested but in only 43meeting. Suddenly Palmer appeared ridiculous. Thecases could evidence be found to justify deportation.red scare swiftly subsided.Nevertheless, the public reacted so favorably thatPalmer, thinking now of winning the 1920 Democra-tic presidential nomination, planned an immenseroundup of communists. He obtained 3000 warrants,The Election of 1920and on January 2, 1920, his agents, reinforced by lo-cal police and self-appointed vigilantes, struck simul-Wilson still hoped for vindication at the polls in thetancously in 33 cities. Palmer's biographer, Stanleypresidential election, which he sought to make àCoben, has described the "Palmer raids" vividly:"great and solemn referendum" on the League. Hewould have liked to run for a third term, but in hisThere was a knock on the door, the rush of police.enfeebled condition he attracted no support amongIn meeting houses, all were lined up to be searched;Democratic leaders. The party nominated James M.those who resisted often suffered brutal treatment.Cox of Ohio.Police searched the homes of many of those ar-Cox favored joining the League, but the clec-rested; books and papers, as well as many peopletion did not produce the referendum on the new or-found in these residences, were carried off to head-ganization that Wilson desired. The Republicans,quarters. Policemente also sought those whose nameswhose candidate was another Ohioan, Senator Waappeared on seized membership lists; they capturedren G. Harding, equivocated shamelessly on the'smany of these suspects in bed or at work, searchingsuc. The election turned on other matters, largelytheir homes, confiscating their possessions, almostemotional. Disillusioned by the results of the WI.always without warrants.many Americans had had their fill of idealism. Thewanted, apparently, to end the long period of moniAbout 6000 persons were taken into custody,uplift and reform agitation that had begun undermany of them citizens and therefore not subject toTheodore Roosevelt and return to what Hardingthe deportation laws, many others unconnected withcalled "normalcy.'any radical cause. Some were held incommunicado forTo the extent that the voters were expressingweeks while the authorities searched for evidenceopinions on Wilson's League, their response W2against them. In a number of cases, individuals whooverwhelmingly negative. Senator Harding had beetwent to visit prisoners were themselves thrown behinda strong reservationist, yet he swept the country,bars on the theory that they too must be communists.ning over 16.1 million votes to Cox's 9.1 million. InHundreds of suspects were jammed into filthyJuly 1921, Congress formally ended the war with the"bullpens," beaten, and forced to sign "confessions.'Central Powers by passing a joint resolution.The public tolerated these wholesale violations ofThe defeat of the League was a tragedy both fircivil liberties because of the supposed menace of com-Wilson, whose crusade for a world order based itmunism. Gradually, however, protests began to bepeace and justice ended in failure, and for the worldheard, first from lawyers and liberal magazines, thenwhich was condemned by the result to endure anothofrom a wider segment of the population. No revolu-still more horrible and costly war. Perhaps this dreaditionary outbreak had taken place. Of 6000 seized inoutcome could not have been avoided. Hadthe Palmer raids, only 556 proved liable to deporta-compromised and Lodge behaved like ation. The widespread ransacking of communists'stead of a politician, America would have joined de

Closing the GatesNew Urban Social Patternsly-The Younger GenerationvedThe "New" WomaneButPopular Culture: Movies and RadioicThe Golden Age of SportstheUrban-Rural Conflicts: Fundamentalismtene-Urban-Rural Conflicts: ProhibitionThe Ku Klux KlanSacco and VanzettiLiterary TrendsThe "New Negro"The "New Era"The Age of the ConsumerHenry FordThe AirplaneThe Great War seemed to many of those who lived through it a turningpoint in history, the real division separating the nineteenth from thenew twentieth century. Actually most of what seemed characteristically newto the people of the 1920s had begun to appear well before 1917, and thechanges they noticed were still going on. They were in the midst of adjust-ing to new social, cultural, and economic forces, forces that were to shapetheir lives and those of their children and grandchildren.Closing the GatedThe ending of the red scare did not herald the disappearance of xenophobia.It was perhaps inevitable and possibly wise that some limitation be placed onthe entry of immigrants into the United States after the war. An immensebacklog of prospective migrants had piled up during the conflict, and thedesperate postwar economic condition of Europe led hundreds of thousandsto seek better circumstances in the United States. Immigration increasedfrom 110,000 in 1919 to 430,000 in 1920 and to 805,000 in 1921, withevery prospect of continuing to rise.In 1921 Congress, reflecting a widespread prejudice against eastern andsouthern Europeans, passed an emergency act establishing a quota system.Each year 3 percent of the number of foreign-born residents of the UnitedStates in 1910 (about 350,000 persons) might enter the country. Each coun-try's quota was based on the number of its nationals in the United States in689690 Chapter 25 Postwar Society and Culture: Change and Adjustment1910. This meant that only a relative handful of theheterogeneity. The motto E Pluribus Unum, con-total would be from southern and castern Europe. Inceived to represent the unity of the original 13 states,1924 the quota was reduced to 2 percent and the baseapplied even more appropriately to the blending ofyear shifted to 1890, thereby lowering further the pro-different cultures into one nationality. The new lawportion of southern and castern Europeans admitted.sought to freeze the mix, to turn the American melt-In 1929 Congress established a system that al-ing pot into a kind of gigantic ice cube.lowed only 150,000 immigrants a year to enter theThe law reduced actual immigration to far belowcountry. Each national quota was based on the sup-150,000 a year. British immigration between 1931posed origins of the entire white population of theand 1939, for example, amounted to only 23,000United States in 1920, not merely on the foreign-even though the annual British quota was overborn. Here is an example of how the system worked:65,000. Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of south-ern and eastern Europeans waited for admission.Italian quotaItalian-origin population, 1920The United States had closed the gates. The Na-150,000White population, 1920tional Origins Act caused the foreign-born percentageItalian quota3,800,000of the population to fall from about 13 percent in1920 to 4.7 percent in 1970. Instead of an open, cos-150,00095,500,000mopolitan society eager to accept, in Emma Lazarus'sItalian quota = 6000 (approximately)stirring line, the "huddled masses yearning to breathefree," America now became committed to preservingThe system was complicated and unscientific, fora homogeneous, "Anglo-Saxon" population.no one could determine with accuracy the "origins"Distaste for the "new" immigrants from castemof millions of citizens. More seriously, it ignoredEurope, many of whom were Jewish, expanded into: aAmerica's long history of constantly changing ethnicmore general antisemitism in the 1920s. American"Give me your tired, your poor, yourhuddled masses yearning to breathefree, the wretched refuse of your teem-ing shore"-these words of EmmaLazarus, inscribed at the base of theStatue of Liberty, tell only part of thestory. Most immigrants were youngand hopeful, like this family at EllisIsland; many were enterprising andambitious. The restriction of immi-gration during the 1920s, meant toexclude misfits, also deprived thenation of such as these.

New Urban Social Patterns 691Jews, whether foreign-born or native, were subjectedEarlier differences between working-class andto increasing discrimination, not because they weremiddle-class family structures persisted. In 1920slow in adopting American ways but because (beingabout a quarter of the American women who wereambitious and hard-working, as immigrants were sup-working were married, but less than 10 percent of allposed to be) many of them were getting ahead in themarried women were working. Middle-class marriedworld somewhat more rapidly than expected. Presti-women who worked were nearly all either childless orgious colleges like Harvard, Yale, and Columbia thathighly paid professionals who were able to employhad in the past admitted Jews based on their academicservants. Most male skilled workers now earnedrecords now imposed unofficial but effective quotas.enough to support a family in modest comfort soMedical schools also established quotas, and no matterlong as they could work steadily, but an unskilled la-how talented, most young Jewish lawyers and bankersborer still could not. Wives in most such familiescould find places only in so-called "Jewish" firms.helped out, usually by taking in laundry or doingpiecework sewing for jobbers.By the 1920s the idea of intrafamily democracyNew Urban Social Patterndhad emerged. In such families husbands and wiveswould deal with each other as equals, which given ex-The census of 1920 revealed that for the first time aisting conditions meant sharing housework and childmajority of Americans (54 million in a population ofcare, downplaying male authority, and stressing mu-106 million) lived in "urban" rather than "rural"tual satisfaction in sexual and other matters. On theplaces. These figures are somewhat misleading whenone hand, they should be friends and lovers, notapplied to the study of social attitudes because themerely housekeepers, earners of money, and produc-census classified anyone in a community of 2500 orers of children. Procreation did not have to be themore as urban. Of the 54 million "urban" residents inmain purpose of matrimony, but if there were chil-1920, over 16 million lived in villages and towns ofdren, they should be left as free as possible to developfewer than 25,000 persons and the evidence suggestsin their own way; rigid discipline was limiting anditrongly that a large majority of them held ideas andtherefore wrong. On the other hand, advocates ofalues more like those of rural citizens than like thosethese companionate relationships believed that thereof city dwellers. But the truly urban Americans, thewas nothing particularly sacred about marriage; di-ane person in four who lived in a city of 100,000 orvorce should be made easier for couples that did notmore-and particularly the nearly 16.4 million whoget along, provided they did not have children.ived in metropolises of at least half a million-wereMuch attention was given at this time to "scien-increasing steadily in number and influence. Moretific" child raising. Child-care experts (a new breed)than 19 million persons moved from farms to cities inagreed that routine medical examinations and goodbe 1920s, and the population living in centers ofnutrition were of central importance, but they were00,000 or more increased by about a third.divided about how the socialization and psychologicalBeing a city dweller meant far more than chang-development of the young should be handled. Oneno one's physical surroundings. It affected familyschool stressed rigid training: Children could becructure, educational opportunities, and dozens of"spoiled" by indulgence; toilet training should beginther aspects of human existence. Indeed, since mostearly in infancy; thumb sucking should be suppressed;i the changes in the relations of husbands, wives,too much kissing could turn male youngsters intochildren that had occurred in the nineteenth cen-"mama's boys." Children are made not born," Johnwere related to the fact that people were leavingB. Watson, a former president of the American Psy-ITS to work in towns and cities, these trends con-chological Association who was also a vice-presidentnued and were intensified in the early twentieth cen-of the important J. Walter Thompson advertisingas more and more people settled in urban cen-agency, explained in The Psychological Care of Infant59. In addition, couples continued to marry moreand Child (1928). "Never hug and kiss them, nevertause of love and physical attraction than becauselet them sit in your lap. If you must, kiss them onceforcial position or economic advantage or becauseon the forehead when they say good night."the wishes of their parents. In each decade, peopleAnother school favored a more permissive ap-arried slightly later in life and had fewer children.proach. Toilet training could wait; parents should payThe Ku Klux Klan703ric of the country. Besides undermining public moral-ity by encouraging hypocrisy, it almost destroyed theDemocratic Party as a national organization. Democ-ratic immigrants in the cities hated it, but southernDemocrats sang its praises, often while continuing todrink (the humorist Will Rogers quipped that Missis-sippi would vote dry "as long as the voters could stag-ger to the polls").The hypocrisy of prohibition had a particularlydeleterious effect on politicians, a class seldom famousfor candor. Members of Congress catered to the de-mands of the powerful lobby of the Anti-SaloonLeague yet failed to grant adequate funds to the Pro-hibition Bureau. Nearly all the prominent leaders,Democrat and Republican, from Wilson and La Fol-lette to Hoover and Franklin D. Roosevelt, equivo-cated shamelessly on the liquor question. By the endof the decade almost every competent observer recog-nized that prohibition at least needed to be over-hauled, but the well-organized and powerful dryforces rejected all proposals for modifying it.The Ku Klux KlanThe most horrible manifestation of the social malaiseof the 1920s was the revival of the Ku Klux Klan.This new Klan, founded in 1915 by William J. Sim-mons, a former preacher, admitted only native-bornDaring Prohibition, rival gangs in many big cities con-white Protestants. The distrust of foreigners, blacks,muded for control of the lucrative (and illegal) sale ofCatholics, and Jews implicit in this regulation ex-On Valentine's Day, 1929, Al Capone's gang-plains why it flourished in the social climate thatin police uniforms, barged into a garage at 2122spawned religious fundamentalism, immigration re-Nerth Clark Street, Chicago, lined up the members ofstriction, and prohibition. In 1920 two unscrupu-de George "Bugs" Moran gang, and shot them (above).lous publicity agents, Edward Y. Clarke and Eliza-Tree months later Capone spent a year in prison forbeth Tyler, got control of the movement anda concealed weapon. He was later sentenced toorganized a massive membership drive, diverting ayears in prison for income tax fraud, though bemajor share of the initiation fees into their ownmined early release for good behavior.pockets. In a little over a year they enrolled 100,000recruits, and by 1923 they claimed the astonishingtotal of 5 million.Simmons gave his society trappings and mysteryThat the law was often violated does not meancalculated to attract gullible and bigoted people whowas ineffective, any more than violations ofyearned to express their frustrations and hostilities15 against theft and murder mean that those lawswithout personal risk. Klansmen masked themselvesrineffective. Although gangsters such as Alphonse

in white robes and hoods and enjoyed a childishurface Al" Capone of Chicago were engaged inmumbo jumbo of magnificent-sounding titles andiliquor traffic, their "organizations" existed beforedogmas (kleagle, klaliff, kludd; kloxology, kloran).passage of the Eighteenth Amendment But pro-They burned crosses in the night, organized massanon widened already serious rifts in the social fab-demonstrations to intimidate people they disliked,704 Chapter 25 Postwar Society and Culture: Change and AdjustmentouYerwa:catsioSacBraguaShoVarthewera trThaatto"thesonsSacetainA Ku Klux Klan initiation ceremony photographed in Kansas in the 1920s. Duringintits peak influence at mid-decade, Klan endorsement was essential to political candi-"Yordates in many areas of the West and Midwest. Campaigning for reelection in 1934,couran Indiana congressman testified, "I was told to join the Klan, or else."contwowouWhecuterand put pressure on businessmen to fire black workersthe organization roused both liberals and conservawithfrom better-paying jobs.tives in every part of the country. And of course itsimprThe Klan had relatively little appeal in the North-victims joined forces against their tormentors. Whennoweast or in metropolitan centers in other parts of thethe powerful leader of the Indiana Klan, a middleNevecountry, but it found many members in middle-sizedaged reprobate named David C. Stephenson, W2andcities and in the small towns and villages of midwesternconvicted of assaulting and causing the death of 2and aand western states like Indiana and Oregon. The scape-young woman, the rank and file abandoned the orgagoats in such regions were immigrants, Jews, and espe-nization in droves. The Klan remained influential forcially Catholics. The rationale was an urge to return toa number of years, contributing to the defeat of theLitan older, supposedly finer America and to stamp out allCatholic Alfred E. Smith in the 1928 presidentialvarieties of nonconformity. Klansmen "watched every-election, but it ceased to be a dynamic force afterThebody," themselves safe from observation behind their1924. By 1930 it had only some 9000 members.mentmasks and robes. They persecuted gamblers, "loose"an agewomen, violators of the prohibition laws, and anyoneters. 1who happened to differ from them on religious ques-Sacco and Vanzettithe Prtions or who belonged to a "foreign race."tellectThe very success of the Klan led to its undoing.The excesses of the fundamentalists, the xenophobes,aboutFactionalism sprang up, and rival leaders squabbledthe Klan, the red-baiters, and the prohibitionists disthen tover the large sums that had been collected from theturbed American intellectuals profoundly. More andof themembership. The cruel and outrageous behavior ofmore they became alienated, bitter, and contemptoics of

Literary Trends 705ous of those who appeared to control the country.execution of Sacco and Vanzetti were the poet EdnaYet their alienation came at the very time that societySt. Vincent Millay, the playwright Maxwell Anderson,was growing more dependent on brains and sophisti-and the novelists Upton Sinclair and John Dos Pas-cation. This compounded the confusion and disillu-sos. After the war the poet Ezra Pound dropped hissonment characteristic of the period.talk of an American Renaissance and wrote instead ofNothing demonstrates this fact so clearly as thea"botched civilization.' The soldiers of the GreatSacco-Vanzetti case. In April 1920 two men in SouthWar, he said,Braintree, Massachusetts, killed a paymaster and aguard in a daring daylight robbery of a shoe factory.walked eye-deep in hellShortly thereafter Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeobelieving in old men's lies, then unbelievingVanzetti were charged with the crime, and in 1921came home, home to a lie,they were convicted of murder. Sacco and Vanzettihome to deceits,were anarchists and Italian immigrants. Their trial washome to old lies and new infamy1 travesty of justice. The presiding judge, WebsterThayer, conducted the proceedings like a prosecutingYet out of this negativism came a literary flower-attorney; privately he referred to the defendants asing of major importance. The herald of the new day"those anarchist bastards."was Henry Adams, whose autobiography, The Educa-The case became a cause célèbre. Prominent per-tion of Henry Adams, was published posthumously inlons throughout the world protested, and for years1918. Adams's disillusionment long antedated theSacco and Vanzetti were kept alive by efforts to ob-war, but his description of late nineteeth-century cor-un a new trial. Vanzetti's quiet dignity and courageruption and materialism and his warning that indus-a the face of death wrung the hearts of millions.trialism was crushing the human spirit beneath theYou see me before you, not trembling," he told theweight of its machines appealed powerfully to thosecourt. "I never commit a crime in my life.I am sowhose pessimism was newborn. Soon hundreds ofconvinced to be right that if you could execute mebright young men and women were referring totwo times, and if I could be reborn two other times, Ithemselves, with a self-pity almost maudlin, as thewould live again and do what I have done already.'"lost generation."When, in August 1927, the two were at last electro-The symbol of the lost generation, in his owncated, the disillusionment of American intellectualsmind as well as to his contemporaries and to later crit-with prevailing values was profound. Some historians,ics, was F. Scott Fitzgerald. Born to modest wealth inimpressed by modern ballistic studies of Sacco's gun,St. Paul, Minnesota, in 1896, Fitzgerald attendedntow suspect that he, at least, may have been guilty.Princeton and served in the army during the WorldNevertheless, the truth and the shame remain: SaccoWar. He rose to sudden fame in 1920 when he pub-and Vanzetti paid with their lives for being radicalslished This Side of Paradise, a somewhat sophomoricind aliens, not for any crime.novel that appealed powerfully to college students andcaptured the fears and confusions of the lost genera-tion. In The Great Gatsby (1925), a more mature work,Literary TrendsFitzgerald dissected a modern millionaire-coarse, un-scrupulous, jaded, in love with another man's wife.The literature of the 1920s reflects the disillusion-Gatsby's tragedy lay in his dedication to a woman who,sent of the intellectuals. The prewar period had beenFitzgerald made clear, did not merit his passion. Hemage of hopeful experimentation in the world of let-lived in "the service of a vast, vulgar, meretriciousDS But the historian Henry F. May has shown thatbeauty," and in the end he understood this himself.de Progressive Era writers, along with most other in-The tragedy of The Great Gatsby was related toelectuals, were beginning to abandon this view byFitzgerald's own. Pleasure-loving and extravagant, hesout 1912. The wasteful horrors of World War I andes,squandered the money earned by Thrs Side of Paradise.listen the antics of the fundamentalists and the crueltyWhen The Great Gatsby failed to sell as well, he turnedndthe red-baiters and the Klan turned them into crit-to writing potboilers. "I really worked hard as hell lasttu-sof society. Among the many writers shaken by thewinter," he told the critic Edmund Wilson, "but it wasMany immigrant women worked in garment industry sweatshops. In 1911, a fire at the Triangle Shirtwaist Compatscaused workers to leap to their deaths (top) when blocked exit doors and the lack of fire escapes trapped them. Thetragic fire, which claimed 146 victims, gave impetus to labor organizations such as the Women's Trade Union Leagueand the International Ladies' Garment Workers Union (ILGWU). The Women's League sponsored demonstrations(note the sign on the right of the lower photo: "Do You Want Fire Protection? ORGANIZE") and pushed for betterpay and conditions for women workers.Supporting Saitsby Unit.ORGANIZE720

730 Chapter 26 The New Era: 1921-1933these nations to respect one another's interests in theislands of the Pacific and to confer in the event thatany other country launched an attack in the area.All the conferees signed the Nine-Power Treaty,agreeing to respect China's independence and tomaintain the Open Door. On the surface, this was ofmonumental importance to the United States since itseemed to mean that Japan had given up its territorialambitions on the Asian mainland and that both theJapanese and the Europeans had formally endorsedthe Open Door concept.By taking the lead in drafting these agreements, theUnited States regained some of the moral influence ithad lost by not joining the League of Nations. Thetreaties, however, were uniformly toothless. The sign-ers of the Four-Power pact agreed only to consult incase of aggression in the Pacific; they made no promisesto help one another or to restrict their own freedom ofaction. As President Harding assured the Senate, "there[was] no commitment to armed force, no alliance, nowritten or moral obligation to join in defense."The naval disarmament treaty said nothing aboutthe number of other warships that the powers mightbuild, about the far more important question of landand air forces, or about the underlying industrial andHowever accurate the point that his policies and thosefinancial structures that controlled the ability of theof big business were harmonious, the image of "Silentnations to make war. In addition, the 5:5:3 ratio actuCal" Coolidge playing a saxophone for the benefit of aally enabled the Japanese to dominate the western PaCharleston-dancing "flapper" is sheer cartoonist license.cific. It made the Philippine Islands undefendable andexposed Hawaii to possible attack. In a sense theseAmerican bases became hostages of Japan. Yet Con-programs, a competition none of them really wantedgress was so unconcerned about Japanese sensibilitiesbut from which all dared not withdraw unilaterally.that it refused to grant any immigration quota toIn November 1921, hoping to reach a generalJapan under the National Origins Act of 1924, CVCDagreement with China, Japan, and the Europeans thatthough the formula applied to other nations wouldwould keep China open to the commerce of all andhave allowed only 100 Japanese a year to enter theslow the armaments race, Secretary of State Hughescountry. The law, Secretary Hughes warned, pmconvened a conference in Washington. By the follow-duced in Japan "a sense of injury and antagonism ining February the Washington Conference had draftedstead of friendship and cooperation."three major treaties and a number of lesser agreements.Hughes did not think war a likely result, butIIn the Five-Power Treaty, the United States,Japanese resentment of "white imperialism" playedVGreat Britain, France, Japan, and Italy agreed to stopinto the hands of the military party in that nationtbuilding battleships for ten years and to reduce theirMany Japanese army and navy officers considered warfleets of capital ships to a fixed ratio, with Greatwith the United States inevitable. "The emotional toBritain and the United States limited to 525,000sentment against America," Akira Iriye writes, "watons, Japan to 315,000 tons, and France and Italy toreinforced by a more sophisticated view of future175,000 tons. The new ratio was expected to produceJapanese-American conflict that was advocated bra balance of forces in the Pacific.some army strategists.The Four-Power Treaty, signed by the UnitedAs for the key Nine-Power Treaty, Japan did notStates, Great Britain, Japan, and France, committedabandon its territorial ambitions in China, and ChinuHitting Bottom 741eigners to buy their goods led him to blame themsheet metal, and similar refuse on swamps, garbagefor the depression itself. He seemed unable to graspdumps, and other wasteland. People began to callwhat should have been obvious to a person of histhese places "Hoovervilles."intelligence: that high American tariffs made cur-Thousands of tramps roamed the countrysiderency devaluation almost inevitable in Europe andbegging and scavanging for food. At the same time,that the curtailment of American investment on thefood prices fell so low that farmers burned corn forContinent as a result of the depression had dealt afuel. In Iowa and Nebraska farmers organized "farmstaggering blow to the economies of all the Euro-holiday" movements, refusing to ship their crops topean nations.market in protest against the 31-cent-a-bushel cornMuch of the contemporary criticism of Hooverand 38-cent wheat. They blocked roads and rail lines,and a good deal of that heaped on him by later histo-dumped milk, overturned trucks, and establishednans was unfair. Yet his record as president shows thatpicket lines to enforce their boycott. The worldhe was too rigidly wedded to a particular theory ofseemed to have been turned upside down. Professorgovernment to cope effectively with the problems ofFelix Frankfurter of the Harvard Law School re-the day. Since these problems were in a sense insolu-marked only half humorously that henceforth theble-no one possessed enough knowledge and intelli-terms B.C. and A.D. would mean "Before Crash" andgence to understand entirely what was wrong or"After Depression."mough authority to enforce the proper correctiveThe national mood ranged from apathy to resent-measures-flexibility and a willingness to experimentment. In 1931 federal immigration agents and localwere essential to any program aimed at restoringgroups in the Southwest began rounding up Mexican-prosperity. Hoover lacked these qualities. He was hisAmericans and deporting them. Some of those re-own worst enemy, being too uncompromising to getturned to Mexico had entered the United States ille-on well with the politicians and too aloof to win thegally; others had come in properly. Unemployedconfidence and affection of ordinary people. As JoanMexicans were ejected because they might becomeHoff Wilson has noted, he refused "to backslap, frat-public charges, those with jobs because they were pre-mize with local supporters, kiss babies." He had toosumably taking bread from the mouths of citizens.much faith in himself and his plans. When he failed to"Capitalism is dying," the socialist theologian Reinholdshieve the results he anticipated, he attracted, de-Niebuhr remarked in 1932, "andit ought to die.his devotion to duty and his concern for the wel-In June and July 1932, 20,000 World War veter-fxre of the country, not sympathy but scorn.ans marched on Washington to demand immediatepayment of their "adjusted compensation" bonuses.When Congress rejected their appeal, some 2000 re-fused to leave, settling in a jerry-built camp of shacksHitting Bottomand tents at Anacostia Flats, a swamp bordering thePotomac. President Hoover, alarmed, charged incor-During the spring of 1932, as the economy soundedrectly that the "Bonus Army" was largely composedthe depths, thousands of Americans faced starvation.of criminals and radicals and sent troops into theaisedIn Philadelphia during an 11-day period when no re-Flats to disperse it with bayonets, tear gas, and tanks.hibi-lef funds were available, hundreds of families existedThe task was accomplished amid much confusion;: tar-in stale bread, thin soup, and garbage. In the nationfortunately no one was killed. The protest had beenearnonly about one-quarter of the unemployedaimless and not entirely justified, yet the spectacle ofpay-acre receiving any public aid. In Birmingham, AI-the United States government chasing unarmed vet-nitedhama, landlords in poor districts gave up trying toerans with tanks appalled the nation.ose inplect rents, preferring, one Alabama congressmanThe unprecedented severity of the depression ledooverold a Senate committee, "to have somebody livingsome persons to favor radical economic and politicalinter-there free of charge rather than to have the housechanges. The disparity between the lots of the richGritainlimed up for fuel [by scavengers]." Many peopleand the poor, always a challenge to democracy, be-ins byverc evicted, and they often gathered in ramshacklecame more striking and engendered considerable bit-ge for-communities constructed of packing boxes, rustyterness. "Unless something is done to provide

772 Chapter 27 The New Deal: 1933-1941government," and at his urging Congress passed an-which there is no escape through mere isolation orother neutrality act broadening the arms embargo toneutrality.' The way to deal with "the epidemic ofcover civil wars.world lawlessness" was to "quarantine" it. EvidentlyIsolationism now reached its peak. A public opin-Roosevelt had no specific plan in mind; neverthelession poll revealed in March 1937 that 94 percent ofthe "quarantine speech" produced a windy burst ofthe people thought American policy should be di-isolationist rhetoric that forced him to back down.rected at keeping out of all foreign wars rather than"It's a terrible thing," he said, "to look over yourtrying to prevent wars from breaking out. In Aprilshoulder when you are trying to lead-ano to find noCongress passed still another neutrality law. It contin-one there."ued the embargo on munitions and loans, forbadeRoosevelt came gradually to the conclusion thatAmericans to travel on belligerent ships, and gave theresisting aggression was more important than keepingpresident discretionary authority to place the sale ofout of war, but when he did, the need to keep theother goods to belligerents on a cash-and-carry basis.country united led him at times to be less than candidIn theory this would preserve the nation's profitablein his public statements. Hitler's annexation of Aus-foreign trade without the risk of war; in fact it playedtria in March 1938 caused him deep concern. Theinto the hands of the aggressors. While GermanNazis' vicious anti-Semitism had caused many of Ger-planes and cannons were turning the tide in Spain,many's 500,000 Jewish citizens to seek refuge abroadthe United States was denying the hard-pressed Span-Now 190,000 Austrian Jews were under Nazi control,ish loyalists even a case of cartridges.When Roosevelt learned that the Germans were bum-"With every surrender the prospects of a Euro-ing synagogues, expelling Jewish children frompean war grow darker," Claude G. Bowers, the Amer-schools, and otherwise mistreating innocent people,ican ambassador to Spain, warned. The New Yorkhe said that he "could scarcely believe that such thingsHerald Tribune pointed out that the neutrality legis-could occur." But public opinion opposed changinglation was literally reactionary-designed to keep thethe immigration law so that more refugees could beUnited States out of the war of 1914-1918, not theadmitted, and the president did nothing.conflict looming on the horizon. President Roosevelt,In September 1938 Hitler demanded that Czecho-in part because of domestic problems such as theslovakia cede the German-speaking Sudetenland to thedeSupreme Court packing struggle and the wave of sit-Reich. British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain andredown strikes, and in part because of his own vacilla-French Premier Edouard Deladier, in a conference withfotion, seemed to have lost control over the formula-Hitler at Munich, yielded to Hitler's threats andpition of American foreign policy. The Americanpromises and persuaded the Czechs to surrender the re-Otpeople, like wild creatures before a forest fire, weregion. Roosevelt failed again to speak out. But when theterushing in blind panic from the conflagration.Nazis seized the rest of Czechoslovakia in March 1939,WRoosevelt called for "methods short of war" to demon-enstrate America's determination to check the fascists.caWar Again in EuropeWhen Hitler threatened Poland in the spring of1939, demanding the free city of Danzig and the PolishchThere were limits beyond which Americans wouldCorridor separating East Prussia from the rest of Ger-reinot go. In July 1937 the Japanese again attackedmany, and when Mussolini invaded Albania, RooseveltNaChina, pressing ahead on a broad front. Roosevelt be-urged Congress to repeal the 1937 neutrality act so thatscilieved that invoking the neutrality law would onlythe United States could sell arms to Britain and Francewahelp the well-armed Japanese. Taking advantage ofin the event of war. Congress refused. "Captain," Viahisthe fact that neither side had formally declared war,President Garner told Roosevelt after counting nosesCohe allowed the shipment of arms and supplies to boththe Senate, "you haven't got the votes," and the presiingsides.dent, perhaps unwisely, did not press the issue.Then the president went further. Speaking inIn August 1939 Germany and Russia signed 1in 1Chicago in October, he condemned nations-henonaggression pact, prelude to their joint assault 05callmentioned none by name-who were "creating aPoland. On September 1 Hitler's troops invadedsiorstate of international anarchy and instability fromPoland, at last provoking Great Britain and France.tothe

The Undeclared War 775By using concern about the European war to jus-jority than in 1932 or 1936. The popular vote was 27tify running for a tradition-breaking third term, Roo-million to 22 million, the electoral count 449 to 82.sevelt brought down on his head the hatred of con-servative Republicans and the isolationists of bothmajor parties, just when they thought they would beThe Undeclared Warnd of him. The leading Republican presidential candi-dates were Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio, son of theThe election encouraged Roosevelt to act moreformer president, and District Attorney Thomas E.boldly. When Prime Minister Churchill informed himDewey of New York, who had won fame as a "racketthat the cash-and-carry system would no longer suf-buster" and political reformer. Taft was consideredfice because Great Britain was rapidly exhausting itsconservative and lacking in political glamor; Dewey,financial resources, he decided at once to provide thebarely 38, seemed too young and inexperienced. In-British with whatever they needed. Instead of propos-stead the Republicans nominated the darkest of darking to lend them money, a step certain to rouse mem-horses, Wendell L. Willkie of Indiana, the utility mag-ories of the vexatious war debt controversies, he de-sate who had led the fight against the TVA in 1933.vised the lend-lease program, one of his mostDespite his political inexperience and Wall Streetingenious and imaginative creations.tonnections, Willkie made an appealing candidate.First he delivered a "fireside chat" that stressedHe was an energetic, charming, openhearted man.the evil intentions of the Nazis and the dangers that aHis rough-hewn, rural manner (one Democrat calledGerman victory would create for America. Aidinghim "a simple, barefoot Wall Street lawyer") won himBritain should be looked at simply as a form of self-vide support in farm districts. Willkie had difficulty,defense. "As planes and ships and guns and shells arebowever, finding issues on which to oppose Roo-produced," he said, American defense experts wouldlevelt. Good times were at last returning. The Newdecide "how much shall be sent abroad and howDeal reforms were too popular and too much in linemuch shall remain at home." When the radio talkwith his own thinking to invite attack. He believed asprovoked a favorable public response, Roosevelt wenttrongly as the president that America could noto Congress in January 1941 with a plan calling forlonger ignore the Nazi threat.the expenditure of $7 billion for war materials thatIn the end Willkie focused his campaign on Roo-the president could sell, lend, lease, exchange, orkvelt's conduct of foreign relations. A preponderancetransfer to any country whose defense he deemed vital(the Democrats favored all-out aid to Britain, whileto that of the United States. After two months of de-most Republicans still wished to avoid foreign "entan-bate, Congress gave him what he had asked for.dements." But the crisis was causing many persons toAlthough the wording of the Lend-Lease Act ob-nuft sides. Among interventionists, organizations likescured its immediate purpose, the saving of Greatthe Committee to Defend America by Aiding the AI-Britain, the president was frank in explaining his plan.headed by Republican William Allen White, andHe did not minimize the dangers involved, yet hisalthe small but influential Century Group containedmastery of practical politics was never more in evi-ornembers of both parties. So did the isolationist Amer-dence. To counter Irish-American prejudices againstipa First Committee, led by Robert E. Wood of Searsthe English, he pointed out that the Irish Republicatbebuck and the famous aviator Charles A. Lindbergh.would surely fall under Nazi domination if Hitler wonheWhile rejecting the isolationist position, Willkiethe war. He coupled his demand for heavy militaryedharged that Roosevelt intended to make the Unitedexpenditures with his enunciation of the idealistices.tates a participant in the war. "If you reelect him,""Four Freedoms" -freedom of speech, freedom ofonitold one audience, "you may expect war in Aprilreligion, freedom from want, and freedom fromhe941," to which Roosevelt retorted (disingenuously,fear-for which, he said, the war was being fought.hoke he knew he was not a free agent in the situa-After the enactment of lend-lease, aid short ofthem. "I have said this before, but I shall say it againwar was no longer seriously debated. The AmericanIt'sd'again and again: Your boys are not going to benavy began to patrol the North Atlantic, shadowingureminto any foreign wars." In November RooseveltGerman submarines and radioing their locations tomed the country handily, though by a smaller ma-British warships and planes. In April 1941 United

784Chapter 28 War and PeaceVAlthough assigned to segregatedunits, black servicement were notlimited to the infantry or enlistedranks. Here are five graduates ofthe Advanced Flying School,Tuskegee, Alabama, just before re-ceiving their commissions in 1942as second licutenants in the ArmyAir Corps.their lives for the common good, how could it con-The navy continued to confine black and His-tinue to treat them as second-class citizens? Black lead-panic sailors to demeaning, noncombat tasks, anders pointed out the inconsistency between fighting forblack soldiers were often provided with inferior recre-democracy abroad and ignoring it at home. "We wantational facilities and otherwise mistreated in anddemocracy in Alabama," the NAACP announced, andaround army camps, especially those in the South. Inthis argument too had some effect on white thinking.1943 William Hastie, a former New Dealer who was1Blacks in the armed forces were treated more fairlyserving as an adviser on racial matters to Secretary of(than they had been in World War I. They were enlistedWar Stimson, resigned in protest because of the "refor the first time in the air force and the marines, andactionary policies and discriminatory practices of thethey were given more responsible positions in the armyArmy and Air Forces in matters affecting Negroes,l'and navy. The army commissioned its first black gen-However, economic realities operated signifikeral. Some 600 black pilots won their wings. Alto-cantly to the advantage of black civilians. More ofogether about a million served, about half of them over-them had been unemployed in proportion to theirseas. The extensive and honorable performance ofnumbers than any other group; now the labor short-rothese units could not be ignored by the white majority.age brought employment for all. More than 5 millionreHowever, segregation in the armed services wasblacks moved from rural areas to cities between 1940Omaintained. Especially in and around army camps inand 1945 in search of work. At least a million of themnthe southern states, rigid segregation proved shockingfound defense jobs in the North and on the Westjoto many northern white soldiers. In some cases Ger-Coast, many of which involved developing valuabledeman prisoners of war were seated in front of blackskills that had been difficult for blacks to acquire belivAmerican soldiers at camp movies. Such practices ledfore the war because of the racial policies of tradefrequently to rioting and even to local mutiniesunions and many employers. The black population ofseamong black recruits.Los Angeles, San Francisco, Denver, Buffalo, Milwau-buMinorities in Time of War: Blacks, Hispanics, and Indians 785kee, and half a dozen other important cities moreregion adopted a kind of civilian dress known as a zootthan doubled in that brief period. The migrants weresuit. These "uniforms" consisted of broad-brimmed fe-mostly forced to live in dreadful urban ghettoes, butdoras, long coats, and pegged trousers. "Zoot suiters"their very concentration (and the fact that outside thetended to have money in their pockets, and their be-South blacks could vote freely) made them importanthavior (like their costume) was not always as circum-politically.spect as many local residents would have preferred. AThese gains failed to satisfy black leaders. Thegrand jury undertook an investigation, and the Los An-NAACP, which increased its membership fromgeles City Council even debated banning the wearing50,000 in 1940 to almost 405,000 in 1946, adoptedof zoot suits. In 1943 rioting broke out when sailorsmore militant stance than in World War I. Dis-on shore leave, apparently resenting these prosperous-crimination in defense plants seemed far less tolera-appearing "foreign" civilians, began roaming the areable than it had in 1917-1918. A. Philip Randolph,attacking anyone they could find in a zoot suit.president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping CarThere were at least understandable reasons whyPorters, organized a march of blacks on Washingtonsome city dwellers resented the zoot suiters, but thesein 1941 to demand equal opportunity for blackdid not justify the way they acted. Still worse, theworkers. Fearing possible violence and the wrath ofwillingness of white leaders to tolerate attacks onsouthern congressmen, Roosevelt tried to persuadeblacks and Hispanics at a time when national unityRandolph to call off the march. "It would make thewas so necessary was particularly frustrating. For ex-country look bad" and "help the Germans," heample, blood plasma from blacks and whites was keptdaimed. But Randolph persisted, and Roosevelt fi-separately even though the two "varicties" were indis-hally agreed to issue an order prohibiting discrimina-tinguishable and the process of storing plasma hadcon in plants with defense contracts. He also set upbeen devised by a black doctor, Charles Drew.i Fair Employment Practices Committee to see thatBlacks became increasingly embittered. Roythe order was carried out. Executive Order 8802 wasWilkins, head of the NAACP, put it this way in 1942:poorly enforced, but it opened up better jobs to"No Negro leader with a constituency can face hissome workers and led many employers to changemembers today and ask full support for the war in thetheir hiring practices.light of the atmosphere the government has created.'Prejudice and mistreatment did not cease. InMany black newspaper editors were so critical of the

meas around defense plants white resentment of theadministration that conservatives demanded they beblack "invasion" mounted. By 1943, 50,000 newindicted for sedition.hlacks had crowded into Detroit. A wave of strikesRoosevelt would have none of that, but the mili-disrupted production at U.S. Rubber and several for-tants annoyed him; he felt that they should hold theirmer automobile plants where white workers laiddemands in abeyance until the war had been won.down their tools to protest the hiring of blacks. InApparently he failed to realize the depth of blacklune a race riot marked by looting and bloody fight-anger, and in this he was no different from the major-no raged for three days. By the time federal troopsity of whites. A revolution was in the making, yet inlestored order, 25 blacks and 9 whites had been1942 a poll revealed that a solid majority of whiteskilled. Rioting also erupted in New York and manystill believed that black Americans were satisfied withfther cities.their place in society. The riots of 1943 undoubtedlyrIn Los Angeles the attacks were upon Hispanicdisabused some of them of this illusion.esidents. Wartime employment needs resulted in aConcern about national unity did lead to a reac-neversal of the Depression policy of forcing Mexicanstion against the New Deal policy of encouraging In-0XIT of the Southwest, and many thousands flockeddians to preserve their ancient cultures and developnhorth in search of work. Most had to accept menialself-governing communities. There was even talk ofstpbs. But work was plentiful, and they, as well as resi-going back to the allotment system and trying to as-le(ent Spanish-speaking Americans, experienced risingsimilate Indians into the larger society. John Collier-Fing standards.resigned as commissioner of Indian affairs in disgustleA larger proportion of Mexican-American menin 1945. In fact, the war encouraged assimilation inoflived in the armed forces than the national average,several ways. More than 24,000 Indians served in the1young civilian Hispanics in the Los Angelesarmed forces, an experience that brought them in786 Chapter 28 War and Peacegroups were well organized and prepared to use theirconsiderable political power if necessary to protectthemselves from abuse.But the underlying public attitude was more im-portant. Americans went to war in 1941 without illu-sions and without enthusiasm, determined to win butexpecting only to preserve what they had. They there-fore found it easier to tolerate dissent, to view thedangers they faced realistically, and to concentrate onthe real foreign enemy without venting their feelingson domestic scapegoats. The nation's 100,000 con-scientious objectors met with little hostility.Internment of the JapaneseThe relatively tolerant treatment accorded most peo-ple makes the nation's policies toward American citi-zens of Japanese extraction all the more difficult toIn World War II the U.S. government adapted theunderstand. Generals on the West Coast were under-Navajo Indian language as a radio code. Navajosstandably unnerved by the Japanese attack on Pearl(who became known as "Code Talkers") were recruited,Harbor and warned that people of Japanese descenttrained, and sent to Marine combat units already de-might engage in sabotage or espionage for Japan.ployed. As the enemy was unable to break the code, con-"The Japanese race is an enemy race," General Johnfidential information was able to flow between the par-L. Dewitt claimed. The 112,000 Americans of Japan-ious units. Here two Navajos operate a portable radioese ancestry, the majority of them native-born citi-set in the Bougainville jungle in 1943.zens, were "potential enemies." "The very fact thatno sabotage has taken place to date," Dewitt observed illogically, "is a disturbing and confirming in-contact with new people, new places, and new ideas.dication that such action will be taken." Secretary ofMany thousands more left the reservations to work inWar Stimson proposed the relocation of the Westdefense industries in cities all over the country.Coast people of Japanese extraction, including Amer-ican citizens, to internment camps in Wyoming, An-zona, and other interior states. President RooseveltThe Treatment of German-concurred but weakly suggested: "Be as responsible asyou can."and Italian-AmericandThe Japanese were properly indignant but alsobaffled, in some cases hurt more than angry. "WeAlthough World War II affected the American peopledidn't feel Japanese. We felt American,' one woman,far more drastically than World War I had, it pro-the mother of three small children, recalled mamduced much less intolerance and fewer examples ofyears later. Some Japanese-Americans refused to sub-the repression of individual freedom of opinion. Peo-mit to military authorities. Gordon Hirabayashi, inple seemed able to distinguish between Italian fascismAmerican citizen and senior at the University ofand Italian-Americans and between the governmentWashington, refused to report for transportation 20of Nazi Germany and Americans of German descentan internment camp. After being convicted and senlin a way that had escaped their parents. The fact thattenced to prison, he decided to appeal. Previousfew Italian-Americans admired Mussolini and thatSupreme Courts had ruled that the government couldVnearly all German-Americans were vigorously anti-deprive Americans of their freedoms during war onlynNazi helps explain this. So does the fact that bothwhen the "military necessity" was compelling. By theW

Women's Contribution to the War Effort 787CANADAB1WASH.NORTHMONTANADAKOTAMINNOREGONIDAHOHartSOUTHWIS.MountainDAKOTAMinidokaTuleLakeWYOMINGIOWANEBRASKANEVADATopazILLManzanarUTAHCOLORADOKANSASGranadaMISSOURICALIF.ARIZONAOKLAHOMAARK.PostonNEWRohwerMEXICOGilaJeromeLA.TEXASMilitary AreaMEXICO(Exclusion Zone)0150300 MilesInternment Camps0150 300 KilometersIdentification tags hung from the collars of theMochida children as they posed with their parents forJapaneoe-American Internment Campophotographer Dorothea Lange. The date was May 8,1942, and the family was awaiting transportationdetention camp from their home in Hayward,California.1920s-more women workers and more of themmarried-soon accelerated. By 1944, 6.5 million ad-ditional women had entered the workforce, and at thepeak of war production in 1945, more than 19 mil-time the Supreme Court ruled on his and similarlion women were employed, many of them in well-cases, the Japanese had been thrown back in the Pa-paying industrial jobs. Additional thousands wereafic; no invasion was even conceivable. Yet the jus-serving in the armed forces: 100,000 in the Women'srices worried that if they declared the internment pol-Auxiliary Army Corps, others in navy, marine, and airky to be unconstitutional, they would appear, Justicecorps auxilliaries.Felix Frankfurter put it, "out of step" with the nation.At first there was considerable resistance to whatIn June, 1943, the Court upheld the conviction ofwas happening. About one husband in three objectedHirabayashi. Finally, in Ex parte Endo, it forbade thein principle to his wife taking a job. Many employersinternment of loyal Japanese-American citizens. Un-in so-called heavy industry and in other fields tradi-fortunately the latter decision was not handed downtionally dominated by men doubted that womenuntil December 1944.could handle such tasks.Unions frequently made the same point, usuallywithout much evidence. A Seattle official of the Inter-Women's Contributionnational Brotherhood of Boilermakers and Iron Ship-builders said of women job applicants: "They don'tto the War Effortunderstand If one of these girls pressed the triggeron the yard rivet guns, she'd be going one way andlith economic activity on the rise and millions ofthe rivet the other." Actually, many women were soonton going off to war, a sudden need for moredoing "men's work" in the shipyards. The Seattle taxi-umen workers developed. The trends of thecab union objected to women drivers on the ground

Johnson Escalates the War 843poor preschoolers, was designed to prepare them for el-700ementary school. It also incidentally improved the chil-EuropeNorth Americadren's health by providing medical examinations and600Asianutritious meals.South AmericaStill another important reform was the Voting500Rights Act of 1965, pressed through Congress by Pres-ident Johnson after more brutal repressions of civil400rights demonstrators in the South. This law providedfor federal intervention to protect black registration and300voting in six southern states. It applied to state and localas well as federal elections.Other laws passed at Johnson's urging in 1965 and2001966 included the creation of the National Endow-ment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the100Humanities and measures supporting scientific re-search, highway safety, crime control, slum clearance,0clean air, and the preservation of historic sites. Of par-1920193019401950196019701980ticular significance was the Immigration Act of 1965,which did away with most provisions of the national-Immigration, 1920-1980origin system of admitting newcomers. Instead,Immigration quotas imposed in the 1920s, together with290,000 persons a year were to be admitted on the ba-the dampening effect of the depression years and Worldsis of such priorities as job skills and need for politicalWar II, meant that up to 1980 immigration had stillasylum. The law also placed a limit of 120,000 immi-not reached its pre-World War I levels, in spite of thegrants a year from countries in the Western Hemi-post-1960 influx from Asia and North America.sphere. Previously, immigration from these countriesCanada, Mexico, Central America, and the West In-had been unrestricted.dies are included in the North American category.The Great Society program was one of the most re-markable outpourings of important legislation in Amer-ican history. The results, however, were mixed. Headand his supporters had envisioned. The same, of course,Start and a related program to help students in sec-can be said of most ambitious reform programs-of Re-ondary schools prepare for college were unqualifiedconstruction; of the Progressive movement; certainly ofsuccesses. But the 1965 Education Act proved a disap-the New Deal, to which Johnson had contributed as apointment. Too many local school districts found waysyoung man. Despite his long political experience, John-of using the federal money to cover their ordinary ex-son tried to accomplish too many things too quickly.penses, and the sums actually devoted to programs forHe relied too heavily on the techniques of political ma-the poor failed to improve most students' performancesnipulation. Perhaps he was carried away by his goodsignificantly.fortune-that he would ever become president mustMedicare and Medicaid certainly provided goodhave seemed to a man of his political acumen most un-medical treatment for millions of people, but becauselikely after he failed to win the nomination in 1960. Hethe patients no longer paid most of the bills, doctors,seized too avidly this unexpected opportunity to makehospitals, and drug companies were able to raise feeshistory. Without the crisis atmosphere that had ap-and prices without fear of losing business. Medical costspeared to justify hasty experimentation during the New:escalated far more rapidly than the rate of inflation.Deal years, the public judged the results of the GreatThe Job Corps, which was designed to help poorSociety and the president who had shaped it skeptically.people get better-paying jobs by providing them with,licational training, was an almost total failure. The costoof the training was high, relatively few trainees com-Johnson Escalated the Warpleted the courses, and of those who did, few found jobs-inwhich they could make use of their new skills.After Diem's assassination, the situation in South Viet-alOn balance, the achievements of the Great Societynam continued to deteriorate. One military coup fol-orwere far below what President Johnson had promisedlowed another, and political instability aggravated mili-864 Chapter 31 Society in Fluxleisure, entertainment, and cultural activities as well asity and buoyant optimism of the period led to an CX-for life's necessities. By the early 1960s more than 12pansion of religious activity. The Catholic churchmillion families, about a third of the population, hadalone built over a thousand new schools and moresuch incomes.than a hundred hospitals along with countless newThe percentage of immigrants in the populationchurches. By 1950 the Southern Baptists had enrolleddeclined steadily; in 1965 over 95 percent of allnearly 300,000 new members and built some 500Americans were native-born. This trend contributedchurches for them to worship in.to social and cultural uniformity. So did the rising in-But while most faiths prospered materially, thecomes of industrial workers and the changing charac-faithful tended to accept the world as it was. Inter of their labor. By 1962 about 90 percent of all in-Catholic, Protestant, Jew (1955), Will Herberg argueddustrial workers enjoyed such fringe benefits as paidthat ethnic differences between people of differentvacations and medical insurance at least partially fi-backgrounds were becoming less important, and as ananced by their employers, and nearly 70 percent par-result, religious toleration was becoming routine.ticipated in pension plans. The merger in 1955 of thePresident Eisenhower lent authority to this argumenttwo great labor federations, the AFL and the CIO,when he said: "Our government makes no sense un-added to the prestige of all union labor as well as toless it is founded on a deeply felt religious faith-andthe power of the new organization.I don't care what it is." According to a Gallup pollAs blue-collar workers invaded the middle classtaken shortly after the war, nearly everyone in Amer-by the tens of thousands, they moved to suburbs pre-ica believed in God. However, another poll revealedviously reserved for junior executives, shopkeepers,that many people were woefully ignorant of religiousand the like. They shed their work clothes for busi-history and doctrine. Large numbers of Christians, forness suits. They took up golf. In sum, they adoptedexample, were unable to tell pollsters the name of anyvalues and attitudes commensurate with their newof the four gospels. Professor Herberg reported thatstatus-which helps explain the growing conservatismgroups at typical suburban synagogues "were muchof labor unions. During the Great Depression, whenmore likely to discuss current events, or busy them-they were underdogs of sorts, the unions fought forselves with bowling, than to study the Bible." Peoplesocial justice. In the 1960s many union workersin general, he concluded, tended to belong to a par-seemed more interested in preserving their gainsticular religion in order to obtain a particular socialagainst the ravages of inflation and taxation than theyposition, a sense of being a member of an importantwere in social reform.institution.Church and state were by law and the Constitu-tion separate institutions, yet acts of Congress andReligion in Changing Timedstate legislatures frequently had indirect effects onevery aspect of organized religion. New Deal welfareSociologists and other commentators on contempo-legislation took on a large part of a burden previouslyrary affairs found in the expansion of the middle classborne by church groups. The expansion of higher ed-another explanation of the tendency of the country toucation resulting from the GI Bill introduced millionsglorify the conformist. They attributed to this expan-of young adults to new ideas and appeared to makesion the blurring of party lines in politics, the nationalpeople somewhat more tolerant of the beliefs of oth-obsession with moderation and consensus, the com-ers, religious beliefs included. On the other hand,placency of so many Americans, and their tendency,however, studies showed that better-educated peoplefor example, to be more interested in the social as-tended to be less involved in the formal aspects of orpects of churchgoing than in the moral and philo-ganized religion, and some became interested in non-sophical aspects of religion.Western faiths, such as Zen Buddhism. Both theseOrganized religion traditionally deals with eternaltrends seemed alarming to the leaders of the estab-values, but it is always influenced by social, cultural,lished religious groups, in part because they reflected1and economic developments. Never had this beenan "education gap" separating religious liberals fromomore true in America than in the decades after Worldreligious conservatives.War II. All the major faiths, despite their differences,Unlike prewar critics who had attacked "ruggedpwere affected. Immediately after the war the prosper-individualism," many post-New Deal social critics,

Native-Born Ethnics873segregate ghetto schools by busing children out ofCésar Chávez, who concentrated on what superficiallytheir local neighborhoods were a particularly bitterwas a more limited goal-organizing migrant farmcause of conflict. These developments caused a pow-workers into unions. Chávez grew up in migranterful white backlash. People already subjected to thecamps in California; he had no schooling beyond thepressures caused by inflation, specialization, and rapidseventh grade. After serving in the navy during Worldchange, and worried by rising urban crime rates andWar II, he went to work for the Community Servicewelfare costs, found black radicalism infuriating.Organization (CSO), a group seeking to raise the po-litical consciousness of the poor and to develop self-help programs for them. Chávez became general di-Native-Born Ethnicorector of the CSO but resigned in 1962 because hefelt it was not devoting enough attention to the plightThe struggles of blacks for equality went hand in handof migrant workers. He then founded the Nationalwith the struggles of those of Mexican descent, princi-Farm Workers' Association, later known as thepally in the Southwest. After World War I, thousandsUnited Farm Workers' Organizing Committee.of immigrants from Mexico flocked into that part ofIn 1965 the grape pickers in his union in Delano,the country, mingling with the far larger native-bornCalifornia, struck for higher wages and union recog-Hispanic population. They could do so legally be-nition. Chávez, seeing in the strike an opportunity tocause the restrictive immigration legislation of theattack the very structure of the migrant labor system,1920s did not apply to Western Hemisphere nations.turned it into a countrywide crusade. Avoiding vio-When the Great Depression struck, Mexican Ameri-lence, he enlisted the support of church leaders; hecans were the first to suffer-about half a million His-organized sit-ins, a march on the state capital, andpanics who were not citizens were either deported orthen a national consumer boycott of grapes that at-"persuaded" to return to Mexico. But during Worldtracted the support of an estimated 17 million people.War II and again between 1948 and 1965, federalHe demonstrated convincingly that migrant workerslegislation encouraged the importation of braceroscould be unionized and that the demands of minori-(temporary farm workers). Many other Mexicans en-ties for equal treatment did not necessarily lead totered the country illegally. The latter were known asseparatism and class or racial antagonism.mojados, or "wetbacks," because they often slippedover the border by swimming across the Rio Grande.Many of these Mexicans and other Spanish-speaking people, including the thousands from the ter-The Mexcican-American founder of the National Farmmory of Puerto Rico who could immigrate to theWorkers Association and later head of the Unitedmainland legally in unlimited numbers, settled in theFarm Workers Organizing Committee, César Chávezbig cities, where low-paying but usually steady worksuccessfully organized migrant workers throughoutwas available. They lived in slums called barrios, as seg-California in the early 1960s and later led a nation-regated, crowded, and crime-ridden as the ghettos ofwide boycott against California grape producers.the blacks.Spanish-speaking residents of the Southwest,native- and foreign-born, and to a lesser degree thosein the big eastern cities, were for a time largely apoliti-cal; they tended to mind their own business and not"make trouble." But in the 1960s a new spirit of resis-tance arose. Leaders of the new movement calledthemselves Chicanos. The Chicanos demanded betterkhools for their children and easier access to highereducation. They urged their fellows to take pride inneir traditions and culture, to demand their rights,ad to organize themselves politically. One Chicanostionalist group tried to secede from New Mexico, anthat brought it into confrontation with the army.The Chicano leader with the widest influence was

Change and Uncertainty 901Despite the tax cuts already made, congressional lead-Change and Uncertaintycrs of both parties agreed to the Income Tax Act of1986, which reduced the top levy on personal in-But if the "Reagan Revolution" seemed to have tri-comes from 50 percent to 28 percent and the tax onumphed, powerful countering forces were at work thatcorporate profits from 46 percent to 34 percent.no individual or party could effectively control. ForLiberal members of Congress, remembering howone thing, the makeup of the American people, alwaysthe voters had reacted to Mondale's talk about in-in a state of flux, was changing at a rate approachingcreasing taxes, found it politically difficult to opposethat of the early 1900s when the "new" immigrationthe measure. But the existing tax system was ex-had been at its peak. In the 1970s, after the Immigra-tremely complicated and full of loopholes benefitingtion Act of 1965 had put an end to the national-ori-particular interests. The new law did away with mostgins concept, more than 4 million immigrants enteredof the tax shelters and special credits that corporationsthe country, and the vast majority of these newcomersand well-to-do individuals had used to reduce theircame from Asia and Latin America. This trend contin-tax bills. The law also relieved 6 million low-incomeued; of the 643,000 who arrived in 1988, more thanpeople from paying any federal income tax at all.550,000 were from these two regions. More thanThe objective of the law was a system that re-111,000 of the immigrants came from East Asianquired people with similar incomes to pay roughlycountries, the Philippines, Korea, and Vietnam. In ad-equal taxes. But it also undermined the principle ofdition, uncounted thousands entered the Unitedprogressive taxation-the practice, dating back to theStates illegally, most crossing the long, sparsely settledfirst income tax enacted after the adoption of the Six-border with Mexico. The nation's Hispanic popula-teenth Amendment in 1913, of requiring high-in-tion increased by 53 percent during the 1980s.come people to pay a larger percentage of their in-Some of the new immigrants were refugees fromcome than those with smaller incomes. The new lawrepressive regimes in Vietnam, Cuba, Haiti, and Cen-set only two rates: 15 percent on taxable incomes be-tral America, and nearly all were poor. Most were hard-low $29,750 for families and 28 percent on incomesworking and law abiding and many were well-educatedabove this limit. A family with a taxable income ofand possessed of valuable skills. But a significant num-$30,000 would pay at the same rate as one with $30ber became public charges and others lawbreakers.million.Most tended, like their predecessors, to crowd to-Reagan advanced another of his objectives moregether in ethnic neighborhoods. Spanish could begradually. This was his appointment of conservativesheard more often than English in large sections of Losto federal judgeships. During his first year in office heAngeles, New York, Miami, and many other cities.appointed Sandra Day O'Connor to the SupremeNo strong demand for immigration restrictionCourt. Justice D'Connor was the first woman everdeveloped, perhaps because so many Americans wereappointed to the Court, but she was also conservativethemselves the children of immigrants. However,on most constitutional questions. When Chief Justiceconservatives found it appalling that so many peopleWarren E. Burger resigned in 1986, Reagan replacedcould enter the country illegally, and even Ameri-him with Associate Justice William H. Rehnquist,cans sympathetic to the so-called undocumentedprobably the most conservative member of thealiens agreed that control was desirable. Finally, inSupreme Court, and he filled the vacancy with An-1986, Congress passed a law offering amnesty to il-tonin Scalia, an even more conservative judge. Afterlegal immigrants long resident in the country andthe resignation of Associate Justice Lewis F. Powell inpenalizing employers who hired illegal immigrants1987, the President nominated Robert Bork, who, asin the future. Many persons legalized their statusNixon's solicitor general, had discharged the Water-under the new law, but the influx of illegal immi-gate special prosecutor, Archibald Cox. Bork wasgrants continued. Problems developed because someboth conservative and rigidly doctrinaire. After pro-employers refused to hire anyone with a foreign ac-tracted hearings, the Senate refused to confirm him,cent on the ground that they might be "illegals"and eventually the appointment went to a less contro-bearing false papers.versial but by no means liberal judge, AnthonyOther trends deeply disturbed thousands ofKennedy. By 1988 Reagan had appointed well overAmericans. The postwar population explosion and thehalf of all the members of the federal bench.following decline in the birthrate assured that great



