The people of the early United Stales had many common traits. Most were white, English-speak- ing Protestant Christians. Yet the American population included large groups of people of other descent who would play a major role in the nation's history. Today's diverse society, representing many nationalities, ethnic groups, and religions, took centuries of struggle to build, as the time line below shows. Growth Produces Conflict In the nation's first century, competition for land and wealth pitted groups of people against one another. Native Americans suffered the first and most permanent losses. British officials and American settlers generally believed that the Indians had to make way for white civilization. This led to frequent conflict. In 1763, Pontiac, leader of the Ottawa Indians, led an unsuccessful three-year war known as Pontiac's Rebellion. During the next century, settlers pressed farther west. Native Americans were forced into signing treaties that crowded them into ever smaller tracts of land with dwindling food sources. Many of these treaties were eventually broken. In the American South, growth and prosperity were achieved through the use of an unpaid labor force: enslaved Africans. By 1750, rice, tobacco, and cotton plantations had become dependent on slave labor. Slaves tended the fields and served white households. African Americans were born into a lifetime of servitude. Slavery broke up families and shattered cultural traditions. Yet Africans strongly influenced American society. Most slaves came from West Africa, and they managed to keep and pass on folklore, religious beliefs, music, and other traditions of their homelands. In the mid-1800s, another mixing of cultures took place that would greatly shape American culture today. From 1845 to 1853, the United States acquired Texas, California, and the Southwest from Mexico. These areas combined the Spanish language, Catholic religion, and other traditions with those of Native Americans. Now this southwestern culture became a part of American life. Cultural, religious, and ethnic diversity increased in the early 1800s. Fleeing political upheaval, a w'ave of German immigrants began in the late 1820s. Severe famine in Ireland in the mid-1840s brought mostly Catholic newcomers. Many settled in eastern cities, forming tight-knit neighborhoods to shield themselves from anti-Catholic prejudice. 1763 Pontiac's". When they weren't busy creating a nation, three of the nation's founders were part-time scientists. They sought practical applications for new scientific theories and discoveries coming from Europe. George Washington used scientific methods to study crop rotation and cattle breeding. Thomas Jefferson contributed to the fields of zoology, botany, geology, architecture, mathematics, meteorology, and engineering. He invented an improved plow and a machine for encoding messages. Benjamin Franklin s innovations include an energy-efficient stove, the lightning rod, and bifocal glasses. As the time line below demonstrates, invention is America's heritage. The Industrial Revolution In the 1700s, the British learned to harness the energy of rushing water to run new mechanical inventions. This discovery led to Britain's Industrial Evolution. One of Britain's most closely guarded secrets was the textile mill. Defying British law, mill worker Samuel Slater memorized the workings of an entire mill, then came to Rhode Island and built his own in 1793. Slater brought the Industrial Revolution to America. Along the fast-flowing rivers of the Northeast, mills and other factories arose. Manufacturing forever changed the economies of northern states. A major advance in manufacturing was the use of interchangeable parts, standard-sized parts that allowed products to be assembled quickly, instead of being made from scratch with individually crafted parts. Inventor Eli Whitney introduced the concept at his weapons factory in Connecticut. Whitney is also credited with inventing a machine in 1793 that changed the economy of the South. The cotton gin performed the time-consuming task of straining the seeds out of raw cotton. Cotton profits soared. Two inventions helped turn the Great Plains into the nation's breadbasket. In 1831 Cyrus McCormick created the mechanical reaper to harvest grain. John Deere's steel plow in 1837 conquered the tough sod of the plains that had broken many a wooden plow. New forms of transportation encouraged trade and migration. The Conestoga wagon hauled freight in the East. It's descendant, the prairie schooner, carried settlers westward. Moving people and goods became faster as canals crisscrossed the North. The famous Erie Canal was completed in 1825. Speedier vessels, such as the steamboat, moved inland goods to coastal seaports. Traffic bristled along the Mississippi and other major rivers. In 1869, the Union Pacific and the Centr.fi Pacific railroad lines were joined at Promontory Point, Utah, creating the first transcontinental railroad. The 1752 Franklin uses kite to show that lightning is electricity 1799 First U.S. smallpox vaccine 1798 Whitney produces muskets with interchangeable parts 1807 Robert Fulton's steamboat Clermont sets speed record 1825 Erie Canal opens wagon American introduced, in medical Pennsylvania school, in Philadelphia 1790 Slater builds first U.S. cotton mill, launching industrial revolution in America 1793 Whitney invents the cotton gin 1831 McCormick invents the mechanical reaper 1832 Morse invents the telegraph Newspapers in the eastern United States were soon full of the news, and people touched by gold fever rushed west by the thousands. California had 14,000 residents in 1848. Within a year, 100.000 people were living in the state. The Gold Rush had a tremendous impact on life in California. For Native Americans, the influx of thousands of white immigrants was a disaster. Newly arriving miners not only forced Native Americans to labor in the gold mines, but also spread illness. In 1848 there were roughly 150,000 Native Americans in California. By 1860 only 35.000 remained. Growing Sectional Differences In the 1850s many Americans were convinced that the nation's two main sections, the North and the South, were moving in different directions. New England mill builders adopted a system of belts to harness river power. On the first floor, cotton was combed: on the second floor it was spun into thread; on the third, thread was woven into cloth; and on the fourth, the cloth was dressed, or finished. Geography Why was the Northeast a suitable place to build a factory? Contrasting Economies The North was becoming more and more urban and more industrial than the South. Its population, two and a halftimes as large as the population of the southern states, was becoming even larger and more diverse, as Irish and German immigrants crowded into swelling northern cities. Of the ten largest cities in the United States in 1860, nine were located in the North. Like immigration, new technology had a heavier impact on the North than on the South. The biggest technological change was the appearance of the railroads. Developed in Great Britain in the 1820s, railroads were the quickest, most efficient form of transportation the world had yet known. Most of the new railroad track, some 70 percent, was in the North. The South had tracks, but southern farmers still tended to rely on water transportation to take their crops to market. Like the railroad, another invention—the telegraph—also magnified differences. In contrast, between 1860 and 1890 500,000 patents were issued for inventions such as the typewriter, sewing machine, and phonograph. European investors and American business leaders began to invest heavily in new inventions. This combination of American ingenuity and financial backing helped create new industries and expand old ones. By 1900 Americans' standard of living was among the highest in the world. So too was the nation's industrial productivity—the amount of goods and services created in a given period of time. Now new rails had to be laid between Omaha, Nebraska, and Sacramento, California. Government involvement was vital, since private investors alone could not have funded the massive project. The federal government awarded huge loans and land grants to two private companies. The Central Pacific Railroad began laying track eastward out of Sacramento, The Union Pacific Railroad began work toward the west in Omaha. Most of the workers on the transcontinental railroad were immigrants. Irish workers on the Union Pacific line used pickaxes to dig and level rail beds across the Great Plains at the rate of up to six miles a day. Chinese workers that the Central Pacific had brought to the United States chiseled, plowed, and dynamited their way through the rock, ice, and snow of the Sierra Nevada mountain range. Finally, after seven years of grueling labor, the two crews approached each other in what is now Utah. On May 10, 1869, at a place called Promontory Point, Central Pacific president Leland Stanford raised his hammer to drive the final, golden spike. A telegraph operator beside the track tapped out a message to crowds throughout the country: "Almost ready now. Hats off. Prayer is being offered_Done!" The nation had its first transcontinental railroad. Railroads Improve Transportation In 1850 steam-powered ships still provided much of the nation's transportation. Over the following decades, however, improvements in train and track design, plus the construction of new rail lines, gave railroads a big boost. Before the Civil War most of the nation's railroad tracks were in short lines that connected neighboring cities, mainly in the East. Since there was no standard track width, or gauge, each train could only travel on certain tracks. As a result, goods and passengers often had to be moved to different trains, which caused costly delays. To make matters worse, train travel was dangerous. No system of standard signals existed, and train brakes were unreliable. The Transcontinental Railroad The rail business improved greatly after the Civil War. The key event was the building of the transcontinental railroad, a railway extending from coast to coast. The project began in 1862. By this time rail lines already reached from the East Coast to the Mississippi River. Rail Problems and Solutions By 1870 railroads could carry goods and passengers from coast to coast, but they still had problems. Trains were often noisy, dirty, and uncomfortable for travelers. The huge engines, spewing smoke and cinders as they thundered through the countryside, aroused fear and distrust. In spite of the problems, train travel continued to expand and improve. Steel rails replaced iron rails, and track gauges and signals became standardized. Railroad companies also took steps to improve safety. In 1869 George Westinghouse developed more effective air brakes. In 1887 Granville Woods patented a telegraph system for communicating with moving trains, thus reducing the risk of collision. Railroads and Time Zones Scheduling proved to be another problem for railroads. In the 1800s most towns set their clocks independently, according to solar time. When trains started regular passenger service, they had to be "on time." Time differences from town to town created chaos. In 1883 the railroads adopted a national system of time zones to improve 152 Chapter 4 • Section 1 1864 Contract Labor Ad 1868 Eight-hour day for government employees 1881 First time and motion studies of workers 1887 Major drought ruins many farmers 1893 Illinois limits child labor i 1880 1900 3 Industrialization and Workers Objectives 1 Identify the sources of the growing American work force and the reasons why entire families worked. 2 Describe factory work in the late 1800s. 3 Explain the roles that women and children played in the work force. 4 Key Terms Define: piecework; division of labor. Main Idea Industry relied on its laborers, who worked for low wages and often in unsafe factories. Reading Strategy Predicting Content Look at the pictures and the main headings in this section. Write a prediction of what life was like for factory workers. As you read, compare your predictions with the information presented in the text. The United States was ripe for economic prosperity after the Civil War. Its abundant natural resources, inventive minds, and risk-taking entrepreneurs all played central roles in the nation's industrial expansion. This expansion would not have been possible, however, without the millions of workers who toiled in the factories. The Growing Work Force Around 14 million people immigrated to the United States between I860 and 1900. Most came in the hope of finding work in America's booming industrial centers. During the Civil War, when labor was scarce, the federal government encouraged immigration by passing what has been called the Contract Labor Act. This law, passed in 1864, allowed employers to enter into contracts with immigrants. Employers would pay their cost of passage, and in return, immigrants had to work for a certain amount of time, up to a year. Employers soon began actively recruiting foreign laborers. In another dramatic population shift, some 8 or 9 million Americans moved to cities during the late 1800s. Most of them fled poor economic conditions on the nation's farms. A long drought beginning in 1887, combined with low prices and more competition from foreign wheat producers, left many farm families penniless. Statistics ot the United States. Colonial Times to 1970 Interpreting Graphs The growth of industry in the mid- to late 1800s changed the distribution of the work force. The Big Business of "Bonanza" Farms New machines and farm techniques increased farm output enormously. Owners of large farms now hoped to reap a "bonanza" by supplying food to the growing populations of the East. They began applying to fanning the same organizational ideas then taking hold in industry. As one observer noted: It is no longer left to the small farmer, taking up 160 acres of land, building a log cabin and struggling to secure himself a home. Organized capital is being employed in the work, with all the advantages which organization implies. Companies and partnerships are formed for the cultivation precisely as they are for building railroads, manufactures, etc." —Commercial and Financial Chronicle, 1879 The result was bonanza farms—farms controlled by large businesses and managed by professionals. Specializing in single cash crops raised for sale in massive quantities, bonanza farms promised enormous profits to their investors. The farms' massive output caused problems, however. When the supply of a certain product rose; faster than the demand, the market became glutted and prices fell. Such dips in prices were common. To compensate for falling prices, farmers produced ever larger amounts of wheat, but this only made the oversupply problem worse. The Problem of Debt Falling prices contributed to a constant worn' for farmers: debt. Once farmers invested in machines, they had to raise only the crop for which the machines were designed. If prices for that crop dipped, farmers could not pay off their debts. In some cases, land speculation contributed to farmers' debts. Hoping to profit from rising land prices, some farmers bought more land than they could manage. The burden of a heavy mortgage became unbearable when die bottom fell out of the market. 1 Comstock did not reveal Its greatest riches until 1873. when quartz mills and other mining machinery were brought in. From 1859 to 1879 Comstock mines produced $350 million, of which 55 percent was in silver and 45 percent In gold. Boom and Bust on the Mining Frontier "Gold!" Since the California Gold Rush of 1849, this word alone has conjured up the image of lucky prospectors striking it rich. The reality, however, was far more complicated. "Pikes Peak or Bust!" The gold strike at Sutter's Mill, California, in 1848 was the first of several large strikes in the West. In 1859, rumors of gold strikes in the area of Pikes Peak, Colorado, brought on a stampede of wagons with the words "Pikes Peak or Bust!" scrawled on their sides. Also in 1859, a silver strike in Nevada's famed "Comstock Lode" brought on another rush.t The lure of quick wealth brought people of all colors, ethnic backgrounds, and levels of education into mining towns. Asians, especially men from China who had left railway work, often became miners. While an overwhelming majority of settlers on the mining frontier were men, some women became miners as well. Miners worked and played hard. Widespread gambling and drunkenness gave mining towns reputations for vice. Actually, most towns settled down quickly. In many cases, the arrival of big mining companies brought stability to the settlement. It is unlikely that this man struck it rich panning for gold. Far more successful were those who "mined the miners," or sold goods to the fortune- seekers. Mining Techniques Miners, working alone or in small groups, searched for metal that was close to the surface. Using a technique called placer mining, they shoveled loose dirt into boxes and then ran water over it, causing the heavy minerals to sink to the bottom. Placer mining worked well for finding the loose gold that had washed out of rock and into the streams. Yet before long, all the easily gathered precious metal was gone. By the late 1850s and early 1860s, in fact, most of the precious metals that remained in the West lay locked in quartz and deeply buried. Frontier life created Americans who were ready for adventure, bent on self-improvement, and committed to democracy. Turner's Critics The Turner thesis, as his view came to be called, made certain assumptions that historians have since modified. Turner defined settlers as whites only and saw no difference in the experiences of women and men. His theory was not a complete picture of frontier life because it did not consider the important contributions African Americans and immigrants from Japan and China made to the West. Nor did Turner consider the impact of settlement on Native American and Spanish- speaking inhabitants. Turner concentrated on the effects that individuals had on development, but played down the government subsidies and big business investments that were critical to farming, cattle ranching, and mining. Finally, he disregarded the traditions that immigrants had brought from their homelands and used in helping build the nation. Frontier Realities A far more complex view of the West now prevails. This view more accurately reflects the reality of the settlement of the West. Diverse Western Settlers The West did appeal to the restless, adventurous man, but it also appealed to adventurous women. While many women regretted their family's decision to go west, others embraced the more open society and thrived on the frontier. Still, the West was hardly a land of unlimited opportunity for either men or women. Boom inevitably led to bust, especially when prices fell for the items that settlers produced. Western settlers were not always eastern whites. Chinese and Japanese settlers farmed the fertile lands of the West Coast. Chinese and African American railway workers went into mining and established businesses in western towns. About 9,000 African Americans worked as cowhands on ranches. Thousands of black Exodusters settled the West. Thousands more African Americans served there as soldiers in the United States Army, most notably in the all-black Ninth and Tenth Cavalry Regiments, which Native Americans named the "buffalo soldiers." A Limited View of Democracy Frontier life encouraged certain democratic values. As noted earlier, western states gave women the vote before their eastern counterparts did the same. Yet many settlers rode roughshod over 198 Chapters • Sections the rights of the Native American peoples they displaced. On the West Coast, white settlers treated Asian immigrants with scorn, isolating them in separate neighborhoods and prohibit* ing them from owning land. The Impact on the Land Although in the popular mind the settlement of the West meant progress, the costs to the environment were high. Settlers treated the vast natural resources of the West as if they were limitless. Railroad tunnels destroyed mountains. The construction of huge mines scarred the land and leveled forests. Overcultivation eroded fields, and senseless slaughter nearly wiped out the buffalo. Frontier Myths and National Identity Despite today's deeper understanding of the history of the American West, frontier myths linger on. Through literature, film, and song, they continue to influence how Americans think about themselves. Creating the Myths The romantic image of the American cowboy began as early as the 1870s, in the dime novels of writers like Edward L. Wheeler. In Deadwood Dick, The Prince of the Road: or, the Black Rider of the Black Hills, Wheeler painted a hero who was, at various types, outlaw, miner, gang leader, or cowboy and who dealt out righteous justice against evil. Write down several questions you might ask about the experiences of immigrants around 1900. As you read, note answers to your questions. It was sometimes said that America's streets were paved with gold. This myth held a grain of truth for the millions of immigrants who left a life of utter poverty behind. They came to America because it offered, if not instant wealth, then at least the chance to improve their lives. Some immigrants did get rich here, through hard work and determination. Many more managed to carve out a decent life for themselves and their families. For these immigrants, the chance to come to the United States was indeed a golden opportunity. The Immigrant Experience In the late 1800s, people in many parts of the world were on the move from farms to cities and from one country to another. Immigrants from around the globe were fleeing crop failures, shortages of land and jobs, rising taxes, and famine. Some were also escaping religious or political persecution. Immigrants' Hopes and Dreams The United States received a huge portion of this global migration. In 1860 the resident population of the United States was 31.5 million people. Between 1865 and 1920, close to 30 million additional people entered the country. Some of these newcomers dreamed of getting rich, or at least of receiving free government land through the Homestead Act. Others yearned for personal freedoms. In America, they had heard, everyone could go to school, young men were not forced to serve long years in the army, and citizens could freely take part in a democratic government. Crossing the Ocean In the late 1800s, steam-powered ships could cross the Atlantic Ocean in two to three weeks. By 1900, on more powerful steamships, the crossing took just one week. Even this brief journey, however, could be difficult, especially for those who could not afford cabins. Most immigrants traveled in steerage, a large open area beneath the ship's deck. Steerage offered limited toilet Millions of immigrants brought their belongings and their dreams to the United States in the late 1800s. Chapter 6 • Section 2 211 Number of Immigrants (in thousands) These arrivals on Ellis Island contemplate a bewildering yet promising future in their new homeland. facilities, no privacy, and poor food, but the fare was relatively cheap. Crossing the vast Pacific Ocean took much longer, but the arrangements were similar. Passengers traveled in steerage, with few comforts. Where a person came from, however, could make a difference in the conditions aboard ship. Immigrants from Japan, whose power in the world was growing, often received better treatment than those from China, which at that time was a weak country. Arriving in America Information about the number and origins of the nation's immigrants is not precise. Officials often misidentified the origins of immigrants. About one third of them were "birds of passage." These were usually young, single men who worked for a number of months or years and then returned home. Historians estimate that about 10 million immigrants arrived between 1865 and 1890. European Immigration, 1870-1920 Year Source: Historical Statistics ot the United States. Colonial Times to 1970 Interpreting Graphs The greatest number of immigrants came from Europe. Most came from northern European countries: about 2.8 million from Germany, another 1.8 million from Great Britain, and nearly 1.4 million from Ireland. In the 1890s, the pattern of immigration shifted dramatically. Most new immigrants came from the countries of southern and eastern Europe and the Middle East. Between 1890 and 1920 about 10 million Italians, Greeks, Slavs, Eastern Europeans, Russian Jews, and Armenians arrived. Around 3.8 million immigrants came from Italy alone. From Russia came another 3 million. Until the 1880s, decisions about whom to allow into the country were left to the states. In 1882 the federal government began excluding certain categories of immigrants. In 1891 the Office of the Superintendent of Immigration was formed to determine who was fit for life in America and who was not. Immigrants entered through several ports. European newcomers might come through Boston, Philadelphia, or Baltimore. Asians might enter through San Francisco or .Seattle. Yet more than 70 percent of all immigrants came through New York City, the "Golden Door." Immigrants from Europe Throughout most of the 1800s, immigrants arriving in New York entered at the Castle Garden depot, near the southern tip of Manhattan. In 1892, the federal government opened a huge reception center for steerage passengers on Ellis Island in New York Harbor, near where the Statue of Liberty had been erected in 1886. The statue, a gift from France, celebrated "l iberty Enlightening the World." It became a symbol of the United States as a place of refuge and hope. Physical Exams In 1892 the federal government required all new immigrants to undergo a physical examination. Those that were found to have a contagious disease such as tuberculosis faced quarantine, a time of isolation to prevent the spread of a disease. They could even be deported. People with trachoma, an eye disease common among immigrants, were automatically sent back to their country. Fiorello La Guardia, who later became mayor of New York City, worked as an interpreter at Ellis Island. After their physicals, immigrants showed their documents to officials and then collected their baggage. If they had the address of friends or relatives, they headed off to find them. Those who were on their own had a harder time. Criminals hung around ports with fake offers of lodgings and jobs, stealing money and baggage from the unwary. Where Immigrants Settled Immigrants often sought to live in communities established by previous settlers from their homelands. These communities formed not only in ports of entry, such as New York and Boston, but also in inland cities. In this way, large settlements of Poles and Italians grew in Buffalo, Cleveland, Detroit, and Milwaukee. A diverse group of immigrants found a home in Chicago, a growing port, railroad hub, and industrial center. Some immigrants continued on to mining towns of the West. Only 2 percent went to the South, an area that offered newcomers few jobs. Once settled, immigrants looked for work. When jobs were scarce, employers took advantage of the newcomers. They paid them less than other workers and paid the women even less than the men. Female seamstresses, for example, did the same job as male tailors, working up to 14 hours a day, 6 days a week, but earning only half as much as the men. Immigrants from Asia Most of the immigrants who entered the United States through West Coast ports came from Asia. Chinese and Japanese formed the largest groups by far. Culturally, Asians differed greatly from both Americans and Europeans, and those differences made them targets of suspicion and even hostility. Often as a result, Asian immigrants found that the path to acceptance was especially difficult. Chinese immigrants brought distinctive styles and customs to the United States. In the mid-1800s, American railroad companies recruited about a quarter of a million Chinese workers. More than 12,000 of them helped build the transcontinental railroad, completed in 1869. Like the indentured servants of the colonial era, the Chinese had Chapter 6 " Section2 213 Many people held opinions on how immigrants could best adjust to their new lives in the United States. Some thought they should give up their own language and customs as quickly as possible. Others thought they should hold on to their heritage. A Polish immigrant, 1913 on his neighborhood in New York, compare the statements of the two speakers. to work for their companies until they had paid the cost of their passage and upkeep. Many Chinese immigrants paid their debts, settled down, and began to work in other fields, often side by side with white Americans and European immigrants. Those occupations included mining, fanning, fishing, factory work, food preparation, and laundering. In this way the Chinese contributed to their new country, but that often was not enough to earn the respect of white society. White Americans could not seem to see beyond the different appearance, dress, food, and other foreign aspects of the Chinese. Like many European immigrants, the Chinese avoided hostility by moving into communities already dominated by Chinese immigrants, such as the Chinatown section of San Francisco, American Labor unions fought hard exclude Chinese immigrants. Because the Chinese accepted low wages, they affected the rates of pay of all workers. The unions main- Main Idea Why did Chinese immigrants face hostility? tained that if Chinese laborers kept pouring into California, wage rates there would continue to drop. Other groups claimed the Chinese simply were not worthy of being Americans. Using scientific-sounding but faulty reasoning, anti-Asian movements claimed that Asians were physically and mentally inferior to white Americans. These claims both reflected and helped spread racist attitudes toward Asian immigrants. Congress responded to the demands of unions and others by passing the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882. The act prohibited Chinese laborers from entering the country. It did not, however, prevent entry' by those who had previously established residence or who had family already living in the United States. The act was renewed in 1892 and 1902 and then made permanent. It was not repealed until 1943. In 1910 the federal government built an immigration center on Angel Island in San Francisco Bay, similar to the center on Ellis Island in New York Harbor. T here immigrants underwent a lengthy examination. Besides having to pass medical checks, the Chinese newcomers also had to prove dial they should not be excluded. Japanese Restricted Many of the earliest Japanese to immigrate to the United States came from Hawaii. They had migrated to Hawaii to work on sugar plantations, and when the United States obtained Hawaii in 1898, a number of Japanese saw an opportunity for a better life in America. By 1920 some 200,000 Japanese had arrived through West Coast ports. Most Japanese settled in the Los Angeles area, and soon they were producing a large percentage of southern California's fruits and vegetables. Mainly involved in private business, the Japanese did not compete with union laborers as the Chinese had. Still, labor unions and the political leaders who supported them fought to stop Japanese immigration. More than economic motives were at work, for some acts reflected prejudice against Asians generally. In 1906, for example, the San Francisco school board ruled that all Chinese, Japanese, and Korean children should attend a separate school. The Japanese government condemned this segregation, or forced separation, claiming it violated an 1894 treaty that gave Japanese citizens the right to enter the United States freely. The issue threatened to become an international crisis. In response, President Theodore Roosevelt reached a compromise with Japanese officials in 1907. Named the Gentlemen's Agreement because it was not an official government document, the compromise called on San Francisco to end its school segregation and Japan to stop issuing passports to laborers. Anti-)apanese feeling, however, did not subside. In 1913 California passed the Webb Alien Land Law, which banned alien (nonciti- zen) Asians from owning farmland. Immigration from Mexico Congress passed the Newlands National Reclamation Act to promote the irrigation of southwestern lands. Over the next decade, irrigation turned millions of acres of desert into fertile farmland across Texas, Arizona, New Mexico, and California. The new farmland meant new jobs in the sparsely populated Southwest. Employers hired Mexican laborers to work on farms as well as in mines. More than 100,000 Mexicans headed north between 1900 and 1910. The Mexican Revolution, which began in 1910, increased the flow north over the next decade. When the United States entered World War 1 in 1917, demand increased sharply for laborers to grow and harvest food and mine the copper, coal, and other vital mineraLs needed for the war effort. Around a million Mexicans, 10 percent of Mexico's population, came to the United States during this decade. When the Immigration Restriction Act of 1921 limited immigration from Europe and Asia, labor shortages again drew Mexicans across the border. By 1925 Los Angeles had the largest Spanish-speaking population of any North American city outside of Mexico. Two Immigrant Portraits Facts and figures tell only a part of the story of immigration in the llnited States. The drama behind the figures is best revealed in the accounts of ordinary people, whose lives and experiences reflect the struggles and triumphs of living day to day in a new land. Sadie Frowne, Polish Immigrant Sadie Frowne's early years in her native Poland were happy. Her mother kept a grocer's shop and worked in the fields with her husband. Sadie helped out with chores whenever she could. When Sadie was 10, however, her father died. Unable to support themselves, Sadie and her mother looked to the United States, where they hoped to build a new life. Sadie's aunt, who lived in New York City, collected donations to pay for their passage to America. In 1898, 13-year-old Sadie and her mother made the 12-day Atlantic crossing: There were hundreds of voicesJ other pe0p|e packed in with us, men, women and children, and almost all of them were sick. We thought we should die, but at last the voyage was over, and we came up and saw the beautiful bay and the big woman with the spikes on her head and the lamp that is lighted at night in her hand.5* —Sadie Frowne In New York Sadie worked as a live-in servant. Her mother found a job as a garment worker. Tragedy then struck again when Sadie's mother contracted a fatal case of tuberculosis, a disease then raging through the crowded neighborhoods of New York City. Now she would have to support herself. Sadie landed a new job as a skirt maker, earning $4 for a six-dav week. She rented a room with another young woman for $1.50 a week. By keeping her expenses down, Sadie was now able to set aside a dollar a week for "clothing and pleasure" and another dollar for savings. She went to school at night to learn English. She also worked to improve her sewing skills, found a better job, and moved to a nicer place in Brooklyn. With constant work, sacrifice, and determination, Sadie was living out the dream of millions of immigrants. It was a dream of simple comforts, modest prosperity and the chance for a better life. Take Eto, Japanese Picture Bride Tameji Eto came to the United States from Japan in 1904. After working as a farmhand he became a foreman for the Pacific Coast Railroad Company. He earned enough to lease land for his own farm. Treasured items from home, such as this stuffed bear and set of spoons, helped provide a link between an immigrant's old life and new. Chapter 6 • Section 2 215 Japanese picture brides, such as these women in traditional dress, looked with both hope and apprehension to life in a new land with new husbands they had never met. Culture What other social challenges do you think new immigrants faced in the United States? Tameji began to think of settling down and starting a family. Because few lapanese women had immigrated to the United States, Tameji's thoughts turned to Take, the sister of one of his school friends back in Japan. He wrote her family to ask permission to marry' her. Nineteen-year-old Take had no memory' of Tameji. Yet her parents insisted that she agree to the arranged marriage, and Take accepted the proposal Clutching Tameji's photograph, her only means of identifying her future husband, she sailed for the United States. On board ship, Take met other "picture brides," women w'hose marriages had been arranged through the exchange of photographs across the Pacific Ocean. Like her companions, Take spent the voyage trying to adapt to strange foods and wondering about her future. After her arrival and a 10-day quarantine for an eye infection. Take finally met Tameji. Luckily, he looked like his picture, "straight and tall with lots of hair,'' and he also seemed kind. Together they set out for Tameji's land in the frontier town of Grand Arroyo, California. For Take the frontier life posed a challenge, but one she accepted. She later told one of her eight children that farming the semiarid California land "was not easy, but it was my future as well as [Tameji's], and 1 wanted to be a part of it. Father never demanded I work so hard. I did it because it was necessary' and I wanted to." The Etos' hard work paid off, and by 1919 they had enough money to buy their own farm. Because of the Webb Alien Land Law, however, they had to buy land under the name of a white friend. After some difficult years, the farm did well. Lake cared for her children and cooked for a farm crew of 40 to 50 men. Finally, after 15 years of hard work, the Etos could afford a journey back to Japan to see their parents and tell them of their success in America. Comprehension 1. Key Terms Define: (a) steerage; (b) quarantine; (c) Chinese Exclusion Act; (d) segregation; (e) Gentlemen's Agreement; (f) alien. 2. Summarizing the Main Idea Where did various groups of immigrants settle once they had entered the United States? 3. Organizing Information Create a Venn diagram to compare the experiences of European, Asian, and Mexican immigrants. Critical Thinking 4. Analyzing Time Lines Review the time line at the start of the section. How do the entries reflect varying attitudes toward immigration? 5. Drawing Conclusions Why do you think steamships have a steerage area for immigrants? Writing Activity 6. Writing a Persuasive Essay Write a letter that Sadie Frowne or Take Eto might have written to persuade a relative in her former homeland that she did the right thing by coming to the United States. 216 Chapter 6 * Section 2 Property damage estimates reached $200 million, the equivalent of $2 billion today. A similar fire in Boston the following year caused the equivalent of nearly $1 billion damage. Contagious diseases, including cholera, malaria, tuberculosis, diphtheria, and typhoid, thrived in crowded tenement conditions. Epidemics, such as the yellow fever that swept through Memphis, Tennessee, in the late 1870s and through New Orleans, Louisiana, in the early 1900s, took thousands of lives. Children were especially vulnerable to disease. In New York City, in one district of tenements, 6 out of 10 babies died before their first birthday. Ghettos Some urban neighborhoods became ghettos, areas in which one ethnic or racial group dominated. Many newly arrived immigrants chose to live near others of their ethnic group because of the comfort of familiar language and traditions. We know now that there is no way out; that the 'system' that was the evil offspring of public neglect and private greed has come to stay, a storm-centre forever of our civilization. Nothing is left but to make the best of a bad bargain." —Jacob Riis, I low the Other Half Lives, 1890 In order to document his reporting, Riis mastered the new technology of flash photography. Drawings based on those photographs appeared in his books, and he showed the actual photographs of overcrowded rooms and run-down buildings in his lectures on the plight of immigrants. As a result of Riis's work, New York State passed the nation's first meaningful laws to improve tenements, pi The Results of City Growth Some city residents could avoid urban problems simply by leaving the cities. The middle and upper classes began moving to the suburbs in the late 1800s. As a result, the gap between the well-to-do and the poor widened. A few cities preserved areas for the most wealthy residents near the city center. These areas include Boston's Beacon Hill, Chicago's Gold Coast, and San Francisco's Nob Hill. Often, people living in these neighborhoods also owned country estates and were quite isolated from the nearby poverty. Political Divisions Rapid urban growth put pressure on city officials to improve police and fire protection, transportation systems, sewage disposal, electrical and water sendee, and health care. To deliver these services, cities raised taxes and set up offices to deal with people's needs. Increased revenue and responsibilities gave city governments more power. Competition among groups for control of city government grew more intense. Some groups represented the remaining middle and upper classes. Others represented new immigrants and workers. The Rise of Political Bosses Out of these clashing interests, the political machine was born. This was an unofficial city organization 220 Chapter 6 • Section3 Reading Tables and Analyzing Statistics Statistical tables present large amounts of numerical data clearly and concisely. 1'he patterns suggested by statistics must be carefully analyzed, however, and their sources evaluated for reliability. Statistics should be verified by other historical evidence. Use the following steps to read and interpret the data below. 1. Determine what type of information is presented and decide whether the source is reliable. The title of the table and the labels for the rows and columns tell you what information is presented. The source is usually found below the table, (a) What is the table's title? (b) How many decades are covered? Objectives 1 Describe the efforts in the late 1800s to control immigration and personal behavior. 2 Explain how different movements helped the needy. 3 Key Terms Define: nativism; temperance movement; prohibition; vice; social gospel movement; settlement house. Main Idea A variety of groups worked to improve social, economic, and political conditions in the cities. Reading Strategy Reinforcing Key Ideas Write down these headings: Controlling Immigrants and Helping the Needy. As you read, list under the correct heading strategies used to reform cities. In 1890 New York City had as many Italians as the city of Naples, Italy, and as many Germans as Hamburg, Germany. It had twice as many Irish as Dublin, Ireland, and twice as many Jews as Warsaw, Poland. Other cities around the country also attracted large numbers of immigrants. The many Americans migrating from the countryside boosted urban populations further. This steady stream of people to the cities brought serious problems that needed solutions. Controlling Immigration and Behavior Many Americans linked all the problems of the cities to the new immigrants. By controlling immigrants, they hoped to restore what they believed was a past of purity and virtue. Groups were formed to pursue this goal. Some sought to keep immigrants out, while others wanted to control their behavior. Nativism In the 1850s the Know-Nothing party had gained many followers by vowing to restrict immigration. Thirty years later this policy of nativism, or favoring native-born Americans over immigrants, reappeared. The rise of immigrants to positions of power in the cities helped provoke this new wave of antifor- eign bias. Passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882 showed how politically effective the new nativists were. Nativists did not oppose only Asian immigration. The American Protective Association, a nativist This 1885 brochure reflects the fear that hiring immigrants would lower wages. group founded in 1887, also targeted immigrants in general. It called for the teaching of only American culture and the English language in schools and demanded tighter rules on citizenship and employment of aliens. Nativists won a victory in 1885, when Congress repealed the Contract Labor Act. Passed in 1864, the law had allowed employers to recruit foreign laborers. Even after the law's repeal, however, employers often illegally brought in foreign workers to replace striking Chapter 6 • Section 4 22 3 The caption on this cartoon reads "Uncle Sam is a man of strong features." Diversity What does the cartoon suggest about the artist's view of immigration? Main Idea How did some Americans want to change the customs of immigrants? employees. Such actions only heightened nativist feelings among workers. There were nativists among the wealthy as well. The Immigration Restriction League was organized in 1894 by some recent graduates of Harvard College. The League hoped to exclude immigrants considered unfit by forcing them to pass literacy tests. Its main targets were immigrants from southern and eastern Europe, whose cultures differed greatly from those of League members. Prohibition Like nativisin, another movement begun before the Civil War saw a revival later in the 1800s: the temperance movement, an organized campaign to eliminate alcohol consumption. Three groups dominated the new temperance movement: the Prohibition party, founded in 1869, the Woman's Christian Temperance Union, founded in 1874, and the Anti-Saloon League, founded in 1893. These groups opposed drinking on the grounds that it led to personal tragedies. They supported prohibition, a ban on the manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages. Prohibition groups also opposed drinking because of what they saw as the links among saloons, immigrants, and political bosses. Immigrant men often used saloons as social clubs, where they could relax and also pick up information about jobs. Prohibitionists believed that saloons undermined public morals. Some prohibitionists even claimed that saloons formed the center of a movement to take over the United States. "Foreign control or conquest is rapidly making us un-Christian, with immorality throned in power," one prohibitionist wrote in 1908. Had foreigners used "armies and fleets," he declared, they could not have achieved greater control. Purity Crusaders As cities grew, drugs, gambling, prostitution, and other forms of vice became big business. Vice (immoral or corrupt behavior) was not unique to the cities. But large urban populations made vice highly visible and very profitable. Then as now, many residents fought to rid their communities of unwholesome and illegal activities. "Purity crusaders" led the way. In 1873 Anthony Comstock founded the New York Society for the Suppression of Vice. The following year he won passage of a law that prohibited sending obscene materials through the United States mail. Material deemed obscene included descriptions of methods to prevent unwanted pregnancy. For decades the Comstock Law, as it came to be known, slowed the distribution of information about birth control. Other purity crusaders attacked urban political machines, saying that machine- controlled police forces profited from vice. Police were known to demand payment from gamblers, for example, in return for ignoring illegal activities. On occasion, purity crusaders joined forces with other reformers to run for public office. By campaigning on an anti-vice platform, some succeeded in throwing machine candidates out of office. Usually the political machines regained power in later elections by mocking the self-righteous tone of many purists and by arguing that morality was a personal issue. Helping the Needy Another group of reformers, moved by social conscience or religious idealism, preferred to improve society by helping the needy. They argued that prosperous Americans should fight poverty and improve unwholesome social conditions in cities. The Charity Organization Movement In 1882 losephine Shaw Lowell founded the New York Charity Organization Society (COS). The COS tried to make charity a scientific enterprise. Members kept detailed files on those who received help. In this way COS leaders could more easily determine how to serve their clients. Yet keeping detailed files also allowed COS leaders to distinguish between the poor whom they considered worthy of help and those whom they deemed unworthy. This attitude sometimes led to unkind treatment of the needy. Some charity reformers interfered in the lives of immigrants. One clergyman who worked in a southern Italian neighborhood claimed that social workers burst into homes of immigrant women. There they "upset the usual routine of their lives, opening windows, undressing children, giving orders not to eat this and that, not to wrap babies in swaddling clothes." Many COS members wanted immigrants to adopt American, middle-class standards of child-raising, cooking, and cleaning. They did not care how strange these customs seemed to people with different cultural backgrounds. This disturbed some immigrants, but others were grateful for the advice and assistance. The Social Gospel Movement In the 1880s and 1890s, urban churches began to provide social services for the poor who now surrounded them. They also tried to aim prohibition and purity campaigns in new directions. Instead of blaming immigrants for drinking, gambling, and other behaviors, the churches sought to treat the misfortunes that drove people into such activities. Soon a social reform movement developed within religious institutions. Called the social gospel movement, it sought to apply the gospel (teachings) of Jesus directly to society and focused on the gospel ideals of charity and justice, especially by seeking labor reforms. In 1908, followers of such views formed the Federal Council of the Churches of Christ. This organization supported improved living conditions and a larger share in the national off on burns ken pours puls pours art takes are placet! pours out The wife She lakes off trie in. Some reformers focused their efforts on helping immigrants adjust to life in the United States. This immigrant is learning English. Culture What else is she learning? wealth for all workers. Other religious organizations, including some Jewish synagogues, adapted the social gospel ideal for themselves. The Settlement Movement Thousands of young, educated women and men put the social gospel into practice in an innovative reform program called the settlement movement. These young reformers would move into a house in the midst of a poor neighborhood. From this settlement house, a kind of community center, they offered social services. The settlement movement had begun in Britain. Its founders believed that simply giving money to the poor never really helped them. In order to find out what would be most helpful, social workers had to live in poor neighborhoods. There they could witness the effects of poverty firsthand. In 1889, inspired by the British settlement movement, Jane Addams and Ellen Gates Starr bought the rundown Charles Hull mansion in Chicago. They repaired it and opened its doors to their immigrant neighbors. At first, Starr and Addams simply wanted to get to know them, offering help when needed. Soon they began anticipating and responding to the needs of the community as a whole. Over the decades that followed, Addams and Starr turned Hull House into a center of community activity. What ethnic and racial backgrounds are reflected in the faces of your classmates? Listen to conversations on the streets of a large city. You may hear people speaking languages such as Spanish, Vietnamese, French, Russian, and Japanese. The United States has always I Family of immigrants arriving benefited from the at Ellis Island in 1905 intelligence and hard work of its immigrants. Yet some Americans have felt threatened by the continued arrival of immigrants and have called for measures to restrict immigration. The Impact Today More than 20 million people came to the United States between 1890 and 1920. Some Americans viewed this surge of immigration as a threat to their way of life. Most Americans at that time were of northern and western European ancestry, and an increasing share of the new immigrants came from eastern and southern Europe, China, and Japan. In the 1920s, widespread fear of foreigners prompted Congress to pass laws limiting immigration, especially from countries outside northern and western Europe. These laws set quotas, or numerical limits, on the number of immigrants allowed from certain countries. This country-based quota system remained in effect until 1965. A new immigration law in that year established broader quotas of 120,000 immigrants from the Western Hemisphere, 170.000 from the Eastern Hemisphere, and 20.000 from any one nation. Immigration policy continues to be debated and revised. The Immigration Act of 1990 raised the overall immigration quota. Laws passed in 1986 and 1996 sought to halt the tide of illegal immigration, for example by toughening the penalties for smuggling people into the country. Many Americans call for additional changes in immigration policy. List reasons why public schools expanded during the late 1800s. 2 Describe the higher education opportunities that were available after the Civil War. 3 Examine the views of W.E.B. Du Bois on civil rights and education for African Americans. 4 Key Terms Define: literacy; assimilation; philanthropist; Niagara Movement. Main Idea Education was a lofty goal that was out of reach for most nineteenth-century Americans. As the century came to a close, however, more and more Americans gained the opportunity to learn. Reading Strategy Reinforcing Main Ideas As you read the section, make a list of examples of how educational opportunities expanded between 1870 and 1910. Americans had long understood that a democratic society functioned best when its citizens could read and write. By the late 1800s, however, an education had become more than just a worthy goal. For a growing number of Americans, it was a necessary first step toward economic and social success. In recognition of this fact and in response to public demand, educational opportunities expanded. The Growth of Public Schools By the time of the Civil War, more than half of the nation's white children were attending the nation's free public schools. Because most children had to help their families earn a living, however, many left school at an early age. A high school diploma was still the exception. In 1870, only 2 percent of all 17-year-olds graduated from high school. An even lower percentage of students went on to college. The vast majority of American children attended school for only a few years and acquired only basic skills. As industries grew after the Civil War, young people came to realize that they needed more than basic skills to advance in life. Parents began pressuring local governments to increase school funding and lengthen the school year. At the same time, reformers pressured state governments to limit child labor. By 1900, 32 states had laws that required children between the ages of 8 and 14 to attend school. Although unevenly enforced, these laws had a powerful effect. By 1910 nearly 60 percent of American children attended school, with more than a million students in high school. Immigrants and Education Many immigrants placed a high value on American public education. In the mid-1890s, the Russian immigrant father of author Mary Antin was proud to send his children to a Boston public school, convinced "there was no surer way to their advancement and happiness." One of the most important functions of the public schools was to teach literacy skills. Literacy is the ability to read and write. For many immigrants, learning to read and write English was an important achievement in their Colonial Times to 1970 Interpreting Graphs The expansion of education meant more students in classrooms, such as this one in Nebraska in 1895. Culture How do the illiteracy figures above show the success of the push for expanding education? Some parents resisted Americanization. Fearing that their children would forget their heritage, many parents sent their children to religious schools where they could learn their own cultural traditions in their native languages. For example, Polish parents in Chicago in the early 1900s sent their children to Roman Catholic schools. There, Polish history and religion were taught in Polish, and American history, bookkeeping, and algebra were taught in English. Of course, the process of Americanization was not a one-way street. The contact between Americans and newer immigrants, both in public schools and in the wider society, allowed for a constant sharing of cultural traditions. As immigrants shared customs and habits from their homelands, they enriched their new country and helped to redefine American culture itself. Uneven Support for Schools Though state and local government support for education was expanding, not everyone benefited equally. This is because most schools throughout the country were segregated. Compared to white schools, schools for African Americans received far less money. Writing of her upbringing in Durham, North Carolina, in the 191 Os, civil rights activist Pauli Murray remembered vividly the contrast between "what we had and what the white children had." She noted: quest to succeed in the United States. Adults attended school at night to learn English and civics, which they needed to qualify for citizenship. Beyond teaching basic literacy skills, public schools also played a role in assimilating immigrants into the American way of life. Assimilation is the process by which people of one culture become part of another culture. Public school teachers taught their students about American standards of thrift, patriotism, and hard work. Students also learned how to cook traditional American foods and play American games like baseball. As a result of their schooling, many immigrant children became Americanized. We got the greasy, torn, dog- voicEsj eared (jookg. they got the new ones. They had field day in the city park; we had it on a furrowed, stubby hillside. They got wide mention in the newspaper; we got a paragraph at the bottom. We came to know that whatever we had was always inferior.55 —Pauli Murray Mexican Americans in parts of the Southwest and many Asians in California were also sent to separate schools that were less well funded than those for white children. Historical Statistics of the United States. Colonial Times to 1970 I Interpreting Tables Violence against African Americans was an alarmingly frequent phenomenon in the late 1800s. In spite of vocal protests, mobs had killed more than 3,000 African Americans by the 1920s. Government Why do you think lynch mobs were rarely pursued or caught? they were merely individuals who were unlucky enough to be in the wrong place at the wrong time. The seizure sometimes included a mock trial, torture, and even mutilation, before the victim was hanged and riddled with bullets. Those who carried out these horrors were rarely pursued or caught, much less punished. Although most lynchings took place in the South, African Americans in the North were sometimes lynched as well. been secretly transferred to another city, a mob of several thousand white citizens attacked, looted, and burned black businesses and homes and killed two elderly African Americans. The Illinois state militia gained control of the mob only after two days. African Americans Resist Discrimination As conditions for African Americans deteriorated, black leaders began to seek new approaches to race problems. For example, Bishop Henry M. Turner of the African Methodist Episcopal church advocated black pride and emigration to Africa. Others criticized Booker T. Washington for his silence on such issues as lynching. Such attacks ignored Washington's quiet support for legal cases against segregation and his financial support for civil rights and black businesses. As you read in Section 1, a number of outspoken African Americans caine togelher under the leadership ofW.E.B. Du Bois in 1905 to denounce all discrimination. Meeting in Niagara Falls, Ontario, Canada, they vowed never it) accept "inferiority," bow to "oppres- sion," or apologize "before insult." "We do not hesitate to complain, and to complain loudly and insistently," they warned. The Niagara Movement, as this group came to be called, gained only about 400 members and won few victories. After the 1908 Springfield race riot, however, its members joined with concerned white citizens to discuss solutions to the conflict between the races. Conditions in the North Decline Many African Americans, though realizing that life in the North was far from perfect, moved there in part to escape legal segregation. What they found instead was de facto discrimination, or discrimination "in fact" instead of by law. Northern schools, housing, and employment were effectively segregated. As many African Americans moved north, they began to compete with white Americans and recent immigrants for work in the industrial cities. Whites' fears of racial equality erupted in the form of race riots in 1900 in New York City and in 1908 in Springfield, Illinois. The Springfield riot was touched off when authorities refused to release a black prisoner charged with rape to a crowd of white citizens. After learning that the prisoner had Main Idea How did some African Americans respond to legal segregation in the South? The NAACP Maiy White Ovington, a white social worker who had worked in black neighborhoods, was among the concerned individuals. She helped organize a national conference on the "Negro Question" to be held on Lincoln's birthday in 1909. Niagara Movement leaders attended. The following year, this interracial group founded the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). By 1914 the NAACP had 50 branches and 6,000 members. Its magazine. Crisis, edited by Du Bois, reached more than 30,000 readers. The organization worked primarily through the courts. It won its first major victory when the Supreme Court declared grandfather clauses in voting restriction law's unconstitutional in 1915. In the decades ahead, the NAACP would remain a vital force in the fight for civil rights. 244 Chapter 7 • Section3 African American Achievement African American mutual aid and benefit societies also multiplied in this period. Social workers and church groups founded settlement houses in black neighborhoods. The Young Men's and Young Women's Christian Associations developed separate recreational and guidance programs for African American youth. The National Urban League, founded in 1911, improved job opportunities and housing for blacks. Also during this period, African American intellectuals began to publish literature, history, and groundbreaking sociological studies. Black-owned businesses appeared everywhere. To help them, Booker T. Washington founded the National Negro Business League in 1900. By 1907 it had 320 branches. In 1912 Madam C. J. Walker spoke at the annual meeting of the Negro Business League. She was a notable example of African American achievement at the turn of the century. Born Sarah Breedlove, Walker came from a family of ex-slaves and sharecroppers. Her first seven years were spent on a Louisiana cotton plantation. Then, after the death of her parents, she moved to Vicksburg, Mississippi, to work as a servant. She later moved to St. Louis, where she worked for 17 years laundering clothes. "I got myself a start by giving myself a start," Walker would later say. She did so by developing her own preparations to style the hair of African American women. Walker moved to Denver, Colorado, in 1905, where she married C. J. Walker, a newspaper sales agent. There she set up a prosperous mail-order business for her hair products. She also established a chain of beauty parlors and training schools. By 1916 her company claimed 20,000 employees. Her business was a great success and Walker moved to Harlem, in New York City, an area that had begun to attract African American residents. Her Harlem town house and later her estate in Irvington-on-Hudson, New York, became gathering places for the country's African American leaders. Walker supported black welfare, education, and civil rights work with large contributions. She also made many speeches for the antilynching drives of the NAACP and for African American women's organizations. "The girls and women of our race must not be afraid to take hold of business endeavor," she said in her 1913 speech to the Negro Business League. "1 want to say to every Negro woman present, don't sit down and wait for the opportunities to come.... Get up and make them!" George Washington Carver rose from slavery to become an important agricultural scientist. He is most famous for his work on peanuts. Comprehension 1. Key Terms Define: (a) poll tax; (b) grandfather clause; (c) Jim Crow; (d) Plessy v. Ferguson; 1916 US acquired Canal Zone. 1904 Canal completed, 1914 This map shows how frequently the United States intervened in the affairs of Latin American countries in the early 1900s. The United States government defended these interventions as necessary for the protection of the nation's economic and political interests. Place What form did most of these interventions take? Chapter B • Section 4 279 The National Security League, having won its battle for preparedness, began to preach "100 Percent Americanism." Early in 1917 the League got Congress to pass, over Wilson's veto, a literacy test for immigrants. This test excluded those who could not read English or some other language. As it turned out, relatively few immigrants failed the test. Still, the test set the stage for a vigorous revival of nativism. "Hate the Hun!" Once the United States declared war, alertness for spies approached hysteria. The war also spurred a general hostility toward Germans. People began calling them Huns, in reference to an Asiatic people who brutally invaded Europe in the fourth and fifth centuries. German composers and musicians were banned from symphony concerts. German measles became "liberty measles," and a hamburger (which was named after Hamburg, a German city) became a "liberty sandwich." Yet it was a mob of Americans who showed brutality and hatred in April 1918, when they lynched German-born citizen Robert Prager near St. Louis. Despite his German heritage. "I am afraid we are going to have a good many instances of people roughly treated on very slight evidence of disloyalty," wrote Secretary of War Newton Baker. Indeed, as this 1917 photograph shows, anti-German feeling in the United States led to the arrest of many citizens of German descent. Government How did government policies such as the Sedition Act contribute to nativist hatred? Prager had in fact tried to enlist in the navy. His lynching was but one of numerous wartime attacks on people of German descent. Repression of Civil Liberties In his message to Congress in 1917, calling for war on Germany, Wilson had claimed that the Lfnited States would be fighting for liberty and democracy. His claim offended those who suffered from wartime restrictions on their civil liberties. In that same war message Wilson warned that disloyalty would be "dealt with with a firm hand of stern repression." Accordingly, Congress in 1917 passed the Espionage Act, which made it illegal to interfere with the draft. The Espionage Act was amended in 1918 by the Sedition Act. (Sedition is speech or actions that encourage rebellion.) The Sedition Act made it illegal to obstruct the sale of Liberty Bonds or to discuss anything "disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive" about the American form of government, the Constitution, or the army and navy. The government pursued more than 1,500 prosecutions and won more than 1,000 convictions. Socialist and former presidential candidate Eugene Debs drew a ten-year jail sentence for criticizing the American government and business leaders and urging people to "resist militarism." Controlling Political Radicals Socialists such as Debs argued that the war was merely a quarrel among imperialist capitalists. This view became a rallying point for antiwar sentiment In the elections of 1917 in New York, Ohio, and Pennsylvania, socialists made impressive gains. The radical labor organization Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) also gained new supporters. Its membership of western miners, migrant farm workers, and other unskilled laborers supported the IWW's goal of overthrowing capitalism. The views of socialists and the IWW distressed moderate labor leaders like Samuel Gompers, who had pledged union cooperation with the war effort. The police hounded the IWW. Raids in September 1917 led to the conviction of nearly 200 members in trials held in Illinois, California, and Oklahoma. Groups of vigilantes, citizens who take the law into their own hands, lynched and horsewhipped others. 324 Chapter 10 • Section 4 Changing People's Lives American patriotism and war fever made military styles and activities more acceptable at home. Scouting programs for boys and girls, involving military-style uniforms, marching, and patriotic exercises, grew in popularity. Military drill became part of many school programs. By the summer of 1918, all able-bodied males in colleges and universities became army privates, subject to military discipline. Social Mobility for Minorities and Women Americans turned away from military styles and activities after the war. But other social changes had more lasting effects. The war cut off the flow of immigrants from Europe, and the armed forces took many young men out of the labor pool. Businesses, especially war-related industries, suddenly needed workers. These wartime conditions propelled some people into higher paid jobs. Factories that used to discriminate against African Americans and Mexican Americans now actively recruited them. The African Americans who left the South to work in northern factories added to a steady stream of migrants that had started in the late 1800s. The stream turned into a Hood during the war, when some 500,000 African Americans joined what came to be called the Great Migration. Women, too, benefited from the diminished work force. Some women found jobs on farms, thanks to organizations such as the Women's Land Army. Others moved into jobs previously closed to them, such as telegraph messenger, elevator operator, and letter carrier. A few earned management positions. As a result of the war, about 400,000 women joined the industrial work force for the first time. In 1917 a speaker for the Women's Trade Union League proclaimed, "At last, after centuries of disabilities and discrimination, women are coming into the labor and festival of life on equal terms with men." Such pronouncements, while premature, celebrated what seemed like a major social change. Prohibition Finally Passes In 1917 the temperance movement was almost a century old. In that year Congress proposed the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution, which made it illegal to manufacture, sell, or transport alcoholic beverages in the United States. Members of Congress backed the Eighteenth Amendment in part to show patriotism during wartime. The production of alcohol used a lot of grain, which was now needed to make the bread to feed people at home and overseas. The states ratified the Prohibition Amendment in 1919. The IWW gained strength during World War I. It also became the target of the government's effort to control political radicals. Comprehension 1. Key Terms Define: (a) Liberty Bond; (b) price controls: (c) rationing; (d) daylight saving time; (e) sedition; (f) vigilante. 2. Summarizing the Main Idea What special powers did new government agencies have over industry and labor during the war? 3. Organizing Information Create a chart to show the steps the government took to finance the war, manage the economy, and boost Americanism. Critical Thinking 4. Analyzing Time Lines Review the time line at the start of the section. Which event do you think did the most to change Americans' lives? Explain. 5. Demonstrating Reasoned Judgment Do you think the Sedition Act was a good way to deai with critics during wartime? Explain. Writing Activity 6. Writing a Persuasive Essay Write an essay in the form of a speech for one of the "four- minute men," Before you begin, decide who your audience is and craft your speech to persuade that audience to buy war bonds. Chapter lO > Section 4 32 5 leaders. Britain, France, Japan, and the United Slates, whose investments in Russia had been seized by Bolsheviks, backed the Whites. After two bloody years, millions of deaths, and widespread destruction, the Reds triumphed in 1920. In time their new nation became known as the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), or the Soviet Union. Lenin made communism the official ideology of the Soviet Union. As practiced in the Soviet Union, communism meant the following: (1) The government owned all land and property. (2) A single political party controlled the government. (3) Individuals had no rights that the government was bound to respect. (4) The government vowed to stir up revolutions in other countries and spread communism throughout the world. The Communist system was openly hostile to American beliefs and values, such as capitalism, private ownership of land and business, and First Amendment freedoms. As early as 1919 a red scare, an intense fear of communism and The case of Sacco and Vanzetti inspired much protest, including this piece of folk art. Government Why did the artist include a plea for a fair trial? other extreme ideas, gripped the United States. Americans called for known Communists to be jailed or driven out of the country. Schenck v. U.S. A 1919 Supreme Court decision seemed to some people to justify jailing Communists. During World War I, a war opponent named Charles Schenck had mailed letters to men who were drafted, urging them not to report for duty. He was convicted of breaking the Espionage Act, a wartime law aimed at spies and people who opposed the war. 1 le appealed the case, claiming that he was only exercising his right to speak freely. In the Court's written opinion. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., said that the government was justified in silencing free speech when there is a "clear and present danger" to the nation. He compared what Schenck had done to shouting "Fire!" in a crowded theater, which would cause a dangerous panic. The Palmer Raids As the red scare heightened, the United States government began a campaign to identify and root out groups whose activities posed a "clear and present danger" to the country. In 1919 the Justice Department, headed by Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer, set up a special force to conduct raids and arrest suspected "subversives" (people trying to subvert, or overthrow, the government). Palmer's targets included Communists, socialists, and anarchists. Palmer's force jailed thousands of people. Most had been born overseas. Many were innocent of any crime. More than 500 immigrants were deported, or sent back to their homelands, although they had not been convicted of any crime. Palmer received strong support at first. The army's chief of staff urged that those deported be sent away on "ships of stone with sails of lead," and popular preacher Billy Sunday suggested that a firing squad would save money on ships. The red scare reached such a fever that in January 1920 the New York Stale Assembly voted to expel five members wrho were socialists. Yet the five had been legally elected and had broken no rules or laws. People were outraged that the assembly had ignored the public's right to elect whomever they wanted. Sacco and Vanzetti The red scare played a part in one of the most controversial events in United States history. The story began on April 15, 1920, when gunmen robbed and killed the guard and 342 Chapter 11 • Section 1 Union Membership and Work Stoppages, 1916-1920 paymaster of a shoe factory in South Braintree, Massachusetts. A few weeks later, police arrested two Italian immigrants in connection with the crime. One, Nicola Sacco, was a shoemaker, while the other, Bartolomeo Vanzetti, was a fish peddler. Both were carrying guns when they were arrested, and Sacco's was the same model used in the crime. Yet many Americans suspected that the real reason the two men were accused of the crime was that they were immigrants. The case drew international attention and controversy. Sacco and Vanzetti were soon convicted and sentenced to die. Their case was appealed to higher courts again and again for years, but their conviction was upheld.t In 1927, Sacco and Vanzetti were electrocuted. Source: Historical Statistics ot the United States. Colonial Times to 1970 Source: Historical Statistics ot the United States Colonial Times to 1970 Interpreting Graphs The post-World War I years were stormy ones for labor and business. The number of annual strikes was high and union membership was on the rise Economics Based on this information, how would you summarize the condition of organized labor in 1920? Labor Strikes One cause of the red scare was a wave of labor unrest in 1919. Many Americans were convinced that Communists were behind the strikes. Most of the unrest, however, had a simpler cause. In early 1919 food prices and rents shot up, and by 1920 the cost of living was more than double prewar levels. The Boston Police Strike Boston police officers had not received a pay increase since the start of World War I. In the fall of 1919, they decided they had had enough of sacrifice. When 19 officers were fired for union activity, the whole force voted to strike. With police off the job, rioting soon broke out in Boston. Massachusetts governor Calvin Coolidge called out the state guard. "There is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody, anywhere, anytime," Coolidge said. The future President gained national attention for his firm response to the strike. t Investigators in 1961 reexamined Sacco's gun and found that it was indeed the murder weapon, although it had never been proven that it was Sacco who fired the gun. On the 50th anniversary of the executions. August 23. 1977, Massachusetts governor Michael Dukakis decreed that Sacco and Vanzetti had not received their right to a fair trial. Steel and Coal Strikes Meanwhile, steelworkers in Gary, Indiana, and several other cities struck in 1919. Claiming that the strike was the work of Communists, the United States Steel Corporation used force to break it. The corporation's private police force killed 18 strikers and beat hundreds more.Tf Another strike in that troubled fall of 1919 look place in the coal fields. The United Mine Workers of America (UMW) had made a no- strike agreement during the war, hut they claimed the agreement ended with the armistice. The government claimed the agreement was still in effect. When the workers struck for a shorter work week and better pay. Attorney General Palmer got a court to order strikers back to work. Although the UMW canceled the strike, it did manage to get its workers a raise. After hitting its high point in 1919, strike activity declined during the 1920s, as the economy boomed and wages rose. Union membership dropped during 1921 and 1922, and did not grow again through the rest of the decade. tt A follow-up investigation produced the 'Report on the Steel Strike ot 1919," which helped limit working hours in the steel industry. Chapter 11 * Section 1 343 Immigration from Regions of Europe Year Source: Histonc.il Statistics of the United States. Colonial Times to 1970 Interpreting Graphs The 1921 cartoon at left satirized American immigration restriction. Government Describe the effect of Harding's immigration policies on the number of immigrants from eastern and southern Europe as shown by the graph above. Republican Leadership Strikes, arrests, revolution overseas—such events frightened Americans in the 1920s, and they turned to the Republican party to maintain stability. In a remarkable solidifying of its power, the Republican party' dominated all three branches of government. Republican Presidents Warren G. Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert Hoover served from 1921 to 1933. Republicans held the majority in Congress during this time. In addition. Supreme Court decisions of the era reflected the influence of its new Chief Justice, former President William Howard Taft, appointed by Harding in 1921. Republican leaders of this generation were united in basic goals and ideals. They favored business, and many of them were in fact businessmen. They wanted social stability, believing that it promoted economic growth. The Harding Presidency President Harding took office as the red scare and the labor strikes were beginning to subside. In that respect, the country did seem to be getting back to "normalcy." Harding made some wise Cabinet appointments. The able administrator (and future President) Herbert Hoover became Secretary of Commerce. Treasury Secretary' Andrew Mellon was one of the nation's most powerful businessmen. Under Harding and his Republican successors, Mellon shaped the economic policies of the 1920s. However, Harding showed terribly poor judgment in many of his appointments, giving jobs to friends, some of whom were incompetent and dishonest. These decisions would eventually overwhelm his presidency and his life. Isolationism Harding's foreign policy reflected Americans' postwar desire for a return to isolationism, a policy of avoiding political or economic alliances with foreign countries. Hence Harding made no further attempt to join the League of Nations. Yet the President did support efforts to find ways of preventing future wars. He called for disarmament, a program in which the nations of the world would voluntarily give up their weapons. In 1921 Harding convened the Washington Conference, at which several major nations signed treaties limiting the size of their navies. In 1922 Congress, with I larding's support, passed the Fordney-McCumber Tariff, which raised rates on a number of imports. It especially discouraged imports that competed with goods made by new American industries, such as china, toys, and chemicals. Limiting Immigration As Americans became more isolationist, they also became more nativist. As you have read, nativism is a movement favoring native-born Americans over immigrants, it had first appeared in the 1800s, but after World War 1 it grew stronger, for several reasons: (1) Many Americans believed that people from foreign countries could never be fully loyal to the United States. (2) Nativists, who were mostly Protestants, had long disliked immigrants who were Catholics, Orthodox Christians, or Jews. (3) Americans often blamed the problems of cities, such as slums and corruption, on the immigrants who lived in them. (4) Workers feared immigrants might take their jobs away from them. (5) Nativists argued that some immigrants came from the most unstable parts of Europe, where World War I had started. They believed that these immigrants might hold or might adopt dangerous political ideas. When immigration rose sharply after World War I, nativist reaction was swift. In 1921, at Harding's request, and again in 1924, Congress passed laws restricting immigration. The laws limited annual immigration to 330,000 people and set up a quota, or numerical limit, on immigrants from each foreign nation. The laws set low quotas for immigrants from southern and eastern European countries, including Italy, Poland, and Russia. Asian immigration was banned altogether. The Teapot Dome Scandal At the start of 1923, the economy was bouncing back from wartime disruptions, and the President enjoyed strong popularity. Within months, however, Harding was dead. In the months before his death, major corruption scandals in Harding's administration were coming to light. There was no evidence that the President was involved in the scandals. In fact, Harding became terribly disturbed when he heard of the scandals, and the strain may have contributed to his death, from heart problems, on August 2, 1923. By 1924 the extent of the corruption in Harding's administration had become known. One official had stolen government funds. Others had taken bribes in return for help getting contracts approved or laws passed. Several other officials were also accused of wrongdoing, and two committed suicide. The worst Harding scandal came to be known as the Teapot Dome scandal. In 1921 and 1922, Harding's Secretary of the Interior, Albert B, Fall, secretly gave oil drilling rights on government oil fields in Elk Hills, California, and Teapot Dome, Wyoming, to two private oil companies. In return. Fall received more than $300,000 in illegal payments and gifts disguised as loans. He later went to jail for his role in the scandal. The Coolidge Presidency Vice President Calvin Coolidge was visiting his parents in Vermont on August 3, 1923, when word arrived of Harding's death. At 2:30 A.M., by the light of a kerosene lamp, Coolidge's father, a justice of the peace, administered to him the oath of office of President of the United States. Coolidge was still widely respected for his actions as governor of Massachusetts. He had played no part in the Hlarding scandals. In fact, one Democrat said that Coolidge's "great task was to restore the dignity and prestige of the Presidency when it had reached the lowest ebb in our history." After finishing Harding's term, Coolidge ran in the 1924 election, defeating Democrat John W. Davis and Progressive Robert M. La Follette with the slogan "Keep cool with Coolidge." Coolidge had a reputation as a skilled public speaker, but in private he was a man of few words. Someone said of him that "he could be silent in five languages.''^ The Democrats in 1924 tried to use public anger over the Teapot Dome affair to defeat the Republicans, as this campaign artifact shows. Laissez Faire In one sentence, Coolidge summed up a major theme of the Republican decade: "The business of the American people is busi- ness." The best that the government could do, he believed, was not to interfere with the growth of business. This laissez-faire business policy helped fuel the tremendous economic boom of the 1920s. As part of his laissez-faire policy, Coolidge tried to make the federal government smaller. For example, when war veterans won a bonus payment from Congress, he vetoed the bill on the grounds Main Idea n.iaamn.H What policies did Republican leaders pursue in the 1920s? 1" Many funny anecdotes grew up around 'Silent Cal," as he was called. His wife, Grace, told the story of a young woman who sat next to Coolidge at a dinner party. The woman told Coolidge that she had bet that she could get him to say at least three words. Without looking at her, the President said, in his typically dry wit: "You lose." Chapter 11 • Section 1 345 African American Migrations. The migration of African Americans from the South to the North helped alter the populations of both regions. This family moved from the rural South to settle in Chicago in 1912. Movement Which states lost the largest percentages ot their black populations? anger and hatred from whites, who feared that migrants threatened their jobs and wages, African American women often had to work as household hdp for whites, at wages that kept them trapped in poverty. Other Migration As you read, the nation's immigration laws were tightened in the 1920s. As the number of immigrants from Europe decreased, employers turned to immigrants from Mexico and Canada to fill low-paying jobs. The new immigration quotas did not apply to nations in the Americas. In the West, Mexicans supplied this labor, migrating across the border to work on the firms of California and the ranches of Texas. In the Northeast, Canadians from the French- speaking province of Quebec traveled south to work in the paper mills, potato fields, and forests of New England and New York. The migrants also took jobs in the cities. Los Angeles, for example, became a magnet for Mexicans and developed a distinct barrio, or Spanish-speaking neighborhood. New York also attracted Spanish-speakers—Puerto Ricans migrating in the hope of a better life in the United States. Growth of the Suburbs One result of the movements of Americans in the 1920s was a huge increase in the size of American suburbs. Some suburban growth had taken place earlier, as cities built transportation systems that used electric trolleys, or railway cars, that ran on rails laid in or along streets. The trolleys allowed people to get from the suburbs to jobs and stores in the city quickly and cheaply. When automobiles were introduced, electric trolleys lost passengers. Between 1916 and 1926, about 2,500 miles of trolley track were abandoned. Yet the loss of trolleys did not slow the growth of suburbs. About 80 percent of the old trolley routes were soon replaced by bus lines. By the middle of the 1920s, about 70,000 buses were operating throughout the United States. The automobile extended transportation lines even farther. New York City is a good example of demographic change during the 1920s. The number of residents decreased in Manhattan, the heart of the city. Meanwhile, one of the city's suburbs. Queens, saw its population double. Poverty was especially hard on sharecroppers in the South who had to live In improvised camps after being evicted from their farms by landowners. Economics How did increased poverty lead to a decline in health? In the country, people grew food and ate berries and other wild plants. In cities, they sold apples and pencils, begged for money to buy food, and fought over the contents of restaurant garbage cans. Families who had land planted "relief gardens" to feed themselves or to barter food for other items. Stresses on Families Living conditions declined as families moved in together, crowding into small houses or apartments. The divorce rate dropped because people could not afford separate households. People gave up even small pleasures like an ice cream cone or a movie ticket. Men who had lost jobs or investments often felt like failures because they could no longer provide for their families. If their wives or children were working, men thought their own status had fallen. Many were embarrassed to be seen at home during normal work hours. They were ashamed to ask friends for help. Women faced other problems. Those who depended on a husband's paycheck worried about feeding their hungry' children. Working women were accused of taking jobs away from men. Even in the better times of the 1920s, Henry Ford had fired married women. "We do not employ married women whose husbands have jobs," he explained. In the Depression, this practice became common. In 1931, the American Federation of Labor endorsed it. Most school districts would not hire married women teachers, and many fired those who got married. Many women continued to find work, however, because poor-paying jobs such as domestic service, typing, and nursing were considered "women's work." The greatest job losses of the Depression were in industry and other areas that had seldom hired women. Discrimination Increases Hard economic times put groups of Americans in competition with one another for a shrinking number of jobs. This produced a general rise in suspicions and hostilities against minorities. African Americans, Hispanics, and in the West, Asian Americans, all suffered as white laborers began to demand the low-paying jobs typically filled by these minorities. African Americans continued to leave the South, although not as many as in the 1920s. They had jobs such as janitors or baggage carriers in northern cities, but soon lost even those jobs to whites. Black unemployment soared— about 56 percent of black Americans were out of work in 1932. Photographer Gordon Parks, who rode the trains to Harlem, later wrote: to most blacks who had voiCEsj flocked in from all over the land, the struggle to survive was savage. Poverty coiled around them and me with merciless fingers. Because relief programs discriminated against African Americans, black churches and organizations like the National Urban League gave private help. The followers of a Harlem evangelist known as Father Divine opened soup kitchens that fed thousands every day. Discrimination increased for African Americans in the South. Some white southerners declared openly that blacks had no right to a job if whites were out of work. African Americans were denied civil rights such as access to education, voting, and health care. Lynchings increased. Flispanics and Asian-Americans lost not only their jobs but also their country. Thousands were deported—even those born in America. The justice system often ignored the rights of minority Americans. In March 1931, near Scottsboro, Alabama, nine black youths who 386 Chapter 12 • Section 3 Some New Deal Agencies Agency Purpose Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) Provided jobs to young, unmarried men (and, later, women) to work on conservation and resource development projects. Works Progress Administration (WPA) Gave the unemployed work in building construction and arts programs. Public Works Administration (PWA) Sponsored massive public works projects such as dams and hydroelectric plants. National Recovery Administration (NRA) Worked with industries to establish codes outlining fair business and labor practices. National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) Enforced provisions of the Wagner Act, which included the right to collective bargaining and other union rights Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) Insured bank deposits up to $5,000. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Regulated the stock market and protected investors from dishonest trading practices. Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA) Attempted to raise farm prices by paying farmers to lower farm output. Social Security Administration (SSA) Provided old-age pensions, disability payments, and unemployment benefits. Interpreting Tables New Deal zeal created dozens of federal agencies. Government How did these agencies aim to help both the nation and individuals? about significant economic improvement, criticism began to mount. Many worried about the increasing power that New Deal agencies were giving to the federal government. Former President Hoover warned against "a state- controlled or state-directed social or economic system. That is not liberalism; it is tyran- ny," he said. FDR also found his programs under attack by the Supreme Court. In 1935 the Court declared the NTRA unconstitutional because it gave the President lawmaking powers and regulated local, rather than interstate, commerce. The following year, the Court ruled that the tax that funded AAA subsidies to farmers was also unconstitutional. Two of the most important elements of the New Deal had crumbled. It was time to reassess. A Second New Deal Most of the public remained behind Roosevelt. The midterm elections of 1934 showed overwhelming nationwide support for FDR's administration. In 1935 he launched a new, even bolder burst of legislative activity. Some have called this period the Second New Deal. In part, it was FDR's response to critics who said he was not doing enough for ordinary Americans. The Second New Deal included more social welfare benefits, stricter controls over business, stronger support for unions, and higher taxes on the rich. New and Expanded Agencies New agencies attacked joblessness even more aggressively than before. The Works Progress Administration (WPA), an agency set up in 1935 and lasting eight years, provided work for more than 8 million citizens. The WPA constructed or improved more than 20,000 playgrounds, schools, hospitals, and airfields and supported the creative work of many artists and writers. (See Section 3.) The Second New Deal responded to the worsening plight of agricultural workers. The original AAA had ignored many of the farm workers who did not own land. In the Southwest, for example, Mexican American farm workers struggled to survive. Many of these migrant workers were forced to return to Mexico. Others tried to form unions, causing fierce resistance from farmer associations. In the South, landlords had accepted the AAA subsidies, taken land out of production, and left tenants and sharecroppers to fend for themselves. In May 1935 Rexford Tugwell set up a Resettlement Administration that loaned money to owners of small farms and helped resettle tenants and sharecroppers on productive land. In 1937 a Farm Security Administration (FSA) replaced Tugwell's agency. It loaned more than $1 billion to farmers and set up camps for migrant workers. New Labor Legislation Labor unions had liked the NIRA provision known as 7a, which •408 Chapter 13 • Section 1 appeared on all shoes, clothes, weapons, and other equipment provided by the military. While the "four freedoms" and the Adantic Charter may have defined the goals of the United States in the war, most GIs served for more personal reasons. As soldiers fought in filthy foxholes overseas, they dreamed of home and a cherished way of life. When asked what he was fighting for, a young marine on the Pacific front replied, "What I'd give for a piece of blueberry pie." Discussion about desegregating the armed forces during World War II aroused strong feelings on both sides. Below are two viewpoints. In Support of Integration In Opposition to Integration Diversity in the Armed Forces Americans from all ethnic and racial backgrounds fought during World War II. Among these were more than 300,000 Mexican Americans. Most enlisted in the army. Mexican American troops fought to defend the Philippines, served in the North African campaign, and took part in the D-Day invasion of France in 1944. Some 25,000 Native Americans also served in die army and other branches of the military. The marines recruited about 300 Navajos to serve as radio operators. They developed a code based on their language that the lapanese could not break when they eavesdropped on marine radio transmissions. The "code talk- ers," as they became known, provided a vitally important secure communications link in several key battles in the Pacific. Although Japanese Americans were not accepted into the armed forces until early 1943, thousands volunteered to fight. Many came from the camps where tens of thousands of lapanese Americans were detained during the war. Eventually some 17,000 Japanese Americans fought in the United States armed services. Most were Nisei, or citizens born in the United States of Japanese immigrant parents. The all-Nisei 442nd Regimental Combat team won so many commendations for bravery while fighting in Europe that it became the most decorated military unit in American history. African American troops also played an important role in the war. Nearly a million African Americans volunteered or were drafted to serve in the military. At first, most black troops were limited to support roles. However, black leaders pushed to get African Americans into combat. By late 1942, faced with mounting casualties, military authorities reluctantly gave in. Like Japanese American troops, African Americans fought in segregated units. The African American 761st Tank Battalion captured 30 major towns from the Germans in a grueling 183-day campaign. The Army Air Force 99th Fighter Squadron, known as the Black Eagles, "Though I have found no Negroes who want to see the United Nations lose this war, I have found many who, before the war ends, want to see the stuffing knocked out of white supremacy, if freedom and equality are not vouchsafed [granted] the peoples of color, the war for democracy will not be won. We demand the abolition of segregation and discrimination in [all] branches of national defense." —A. Philip Randolph, African- American labor and civil rights leader, November 1942 "In this hour of national crisis, it is much more important that we have the full-hearted co-operation of the thirty million white southern Americans than that we satisfy the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. If they be forced to serve with Negroes, they will cease to volunteer; and when drafted, they will not serve with that enthusiasm and high morale that has always characterized the soldiers and sailors of the southern states." —W. R. Poage. Texas state representative, 1941 ANALYZING VIEWPOINTS What arguments does each side use to support its viewpoint? To defeat the Japanese in the Pacific, United States Marines had to keep their strategies from the enemy. Navajo code talkers like these allowed the Allies to stay one step ahead of the Japanese, Diversity How else did the armed forces benefit from diversity? Chapter 14 * Section 2 437 favorable to the Soviet Union and its people. This had been during the war, when the United States and the Soviet Union had been allies. Many stars protested HUAC's attitude and procedures. Actor Frederic March asked Americans to consider where it all could lead: "Who's next? ... When some attempted to make statements, they were denied permission. Actor Humphrey Bogart (right), who protested HUAC's actions against other actors, ended up having to clear his own name. Red Channels (above) was an index of blacklisted actors published in 1950. Invoking their Fifth Amendment rights, 10 of the accused declined to answer the committee's questions. The Hollywood Ten were cited for contempt of Congress and served jail terms ranging from six months to a year. The HUAC investigations had a powerful impact on filmmaking. Nervous motion picture executives denounced the Hollywood Ten for having done a disservice to their industry. The studios compiled a Hollywood blacklist, a list of people who employers agree not to hire. Many other entertainment figures were added to the blacklist simply because they seemed subversive or they opposed the idea of a blacklist. The list included actors, screenwriters, directors, and broadcasters. In the past, Hollywood had been willing to make movies on controversial subjects such as racism and anti-Semitism. Now studios resisted all films dealing with social problems and concentrated on pure entertainment. The McCarran-Walter Act While HUAC carried out its work, Democrat Pat McCarran headed a Senate hunt for Communists in the movie industry, labor unions, the State Department, and the UN. Senator McCarran became convinced that the most disloyal Americans were immigrants from Communist- dominated parts of the world. At his urging, in 1952 Congress passed the McCarran-Walter Act. This law established a quota system for each country, discriminating against potential immigrants from Asia and Southern and Central Europe. President Truman vetoed McCarran's bill, calling it "one of the most un-American acts I have ever witnessed in my public career." Congress, however, passed the bill over the President's veto. Spy Cases Inflame the Nation Two famous spy cases helped fuel the suspicion that a conspiracy within the United States was aiding the Communists overseas in their military' and political successes. In 1948, HUAC investigated Alger Hiss, who had been a high-ranking State Department official before he left government service. Whittaker Chambers, a former Communist who had become a successful Time magazine editor, accused Hiss of having been a Communist in the 1930s. Hiss denied the charge and sued Chambers for slander. Chambers then went one step further and declared that Hiss had been a Soviet spy. Too much time had passed for the spying charge to be pressed. After two trials, Hiss was 498 Chapter 16 • Section2 1946 1947 Truman appoints Jackie Robinson is first Committee on African American to play Gvil Rights major league baseball 1949 Truman orders desegregation of armed forces 1954 Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas 1955 Bus boycott begins in Montgomery Alabama 1956 Supreme Court declares segregation on buses illegal 1946 1951 " Demands for Civil Rights Objectives 1 Describe the progress made in the struggle for equality during the Truman years. 2 Understand such highlights of the 1950s as the Brown decision, the Montgomery bus boycott, and the confrontation in Little Rock. 3 Describe how other minorities began to follow the example set by the African American movement. 4 Key Terms Define: Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas; Montgomery bus boycott; integration. Main Idea Following World War II, African Americans began to push harder in the civil rights movement and brought about significant results. Reading Strategy Formulating Questions Reread the main idea above. Then rewrite it as a question. As you read the section, write down possible answers to your question. Before and during World War II, African Americans were not treated as equals by a large portion of American society. After the war, however, the campaign for civil rights began to accelerate. Millions of people believed that the time had come to demand that the nation live up to its creed that all are equal before the law. The Struggle for Equality The story of the postwar struggle for racial equality begins with President Truman. While holding in private many of the racial prejudices he had learned growing up in the South, Truman recognized that as President he had to take action. In a letter to a friend, he wrote, "I am not asking for social equality, because no such things exist, but I am asking for equality of opportunity for all human beings." Truman's Actions Truman had publicly supported civil rights for many years. In September 1946 he met with a group of African American leaders to discuss the steps that needed to be taken to achieve their goals, They asked Truman to support a federal anti- lynching law, abolish the poll tax as a voting requirement, and establish a permanent board to prevent discriminatory practices in hiring. Congress refused to address any of these concerns, so in December 1946, Truman appointed a biracial Committee on Civil Rights to look into race relations. This group produced a report demanding action on the concerns listed above. In addition they also recommended that a permanent civil rights commission be established. Once more Congress failed to act. In July 1948 Truman took action and banned discrimination in the hiring of federal employees. He also ordered an end to segregation and discrimination in the armed forces. Real change came slowly, however. Only with the onset of the Korean War in 1950 did the armed forces make significant progress in ending segregation. This 1948 campaign button proclaimed Truman's commitment to civil rights. Chapter 17 • Section 4 529 Number of Immigrants (in thousands) Immigration from Selected Regions, 1960-1970 Year Source Historical Statistics ot the United States, Colonial Times to 1970 southern and eastern Europe and banned Asian immigration altogether. The Immigration Act of 1965 eliminated the quotas for individual countries and replaced them with more flexible limits. These included 170,000 people from the Eastern Hemisphere and 120.000 from the Western Hemi- sphere.t Family members of United States citizens were exempted from the quotas, as were political refugees. In the 1960s approximately 350.000 immigrants entered the United States each year; in the 1970s the number rose to more than 400,000 a year. Interpreting Graphs Congress eased the strict restrictions on immigration with the more generous Immigration Act of 1965. Diversity On which group of immigrants did this legislation have the greatest effect? Earl Warren Medicare and Medicaid iohnson also focused attention on the increasing cost of medical care. Twenty years before, Harry Truman had proposed a medical assistance plan as part of his Fair Deal program. It had never been passed into law. Johnson used his leadership skills to push two new programs through Congress, Medicare and Medicaid. Medicare provided hospital and low-cost medical insurance for most Americans age 65 and older. "No longer will older Americans be denied the healing miracle of modern medi- cine," Johnson declared. "No longer will illness crush and destroy the savings that they have so carefully put away." Medicaid provided low-cost health insurance for poor Americans of any age who could not afford their own private health insurance. These broad-based health care programs were the most important pieces of social welfare legislation since the passage of the Social Security Act in 1935. They demonstrated the government's commitment to provide help to those Americans who needed it. Immigration Reform The Great Society also revised the immigration policies that had been in place since the 1920s. The immigration laws passed in 1921 and 1924 had set quotas, or numerical limits, for each foreign nation. The laws set low quotas for immigrants from Earl Warren earned his law degree at the University of California, Berkeley, and went on to serve as district attorney and then attorney general in California. While serving as the governor of that state, Warren ran as the Republican candidate for Vice President in 1948. Warren left his office as governor of California when he was appointed Chief Justice of the United States by President Eisenhower in 1953. Warren served as Chief Justice until he retired in 1969. Under Earl Warren, the Supreme Court took action to overturn many old laws and court rulings and to establish new legal precedents. For example, just one year after Warren's appointment, the Court outlawed segregation in public schools with its decision in Brown v. Board of Education (1954). (See the previous chapter.) In 1965 the Court struck down a Connecticut law that prohibited the use of birth control. In another area, the Court ruled that religious prayer in public schools was unconstitutional according to the First Amendment principle of separation of church and state. In yet another significant decision, the Court decreed that obscenity laws could not restrict material that might have some "redeeming social value." Many of the Court's other far-reaching decisions were made in the areas of criminal procedure and legislative apportionment. The 1965 law did place a maximum of 20.000 immigrants from any one country. 548 Chapter 18 * Section2 Criminal Procedure Earl Warren and other members of the Supreme Court were concerned with safeguarding the constitutional rights of the individual against the power of the state. In particular, the Warren Court handed down several decisions protecting the rights of persons accused of crimes. The case of Mapp v. Ohio (1961) established the exclusionary rule, which stated that evidence seized illegally could not be used in a trial. The court's decision in Gideon v. Wainwright (1963) ruled that suspects in criminal cases who could not afford a lawyer had the right to free legal aid. In the case of Escobedo v. Illinois (1964), the justices stated that accused individuals had to be given access to an attorney while being questioned. The Court's decision in Miranda v. Arizona (1966) stated that a suspect must be warned of his or her rights before being questioned. As a result of the Miranda rule, police must inform accused persons that they have the right to remain silent, that anything they say can be used against them in court, that they have a right to an attorney, and that if they cannot afford an attorney one will be appointed for them. Congressional Reapportionment The Warren Court also handed down a series of decisions having to do with apportionment, or the distribution of a legislative body's seats among electoral districts. At the lime that Warren came to the Court, Earl Warren (1891-1974) / Great Society Legislation, 1964-1966 Legislation Purpose Economic Opportunity Act, 1964 Created to combat causes of poverty such as illiteracy and unemployment. Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA), 1964 Sent volunteers to help people in poor communities and set up community action programs to give the poor a voice in defining local housing, health, and education policies. Medicare, 1965 Provided hospital and low-cost medical insurance for most Americans age 65 and older. Medicaid, 1965 Provided low-cost health insurance for poor Americans of any age who could not afford their own private health insurance. Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 Provided education aid to states based on the number of children from low-income homes. Immigration Act of 1965 Eliminated strict quotas for individual countries and replaced them with more flexible limits. The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), 1965 Established to oversee the nation's housing needs and to develop and rehabilitate urban communities. HUD also provided money for rent supplements and low-income housing. The National Foundation of the Arts and Humanities, 1965 Offered grants to artists and scholars. Water Quality Act, 1965; Clean Water Restoration Act, 1966 Brought about water and air quality standards and provided funding for environmental research. The National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, 1966 Established safety standards for all vehicles to protect consumers. Interpreting Tables Great Society legislation addressed a wide range of topics Economics Which legislation attempted to combat poverty? Describe the Latino population. Explain how Cesar Chavez and others protested discrimination. 3 Describe the ways in which Asian Americans fought against racial discrimination and made economic and political gains in the 1960s and 1970s. a Key Terms Define: Latino; migrant farm worker; United Farm Workers (UFW); Japanese American Citizens League (JACL). Main Idea Inspired by the civil rights movement, Latinos and Asian Americans launched their own movements to overcome discrimination. Reading Strategy Outlining Information Skim the section and use the headings and subheadings to create an outline. As you read, fill in appropriate details in your outline of the section. Inspired by the civil rights and women's movements, other ethnic and racial groups began to fight for equality during the 1960s and 1970s. In May 1970, journalist Ruben Salazar predicted the future of the Chicano movement in Los Angeles, California. "We are going to overthrow some of our institutions," he said. "But in the way Americans have always done it: through the ballot, through public consensus. That's a revolution." Three months later, Salazar was killed when rioting broke out after police tried to stop a Chicano anti-Vietnam War demonstration. Although Salazar was not an activist, after his death he became a martyr to the movement. The Latino Population People whose family origins are in Spanish- speaking Latin America, or Latinos, come from many places. They share the same language and some elements of culture. But whether they come from Puerto Rico, Cuba, Mexico, or other parts of the Americas, Latinos often have been seen as outsiders. They have been denied equal opportunities in many aspects of life, including employment, education, and housing. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, more and more people arrived from Central America and South America. Between 1970 and 1980, census figures for people "of Spanish origin" rose from 9 million to 14.6 million. Specific groups tended to settle in certain areas. Cubans moved to Florida, Puerto Ricans moved to the Northeast, and Mexicans moved to the West and Southwest. Mexican Americans, often known as Chicanos, always have been the most numerous Latinos in the United States. In the 1960s, they began to organize against discrimination in education, jobs, and the legal system, leading to el Movtmiento Chicano—the Chicano movement. Cultural identity Activists began encouraging pride in Mexican American culture and its dual heritage from Spain and the ancient cultures of Mexico. In 1967 Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales, a Denver, Colorado, activist, wrote a 596 Chapter 20 • Section2 long poem that raised Mexican Americans' self-awareness nationwide. Yo Soy Joaquin (UI am Joaquin") expresses the importance of cultural identity. It begins: I am Joaquin lost in a world of confusion caught up in the whirl of a gringo [white] society. confused by the rules, scorned by attitudes, suppressed by manipulation and destroyed by modem society. Gonzales' claim was that the Anglos—white, English-speaking non-Latinos—had undermined Mexican Americans' control over their lives through economic pressure and through institutions such as the schools, the Roman Catholic Church, and the media. Education Schools in the barrios, or Latino neighborhoods, were crowded and run-down, with high dropout rates. In March 1968, 10,000 Mexican American students walked out of five such Los Angeles high schools to protest their unequal treatment. Students in other parts of California, and in Colorado and Texas, followed their example. Students demanded culturally sensitive courses, better facilities, and Latino teachers and counselors. First pension plan for retired farm workers • First functioning credit union for farm workers • Extension of unemployment compensation for farm workers Health • First union contracts requiring rest periods, clean and Safety drinking water, hand washing facilities, and protection against exposure to pesticides • First comprehensive union health benefits for farm workers and their families • First union contracts regulating safety and sanitary conditions of farm labor camps • Abolition of the crippling short-handled hoe • Extension of disability and workers' compensation to farm workers Interpreting Tables Labor activists Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta founded the United Farm Workers Association (UFWA) in Fresno. California, in 1962. Economics What do you view as the UFWA's most important achievement, and why? Cesar Chavez The students were not, however, the only people protesting in the Latino community. Throughout the 1960s organizers struggled to unite Latino farm workers. Cesar Chavez, founder of the United Farm Workers, became a hero to millions of Americans, both Latino and Anglo. He was born in Yuma, Arizona, where his family had farmed for three generations. During the Great Depression, they lost their adobe farmhouse because they could not afford the taxes. Relocating to California, they made their living as migrant farm workers, moving from farm to farm to provide the labor needed to plant, cultivate. and harvest crops. Chavez later remembered how his family fostered a powerful sense of independence: Cesar (1927 Chavez '-1993) 44 I don't want to suggest we were that radical, but I know we were probably one of the strikingest families in California, the first ones to leave the fields if anyone shouted "Huelga!" — which is Spanish for Strike/" —Cesar Chavez As he grew up among farm workers, Chavez came to believe that unions offered the best opportunity to gain bargaining power and resist employers' economic power. Migrant farm workers were some of the most exploited Chapter 20 • Section2 597 workers in the country. They had to spend long hours doing backbreaking work for little pay. In the 1960s Chavez began to organize Mexican field hands into what became the United Farm Workers (UFW). He and a group of loyal followers went from door to door and field to field. By 1965 the union had 1,700 members. The UFW's first target was the grape growers of California. Chavez, like Martin Luther King, ]r" believed in nonviolent action. In 1967, when growers refused to grant more pay, better working conditions, and union recognition, Chavez organized a successful nationwide consumer boycott of grapes picked on nonunion farms. Later boycotts of lettuce and other crops also won consumer support. Chavez's efforts created many angry enemies and even brought him death threats. He responded by saying: Main Idea What methods did Cesar Chavez use to gain rights for migrant farm workers? AMERICAN I fit It's not me who counts, it's v-olfES-l the Movement. And I think that in terms of stopping the Movement—this one or other movements by poor people around the country—the possibility is very remote_The tide for change now has gone too far." — Cesar Chavez In 1975 California passed a law that required collective bargaining between growers and union representatives. Workers now had a legal basis to ask for better working conditions. Chavez's efforts not only made him a national hero but also brought migrant farm workers into the movement for civil rights.® Other Latino Protests Mexican Americans had other heroes, too. Some formed organizations that took a militant approach, while others used political action. In Mexico's northern neighbors, California and Texas, receive the majority of immigrants from Mexico. This mural in Los Angeles illustrates Mexican American pride. Culture How did Chicano activists use their cultural heritage in the Chicano movement? 598 Chapter 20 • Section2 1961 voters in San Antonio, Texas, elected Henry B. Gonzalez to Congress. Another Texan, Elizo "Kika" de la Garza, went to the House of Representatives in 1964, while Joseph Montoya of New Mexico was elected to the Senate. New political groups formed to support Latino interests. For example, Jose Angel Gutierrez brought together Latino groups in Crystal City, Texas, leading to the formation of the political party La Raza Uttida in 1970. The new party worked for better housing and jobs and backed Latino political candidates. Another leader, Reies Lopez Tijerina, argued that the Anglo culture had stolen the Chicanos' land and heritage. To call attention to broken treaties, in 1966 his Alianza Federal de Mercedes (Federal Alliance of Land Grants) marched on the New Mexico state capital, Santa Fe. At about the same time, the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund (MALDEF) was founded. It has provided legal aid to help Mexican Americans defend their rights and encouraged Mexican American students to become lawyers. Asian Americans Discrimination Asian Immigration, 1951-1978 India China Hong Kong Vietnam Korea Place of Origin Source: Statistical Abstract ot the United States Japan Philippines Fight Ever since their arrival in the United States, Americans of Chinese and Japanese ancestry have faced racial discrimination. Prejudice against Japanese Americans reached a peak during World War II, while the Communist takeover of China in 1949 influenced attitudes toward Chinese Americans. Still, the years after the war brought many hopeful and positive changes for Asian Americans. Japanese Americans After the War A major issue for (apanese Americans was compensation for the losses they had suffered during their wartime internment in the 1940s. As previously discussed, Japanese American citizens living along the West Coast were forced to relocate to internment camps. The government had feared that they were a risk to American security following Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor. Not only had their lives been disrupted, but they had lost Interpreting Graphs Patterns of immigration from Asia changed dramatically in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. Diversity From which two countries came the greatest number ot people in the 1950s? In the 1970s? hundreds of millions of dollars in homes, farms, and businesses. The main voice for Japanese Americans, the Japanese American Citizens League (JACL), in 1948 won passage of the Japanese American Claims Act. Under the act. Congress eventually paid relatively small amounts for property losses.t About two thirds of (apanese Americans who had been relocated returned to the Pacific Coast. Others moved to cities cast of the Rockies. Their new communities were more a part of mainstream society than the prewar nihonmachts—"Japantowns"—had been. Economic Changes Although Asian Americans as a group were well educated, in I960 they earned less than white Americans. In California, for example, for each $51 a white male was paid, a Chinese man would earn $38 and a lapanese man, $43. College graduates faced prejudice in attempting to move into management jobs. As a group, Asian Americans in the 1960s and 1970s made economic gains faster than other minorities. Nonetheless, they still faced f The United States did not officially apologize for the losses and injuries suffered by interned Japanese Americans until 1988. In that year Congress passed legislation that provided some monetary compensation to the approximately 60.000 surviving Japanese Americans who had been interned. Chapter 20 • Section2 59 9 These girls are celebrating Hawaii's new status as the nation's fiftieth state in 1959. Statehood for Hawaii created, for the first time, a state in which most voters were of Asian or part-Asian ancestry. Diversity How did Hawaii's statehood affect Asian Americans throughout the nation? discrimination and relied on the example of the civil rights movement to push for gains. Some Chinese American community activists in the 1970s asked for federal help in overcoming problems of unemployment, health, and language barriers. The 1970s also saw an increase in immigration from other Asian countries, especially Korea, India, and Vietnam, as illustrated by the graph on the previous page. Political Representation In 1959 Asian Americans' self-image took a major step forward with the granting of statehood to Hawaii. The new state sent Hiram Leong Fong, a Chinese American, to the Senate, and Daniel K. Inouye, a Japanese American, to the House of Representatives. Other Asian American lawmakers have since been elected to various positions in local and state governments as well as in the federal government. Comprehension 1. Key Terms Define: (a) Latino; (b) migrant farm worker, United Farm Workers (UFW); (d) Japanese American Citizens League (JACL). 2. Summarizing the Main Idea What were the main movements launched by Latinos and Asian Americans to overcome racial discrimination? 3. Organizing Information Create a two- column chart to organize information about Latino and Asian American protests. Label the two vertical columns Latinos and Asian Americans. Label the two horizontal rows Reasons for Protest and Results of Protest. Critical Thinking 4. Analyzing Time Lines Review the time line at the start of the section. Choose one entry and explain its role in expanding the rights of Latinos or Asian Americans. 5. Identifying Central Issues What role did Cesar Chavez play in the Chicano struggle for equal rights? Writing Activity 6. Writing a Persuasive Essay Write a pamphlet urging consumers to support the grape boycott organized by Cesar Chavez and the United Farm Workers. 600 Chapter 20 • Section2 Military Forces (in thousands) U. S. Military Forces and Battle Deaths in Vietnam, 1965 -1972 Year Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States Year Source: Statistical Abstract ot the United States Interpreting Graphs United States involvement in Vietnam peaked in 1968. Foreign Relations How many United States soldiers were in Vietnam in 1968? How many United States soldiers died in battle in 1968? group of faculty members planned a strike to protest the war, the Michigan legislature threatened to fire them. Instead, an even larger group decided to make a public statement. Some 50 or 60 professors decided to teach a special night session in which issues concerning the war could be aired. To their surprise, several thousand people showed up and made the evening a monumental success. Soon other teach-ins followed at colleges around the country. Supporters as well as opponents of the war appeared at the early teach-ins, but soon antiwar voices dominated the sessions. Resistance to War A Selective Service Act allowing the government to draft men between the ages of 18 and 26 had been in place since 1951. Relatively lew people refused to be drafted in the first half of the 1960s. Most who did were conscientious objectors. They opposed fighting in the war on moral or religious grounds. In July 1965 President Johnson doubled the number of men who could be dratted into the armed forces. By the end of the year he had doubled the number again. These moves led to the rise of a draft-resistance movement that urged young men not to cooperate with their local draft board. As more and more young men were called into service and sent to fight in Vietnam, Americans began to question the morality and fairness of the draft. College students could receive a deferment, or official postponement of their call to serve. Usually this meant they would not have to go to war. Those who could not afford college did not have this avenue open to them. In 1966 the Selective Service System announced that college students who ranked low academically could be drafted. In 1967 resistance to the military draft began to sweep the country. Many young men tried to avoid the draft by claiming that they had physical disabilities. Others applied for conscientious-objector status. Still others left the country. By the end of the war as many as 100.000 young men had crossed the border into Canada to avoid military service. Antiwar groups grew by leaps and bounds around the country. During demonstrations, marchers chanted "Hey, hey, LBJ. How many kids did you kill today?" In April 1967 some 200.000 opponents of the war marched in New York City. In October more than 50,000 protesters gathered in Washington, D.C., for a March on the Pentagon, home of the Defense Department. In 1969 the National Chicano Moratorium Committee staged its own antiwar demonstrations. These protesters argued that Vietnam was a racial war, with black and brown Americans being used against their brothers and sisters b developing nations. In the first she months of 1968, more than 200 major demonstrations erupted at colleges and universities around the country. Despite the widespread discontent, not all students agreed with the antiwar protesters. Some firmly supported American involvement in Vietnam. Others questioned the war but Chapter 21 • Section 3 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act 1990 Immigration Act increases quotas 1992 Carol Moseley Braun elected to Senate 1996 California passes Proposition 209 1998 Justice Department sues Microsoft 1985 1990 2cj 3 Twenty-First Century Americans Objectives 1 Describe the changing makeup of the nation's diverse population. 2 List the differences of opinion that emerged as Americans struggled to make diversity work. 3 Summarize the economic and political impact of the nation's aging population. 4 Analyze the impact of the computer revolution on the future of the United States. 5 Key Terms Define: multiculturalism, Internet. Main Idea In the 1990s, the United States sought new ways to create unity out of its ethnic and cultural diversity and to deal with the consequences of an "aging" population and a technological revolution. Reading Strategy Organizing Information As you read the section, create a graphic organizer summarizing the many changes facing the United States. The Latin motto of the United States, found on American coins, is "Epluribus ununi" meaning in English, "From many, one." This brief phrase reflects the patterns of the nation's past and the possibilities for its future. The United States was created when 13 separate colonies agreed to form a single union, Since then, people from an astonishing variety of lands have come to the United States and have This California road sign warns drivers to be on the lookout for undocumented aliens who might have crossed the border from Mexico. enriched the culture of the nation. That process continued in the 1990s, and new priorities emerged as the nation matured. Creating unity out of diversity remains one of the nation's biggest challenges and a key to its future prosperity. A Nation of Diversity In the 1990s, as a result of another wave of immigration, the United States became more diverse than ever before. Throughout American history, each wave of immigration has been characterized by people from a different part of the world. Most immigrants in the 1600s came from England. Great numbers of German and Irish immigrants arrived in the mid-1800s. In the late 1800s and early 1900s most immigrants were from southern and eastern Europe. By the late 1900s, close to 90 percent of all legal immigrants came from Asia and Latin America. As points of origin shifted away from Europe, Los Angeles became the major port of entry, just as New York City had been a century before. In 1996 an all-time high of 28 percent of the nation's people were African American, Hispanic, Asian American, or Native American. This expanding diversity meant that the United States was becoming, in the words of writer Ben ). Wattenberg, "the first universal nation." Changing Immigration Policies American immigration policy contributed to the nation's growing diversity. Laws passed in the 1920s had strictly limited immigration and had given preference to immigrants from northern and western Europe. The Immigration Art of 1965 eliminated the bias that favored European 740 Chapter 25 • Section 3 immigrants. In 1986 the Immigration Reform and Control Act sought to curb illegal immigration, in part by forbidding employers to hire illegal aliens. At the same time, however, it permitted illegals who had lived in the United States since 1982 to register to become citizens. The Immigration Act of 1990 increased immigration quotas by 40 percent. It also erased restrictions that had denied entrance to many people in the past. Changing Population Patterns Changes in immigration caused changes in the nation's demographics, or population characteristics and patterns. While earlier immigrants had settled mainly on the East Coast, many of the new arrivals chose the Sun Belt. (The Sun Belt stretches from Florida to California.) Like their predecessors, most immigrants of the late 1900s settled in urban areas. In 1990 minorities made up at least half the population in 15 of the nation's 28 largest cities. African Americans predominated in Detroit, Chicago, New Orleans, and Washington, D.C. Latinos were most heavily concentrated in Phoenix, El Paso, and San Antonio. Large numbers of Asian Americans settled in San Francisco. Los Angeles experienced the most dramatic variety of all. Korean, Vietnamese, Cambodian, Samoan, and Taiwanese newcomers joined established groups of Mexican Americans, African Americans, and European Americans. Like the many nationalities that had crowded into New York City a century earlier, these groups competed for jobs and housing. Similar competition occurred in other cities with large immigrant populations. Minorities in Politics As minority groups grew in size, they also gained a new voice in the nation's political system. In 1992 Carol Moseley Braun, an Illinois Democrat, became the first African American woman to win election to the United States Senate. Also in 1992 Ben Nighthorse Campbell, a Republican from Colorado, became the first Native American to win election to the United States Senate. The 1994 midterm election sent 38 African Americans and 18 latinos to the House. As Representative Nydia Velazquez of New York Slate observed, "Many of the new members were elected on [the promise of] changing 'business as usual."' Minority political partici- Interpreting Graphs Immigration continues to keep the American population diverse. Diversity Which group comprised the largest percentage of immigrants to the United States between 1981 and 1995? How would you expect these statistics to affect the overall ethnic composition of the United States over several decades? pation continued to grow as the century drew to a close. The House that took office at the start of Clinton's second term boasted 39 African Americans, 21 Latinos, and 5 Asian Americans. Making Diversity Work As American society became more diverse, government, private organizations, and individual citizens all undertook efforts to make diversity work. Some of these efforts aroused controversy. Affirmative Action One of the most heated debates concerned affirmative action. President Johnson had introduced affirmative action policies under the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and an executive order in 1965. Its purpose was to improve employment and educational opportunities by giving preferences to African Americans and later to other minorities and women. Supporters of affirmative action argued that it succeeded in giving increased opportunities to tens of thousands of women and minorities. Opponents claimed that giving preferential treatment to some groups was unfair to everyone else. Diversity According to the graphs, which group in the United States will experience the most dramatic rate of growth between 1996 and 2050? Multiculturalism Another effort to make diversity work was multiculturalism. Multiculturalism was a movement that called for greater attention to non-European cultures in such areas as education. For example, advocates of multicultural education argued that school textbooks should include information on the contributions of people from all groups. Professor of education Jaime S. Wurzel explained the thinking behind this belief: multicultural person vo icEsj questions the arbitrary nature of his or her own culture and accepts the proposition that others who are culturally different can enrich their experience." —Jaime S. Wurzel Others disapproved of this approach. History professor Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., referred to multiculturalism as "ethnic cheer- leading." He criticized the use of history to make people feel good about themselves rather than to discover the truth about the past. Other critics worried that extreme versions of multiculturalism could damage the unity of society. They argued that the approach emphasized differences between groups rather than the shared values and experiences of all Americans. The Future of Immigration In addition to debates over diversity, concerns about the economy in the 1990s caused some people to question government immigration policies. Some citizens proposed lowering the number of immigrants admitted each year. Other proposals included requiring schools to teach children only in English and limiting the rights of illegal immigrants. In 1994, for example, California voters approved Proposition 187. This law required teachers and clinic doctors to deny assistance to illegal aliens and to report them to police. Supporters of the measure argued that states that were home to a large number of immigrants, like California, were unfairly burdened by heavy social welfare costs. The welfare reform passed by Congress in 1996 recognized this argument. It cut off food stamps for nearly all needy immigrants. The following year Congress reconsidered this drastic action and restored benefits to most immigrants who were legal residents of the United States. It seemed likely that the public debate over immigration would continue as Americans attempted to reconcile unity and diversity. 742 Chapter 25 • Section3 America's Aging Population As the United States approached the turn of the century, its population was older than ever before. Elderly people made up the fastest- growing age group in the country. The number of people age 65 and over increased nearly elevenfold between 1900 and 1995. At the same time the nation's total population only tripled. Advances in medical care increased average life expectancy for newborns from 47 to 76 years. Between 1980 and 1995 alone, the number of people age 75 and over grew by 48 percent. An "aging revolution" was clearly under way. The "graying of America" had important political and economic effects. Many older Americans pushed successfully for legislation that prohibited forced retirement at a given age. In addition, because older Americans were growing in number and living longer, entitlement payments increased greatly. The Social Security system, for example, faced difficulties because the number of retirees receiving benefits was rising faster than the number of workers. In 1983, Congress tried to deal with the problem by raising taxes for workers and setting a later age for retirement benefits to begin. However, experts warned that more radical steps would have to be taken before the huge baby boom generation began retiring in the twenty-first century. In the' mid-1990s polls showed that many young Americans doubted that the Social Security system would exist when they reached retirement age. Some of them also indicated that they resented paying high taxes to provide benefits for people who were already retired. Some observers suggested that inter-generational conflict could become another tension in American society. Clearly, a solution to the Social Security problem needs to be found. There was similar pressure on the medical care system. Medicare, established during the Great Society of the 1960s, provided many of the medical expenses of older Americans. As the number of recipients and health care costs rose, however, Medicare payouts exploded from $7.5 billion in 1970 to over $200 billion in the 1990s. As with Social Security, Congress agreed that long-term changes were needed. Clinton appointed a panel of Republicans and Democrats to study the future of Medicare. The Computer Revolution The pace of change today is increasing, and the computer is perhaps the best symbol of this change. Between 1983 and 1995, the percentage of American households with a computer jumped from 7 percent to 37 percent. Computers navigate spacecraft, route telephone calls, and assist in all kinds of scientific research. The Internet, a computer network that links millions of people around the world, is revolutionizing American education and business. How will these changes affect employment? While computers have replaced some human workers, the growth of "high tech" industries has created thousands of new jobs. These jobs demand a high level of education and skills. One feature of the emerging economy is the lack of stable, well-paying jobs for unskilled workers. Education, therefore, has become more important than ever before. Main Idea How will the computer revolution affect employment opportunities? The computer's ability to store, manipulate, and transfer information with astonishing speed will continue to transform the American economy and society in the new century. Culture Describe some of the ways in which the computer and the Internet have influenced American culture in recent years. Chapter 25 • Section3 743 Immigration and the Golden Door A poem inscribed at the base of the Statue of Liberty begins: "Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free—" Emma Lazarus wrote these lines in 1883, during a new wave of immigration to the United States. More than a hundred years later, immigration is again on the rise. Both the sheer numbers of immigrants and their cultural diversity are profoundly reshaping American society—everything from foods and phone books to schools and politics. Should we continue to welcome people from other lands, or do we need to restrict immigration? undocumented immigrant, political asylum, green card, nativist, bilingual education Ovidiu Colca spent five years in a Romanian labor camp as punishment for trying to escape to the United States. I Ic finally emigrated in 1978 and settled in New York. In 1985 he won the only contract to make replicas of the Statue of Liberty for the centennial celebration tire next year. With the help of about two dozen other immigrants in his factory in Blissvillc, Queens, Colea and his business became very successful, manufacturing the very symbol of the American dream. Not all immigrant stories end so happily. For example, in FJ Monte, California, 72 immigrants from Thailand lived and worked locked inside an apartment complex surrounded by razor wire. They sewed garments for up to 115 hours a week in cramped sweatshops. From their meager wages, their employer deducted the nearly $5,000 cost of transportation to the United States. "Living in there was like death, never able to see the world out- side," said one woman. Eventually a worker escaped and notified authorities, who freed the others. Rising Immigration Between the extremes of these two experiences lie the stories of millions of newcomers to the United States in recent years. In the 1980s immigration skyrocketed. During that decade, the number of newcomers soared to about 7.3 million, more than one and a halftimes what it had been in the previous decade. This surge continued into the 1990s. In 1991, the number of official immigrants entering the United States totaled 1,827,200 people. The figures dropped in succeeding years, with 915,900 arriving in 1996. To appreciate the full impact of recent immigration, however, one must add to these figures the number of undocumented immigrants. (These are immigrants who have entered the United States illegally.) The Immigration and Naturalization Service estimated that in 1996 some 5 million people were living in this country illegally. Reasons for Immigration Immigrants can legally enter the United States for the following reasons: 1. They have relatives who are American citizens. 2. They possess needed job skills. 3. They are refugees from war or are seeking political asylum to escape persecution. The principal reason immigrants come to the United States is family ties. In 1996, about 65 percent of legal immigrants were family members of American citizens. Another 13 percent were granted entry because they had specialized work skills. About 14 percent were refugees and asylum seekers. The rest fell into special categories of the immigration law. Sources of Immigration The largest group of immigrants in 1996—about 37 percent—came from North America and the Caribbean, with Mexico in the lead. Approximately one third of all immigrants in that year came from You only need go as far as your local grocery store to see that immigration affects American culture. Economics Which of the foods in this photograph can you find in your local grocery store? Do those foods reflect the background of the people who live in your area? How do they reflect the diversity of America as a whole? Asia, with the largest contingent from the Philippines. About 16 percent came from Europe, 7 percent from South America, and 6 percent from Africa. All in all, more people are coming to the United States from more countries than ever before. Finding Homes Once they arrive, newcomers face seemingly endless challenges, the first of which is finding a place to live. Immigrants move to every state of the Union, with the greatest concentrations in California, New York, Florida, and Texas. Most settle in cities with ethnic neighborhoods where they can find familiar food, language, and customs, as well as a network of people to help them learn the American way of life. Nur Emirgil, a Turkish immigrant to Queens, New York, describes how her neighborhood works: "Somebody calls or knocks on the door and asks, 'Can this person stay on your couch for a few days?' 'Do you know any job they can get, someplace that doesn't care about green cards [work permits for foreigners]?' 'Can you go with them to the doctor to translate?'" Adjusting to America For immigrants, striking a balance between preserving old ways and learning new ones can be difficult. Many immigrants discover they have to give up their old line of work and take the lowest-paying unskilled jobs just to be employed at all. While they want their children to learn English, they also want them to maintain their heritage. lust as immigrants have changed to adjust to America, this nation has changed to adjust to them. New products and services have appeared to appeal to the nearly 10 percent of Americans who are foreign-born. Television and radio now broadcast in several dozen languages. Yellow pages have been published for different ethnic groups. Foods imported from places as different as Southeast Asia and Mexico line the shelves of gro- cery'stores in small towns like Garden City, Kansas. Caring for Immigrants The arrival of so many immigrants of such diverse origins has placed a strain on the United States. Areas with large foreign-born populations must provide ballots in one or more languages besides English, big-city school systems like those in Chicago and Los Angeles must devise ways to teach classes representing dozens of different languages. Public hospitals must treat poor immigrants who cannot afford to pay for health care. All of these services cost money at a time when federal, state, and local governments have less to spend. We are, as President Kennedy put it, a "nation of immi- grants." With the exception of Africans, who were brought to the Americas against their will, all other immigrants have come here in search of a better life. They see America as a land of opportunity. But opportunity has always involved risk, loss, and change. Coming to the United States has meant wrenching changes for immigrants, who had to leave their homelands behind and adapt to new circumstances. It has also meant the growth of a unique American culture. Some call it a melting pot. Others describe it as a salad bowl or a mosaic But whatever the metaphor, American society is indeed the product of many people from many nations. Early Diversity Archaeologists estimate that perhaps as long as 40,000 years ago, people began migrating to the Americas across a land bridge from Asia. Their descendants, today's Native Americans, disagree. They claim instead that their people have lived in the Americas since Earth's creation. In either case, Native Americans had formed about 500 nations by the time Europeans began colonization in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The European countries that colonized North America had a variety of goals and thus a variety of immigration patterns. The Spanish set up colonies to extract wealth from the land and to convert Native Americans to Christianity, but not primarily to relocate Spaniards. The French, similarly, did not emphasize settlement. They too wanted the riches of the land, and in the 1600s and 1700s that meant trapping and trading with Native Americans for furs. The English and Dutch, on the other hand, did want to settle North America. The Dutch settlement of New Amsterdam advertised to recruit people. The Dutch were so successful in drawing people from many places that as early as 1644, 18 languages were spoken in New Amsterdam. William Penn also advertised throughout Europe for people to come to Pennsylvania. In 1750, in fact, more than half the people of the English colonies were non- English. Almost 20 percent were African, and the rest were Scotch Irish, German, Irish, Scottish, Welsh, Dutch, French, and Swedish. This Russian family came to the United States in the early 1900s. In those years, thousands of new arrivals passed through the Ellis Island immigration center each day. Government How did Americans respond to this wave of immigration? This cartoon refers to a 1921 law that restricted immigration from European countries. That law set quotas based on national origin. Immigration from a particular country could not exceed 3 percent of the number of people of the same nationality living in the United States in 1910. Culture How does the cartoon portray immigrants? Immigration and Backlash In his 1782 Letters from an American Farmer, J. Hector St. John de Crevecoeur wrote, "I could point out to you a family whose grandfather was an Englishman, whose wife was Dutch, whose son married a French woman, and whose present four sons have now four wives of different nations." As the new nation, founded on principles of equality, grew, so did its immigration from many nations. Until 1846 those nations were mostly in western and northern Europe, and almost all their emigrants were Protestant. In America there were jobs and land enough for all. Starling in 1846 the immigrant population changed rapidly as the potato famine in Ireland sent hundreds of thousands of Irish Catholics to America. Most settled in northeastern cities, taking jobs in factories or on canals or railroads. Joining them were hundreds of thousands of German immigrants fleeing political oppression. This new wave of immigrants settled largely in the cities of the Northeast or bought farmland in the Midwest. The Irish and many of the Germans were Catholic. Some native-born Americans, fearing control by the Pope and loss of jobs to newcomers, were hostile toward the foreign-born. Many of these nativists formed the Know- Nothing party, which became an important political force in 1854. The Know-Nothings wanted to keep Catholics and foreigners out of public office and to require 21- years of residence before an immigrant could qualify for citizenship. Although the Know-Nothing party fell apart, nativist feelings grew as Chinese immigrants arrived in the mid- 1800s. Fearing competition for jobs, nativists succeeded in passing the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882. This federal law cut off all immigration from China. Anti- Asian sentiment also curtailed Japanese immigration with the Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907. The New Immigration Beginning in the 1880s, immigration to the United Stales increased rapidly. Between 1870 and the end of the 1880s, immigration doubled. This new wave of immigrants was different from the ones before. Instead of coming from western and northern Europe, as earlier, they came from southern and eastern Europe. Instead of being mainly Protestant, they were Catholic and Jewish. Instead of spreading out over the farmlands of the Midwest and Great Plains, Statistical Abstract ot the United States Interpreting Graphs As the 1990s drew to a close, immigration was helping to create an Increasingly diverse American population. Diversity From which region did most immigrants originate during the 1980s and early 1990s? Even as these newcomers were becoming part of the country's mainstream, opposition to immigrants continued to flourish. During World War I, government propaganda fanned nativist sentiment. Immigration Laws After the war, America went through a period of intense fear of foreigners. Believing political radicals were spreading communism and revolution, the Justice Department jailed or deported hundreds of innocent people between 1919 and 1921. Wanting no part of European politics, American foreign policy became isolationist. In this spirit. Congress passed the Immigration Law of 1921, which limited immigration to 350,000 people per year and set up quotas for nationalities. The Immigration I .aw of 1924 went even further. It capped immigration at 164,000, banned all Asians, and limited the number of immigrants from each country to 2 percent of the number of people of the same nationality living in the United States in 1890. This last provision aimed to halt immigration from southern and eastern Europe. With these laws in place, immigration slowed to a trickle. During the next 30 years, only about 100,000 people came to the United Slates each year. Then, in 1965, Congress passed a new law lifting all W tKF HP immigration quotas, thus AMERICA opening the 1 w " Golden Door to v D' result, the number of immigrants has greatly increased, and their countries of origin have changed. Between 1930 and 1960, about 80 percent of all immigrants came from Europe or Canada. Since 1960, about 80 percent have come from Asia, Latin America, and the Caribbean. As the number of legal immigrants has grown, so has the number of illegal, or undocumented, immigrants. To combat this problem, Congress passed the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. This law punished employers who knowingly hired illegals. It also granted amnesty to illegals who had lived in the United States since 1982, to enable them to register to become citizens. The Immigration Act of 1990 raised immigration totals and removed certain restrictions on people who had been denied entry in the past. The impact of these laws is reflected in the changing composition of American society. At nearly 10 percent of the total population, America's foreign-born population is at its highest level since 1940. This greater diversity has, in turn, Some Americans today believe that immigration to the United States should be restricted or even stopped completely. more non- Europeans. As a THE 756 Chapter 26 sparked intense debate about the future of American immigration policy. Massive immigration will destroy America, says author Lawrence Auster. "As whites lose their numerical, political, and cultural dominance, American civilization with all its constituent virtues will also come to an end." Not so, counters Julian L Simon, a professor at the University of Maryland. He believes that "Talented young immigrants help us achieve every one of our national goals. They make us richer and not poorer, stronger and not weak- er." Arguments such as these are representative of much of the national debate about immigration policy. to Charles Wheeler, executive director of the National Immigration Law Center. There are political arguments against immigration as well. T he federal government sets immigration policy, but it does not pay for all the services immigrants require. By and large, state and local governments must cover the costs of welfare, health care, and education for immigrants and for their children, who are citizens if born in the United States. Many Californians oppose immigration because their state receives the largest number of immigrants, both legal and illegal. The costs for the state are enormous. Said a California state assembly aide in 1993: AMERICAN] "The state is )L°l£ESJ broke. We've had a multibillion-dollar deficit three years Arguments Against Immigration Opponents of current policy argue that high levels of immigration hurt the American economy. Because immigrants are willing to work for low wages, many fear they will take jobs away from native-born Americans. "How can we keep bringing people into this country when our own people don't have jobs?" asks Clark Yates, an auto mechanic in Chicago, Illinois. Illegal immigrants, in particular, will work for less than minimum wage, which drives down other workers' pay. "Undocumented immigrants tend to compete unfairly for low-skilled jobs, and they can sometimes bring down the level of wages and working conditions," according Time magazine created this computer-generated portrait by combining the characteristics of all the races present in the United States in 1993. Culture What are some arguments in favor of immigration? in a row, and yet we continue to pay medical benefits for these illegal immigrants. We take better care of them than of our own people." —California State assembly aide In 1994 Governor Pete Wilson asked the President to declare an emergency in California and repay the state the $2.4 billion it spends each year on undocumented immigrants. Also that year, by a margin of 59 to 41 percent, California voters approved Proposition 187, which denied public services to illegal immigrants. Finally, immigration opponents see the new immigrant groups as fragmenting American society, dividing it into ethnic enclaves rather than adapting to American culture. Language has become a rallying point, with campaigns for "English only" as the official language. In 1975, Congress amended the voting rights act to require bilingual ballots. English-only advocates point out that naturalized citizens are supposed to know the language and claim that many have cheated to pass the naturalization exam. John Sillier, former chairman of the Massachusetts State Board of Education, argues: AMERICAN] "Citizenswho _voices t are not proficient in English cannot, in most cases, follow a political campaign, talk with candidates, or petition their representatives. They are citizens in name only and are unable to exercise their rights. Providing them with bilingual ballots does not enable them to exercise those rights in any meaningful way." —John Silbcr Bilingual education is another source of frustration for those who want to limit immigration. In bilingual programs, students are taught in their native language as well as English while their English- language skills improve. Opponents of bilingual education argue that these programs only perpetuate separateness rather than promote assimilation into the American mainstream. Without a common language, they believe, our common culture is in danger. Opponents received a boost from voters in California. In 1998 Californians approved Proposition 227, which severely limits bilingual education in that state. The law gives all children with limited English skills just one year to learn English before joining regular classes. Proposition 227 ended 30 years of full-scale bilingual instruction in the nation's largest school system. Arguments for Immigration Immigrants help, not hurl, the economy, claim immigration supporters. They Come highly motivated to work, with strong family units that promote discipline and high standards. Immigrants contribute to the economy as consumers, small- business owners, and taxpayers. They also take jobs few native-born Americans want. As Chicago carpenter Eddy Jercna explains: AMERICAN "My brother... voices^ has a business, and the Mexicans work hard for him 12 hours a day and they don't complain. You get these American-born guys, they don't work like that. This country was built by immigrants. The Mexicans deserve to be here." —Eddy Jerena Immigration supporters point out that most immigrants do not receive public assistance. Most legal immigrants have to wait live years to be eligible for welfare. Illegal immigrants are not eligible for any social services except emergency Medicaid and vital programs related to child welfare. A study in 1997 showed that 4.9 percent of immigrants receive help, in contrast to 3.3 percent of the native-born population. But many of those immigrants are refugees or the elderly, who do not qualify for Social Security as older Americans do. Finally, supporters say immigration is an investment that will pay off in a trained work force and future taxpayers. To those who would deny education to the children of illegal immigrants, Indianapolis Superintendent of Schools Esperanza Zendejas replies: AMERICAN! "These kids voicesJ are g0jng to be here for a long time. So the question is whether we want to educate these kids now or pay for increased social welfare costs later down the line. I think it's an easy choice** —Esperanza Zendejas The Statue of Liberty was what many immigrants first saw when they arrived in the United States. For some, trunks like the one below carried all the possessions they were able to bring from home. The Debate Continues Although both supporters and opponents of immigration believe it is necessary to exert greater control over illegal immigrants, they disagree over how to do it. They also disagree over the level of legal immigration and whether legal immigrants should be eligible for social services. Voters will need to weigh the Statue of Liberty's promise against their perception of America's ability to keep that promise. 