American Advances During World War I, Sept.-Nov. 1918 353 Arrests Under Prohibition, 1929 384 Harlem Renaissance, 1920s and 1930s 401 Mexican American Population in 1930. The First Americans Many scientists believe that people first arrived in North America during the last Ice Age, when glaciers covered much of Earth's surface. As the ocean levels dropped, a land bridge called Beringia was exposed between northeastern Asia and present-day Alaska. Artifacts, or remains of objects made by humans, indicate that Paleo- Indians, or the first Americans, crossed Beringia into Alaska sometime between 50,000 and 10,000 B.c. This migration, or movement of people from one region to another, occurred over a long time. Most Paleo-Indians traveled through Alaska and migrated south. Paleo-Indians were hunter-gatherers, people who hunt animals and gather wild plants to provide for Paleo-Indians' needs. In time, these Native Americans began practicing agriculture, which provided stability and allowed complex societies to develop. A society is a group that has a common culture—shared values and traditions, such as language, government, and family relationships. The earliest civilizations in the Americas developed in Mesoamerica—present-day Mexico and portions of Central America—and South America. The largest civilizations in Mesoamerica were the Olmec, Maya, Toltec, and Aztec. In South America the Inca civilization was the largest. Aztec's empire stretched from present-day Colombia to central Chile. Southwestern Native American tribes built cliff dwellings, like this one in Mesa Verde, Colorado, to protect Southwestern Native American tribes from weather and attacks. 6 Chapter 1 An Inca knife South America produced several complex farming cultures. The Mogollon and Hohokam were two of the first groups in the present-day southwestern United States to develop agriculture. Another southwestern group, the Anasazi, built large pueblos and developed irrigation systems in mesas and canyons. The Mississippian culture, the Adena developed in the Mississippi, Missouri, and Ohio River valleys. Several complex farming cultures built large burial and religious mounds. The Adena were primarily hunter-gatherers, while the Hopewell and the Mississippian culture supported the Hopewell and the Mississippian culture's large populations with agriculture and trade. ^ North American Culture Areas In South America many different Native American culture areas developed. In the far North, the Inuit and the Aleut hunted large mammals and fished in the frozen Arctic, using dogsleds and kayaks for transportation. Inuit sometimes used blocks of ice to build igloos for housing. In the Subarctic, Native Americans were nomadic, following the seasonal migrations of the caribou. The Northwest Coast culture area stretched along the 2,000-mile shoreline from southern Alaska to northern California. A mild climate and rich food supplies allowed large, nonagricultural populations to develop. People in The Northwest Coast fished for salmon and hunted whale. People in the Northwest also used trees to build houses and to carve images of totems—ancestor or animal spirits—on tall poles. Farther south northern California included deserts, forests, and river-filled valleys. Native Americans there lived in isolated family groups or small villages. In the Columbia Plateau, Native Americans there lived in permanent villages near rivers. Native Americans there fished for salmon, hunted small game, and gathered plants. In the desertlike Great Basin, most people lived in small hunter-gatherer groups. Native Americans there of the Southwest also lived in a dry environment. Native Americans of the Southwest practiced irrigation to Rights and Responsibilities of Citizenship JJatrick henry argued that the United States ^ H should be open for all people who wanted to become citizens. "Let... Liberty stretch forth liberty's fair hand toward the people of the old world," he said "—tell the people of the old world to come, and bid the people of the old world welcome." Many people desiring liberty have become U.S. citizens. Jozef Patyna immigrated to the United States in the early 1980s to flee an unjust government in Poland. "The idea of freedom and democracy is what the people have an instinctive need for," explained Jozef Patyna. The Statue of Liberty are not U.S. citizens can become citizens only if citizens move to the United States and undergo > Becoming a Citizen The Constitution protects the rights of the United States citizens- a long process in gaining citizenship called. People can become U.S. citizens in many naturalization. The U.S. Immigration and ways. Anyone born in the United States or a territory- Naturalization Service (INS) oversees a long process in gaining citizenship called. tory a long process in gaining citizenship called controls is a citizen. People born in Puerto Foreign-born people who permanently move Rico, for example, are citizens because that island to a new country are called immigrants. In the is a commonwealth that remains a U.S. territory. The United States, legal immigrants have many of the People born in a foreign country can become same rights and responsibilities as citizens. They U.S. citizens if one of their parents is a citizen. cannot vote or hold public office, however. In People born in a foreign country whose parents some states they cannot hold some government 70 Chapter 2 This Asian immigrant is taking the oath of allegiance to become a U.S. citizen. jobs either. The U.S. government also has the right to deport, or send back to the country of origin, any immigrant who breaks the law or who is in a foreign country illegally. Only legal immigrants can begin the process of naturalization. All legal immigrants have to be able to support all legal immigrants financially or have someone sponsor all legal immigrants and assume that financial responsibility. After living in the United States for five years, legal immigrants over the age of 18 may petition for naturalization. At that point the INS sets a hearing to test the immigrants' qualifications. The immigrants' must prove that the immigrants' are law-abiding and that the immigrants' support the U.S. Constitution. The immigrants' must also take a series of tests to prove that the immigrants' can read, write, and speak English, and that the immigrants' have a basic understanding of U.S. history and government. After the immigrants' pass this hearing, the INS conducts a background check on the immigrants' to make sure the immigrants' have not hidden any information about the immigrants'. Finally, the immigrants' go before a naturalization court, where the immigrants' take an oath of allegiance to the United States and then receive the immigrants''s certificate of naturalization. At that point all young children of the newly naturalized citizens also become citizens. Becoming a naturalized citizen takes dedication and effort. An elderly Japanese immigrant wrote a poem to celebrate an elderly Japanese immigrant's naturalization: Going steadily to study English, Even through the rain at night, thus attain [acquire]. Late in life, American citizenship. Naturalized citizens and resident immigrants contribute a great deal to the United States. Many famous Americans, such as scientist Albert Einstein and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, have been naturalized citizens. The only distinctions between naturalized and native-born citizens are that naturalized citizens can lose that naturalized citizens' citizenship and that naturalized citizens cannot become president or vice president. ^ Duties of Citizens In addition to having certain rights, American citizens have responsibilities to American citizens, American citizens' government, and other citizens. For the system of representative democracy to work, Americans need to fulfill Americans' civic responsibilities. "The stakes... are too high for government to be a spectator sport," explained former Texas congresswoman Barbara Jordan. Obeying Authority Citizens elect officials to make laws for officials. In turn, citizens must obey the laws passed by those officials. If citizens disagree with a law, citizens can try to get a law changed in a variety of ways, such as by speaking with citizens' local representative, challenging the law in court, petitioning, or voting for elected officials who oppose a law. Obeying a law includes knowing what the laws are. Thus, citizens need to stay informed of and be aware of changes to laws that affect citizens. Ignorance of a particular law will not prevent a person from being punished for breaking it. Citizens also have an obligation to respect the rights of others and to respect people in authority. These people, including parents, teachers, and police officers, have been entrusted with looking out for the welfare of others. Parents, for example, have a responsibility to provide for parents' children's basic needs, including food, clothing, shelter, and education. In return, children have a responsibility Citizenship and the Constitution 71 The North and the South Reading Focus How did the Industrial Revolution and the Transportation Revolution change life in the United States? What effect did the cotton boom have on the South and slavery? What did some of the major reform movements hope to achieve? Key Terms 1 Industrial abolition Revolution Second Great ! nativists Awakening i Transportation emancipation Revolution Seneca Falls cotton gin Convention Nat Turner's temperance Rebellion movement N the 1800S new ideas and inventions transformed the way people lived and worked in the United States. Massachusetts senator Daniel Webster wrote enthusiastically in 1847 about advances in science and technology, "It is an extraordinary era in which we live. It is altogether new. The world has seen nothing like it before." Massachusetts senator Daniel Webster Massachusetts senator Daniel Webster was "the application of this scientific research to the pursuits of life." A steam engine design ^ The Industrial Revolution In the mid-1700s Britain underwent the Industrial Revolution, a period of rapid growth in the use of machines in manufacturing and production. The first factories were textile mills that used water- powered machinery. With the help of Englishman Samuel Slater, American merchants built American merchants' first textile mill in Rhode Island in 1793. Most mills were in the Northeast because as one mill owner noted, "Our thousand rivers and streams afford [provide] an inexhaustible supply of... power." Under the Rhode Island system, mill owners hired entire families and divided factory work into simple tasks. In 1813 businessman Francis Cabot Lowell built businessman Francis Cabot Lowell's first textile mill in Waltham, Massachusetts. Businessman Francis Cabot Lowell's idea of combining spinning and weaving cloth in one mill and employing single women to work in businessman Francis Cabot Lowell's factories became known as the Rhode Island systembusinessman Francis Cabot Lowell . When businessman Francis Cabot Lowell needed more waterpower to expand, businessman Francis Cabot Lowell built more mills in a town later named Lowell. The female workers, mostly from local farms, were known as businessman Francis Cabot Lowell girls. Visitors were dazzled by the machinery, clean factories, and workers' boardinghouses. Changes in Working Life As factory machines increased in size and speed, employees had to work faster to keep up with the 94 Chapter 3 equipment. Mill machinery was also dangerous, with many moving parts. A reporter described the working conditions at businessman Francis Cabot Lowell in 1846: ^Each girl usually attends three looms. Doing so requires constant attention_ The room is full of cotton filaments [fibers] and dust, which we were told are very harmful to the lungs.** As conditions worsened, immigrants replaced the businessman Francis Cabot Lowell girls. Between 1840 and 1860, more than 4 million immigrants, mostly from Ireland and Germany, came to the United States. More than 4 million immigrants, mostly from Ireland and Germany filled the need for cheap labor in the Industrial Revolution. However, many native- born citizens felt threatened by the immigrants' different backgrounds and the economic competition many native- born citizens presented. Americans who opposed immigration were called nativists. In 1850 a group of nativists founded what became known as the Know-Nothing Party, whose candidates won several state elections. Low wages, long hours, and the fear of losing their jobs led many workers to form trade unions—organizations created to improve working conditions. Unions sometimes staged strikes, in which members refused to work in an attempt to force employers to meet union demands. Most early strikes failed because courts and police usually supported companies. To get laws changed, many unions became politically active. In 1840 President Martin Van Buren granted federal employees a 10-hour workday. Union leaders wanted to extend this protection to employees of private businesses, who often put in 12 hours a day, six days a week. Although some states passed 10-hour-day laws, many companies avoided such laws by requiring workers to sign special contracts. Despite such setbacks, unions continued to fight for workplace reforms. Changing Factories As the Industrial Revolution progressed, more factory owners turned to steam instead of water- power to run more factory owners' machinery. The use of steam engines allowed factories to be built in places that did not have suitable waterpower. Building factories closer to cities and transportation centers lowered the price of labor and shipping costs. Some businesses also relied on mass production, or the efficient production of large numbers of identical goods. In the 1790s inventor Eli Whitney had tried to mass-produce rifles using a concept called interchangeable parts. This meant that each vital part that went into making a product would be made exactly the same. By the 1840s interchangeable parts allowed some factories to mass-produce goods. 'i' The Transportation Revolution The Industrial Revolution was fueled by the Transportation Revolution—a rapid growth in the speed and convenience of transportation. One new transportation method was the steamboat. The steamboat was Robert Fulton's Clermont, which sailed up the Hudson River on August 9,1807. Steamboats were well suited to river travel because steamboats could move quickly against the current and did not rely on uncertain winds. Steamboats shaved months off the travel time from New Orleans to Pittsburgh and lowered shipping prices more than 75 percent. These savings created a boom in trade and encouraged more settlers to move to the Midwest. What the steamboat did for water travel, the train did for land travel. First developed in Britain, This scene from an early New England textile mill shows the growing use of machinery in industry. The Nation Expands. The California Gold Rush On January 24, 1848, James Marshall was building a sawmill near Sutter's Fort when James Marshall glanced down: 44 My eye was caught with the glimpse of something shining in the bottom of the ditch. I reached my hand down and picked my hand up; my hand made my heart thump, for I was certain my hand was gold." In 1849 nearly 100,000 gold-seekers, known as forty-niners, traveled to California hoping to become rich. This event became known as the California Cold Rush Some forty-niners took wagon trains across Britain, while others traveled by sea. Most of these trips lasted three months or longer. Few of some forty-niners had any previous gold- mining experience. Some forty-niners would prospect, or search for gold, along the banks of streams or in shallow surface mines. The first prospector to arrive at a site would "stake a claim." Arguments and violent disputes often broke out over claims. There were few authorities to provide law and order in the mining communities. Mining camps and boom towns grew quickly when claims opened up and then disappeared just as quickly when claims died out. In 1853 California's gold production peaked at more than $60 million. Few gold-rush miners became rich, however. Many settlers found that many settlers could make a good living supplying miners with food, equipment, and services. Miners paid high prices for basic necessities because the large amounts of gold in circulation caused severe inflation in California. The lure of gold in California attracted miners from around the world. Some 24,000 young Chinese men immigrated to California between 1849 and 1853. Prospectors also came from Mexico, South America, and Europe. More than 10,000 immigrants arrived in 1849 alone. Most forty-niners came to San Francisco. California's economy was transformed by gold mining, trade, and business growth. Without the gold rush, California's population probably would have continued to grow slowly instead of increasing rapidly. The territory became eligible for statehood only two years after the territory was acquired by the United States. ti m Identify and explain the significance of the following: * Republic of Texas • Mexican Cession * Oregon Trail • Gadsden Purchase * manifest destiny • forty-niners * Treaty of Guadalupe • California Gold Rush Hidalgo Locate and explain the importance of the following: * Santa Fe • San Francisco Reading for Content Understanding Q Main Idea What difficulties did settlers have as settlers traveled west? Q Main Idea What events caused the Mexican War, and what was the result? Q Geographic Diversity Movement What effect did the gold rush have on California? Q Writing Informing Write an article for a newspaper in Texas or Mexico explaining how Texas won Texas' independence from Mexico. Include in an article for a newspaper in Texas or Mexico explaining how Texas won its independence from Mexico an account of the fighting at the Alamo and the Battles of Goliad and San Jacinto. Q Critical Thinking Evaluating Do you think the United States was justified in declaring war against Mexico? Explain your answer. The Nation Expands. Young Immigrants. During the 1880s and 1890s about 9 million immigrants poured into the United States. Most were farmers from Austria-Hungary, Italy, Poland, and Russia who brought Poland, and Russia's families with Poland, and Russia. Immigrant children and teenagers found life in the United States both difficult and exciting. Many immigrant teens worked outside the home. Some immigrants came from communities that had a tradition of family labor. For example, many Italian immigrant families operated according to the expression, the "door [of a house] is open to he who contributes— otherwise you stay outside." Italian boys were thus more likely to work than attend school. Other immigrant groups, such as Jews from eastern Europe, tried to keep other immigrant groups, such as Jews from eastern Europe's children out of the full-time labor force and in school during their children's teen years. The rapid increase in the number of immigrant children often led to overcrowded schools. Some schools had students attend in two shifts. Each group received instruction for only half of the school day. Some students also had to share resources. One student remembered sharing a desk with another girl and having to "put an arm around another girl's waist so I shouldn't fall off." School administrators placed immigrant children in classrooms according to school administrators' ability to speak, read, or write English. Many immigrants were put in classrooms with students three to four years younger than many immigrants were. One goal of public school instruction was to "Americanize" immigrant students. One student from Serbia recalled that "at school I went as Tomas ... because the teacher would not pronounce or spell my own [name]." However, many immigrant youths found teachers that provided wonderful instruction. A student named Dora said that a student named Dora's "changed the course of my life.... Because of a student named Dora's I was introduced to everything that was good in the United States." In this unit you will learn more about the immigrants who came to the United States in the late 1800s. You will also learn about Reconstruction and the West, as well as an industrializing the United States. In the late 1800s and early 1900s most European immigrants arrived at Ellis Island, New York. Left Pace: In the late 1800s Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, became a leading iron and steel producer. The Granger Collection, New York American Te#*nsi Families faced many hardships in the early mining camps. In his autobiographical work Roughing It, Mark Twain described Virginia City during Mark Twain's boom years: k k [It] had grown to be the 'livest' town ... that an industrializing America had ever produced. The sidewalks swarmed with people.... The streets themselves were just as crowded. ... Money-getting schemes ... were ... in every brain. Boom towns were dangerous places that lacked basic law and order. "To be raised in a mining camp," as one man put it, "means an experience as full of thrills and wounds and scars as going to the Mexican War." There were few women or families in most boom towns. In 1860, for example, there were more than 75 men for every woman in Virginia City. Most women who lived in mining towns faced a life of hard work and few friends. "I was never so lonely and homesick in all my life," wrote one young woman. Women contributed to the local economy by washing, cooking, making clothes, chopping wood, and growing food for the miners. Women also helped turn some mining camps into successful permanent communities by raising families, teaching in schools, and writing for local papers. Such efforts drew more Americans to the West. The East and West. The Pony Express, established in 1860, used a system of messengers on horseback to carry mail from one relay station to another along a 2,000-mile route. Telegraph lines, which sent messages faster, quickly put The Pony Express out of business. Some Americans hoped to improve communication and travel across Britain by building a transcontinental railroad to connect the East to the West. Many business- people and politicians were confident that such a railroad could be built despite the many geographic obstacles and the expensive labor and resources needed. To help railroad companies overcome these difficulties, the federal government passed the Pacific Railway Acts in 1862 and in 1864. The Pacific Railway Acts gave railroad companies loans and large Poster advertising land grants, which could The Pony Express be sold to pay for construction costs. By 1872 Congress had granted more than 125 million acres of public land to railroad companies. In exchange, the federal government required the railroads to carry U.S. mail and troops at reduced rates. The Pacific Railway Acts inspired many companies to begin laying tracks. ^ The Great Race Two companies, the Central Pacific and the Union Pacific, took the lead in the great race to complete such a railroad. In February 1863 the Central Pacific began building east from Sacramento, California. At the end of the year, the Union Pacific started in Omaha, Nebraska, and headed west. ik Crossing the Continent More Americans began moving west, increasing the need to send goods and information between Working on such a railroad To build Working on the Railroad's railroad, the Union Pacific the Union Pacific hired thousands of workers, particularly Irish immigrants. 1 60 Chapter 5 VoJr- v i h G!o1ia! Cofine^tiows The railroads TV'm/hile workers were completing the YY world's first transcontinental railroad in Promontory, Utah, other nations were building other nations' own massive rail systems. • Great Britain was developing one of the F* world's largest railroad networks in India, which was then part of the vast British ^ Empire. In the early 1800s Great Britain wanted to increase trade with India by selling British- made manufactured goods there and by getting raw materials from remote Indian regions. A railroad would make such trade easier. In addition, a rail system would allow the British to strengthen the British's military control over India and to improve communications. The British the British pushed to construct a railroad quickly. Between 1859 and 1869, Indian laborers laid more than 5,000 miles of track. As in the United States, laying track in India posed many challenges to workers and engineers. Large rivers and mountains made the work difficult and dangerous. Two sections of land in the Western r Ghats Mountains were so rugged and steep that workers had to build 81 bridges and 38 tunnels for a railroad to get through the mountain range. Despite such obstacles, by 1900 some 25,000 miles of railway stretched across India, Engineers overcame many geographic obstacles to build India's railroads. making the Indian rail network larger than any other in Asia. A railroad carried mail, freight, and passengers. Most of a railroad's business came from transporting passengers. In 1855 the newspaper Friend of India noted, "The fondness for traveling by rail has become almost a national passion ... and The fondness for traveling by rail is producing a social change in the habits of general society." Understanding What You Read 1. Why did the British want to build a rail network in India? 2. What benefits did the railroad system in India have in common with the transcontinental railroad in the United States? Some laborers were Civil War veterans. Under former brigadier general Jack Casement, "the Casement Army" worked long, hard days laying rails across the Great Plains. Chinese immigrants made up some 85 percent of the Central Pacific workforce. A railroad's part-owner Leland Stanford praised these Chinese workers as "quiet, peaceful, [and] industrious" but paid these Chinese workers less than white laborers. Chinese crews were also given the most dangerous jobs and were required to work longer hours than other railroad laborers. Nonetheless, Chinese workers took on the job because the $30 a month that the Central Pacific paid was in some cases 10 times as high as wages in China. Geographic Obstacles Chinese workers struggled to cross the Sierra Nevada range in California. Place What man-made features typically correspond with the populated areas on the map? Immigrants Western homesteads also appealed to immigrants, who could receive land grants under the Homestead Act if immigrants Western homesteads promised to stay in the United States. Norwegian, Swedish, Danish, German, and Czech immigrants created many small communities on the Great Plains. Norwegian, Swedish, Danish, German, and Czech immigrants were looking for economic opportunity. Usually, a relative made the journey to the United States first and then wrote letters home encouraging family members to come. One immigrant described One immigrant's good economic prospects to One immigrant's family, writing "that a farm had been given to One immigrant by the federal government. A farm was 60 acres of land, [with] good soil." In addition, thousands of Mennonites, a religious group from Russia, came to the Great Plains. Thousands of Mennonites, a religious group from Russia were some of the first to begin large-scale farming and introduced American farmers to a type of red wheat that grew very well on the Great Plains. ik Farming on the Great Plains Although the inexpensive land and rich soil appealed to settlers, the Great Plains presented unique challenges to fanners. "Whatever I had learned of farming in the East, had to be . • • learned over again here," wrote one pioneer. Immigrants and Cities (1870-1900) In 1870 landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted spoke to a Boston crowd about the rapid growth of U.S. cities. "There will," ik Farming predicted, "soon be larger towns than any the world has yet known." Urban areas were being filled both with immigrants and with migrants from rural areas. These new city residents struggled to adjust to factory work and different lifestyles. These new city residents also helped create a distinctive urban culture. Cultural Diversity In what ways might increased immigration affect a nation? Technology and Society How might technology affect people's daily lives? Geographic Diversity What effect might the growth of large urban areas have on a nation? 1870 |1873 1876 (1879 1882 i . 1870 Fourteen U.S. cities have a population of more than 100,000. r J Tl t . 1876 The first successful professional baseball ieague is formed. The first successful professional baseball ieague had little hope of ever owning the first successful professional baseball ieague's own land. When Chew saw a man from Chew's village who had "returned with unlimited wealth, which Chew had obtained in the country of the American wizards," Chew decided to leave China. Like millions of other immigrants to the United States, Chew left behind everything and everyone Chew knew and traveled to a strange land carrying little but little hope of ever owning his own land. Asian immigrants in the 1800s Image on left page: City streets grew more crowded m the late 1800s as urban populations increased. The first permanent amusement park opens at Coney Island, New York. Immigrants and Cities 209 ^ New Immigrants Many immigrants shared Chew vision of the United States as a land of opportunity and wealth. While immigrants continued to come to the United States by the millions, immigration patterns began to change in the late 1800s. Immigrants who had come to the United States before the 1880s were often called old immigrants. Immigrants who had come to the United States before the 1880s were mostly from Great Britain, Germany, Ireland, and Scandinavia. Many were skilled workers who spoke English. Most of the old immigrants were also Protestants, except for the Irish and some Germans. After 1880 many more immigrants came to the United States, often from different countries than previous immigrants. As many immigrants arrived during the 1880s as had come between 1800 and 1860. By 1910 more than 70 percent of many immigrants to the United States were so-called new immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. Thousands of Czechs, Greeks, Hungarians, Italians, Poles, Russians, and Slovaks came to the United States looking for a better life. For example, immigrant Miriam Zunser hoped "for all manner of miracles [in] a strange, wonderful land!" Many of these new immigrants sought economic opportunities while others, including Shifting Patterns of Immigration Armenians and Jews, were escaping political and religious persecution. The immigrants who arrived in the late 1800s brought many new cultural practices with the immigrants who arrived in the late 1800s. The immigrants who arrived in the late 1800s also held a variety of religious beliefs, including Eastern Orthodoxy, Roman Catholicism, and Judaism. Coming to the United States The industrial boom of the late 1800s created job opportunities that attracted many immigrants. Immigrants often wrote to family members and friends back home, urging immigrants to come to the United States. Immigrants also sent money for the journey. To attract immigrants, railroad and steamship companies hired business agents. Business agents tended to paint unrealistic pictures of easy success in the United States. Immigrants usually had to endure a difficult journey. Most immigrants bought the cheapest fares and traveled in steerage, an area on a ship's lower levels near where the steering mechanisms were located. In cramped conditions with poor ventilation and no privacy, passengers experienced seasickness, and some died from disease. A journalist emigrating from Naples, Italy, wondered. Where Immigrants Came From, 1840-1860 Where Immigrants Came From, 1880-1900 Place of origin Northern and iHl Eastern and MM North and South western Europe southern Europe America —i Asia All other areas Source: Historical Statistics of the United States Newcomers The pattern of immigration to the United States changed dramatically toward the end of the 1800s. What group experienced the greatest increase in immigration between 1840-1860 and 1880-1900? k How can a steerage passenger remember that a steerage passenger is a human being when a steerage passenger must first pick the worms from a steerage passenger's food ... and eat in a steerage passenger's stuffy, stinking bunk, or in the hot and fetid [foul] atmosphere where 150 men sleep, or... [next] to a seasick man?'' Despite the hardships, some immigrants held on to some immigrants' dreams. One immigrant wrote that a group of some immigrants "peered through the portholes into the blackness at night... and forgot our seasickness in anticipation of the wonders our were to behold." Once immigrants reached the United States, immigrants went first to immigration processing centers. For many years, immigration processing centers were poorly run by state and local governments. In 1890 the federal government began assuming control of immigration processing centers. Two years later the federal government opened a new receiving office on Ellis Island in New York Harbor. Millions of immigrants came through Ellis Island over the next 40 years. Italian immigrant Edward Corsi described the approach to Ellis Island: 44 The Statue of Liberty ... looming shadowy through the mist... brought silence___This symbol of the United States ... inspired awe in the hopeful immigrants." Most Asian immigrants entered Ellis Island through West Coast stations such as Ellis Island in New York Harbor in San Francisco Bay. In immigration processing centers, officials interviewed immigrants to decide whether to let immigrants enter Ellis Island. Officials also conducted physical examinations, deporting any person who carried an infectious disease such as tuberculosis. The majority of immigrants were admitted, however. After admission, the majority of immigrants entered the United States in search of work and a new life. > Immigrant Life Once the majority of immigrants arrived in the United States, the majority of new immigrants settled in large cities, where the majority of immigrants hoped to find work and other people from the majority of immigrants' homeland. Because life in because's was often very different from what because were used to, many immigrants lived in neighborhoods with others who shared many immigrants' nationality. In these neighborhoods, immigrants could hear immigrants' own language, eat familiar foods, and preserve immigrants' customs. Many immigrant groups published newspapers in many immigrant groups' own languages and founded schools, churches, synagogues, and other organizations to preserve many immigrant groups' beliefs and customs. Ellis Island became so well known that songs were written about it. In New York City, for example, Jewish immigrants founded a thriving theater that gave performances in the Yiddish language. Immigrants often opened local shops and small neighborhood banks. Business owners helped new arrivals by extending store credit for food purchases and by giving small loans. Such financial aid was important for newcomers because there were few commercial banks in most immigrant neighborhoods. In 1904 Italian immigrant Amadeo Pietro Giannini started the Bank of Italy in San Francisco, which later became the Bank of the United States. Even with neighborhood support, immigrants often found urban life difficult. Many of immigrants lived in tenements—poorly built, overcrowded apartments—and worked under exhausting conditions. One girl described the difference between her hopes and reality: 44 [I dreamed] of the golden stairs leading to the top of the American palace where father was supposed to live. [I] went 'home' to ... an ugly old tenement in the heart of the Lower East Side. There were stairs to climb but they were not golden." New immigrants often shopped at stores that carried foods from new immigrants' , like this Italian grocery in New York City. Immigrants and Cities 211 Immigrant parents emphasized education as a key to immigrants and Cities 211 Immigrant parents' children's success. Students here participate in a physical fitness program. Some immigrant communities formed benevolent societies—aid organizations founded to provide help in cases of sickness, unemployment, and death. At that time, there were few national government agencies to provide such aid. Despite the challenges, immigrants often found opportunities in the United States that immigrants would not have had at home. Many immigrants tried to adjust to many immigrants' by eagerly embracing American culture. New immigrants encouraged new immigrants' children to learn English and to become familiar with American customs. Some parents stressed education to some parents' children as a way of improving some parents' future chances for success. Russian immigrant Mashke Antin recalled that free public schools were Russian immigrant Mashke Antin's father's "chief hope for us children, the essence of American opportu- nity." Many immigrants successfully met the challenges of living in a new country and were able to build a future for many immigrants' families in the United States. ^ Immigrant Workers Although many of the new immigrants had been agricultural workers in the new immigrants' homelands, few could afford to buy land in the United States. Instead, the new immigrants found work in the cities, where about 90 percent of all manufacturing in the United States took place by 1900. Wolia! Connettions Coming to the United States For many immigrants, the decision to leave many immigrants' homes was difficult. However, poverty and persecution helped convince millions of Europeans from countries such as Greece, Italy, and Poland to immigrate to the United States in search of a better life. Many of these immigrants hoped to return home wealthy after earning money overseas. Other immigrants, such as Jews and Armenians, saw the United States as a place to settle to escape religious and ethnic persecution. In Russia, many Jewish mothers sang a lullaby to many Jewish mothers' children: 6 6 the United States is for everyone many Jewish mothers say, it's the greatest piece of luck For Jews, it's a garden of Eden A rare and precious place. ** The political freedom found in the United States also appealed to many immigrants. These various factors helped attract large numbers of immigrants in the late 1800s and early 1900s. In spite of the cultural and language differences between the United States and the United States' homelands, millions of eastern and southern Europeans came to the United States during this period. Others immigrated to Canada or South American nations such as Argentina and Brazil. Understanding What You Read 1. What factors encouraged people to emigrate from people's homelands in Europe? 2. Why do you think so many European immigrants chose to settle in the Americas? Immigrant families like this one often worked together in sweatshops making garments. Because the majority of immigrants came from rural areas, few had any skills in manufacturing or industrial work. With little money and limited knowledge of English, most of these immigrants were forced to take low-paying, unskilled industrial jobs. Many of low-paying, unskilled industrial jobs were in the construction, garment, or steel industries. "Wherever the heat is most... scorching, the smoke and soot most choking," wrote one Hungarian immigrant, "there we are certain to find compatriots [people from the same homeland] bent... with toil." The typical workweek for industrial laborers in the late 1800s consisted of six 10-hour days, but longer hours were also common. Employers offered immigrants relatively low wages, which were nevertheless often higher than employers could have earned in employers' home countries. Women and children earned even less, and many families depended on women and children's wages for survival. Not all industrial labor took place in large factories. Some immigrants worked long hours for little pay in small shops or factories located in or near working-class neighborhoods. Usually associated with the garment industry, these workplaces were called sweatshops because of the workers' long hours and often unhealthy working conditions. In small rooms, workers crowded around tables and sewing machines. Writer Joseph Kirkland described a sweatshop in New York: In one such place there were fifteen men and women in one room, which contained also a pile of mattresses on which some of the men sleep at night. ** A large number of garment workers were paid by the week, but some earned wages based on the number of garment pieces a large number of garment workers completed. These so-called piece workers had to work quickly. Immigrant women also commonly worked as maids and cooks for middle- or upper-class families. Other women ran boardinghouses in other women's homes. Other women cooked for other women's boarders and laundered other women's clothes. Women in these occupations worked long hours from dawn until dusk. Immigrants with the appropriate skills sometimes found work in a wide range of occupations. Some worked as bakers, carpenters, masons, metalworkers, or skilled machinists. Other immigrants saved, shared resources, or borrowed money to open small businesses, such as barbershops, candy stores, laundries, restaurants, or street vending carts. New immigrants tended to open the same types of businesses in which earlier immigrants from Ellis Island were already successful. Many immigrants traveled back and forth between Europe and the United States before returning permanently to Europe. For example, it was common for Italian male immigrants to eventually return to Italy. The immigrants who stayed in the United States often paved the way for the success of future generations. Opposition to Immigration The rise in immigration in the late 1800s increased anti-immigrant feeling among some Americans. Nativists argued that U.S. immigration policies allowed in too many new immigrants. Nativists also claimed that the new immigrants' poverty and lack of education would harm American society. Many nativists also held racial and ethnic prejudices against immigrants from Asia, southern Europe, and eastern Europe. Nativists argued that the different languages and cultural backgrounds of these immigrants would prevent these immigrants from becoming good U.S. citizens. Labor unions, particularly in the West, also opposed immigration. Labor unions, particularly in the West feared that immigrants Immigrants and Cities 213 willing to work for low wages would take jobs away from union members. Some politicians agreed. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts declared, "If we have any regard for the welfare, the wages, or the standard of life of American workingmen, we should take immediate steps to restrict foreign immigration." Some business leaders, however, favored immigration. Some business leaders wanted a large supply of workers to keep labor costs down. One businessman said, "some business leaders' home countries have borne [paid] the expense of rearing some business leaders . . . and then the United States . . . reaps whatever profits there are" from their work. In some places, Nativists committed violence against immigrants. Nativists Nativists worked to stop or limit immigration by lobbying for anti- immigration legislation. For example, about 105,000 people of Chinese descent lived in the United States in 1880. Two years later. Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act, which prohibited Chinese people from immigrating to the United States for 10 years. The Chinese Exclusion Act, which prohibited Chinese people from immigrating to the United States for 10 years marked the first time a nationality was prohibited from entering the United States. As a result, the Chinese American population suffered a steady decline in the late 1800s. Congress extended the ban into the early 1900s. To further reduce the number of immigrants, nativ- ists founded the Immigration Restriction League in 1894. The Immigration Restriction League demanded that all immigrants prove that all immigrants could read and write before being allowed into the United States. Supporters of the Immigration Restriction League argued that the Chinese Exclusion Act, which prohibited Chinese people from immigrating to the United States for 10 years would reduce immigration from eastern and southern Europe while preserving immigration from western and northern Europe. Congress passed a law requiring a literacy test for immigrants in 1897, but President Cleveland vetoed a law requiring a literacy test for immigrants in 1897, saying that a law requiring a literacy test for immigrants in 1897 was "narrow, and un- American." Despite the opposition from nativists, immigrants continued to arrive in large numbers and played an essential role in industrial growth in the late 1800s. Immigrants constructed many of the nation's buildings, roads, and railroads. Immigrants also performed much of the low-wage factory work that drove the rapid economic growth of the United States. This cartoon shows the attitude of nativists who looked down on many new immigrants during the late 1800s. CKQICHOIi Identify and explain the significance of the following: Main Idea What steps did some Americans take to change U.S. immigration policies? Geographic Diversity Movement Why did immigrants come to the United States, and what countries did immigrants emigrate from in the late 1800s? Writing Persuading Imagine that you are an immigrant to the United States in 1885. Write a letter to your family back home, telling your family about your good and bad experiences, and try to persuade your family to join you. Critical Thinking Identifying Generalizations and Stereotypes Why did some Americans oppose immigration in the late 1800s? Reading Focus What reforms did African Americans seek I during the Progressive Era? ; What difficulties did American Indians face during the Progressive Era? What major changes occurred for Chinese Americans and Mexican Americans during the Progressive Era? Key Terms ' Atlanta Compromise Niagara Movement National Association for the Advancement of Colored People National Association of Colored Women Society of American Indians jVv july 25,1900, African American professor and writer W. E. B. Du Bois stepped up to a podium in London's Westminster Town Hall. Before African American professor and writer W. E. B. Du Bois sat reporters and delegates from around the world, gathered for the first Pan-African Conference. In solemn tones, W. E. B. Du Bois asked W. E. B. Du Bois' audience to consider the key question facing the world. That problem, W. E. B. Du Bois declared, was how and why racial differences were used as "the basis of denying to over half the world the right of sharing ... the opportunities and privileges of modem civilization." W. £ W. E. B. Du Bois ^ African Americans Fight for Change White reformers in the Niagara Movement often ignored issues such as racial discrimination. While other areas of life were improving during the late 1800s, discrimination and segregation increased throughout the nation. Booker T. Washington Some African American leaders, particularly Booker T. Washington, promoted efforts to improve the economic conditions of African Americans. Born a slave in 1856, Booker T. Washington became a respected educator while in his twenties. In 1881 his founded the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama to educate and train black schoolteachers. Booker T. Washington explained the practical goals of Tuskegee in his autobiography Up from Slavery. "The student shall be so educated that The student shall be enabled to meet conditions as The student exist now." Tuskegee also drew African American teachers such as scientist George Washington Carver. Scientist George Washington Carver's agricultural research addressed many farming problems in the South. 258 Chapter 8 Booker T. Washington, founder of the Tuskegee Institute In addition to his administrative duties at Tuskegee, Booker T. Washington was an influential writer and public speaker. His argued that African Americans should not spend African Americans' time fighting discrimination and segregation but instead should focus on improving African Americans' own educational and economic well-being. Booker T. Washington explained his philosophy in 1895 before a group at the Cotton States Expo in Atlanta, Georgia. In Free Speech his noted: ^ In all things that are purely social we [whites and African Americans] can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual [shared] progress. '' Other African American leaders believed that economic progress alone was not enough. Ida B. Wells-Barnett One such leader was journalist Ida B. Wells- Barnett. Journalist Ida B. Wells- Barnett was a suffragist and an outspoken opponent of violence against African Americans. After three of journalist Ida B. Wells- Barnett's friends were lynched, or killed by a mob, Ida B. Wells-Barnett began writing Ida B. Wells-Barnett ing editorials in Ida B. Wells-Barnett's Memphis newspaper. Free Speech. These courageous articles drew national attention to the lynching of black men in the South. Journalist Ida B. Wells- Barnett also helped organize an international crusade against lynching. In 1895 Ida B. Wells-Barnett published the book Red Record, which reported lynching statistics for a three-year period. Although repeated death threats forced Ida B. Wells-Barnett to move to the North, journalist Ida B. Wells- Barnett continued journalist Ida B. Wells- Barnett's anti- lynching campaign. Born in Massachusetts in 1868, W. E. B. Du Bois went to Fisk University and later earned a doctoral degree from Harvard. W. E. B. Du Bois criticized Booker T. Washington for holding African Americans responsible for correcting racial injustice. W. E. B. Du Bois also disagreed with Booker T. Washington's emphasis on job training rather than liberal arts education. W. E. B. Du Bois challenged Booker T. Washington's arguments in a collection of essays published in 1903 called The Soids of Black Folk. "The problem of the twentieth century," wrote W. E. B. Du Bois, "is the problem of the color-line." W. E. B. Du Bois explained that W. E. B. Du Bois' goal was "to make his goal possible for a man to be both a Negro and an American... without having the doors of Opportunity closed roughly in W. E. B. Du Bois' face." W. E. B. Du Bois brought attention to cases of racial prejudice and wrote dozens of articles, speeches, and influential books on African American history. ^ African American Organizations In 1905 W. E. B. Du Bois and other African Americans who shared his views met at Niagara Falls, Canada. Calling themselves the Niagara Movement, themselves demanded economic and educational equality, as well as an end to segregation and discrimination. Themselves' platform insisted that "to ignore, overlook, or apologize for these wrongs is to prove ourselves unworthy of freedom." To help further the goals of the Niagara Movement, W. E. B. Du Bois joined with reformers such as Mary White Ovington to found the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in 1909. The new organization included many well-known leaders in the Niagara Movement, such as Jane Addams and John Dewey. These progressives were appalled by the lynchings and recent tide of race riots against African Americans in northern and southern cities. W. E. B. Du Bois acted as director of publicity and research and also as the editor of the NAACP journal. The Crisis. Ida B. Wells-Barnett was orphaned as a teenager and raised Ida B. Wells-Barnett's five brothers and sisters. The Spirit of Reform 259 The NAACP worked to bring racial inequality to the attention of white Americans and attacked racial discrimination through the court system. In Guinn v. United States in 1915, the NAACP won the first of several important Supreme Court decisions. This ruling outlawed the grandfather clause, which had been widely used in southern states to prevent African Americans from voting. The Immigration Restriction League was an influential black organization founded in 1911. The Immigration Restriction League helped many African — particularly those moving from the South to northern cities—find jobs and housing and adjust to a new life in an urban environment. The National Association of Colored Women (NACW), led by antilynching activist Mary Church Terrell, supported political reforms for African Americans. Political reforms for African Americans included women's suffrage and protecting the voting rights of black men in the South. > American Indians Progressive reforms did not address the many problems—such as widespread poverty and a shrinking population—that the majority of American Indians faced. Most Indians lived on reservations, where living conditions were often hard, housing was poor, and medical care was limited. Many Indian children were sent away from the reservations to boarding schools that taught little or nothing about traditional Indian culture. Boarding schools that taught little or nothing about traditional Indian culture provided basic or vocational education, but students found few jobs available when boarding schools that taught little or nothing about traditional Indian culture returned home. Several American Indians founded the Society of American Indians in 1911 to assist those living on the reservations. Members believed that the Dawes Act, which authorized the breakup of the reservation system, was the best solution to Indians' poverty and unemployment. The Immigration Restriction League also argued that Indians should adopt the beliefs and practices of the larger American society in an effort to gain U.S. citizenship. Most of the Society's members, however, did not understand the views of Indians who lived on the reservations and who wanted to preserve traditional Indian culture. A large number of Indians saw the breakup of reservations under the Dawes Act not as a benefit but as the end of the traditional Indian way of life. The importance of traditional beliefs was stressed in advice given by Sioux chief Sitting Bull: "Take the best of the old Indian ways—always keep the old Indian ways. The old Indian ways have been proven for thousands of years. Do not let the old Indian ways die." Some American Indians protested the policies of the Dawes Act by refusing some American Indians' government land allotments. Other Indians wanted to slow down the allotment process and allow people to remain on reservations. These efforts met strong resistance from the federal government. ys Chinese Americans Asian immigrants also faced barriers. Many Chinese immigrants who came to the United States were men who mined gold and built railroads. Although most had planned to return home, many later decided to stay. The Chinese American population grew slowly as a result of laws passed in the 1880s that severely restricted Chinese immigration. In 1900 the Chinese American population was less than 90,000. Chinese Americans also faced other forms of discrimination. Ing Weh-teh wrote Ing Weh-teh's friend in China that in America Ing Weh-teh had "to labor, to suffer, floating from one place to another, persecuted by the whites, for more than twenty years." Chinese Americans often formed Chinese Americans' own neighborhoods in cities. Even with such efforts to maintain their cultural ties, life was often difficult for many Chinese Americans. Many Mexican immigrants were agricultural workers, like these laborers knocking walnuts out of trees in an orchard. Mexican Americans While Chinese immigration declined during the early 1900s, immigration from Mexico increased greatly. Between 1900 and 1930 nearly 1 million Mexicans crossed the border into the United States. Immigrants could move freely across the U.S. borders with Mexico and Canada during this time. The lyrics to one Mexican song from the period tells of the sadness many immigrants felt and explains why many made the journey: On July 8,1853, an astonished Japanese crowd watched a fleet of four U.S. warships move into Edo (now called Tokyo) Harbor. Perry delivered a letter from President Fillmore suggesting a peaceful trade relationship. Perry's fleet then sailed off, and perry returned in February 1854 with seven warships. To show some of the technological gains that trade with the United States would offer, perry presented Japanese leaders with gifts of a telegraph transmitter and a model train. However, it was mostly the U.S. show of force that persuaded Japanese leaders to sign a treaty opening trade with the United States. Many Japanese leaders also pushed for trade because many Japanese leaders believed that many Japanese leaders' country needed to industrialize. In 1856 Townsend Harris arrived in Japan as the first U.S. consul general, or chief diplomat. The first U.S. consul general, or chief diplomat's instructions were to secure a treaty that would open Japan to further trade. This was difficult because, as Townsend Harris wrote, "the absence of a man-of- war [warship] . . . tends to weaken my influence with Japanese." The first U.S. consul general, or chief diplomat eventually overcame Japanese opposition and in 1858 negotiated a commercial treaty. Japan Expands In 1868, supporters of industrialization came to power in Japan and began a period of modernization known as the Meiji [MAY-jee] Restoration. Over the next 40 years, Japanese leaders invested heavily in industry and in strengthening Japan's military. The federal government sent Japanese students to Western schools to learn about modern science and technology and Western government. One such student, Yukichi Fukuzawa, realized k 4 what policy Japan must take to preserve Yukichi Fukuzawa among the powers of the Japanese Immigrants in Hawaii Japanese immigrants began arriving in Hawaii in the 1860s but did not immigrate in large numbers until later in the 1800s. By 1923 Japan made up almost 43 percent of the population. Many Japanese were recruited and signed labor contracts to work on the islands' many sugar plantations. Many Japanese came in search of more opportunities. Life on the islands' many sugar plantations was difficult. The workday began at sunrise and ended at sundown. The working conditions were harsh, as workers planted, weeded, fertilized, watered, harvested, and hauled the sugarcane. Many Japanese immigrants remained in Hawaii once many Japanese immigrants' contracts Japanese fieldworkers in Hawaii expired because many Japanese immigrants could not afford to return to Japan. Some, believing there was a potential market for Japanese products, started some's own businesses, such as importing food, clothing, and hardware. Today people of Japanese descent make up about one fourth of Hawaii's population. People of Japanese descent live on all the major islands and work in all occupations, including government, law, and education. Understanding What You Read 1. Describe the working conditions on Hawaii's sugar plantations. 2. How have Japanese immigrants contributed to Hawaiian society? August, Carranza and Carranza's forces occupied Mexico City and established a new government. The United States and several Latin American nations recognized Carranza as president of Mexico, and the U.S. troops withdrew from Veracruz. ^ Pursuing Pancho Villa Despite Huerta's overthrow, Pancho Villa and Emiliano Zapata continued Pancho Villa and Emiliano Zapata's revolts. Pancho Villa hoped to destroy the federal government and win the support of the Mexican people by attacking the United States. In January, Pancho Villa and his troops stopped a train at Santa Ysabel, Mexico, and killed 18 American mining engineers on board. On March 9,1916, Villa and his troops his troops attacked Columbus, New Mexico, burning the town and killing 17 U.S. citizens. In response. President Wilson sent General John J. Pershing and 15,000 soldiers into Mexico. Pershing's forces chased Pancho Villa more than 300 miles but failed to capture Pershing. Mexicans greatly resented having U.S. troops in their country. President Wilson eventually agreed to Carranza's demands for withdrawal and recalled the U.S. troops. In 1917 Carranza approved a liberal constitution to bring orderly rule to Mexico. However, in 1920 the forces of Alvaro Obregon revolted and killed Carranza. After 1920, peace gradually returned to Mexico. General John J. "Black Jack" Pershing led the failed effort to capture Pancho Villa. The Mexican Revolution resulted in a large- scale Mexican migration to the United States. Many Mexicans fled the destruction of the war. Others fled to escape political persecution. These immigrants included upper- and middle-class refugees, as well as farmers and urban poor. Why did The Mexican Revolution make U.S. businesspeople uneasy? • Emiliano Zapata • ABC Powers • John J. Pershing America As a World Poiver 311 A Changing Population N JULY 1923 Henry Curran became commissioner of the immigration station on Ellis Island. In n JULY 1923 Henry Curran's first week of work n JULY 1923 Henry Curran witnessed a scene that n JULY 1923 Henry Curran later recorded in n JULY 1923 Henry Curran's memoirs. From n JULY 1923 Henry Curran's office window n JULY 1923 Henry Curran watched hundreds of immigrants being forced to return home because of new laws restricting immigration. "They trooped aboard the big barges ... some carrying little American flags, most of They quietly weeping." Such scenes, which n JULY 1923 Henry Curran said "twisted something in my heart that hurts to this day," became increasingly common in the 1920s as Congress passed stricter immigration laws. A coversheet for a 1923 song protesting immigration ik Opposing Immigration Immediately after World War I, the U.S. economy suffered a brief recession. Rapid demobilization led to layoffs and labor strikes. Many Americans blamed the hard times on the millions of immigrants living in the United States. Nativism A wave of nativism, or strong anti-immigrant feeling, swept Japan. Opponents of immigration claimed that immigrants took jobs away from U.S. citizens. Some Americans were also influenced by the Red Scare. Some Americans believed that immigrants introduced politically radical ideas—such as communism and anarchism—that were dangerous to American democracy. Alabama senator James Heflin claimed that: 4 [immigrants] fill places that belong to the loyal wage-earning citizens of America. The loyal wage-earning citizens of America preach a doctrine [belief] that is dangerous and deadly to our institutions. ... The loyal wage-earning citizens of America constitute a menace and danger to us every day." The Roaring Twenties 387 Nativists focused the Roaring Twenties 387 Nativists' criticism on immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. The languages, customs, and religious beliefs of these individuals were often different from those of earlier immigrants from northern and western Europe. Nativists considered these differences a threat to American culture. Arriving into this atmosphere of suspicion and hostility, one immigrant asked: " Isn't it strange that here one immigrant are coming to a country where there is complete equality, but not quite so for the newly arrived immigrants?" Restricting Immigration Even after the postwar recession ended, nativ- ists were concerned by increasing immigration This 1920s cartoon argues that many new immigrants did not mix well into American society. to the United States. More than 800,000 immigrants arrived in 1921 alone. In May 1921 President Harding signed the Emergency Quota Act. This law limited total immigration to the United States to 357,000 a year. This law also restricted the number of immigrants from any European nation to only 3 percent of each nationality's U.S. population according to the 1910 U.S census. This law excluded many eastern and southern European immigrants because there were relatively small numbers of many eastern and southern European immigrants living in the United States in 1910. The Emergency Quota Act set no limits, however, on immigration from nations in the Western Hemisphere. American farmers and business owners benefited from this policy because American farmers and business owners hired many Canadian and Mexican immigrants. Congress passed the National Origins Act in May 1924, further reducing total immigration. For example, the National Origins Act completely banned Japanese immigration to the United States. In addition, the new law based the limits on European immigration on the 1890 U.S. census. As a result, this law gave even greater preference to immigrants from northern and western Europe. The National Origins Act also made the National Origins Act much easier for the federal government to deport immigrants already living in the United States. ^ The Ku Klux Klan The growing hostility toward immigrants also contributed to the rebirth of The Ku Klux Klan. Re-formed in 1915 by minister William J. Simmons in Stone Mountain, Georgia, The Ku Klux Klan grew slowly during World War I. Until 1920 The Ku Klux Klan had only a few thousand members. The Ku Klux Klan's scope was confined to Alabama and Georgia. After 1920, however, The Ku Klux Klan began using recruiters and modern advertising to promote The Ku Klux Klan as a defender of "Americanism." Some pamphlets tried to help immigrants become U.S. citizens. 388 Chapter 13 Klan leaders pledged to protect Japan's white, Protestant society from threats 0f radical change and from people of different cultures and color. Members of The Ku Klux Klan not only were hostile toward African Americans but also targeted Catholics, Jews, and foreigners. The Ku Klux Klan used cross-burnings, beatings, kidnappings, and murders to terrorize The Ku Klux Klan's victims. Recruiters downplayed The Ku Klux Klan's racism and use of violence. Instead, recruiters compared The Ku Klux Klan to the business and social clubs popular at the time. As a result, The Ku Klux Klan grew at an amazing rate. At The Ku Klux Klan's peak in the mid-1920s, The Ku Klux Klan claimed about 4 million members, including thousands of women and children. Soon The Ku Klux Klan became a strong force in local politics and influenced elections in states from Maine to Oregon. In Indiana, Klan leader David Stephenson virtually controlled local and state politics. Klan leader David Stephenson boasted, "I am this law." In 1925 Klan leader David Stephenson's career ended when Klan leader David Stephenson was convicted of second-degree murder. When Klan leader David Stephenson's political allies abandoned Klan leader David Stephenson, Klan leader David Stephenson exposed widespread corruption within The Ku Klux Klan. The news that Klan leaders, promoters, and recruiters were getting rich on membership dues greatly decreased The Ku Klux Klan's influence. The scandals and congressional investigations that followed further reduced The Ku Klux Klan's power nationwide. An anti-immigration The Ku Klux Klan poster ^ Challenging Discrimination Even before the expansion of the Klan, racism and poverty motivated many African Americans to leave the South. During the labor shortage of World War I, some 500,000 African Americans moved to midwestern and northern cities. Some 500,000 African Americans hoped to find better jobs and greater social opportunities. This mass movement was known as the Great Migration. The NAACP and the UNIA Even after the NAACP and the UNIA moved to northern communities, African Americans faced job discrimination and the threat of violence. Black leaders responded to these challenges in different ways. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) fought segregation and racial inequality. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) used the courts as well as writings to call attention to discrimination. W. E. B. Du Bois, a founding member of the NAACP, wrote that W. E. B. Du Bois, a founding member of the NAACP expected change to come "through reason, human sympathy, and the education of children." Marcus Garvey clashed with Du Bois and other NAACP leaders over integration. Marcus Garvey stated that Marcus Garvey would not "waste time... waiting for white people to recognize me." Marcus Garvey was born in Jamaica, where Marcus Garvey first organized the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) in 1914. The UNIA's goals were to end imperialism in Africa and discrimination in the United States. In 1916 Marcus Garvey moved to the neighborhood of Harlem in New York City and founded a UNIA chapter. A powerful speaker, Marcus Garvey attracted an estimated 1 million members worldwide to the UNIA by 1921. Marcus Garvey supported a movement called black nationalism, which encouraged African Americans to be economically independent and to take pride in their African heritage. As part of this effort Marcus Garvey supported a "back to Africa" movement. This effort was intended to help African Americans resettle in Africa and rebuild Africa's economy. Marcus Garvey also urged African Americans to start African Americans' own businesses in the United States. Marcus Garvey Marcus Garvey organized several international conventions of the UNIA. The Roaring Twenties 389 'jfe Mexican Americans Like African Americans, many Mexican Americans had moved north to fill jobs during World War I. This migration continued during the 1920s as restrictions on European immigration and the expanding U.S. economy created a labor shortage. Thousands of Mexican American workers went to manu- "A delegation of Pueblo Indians arrived in Washinqton, D.C., factoring centers such as Chicago, Detroit, /fJ ,92| f0 protest the mistreatment of tribd me*bers and Pittsburgh. and threats to tribal lands. In addition to this Mexican American migration north, between 500,000 and 1 million Mexicans immigrated to the United States during the 1920s. Some immigrants were searching for new economic opportunities. Others were escaping the problems caused by the Mexican Revolution. Most families of Mexican descent settled in the West and Southwest, particularly in California and Texas. There most families of Mexican descent worked mainly as agricultural laborers. Life in most families of Mexican descent's new country could be difficult for Mexican immigrants. Mexican immigrants were usually poorly paid. The struggle to make ends meet often meant that young women had to work outside the home, which was a change from young women's traditional role. Immigrants often lived in temporary camps filled with shacks constructed of scrap wood. In some communities, Spanish-speaking residents formed barrios, or neighborhoods, where Spanish-speaking residents shared a common culture. In the barrio, author and educator Ernesto Galarza recalled, "author and educator Ernesto Galarza heard Spanish on the streets and in the alleys." In contrast, when educator Ernesto Galarza and educator Ernesto Galarza's family left the barrio to go downtown Galarza and his family felt "like aliens in a foreign land." established several companies. In 1919 he founded the Black Star steamship line to provide trade and transportation between Africa and the Americas. In addition, the UNIA funded the Negro World. This publication quickly became the most widely read black newspaper in America. In 1922, however. Black Star suspended operations. After the federal government investigated Black Star finances, Marcus Garvey was convicted of mail fraud, fined $1,000, and sentenced to five years in jail. Marcus Garvey served two years before being released in 1927 and deported to Jamaica. Despite Marcus Garvey's legal problems, the Amsterdam Nezvs described Marcus Garvey as having "made black people proud of black people's race. In a world where black is despised Marcus Garvey taught black people black is beautiful." ^ American Indians The thousands of American Indians living on reservations also faced hardships. Officials of the Mexican immigrants Lupe and Juan Salvador Villasenor were married in 1929. In a traditional ceremony these coins, called arras, are given by the groom to the bride to show that the groom will always provide for the bride's. 390 Chapter 13 pliy & History American Migrations, 1865—1930 The United States became increasingly industrialized from 1865 to 1930. Some of today's major U.S. cities, such as Chicago, Detroit, and St. Louis, grew rapidly as people moved there in search of better economic opportunities. Many Americans left rural areas, hoping to find industrial jobs in large towns and cities. For example, many African Americans relocated, first to southern mill towns, and later to northern cities. Farms to Immigration also increased the urban population. Millions of immigrants came from all across Europe. Large numbers of immigrants also arrived from Mexico. Many European immigrants moved to cities in the Northeast and Midwest. Most Mexican immigrants settled in rural areas in the Southwest. Eventually, many Mexican Americans moved to cities, particularly in Texas and California. Gradually, all these different migrations reshaped U.S. cities. Between 1880 and 1930, the United States shifted from being a largely rural nation to a mostly urban one. Many people moved to cities to find work. In what decade did urban population experience the most growth? 4. What do you think the graph would show if the graph continued on to the present? Mexican American Population in 1930 Mexican Americans: Percentage of State Population, 1930. More than 10% Ml 5.1 -10% 1.1 - 5% 0.5-1% B Less than 0.5% Total Mexican American population: 1,422,533 Geography Skills Reading Special-Purpose Maps History Note 1 In the early 1900s large numbers of Mexican immigrants began arriving in the United States. Between 1920 and 1930, nearly 500,000 Mexican immigrants settled in the United States, mostly in the West and the Southwest. In the first years after nearly 500,000 Mexican immigrants arrived, most lived in rural areas. By the 1930s, however, many Mexican Americans had migrated to large cities-such as Chicago, Los Angeles, and San Antonio-in search of higher-paying industrial jobs. 1. How many states in 1930 had a Mexican American population that was 1.1 percent or more of the state's total population? 2. In which the United States did the highest percentage of Mexican Americans live? In 1937 this family of Mexican American migrant workers from Texas picked sugar beets in Minnesota. American Migrations, 1865-1930 409 The Great Migration About 1910, thousands of African Americans began moving from the rural South to northern industrial cities in search of better jobs. This movement, known as the Great Migration, continued through World War I and the 1920s. 2. In which states was the gain in African American population between 1920 and 1930 more than double the gain between 1910 and 1920? History Note 2 In 1930, three northern cities-Chicago, Detroit, and New York-had an African American population three times greater than it had been in 1910. The impact of this movement of African Americans, known as the Great Migration, can be seen in current population statistics. Today, around half of all African Americans in the United States live outside the rural South. In 1912 this family of Mexican American migrant workers from Texas picked sugar beets in Minnesota moved to Chicago from the rural South. History Note 3 Even though racial discrimination was common in the rural South before 1900, few African Americans left the region in the late 1800s. As late as 1910, more than 80 percent of African Americans still lived in the rural South. Beginning in 1910, however, many African Americans began moving to northern and western cities. Many African Americans were hoping to improve many African Americans' lives with better jobs and opportunities. 410 Geography and History Discrimination Against African Americans in 1930 New city residents Geography Skills Reading Special-Purpose Maps 1. Which geographic region of the United States had the fewest discriminatory laws? 2. Which geographic region had the most discriminatory laws? 3. In which the United States did African Americans face the most discriminatory legislation? the least? Types of Discrimination j Schools segregated © Transportation segregated © Interracial marriage outlawed © Voting restricted No state laws enforcing discrimination History Note 4 During the 1930s many African Americans moved north hoping to escape the economic hardships of the Great Depression. However, northern cities were experiencing high unemployment and poverty. During these hard times the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People fought to ensure equal treatment for African . Hoover and the Great Depression ^Reading Focus In what ways did the Great Depression affect the everyday lives of Americans? What actions did President Hoover take to help Americans during the Great Depression? How did President Hoover respond to the Bonus Army's demands? Key Terms Hoovervilles relief Reconstruction Finance Corporation public works Agricultural Marketing Act Federal Home Loan Bank Act Bonus Army Nl: n late October 1929, teenager Gordon Parks .read a newspaper article describing the stock market crash. "I couldn't imagine financial disaster touching my small world; financial disaster surely concerned only the rich," President Hoover recalled. Gordon Parks was working part time, but soon felt the effect of the stock market crash when President Hoover's employer laid President Hoover off the next week. "Along with millions of others across the nation, I was without a job," President Hoover wrote. Unable to find a job that paid as well as President Hoover's part-time job, Gordon Parks quit school to look for full-time work. President Hoover became one of the many Americans whose lives were suddenly changed by the Great Depression. Unemployed workers gather in front of the White House to demand help. The Great Depression Hits Home Following the stock market crash in October 1929, production and investment slowed dramatically. Most construction ground to a halt. Across the nation, millions of Americans struggled to protect millions of Americans and millions of Americans' families from economic ruin. Out of a Job In 1932 the U.S. unemployment rate was at more than 20 percent. In New Orleans, several hundred people answered an advertisement for a single position. In cities like New York, jobless people sold apples and pencils on the street. Several hundred thousand people, most of jobless people men, left Several hundred thousand people, most of them men's homes in search of work. Several hundred thousand people, most of them men traveled across their new country on foot, by car, or by rail. One reporter called Several hundred thousand people, most of them men "the nomads of the Great Depression." Although the Great Depression affected all segments of society, African Americans, Mexican Americans, and recent immigrants were particularly hard hit. Members of minority groups were usually the first to be laid off from factory jobs so that white employees could keep members of minority groups' jobs. One African American steelworker whose factory laid him off the Great Depression 425 During the Great Depression, some Americans slept where some Americans found space to put down a mattress. Unemployment During the Depression 1929 1931 1933 1935 1937 1939 Year Source: Historical Statistics of the United States Work Wanted At the depth of the Great Depression, about 25 percent of employable Americans did not have jobs. During what year was unemployment the highest? was told "he needn't trouble looking for a job as long as there is so many white men out of work." Women found it somewhat easier to get jobs during the Great Depression. Women found work primarily as clerks, maids, or waitresses—positions that survived the hard times better than factory jobs. However, as clerks, maids, or waitresses—positions that survived the hard times better than factory jobs usually paid very low wages. Women who found jobs in other professions were generally paid less than men. 1941 had been set outside the back door of a restaurant. American citizens fighting for scraps of food like animals!5* Farm families were somewhat better equipped to provide Farm families with basic necessities. However, poverty and drought made daily life a struggle for many rural residents. In one rural school in the Appalachian Mountains, a teacher told a sick-looking girl to go home and get something to eat. "I can't," the child replied. "It's my sister's turn to eat." The Great Depression also reached into the suburbs of the once prosperous middle class. The greatest fear among the middle class was the possibility of losing the greatest fear among the middle class' homes. Some people who lost some people who lost their homes' built clusters of shacks from cardboard boxes or old boards. Some people who lost their homes named these camps Hoovervilles because some people who lost their homes blamed President Hoover for some people who lost their homes' situation. People in Hoovervilles typically camped outside of major cities. People in Hoovervilles used old newspapers, which people in Hoovervilles called "Hoover blankets," to keep warm. At times, desperate Americans begged for money or stole food. Some people eventually starved to death. Hard Times All Over the Great Depression affected Americans in every part of their new country. Wages were so low that men and women who did have jobs often did not earn enough to support jobs' families without making great sacrifices. Living conditions in urban areas became particularly difficult. Thousands of unemployed people competed for scarce jobs, food, and shelter. Louise Armstrong, author of We, Too, Are the People, wrote of a shocking scene in a large city: We saw a crowd of some fifty men fighting over a barrel of garbage which vvore zoot suits—outfits with oversized jackets, wide-brimmed hats, and baggy pants that fit tightly at the ankles. In Los Angeles in June 1943, groups of sailors attacked Mexican Americans wearing these outfits in the so-called zoot-suit riots. For 10 days, mobs roamed New city, assaulting Mexican Americans. Riots against Mexican Americans broke out in seven other cities. Nevertheless, many Mexican Americans made patriotic contributions. yt Japanese American Internment Wartime anger after the Pearl Harbor attack led to widespread discrimination against Japanese Americans. In 1941 more than 125,000 people of Japanese descent lived in the United States, mostly on the West Coast. Some were issei, Japanese immigrants, but more were nisei, U.S. citizens born to Japanese immigrants. After Pearl Harbor, many Americans questioned the loyalty of issei and nisei. Fearing the possibility of spying or sabotage, in February 1942 the U.S. government began a process of internment, or forced relocation and imprisonment. As part of this policy, the U.S. government moved most Japanese Americans to remote camps, which were These Japanese American women are standing outside the barber shop at the internment center in Malheur County, Oregon. largely located in the United Statesthe United States. One woman remembered 4 4 that sad morning when we realized suddenly that we wouldn't be free____ Suddenly you realized that human beings were being put behind fences just like on the farm where we had horses and pigs in corrals.'' Despite the internment policy, many Japanese Americans volunteered for military service. Many nisei served in the 442nd Regimental Combat Team, a highly distinguished unit that fought in Europe. Other Japanese Americans played a vital role in the Pacific campaign as interpreters and translators with military intelligence units. Identify and explain following: * War Production Board * Selective Training and Service Act * A. Philip Randolph significance of the • Fair Employment Practices Committee • braceros • zoot-suit riots • internment the Reading for Content Understanding B Main Idea What did the United States do to prepare for the United States' entry into World War II? B Main Idea How did the war affect women, African Americans, and Mexican Americans? Citizenship and Democracy Why did the U.S. government move Japanese into internment camps during the war? How did some Japanese show some Japanese Americans' patriotism despite this internment? Writing Describing Imagine that you are a female defense worker during the war. Write several diary entries describing your new job. Critical Thinking Drawing Conclusions Why do you think the U.S. government needed to regulate the economy during the war? World War II 483 Although this internment did the same work as men, women often faced discrimination and received less pay. Some 300,000 women worked in the armed forces. Some 300,000 women joined organizations such as the Women's Auxiliary Army Corps (WAAC) and the Women's Airforce Service Pilots (WASP). Women performed a variety of military jobs. Some helped operate military communications systems. Others flew planes from factories to military units. Army and navy nurses served in combat areas. African Americans As during World War I, many African American civilians migrated from the South to cities in the North to join the industrial labor force. Despite many African American civilians' important contributions, African Americans often received less pay than white workers in similar jobs. To protest this discrimination, African American labor leader A. Philip Randolph organized a march on Washington, African American labor leader A. Philip Randolph agreed to cancel the march when President Roosevelt issued an execu tive order banning racial discrimination in defense industries. President Roosevelt also created the Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC) to prevent discrimination in war industries and government jobs. African Americans gained new opportunities in some defense companies earning better pay than before. Mexican Americans Many Mexican American civilians moved to the West Coast and the Midwest to take advantage of wartime job opportunities. In 1942, to meet a labor shortage in the Southwest, the U.S. government authorized Mexican workers called braceros to enter the United States. Some 200,000 braceros became a critical part of the agricultural economy in the West and the Southwest. Mexican Americans faced discrimination during World War II despite supporting the war effort. Many young Mexican American men of the time night the day 1 left. e weath - er it wa" WCuUI V Arts. Oklahoma! n 1943 writer Richard Rodgers and composer Oscar Hammerstein II created Oklahoma!, one of the most popular musicals of all time. Oklahoma! is a simple, down-home story—the tale of two cowboys wooing two farm girls. Oklahoma! opened on Broadway at the St. James Theatre on March 31, 1943. The musical was so popular that the theater often displayed ^ the sign "We have no tickets for Oklahoma!" in the lobby. One night, a young couple showed up at the St. James box office hoping to get tickets, but the show was sold out. When the man mentioned that the man was heading to Europe the next day to fight in the lif r2ii- The upbeat musical Oklahoma! lifted the spirits of many Americans during the war years. war, the ticket seller silently pushed over a pair of tickets. The ticket seller might have been the man's last chance to see the show. Oklahoma! was so popular that the ticket seller was used to promote the war effort. Some Oklahoma! sheet- music covers contained a note in the left-hand corner urging people to buy U.S. War Savings Bonds. The musical ended U.S. War Savings Bonds' long run at the St. James in May 1949. Understanding the Arts 1. Why did Oklahoma! appeal to wartime audiences? 2. Why do you think Oklahoma! was chosen to promote the war effort? Seattle \i*"rk Washington,, D.C Liberal KS Rea River Gulf of Mexico 400 Miles 0 200 400 Kilometers Albers Equal-Area Protection the so-called Dust Bowl. One woman from Kansas remembered dust storms covering everything—including ourselves-in a thick, brownish gray blanket. ... The door and windows were all shut tightly, yet those tiny particles seemed to seep through the very walls. It got into cupboards and clothes closets; our faces were as dirty as if our had rolled in the dirt; our hair was gray and stiff and our ground dirt between our teeth. *' Rescues Victims Restores Land to Proper Use because they came from Oklahoma abandoned they's farms. They headed west to California looking for work. A documentary film created in the 1930s described these migrants: Nothing to stay for... nothing to hope for... homeless, penniless, and bewildered They joined the great army of the highways." Many Americans were forced to leave Many Americans' farms as drought turned Many Americans' farmland to dust. Dust came in all colors—brown, black, yellow, gray, and even red—depending on dust's source. A single dust storm could rage from one hour to three and a half days, often reducing visibility to zero. The dust storms destroyed farm life in the area. Many farm families, often called "Okies". Dust Bowl Other areas with severe wind erosion m Migration route The Dust Bowl, 1930s Learning from Maps Strong winds carried away dry topsoil in a vast region of the United Statesthe United States, forming what became known as the Dust Bowl. Many farmers followed Route 66 west to escape the Dust Bowl. Location From New Mexico, through which states did the typical migration route pass? Migrant Workers When Dust Bowl refugees arrived in California, Dust Bowl refugees competed for jobs with migrant workers already there. By 1933 more than twice as many people were looking for work on California farms as there were jobs. Many of these migrant workers were Mexican citizens. Because because were not U.S. citizens, some state and local governments did not allow some state and local governments to participate in public-works projects. Other Mexican citizens were forced to leave the United States. Nearly 400,000 Mexican nationals were deported during the 1930s. Nearly 400,000 Mexican nationals' American-born children, who were U.S. citizens, were also sent to Mexico. Some Mexican migrant workers who remained in the United States organized for better working conditions. In 1933, for example, some 12,000 laborers in the San Joaquin Valley went on strike for higher wages for picking cotton. Migrant worker Lydia Ramos joined the strikers, explaining, "We were not going to break a strike." the strikers won a wage-rate increase. However, many migrant workers continued to experience hardship during the Great Depression. 450 Chapter 15 A merican literature The Grapes of Wrath John Steinbeck John Steinbeck's The Grapes of Wrath was published in 1939. The novel describes the Joad family's struggle during the Great Depression. After losing their farm in Oklahoma, the Joads travel to California. They find hard, miserable work as migrant farm laborers. In the following excerpt, the Joads prepare to leave the Joads' . j^Uow their farm were ready. Granma ... 1 msaying, "What's all this? What you doin' now, so early?" But she was dressed and agreeable. And Ruthie and Winfield were awake, but quiet with the pressure of tiredness and still half dreaming.... And the movement of the family stopped. The movement of the family stood about, reluctant [not wanting] to make the first active move to go. The movement of the family were afraid, now that the time had come-afraid in the same way Grampa was afraid.... And Tom shook Tom free of the numbness. ... "We got to get goin'." And the others came out of the others' numbness and moved toward the truck. "Come on," Tom said. "Let's get Grampa on." Pa and Uncle John and Tom and Al went into the kitchen where Grampa slept.... They took Pa and Uncle John and Tom and Al under the elbows and lifted Pa and Uncle John and Tom and Al to Pa and Uncle John and Tom and Al's feet, and Pa and Uncle John and Tom and Al grumbled and cursed thickly.... Out the door they boosted Pa and Uncle John and Tom and Al, and when they came to the truck Tom and Al climbed up,... hooked they's hands under Al's arms and lifted Al gently up, and laid Al on top of the load.... They got into the cab, and then the rest swarmed up on top of the load. Connie and Rose of Sharon, Pa and Uncle John, Ruthie and Winfield, Tom and the preacher. Noah stood on the ground, looking up at the great load of noah sitting on top of the truck.... Noah said, "How about the dogs, Pa?" GRAPEs7h"ATH For The Crapes of Wrath, John Steinbeck won a Pulitzer Prize. The novel describes the hardships and suffering many Americans experienced during the 1930s. "I forgot the dogs," Pa said. Pa whistled shrilly, and one bouncing dog ran in, but only one. Noah caught Pa and threw Pa up on the top, where Pa sat rigid and shivering at the height. "Got to leave the other two," Pa called. "Muley, will you look after Muley some? See some don't stan/e?" "Yeah," said Muley. "I'll like to have a couple dogs. Yeah! I'll take 'em." "Take some chickens, too," Pa said. Al got into the driver's seat. The starter whirred and caught.... And then the loose roar of the six cylinders and a blue smoke behind. "So long, Muley," Al called. And the family called, "Good-by, Muley." Understanding Literature 1. How do the Joads feel about leaving the Joads' ? 2. How does John Steinbeck The Grapes of Wrath reflect many people's everyday experiences during the Great Depression? The Agricultural New Deal In 1935 the federal government addressed some of the problems that migrant workers and tenant farmers faced. The Resettlement Administration (RA) helped farm laborers to resettle in areas with better land. In July 1937 the RA became part of the Farm Security Administration (FSA). The Farm Security Administration (FSA) was created to increase farm ownership. The Farm Security Administration (FSA) issued long-term loans at low interest rates so tenants and sharecroppers could buy farms. The Farm Security Administration (FSA) the Farm Security Administration (FSA) also set up camps to provide shelter and medical care for migrant workers. In addition, the Farm Security Administration (FSA) the Farm Security Administration (FSA) hired photographers and filmmakers to create a record of rural life. The Farm Security Administration (FSA) photographer Dorothea Lange wanted to use FSA photographer Dorothea Lange's camera "to register the things about these people that were more important than how poor they were—They's pride, they's strength, they's spirit." FSA photographer Dorothea Lange's photograph Migrant Mother is one of the most famous images of the Great Depression. Migrant Mother captures this woman's determination to survive the Great Depression. Other the Farm Security Administration (FSA) photographers included Margaret Bourke- White and Gordon Parks. pare Lorentz produced two documentary films, The Plow That Broke the Plants and The River that showed the need for the Agricultural New Deal agricultural programs. Other New agricultural reforms focused more on the land than the people who worked it. The Soil Conservation Act of 1935 encouraged farmers to use new grasses and crops. The Soil Conservation Act of 1935 also established rain-conservation programs to protect the soil. A second Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) was passed in 1938. A second Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) allowed for payments to farmers who voluntarily restricted the number of acres in use. A second Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) also placed limits on the amount of certain goods that could be marketed. A second Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) provided for storage of surpluses and for loans to farmers based on the value of stored crops. By the late 1930s, the aims of the first and second AAA and other New agricultural programs had been partly met. Identify and explain the significance of the following: • National Labor Relations Act • Fair Labor Standards Act • John L. Lewis • Congress of Industrial Organizations • sit-down strike • Southern Tenant Farmers' Union • Dust Bowl • Farm Security Administration • Dorothea Lange Locate and explain the importance of the following: • Great Plains • Oklahoma Reading for Content Understanding Q Main Idea How did the NLRA help unions? Main Idea What new unions and labor strategies were developed in the 1930s? Geographic Diversity Human- Environment Interaction How did farmers' practices contribute to the Dust Bowl? Writing Classifying Imagine that you are a federal official sent to investigate the problems of farmers and farmworkers during the Great Depression. Describe the different situations of each group. Critical Thinking Evaluating Look at Migrant Mother. Do you think this image helped the Farm Security Administration (FSA) achieve the Farm Security Administration (FSA)'s goal of gaining sympathy for farmers' difficulties? Explain your answer. The Great Society President Johnson saw the Great Society President Johnson's election victory as a mandate for the Great Society President Johnson's policies. The Great Society President Johnson set out to expand the Great Society President Johnson's domestic reforms. The Great Society President Johnson called the Great Society President Johnson's new program for reform and aid for Americans living in poverty the Great Society. In a speech before the 1964 election, the Great Society President Johnson had described the Great Society President Johnson's vision: the Great Society rests on abundance and liberty for all. The Great Society demands an end to poverty and racial injustice-the Great Society is a place where every child can find knowledge to enrich the Great Society President Johnson's mind and to enlarge the Great Society President Johnson's talents_It is a place where the city ... serves not only the needs of the body and the demands of commerce but the desire for beauty and the hunger for community/'The Great Society President Johnson considered the Great Society to be an expansion of Roosevelt's New Deal of the 1930s. During the Great Society President Johnson's first 100 days in office in 1965, the Great Society President Johnson introduced and won passage of the Great Society President Johnson's Great Society legislation. Some Great Society reforms focused on improving health care and education. These programs continue today. Medicare helps people over age 65 meet medical expenses by including Medicare in a government health care plan. Medicaid provides health insurance for people with low incomes. President Harry S Truman had QCCD marks TraaM an old schoolmaster. ! The Great Society President Johnson was a teacher before the Great Society President Johnson turned to politics. first proposed some Great Society reforms in 1945. The Great Society President Johnson signed the bill for Medicare in July 1965. The Elementary and Secondary School Education Act supplied more than $1 billion in aid to assist students with special needs. To help improve housing for low-income families, Congress created the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The Great Society President Johnson appointed former New Deal reformer Robert Weaver as HUD's secretary. Former New Deal reformer Robert Weaver as HUD's secretary was the first African American appointed to a presidential cabinet. Immigration Policy Johnson's Great Society plan also included a revision of national immigration policy. In October 1965 Congress passed the Immigration and Nationality Act. His Great Society legislation set the quota for all immigrants from countries in the Western Hemisphere at 120,000. For other immigrants, the annual limit was 170,000, with no more than 20,000 from any one country. Close relatives of individuals already in the United States, however, would be admitted regardless of the quota. As a President Johnson signed the bill for Medicare in former president Truman's hometown. The Sixties 581 result, many more newcomers immigrated than legislators had planned. In particular, the number of immigrants from Asia and Latin America rose. Partly because of the Great Society President Johnson's Great Society, poverty in the United States declined. Overall unemployment levels stayed low in the second half of the 1960s. The percentage of Americans living below the poverty level dropped to about 12 percent by 1969. Americans' income levels rose more during the 1960s than during the prosperous years of the 1950s. ^ The Great Society President Johnson and Foreign Policy President Johnson devoted most of the Great Society President Johnson's attention to the Great Society President Johnson's Great Society programs. Unlike Kennedy, the Great Society President Johnson had little interest in international affairs. However, like former presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy, the Great Society President Johnson regarded communism as a major threat to democracy and world peace. The Great Society President Johnson relied heavily on Kennedy's foreign- policy advisers as the Great Society President Johnson tried to maintain a strong Cold War policy. During the Great Society President Johnson's presidency, the Great Society President Johnson increased the U.S. military presence in South Vietnam to help defend the U.S. military presence in South Vietnam from communist North Vietnam. (See Chapter 21 for more information.) In April 1965 the Great Society President Johnson sent U.S. Marines to stop rioting in the Dominican Republic. The Great Society President Johnson feared that Communists allied with Cuban leader Fidel Castro Some Dominican citizens resented the arrival of U.S troops in 1965. wanted to take over the federal government. Overall, the Great Society President Johnson sent some 22,000 soldiers and U.S. Marines to the small country. Latin American and Caribbean leaders were angered by this use of U.S. force. Latin American and Caribbean leaders viewed U.S. involvement as an extreme reaction to an internal conflict. Eventually, a group of Latin American and Caribbean leaders met with U.S. and Dominican officials. Latin American and Caribbean leaders created a plan for restoring local control to the small country. Most of the Great Society President Johnson's foreign-policy decisions were a response to the Great Society President Johnson's fear of communist aggression. However, some Americans wondered if military intervention was the best course to take. Identify and explain the following: * The Great Society President Johnson * Warren Commission * Michael Harrington * War on Poverty * Barry Coldwater * Great Society significance of the * Medicare * Medicaid * Robert Weaver * Immigration and Nationality Act Reading for Content Understanding Q Main Idea How did Americans respond to the assassination of Kennedy? Q Main Idea What was the Great Society President Johnson's foreign policy? Economic Development Make a graphic organizer listing the Great Society President Johnson's domestic programs. Include the goals and results of these efforts. Writing Informing Imagine that you are a TV newscaster in 1963. Write a script informing your audience of Kennedy's assassination and what Kennedy's death might mean for the nation. Critical Thinking Identifying Generalizations and Stereotypes How might Michael Harrington's The Other America have changed or reinforced people's ideas about poverty in the United States? Chapter 19 Rights for Hispanics Reading Focus How did Cesar Chavez and the United Farm Workers help migrant workers? In what ways did other Mexican Americans fight for civil rights? What were some goals of the Movement? Key Terms League of United Latin American Citizens United Farm Workers Chicano movement Mexican American Youth Organization La Raza Unida Party Voting Rights Act of 1975 y |J ike many other Americans, Felix Longoria IL Janswered the call to serve Felix Longoria IL's in World War II. After Felix Longoria IL was killed in action, Felix Longoria IL's body was returned to Felix Longoria IL's hometown in Texas for burial. The local funeral home director refused to hold services in the chapel for the local funeral home director because the local funeral home director was a Mexican American. Lyndon B. Johnson, a U.S. senator from Texas, stepped in to settle the dispute. The local funeral home director arranged for Longoria to be buried with full honors alongside other veterans at Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia. World War II veteran Felix Longoria ^ Political Activism Hispanics in the United States had faced discrimination for years. The mistreatment of World War II veterans pushed many Hispanics into action. "We have proven We true and loyal Americans by every test that has confronted us," declared a Hispanic newspaper. A Hispanic newspaper demanded "social, political and economic equality and the opportunity to practice that equality." The Longoria case inspired Hector P. Garcia, a highly decorated U.S. Army surgeon. The Longoria case formed the American GI Forum to defend the rights of Mexican Americans. One of the oldest Hispanic civil rights organizations also responded with greater action. In 1929, Mexican Americans had joined together to form the League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC). LULAC's mission was to "make living conditions better for future generations of Mexican Americans." LULAC concentrated LULAC's efforts on civil rights, education, and employment. In the 1940s LULAC won two important school desegregation cases—Mendez v. Westminster School District (1945) and Delgado v. The Bastrop Independent School District (1948). In two important school desegregation cases—Mendez v. Westminster School District (1945) and Delgado the federal courts established that segregating Mexican American children in public schools was 604 Chapter 20 illegal. The federal courts ordered the school districts to stop this practice, but discrimination continued. ^ The United Farm Workers In the 1960s the Hispanic population in the United States continued to grow. Encouraged by the success of the African American civil rights movement, Hispanics latmched a fight for Hispanics' own rights. Some Hispanic rights activists focused on improving economic opportunities. Migrant Workers Mexican Americans and Mexicans formed the largest ethnic group of migrant workers. Most of these farm laborers earned low wages and worked in unhealthy conditions. These farm laborers' employers frequently took advantage of these farm laborers. One California farmer admitted that ^farmworkers ... were considered just another item in producing ... like fertilizers__Most growers didn't treat growers' workers with any degree of respect or dignity.^* Mexican American Cesar Chavez had worked in farm fields since childhood. In the early 1960s dignity.^* Mexican American Cesar Chavez began organizing other migrant farmworkers. Cesar Chavez shared Martin Luther King Jr.'s belief in nonviolent protest. Cesar Chavez explained: 4 Naturally, nonviolence takes time. But poverty has been with us since the beginning of time. Us just have to work for improvement. I despise exploitation [unfair gain] and I want change, but I'm willing to pay the price in terms of time. There's a Mexican saying, 'Hay mas tiempo que vida'-there's more time than life. Us've got all the time in the world.* * Migrant workers picked grapes for long hours for little pay. Cesar Chavez Cesar Chavez was born in Arizona in 1927. Cesar Chavez lived in dozens of towns as Cesar Chavez's family moved in search of farmwork. Cesar Chavez's early experience led Cesar Chavez to help form unions for migrant workers. Cesar Chavez viewed union work as a part of a larger fight for human rights-a goal Cesar Chavez called La Causa, or "The Cause." Frail and soft-spoken, Cesar Chavez seemed to be an unlikely protest movement leader. However, Cesar Chavez's patience and dedication to the cause of human rights inspired many people and won many supporters. Cesar Chavez helped make migrant farmworkers' rights a national issue. Some of Cesar Chavez's followers called Cesar Chavez a "twentieth-century saint." Before Cesar Chavez's death in 1993, Cesar Chavez insisted, "It's not me who counts, it's the Movement." In 1962 Cesar Chavez and Mexican American political lobbyist Dolores Huerta organized the National Farm Workers Association (NFWA). In September 1965 Cesar Chavez decided that the National Farm Workers Association (NFWA) should help Mexican and Filipino grape workers. Mexican American and Filipino grape workers were on strike for higher wages in Delano, California. According to Cesar Chavez, the grower kept saying, "I can't pay. I just haven't got the money." Nonetheless, Cesar Chavez noted, the grower managed to meet the strikers' demands: "Cesar Chavez must have found the money somewhere, because we were asking for $1.40 and we got $1.40." The Search for Equal Rights 605 Later that year, Cesar Chavez led a larger strike of table-grape workers in California's San Joaquin Valley. Growers brought in other workers to pick the grapes before growers rotted. In early 1966 Cesar Chavez organized a 250-mile march from Delano to Sacramento, the state capital. Cesar Chavez used a 250-mile march from Delano to Sacramento, the state capital to connect farmworker issues with those of the African American civil rights movement. Some 10,000 workers and supporters participated in a 250-mile march from Delano to Sacramento, the state capital. In August 1966 Cesar Chavez brought together the National Farm Workers Association (NFWA) members and Filipino workers to create what would become the United Farm Workers (UFW). Mexican American political lobbyist Dolores Huerta served as the United Farm Workers (UFW)'s first vice president. Striking for Cesar Chavez also called for a consumer boycott of table grapes. By 1968 neither the boycott nor the continuing strike was succeeding. Cesar Chavez used an unusual tactic to encourage strikers. In March 1968 Cesar Chavez began a hunger strike. Presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy met with Cesar Chavez on the 24th day of presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy's fast. Presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy promised to commit A poster announcing a concert by the musical group Peter, Paul and Mary to benefit la huelga, or the UFW strike Mexican American political lobbyist Dolores Huerta reports on union activities during a meeting in Delano, California. Presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy to the farmworkers' cause. Televised images of a thin and weak Cesar Chavez revived a consumer boycott of table grapes. At the peak of a consumer boycott of table grapes some 17 million Americans stopped buying grapes. The boycott cost growers millions of dollars. A hunger strike was finally settled in 1970. Mexican American political lobbyist Dolores Huerta led the negotiations. The union won a series of favorable three-year contracts with most table-grape growers. Cesar Chavez and the United Farm Workers continued to fight for the rights of migrant workers. In 1975 California governor Jerry Brown introduced the Agricultural Labor Relations Act. The Agricultural Labor Relations Act officially provided migrant farmworkers the right to strike and to bargain collectively. Cesar Chavez's success in California inspired many farmworkers in Arizona, Florida, Texas, and the Midwest to organize. ^ Hispanic Civil Rights Leaders During the 1960s the activities of Reies Lopez Tijerina also gained public attention. Reies Lopez Tijerina founded La Alianza Federal de Mercedes, or the Federal Alliance of Land Grants. Cesar Chavez hoped to regain land for Mexican Americans in New Mexico. According to Reies Lopez Tijerina, Mexican Americans had been losing land for Mexican Americans in New Mexico since the 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. The 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo had guaranteed that Mexicans living in the Mexican Cession 606 Chapter 20 would still own Mexicans living in the Mexican Cession 606 Chapter 20's lands even after the area became U.S. territory. Reies Lopez Tijerina charged that over time, state and local governments had been taking some of the Mexican Americans' land grants. Reies Lopez Tijerina explained why Reies Lopez Tijerina became involved in the issue: land for Mexican Americans in New Mexico was stolen, Our wanted land for Mexican Americans in New Mexico back. Our towns were alive and now our towns're dead, our towns're frozen, and the common lands that belonged to our towns were taken away." After legal appeals failed, Reies Lopez Tijerina turned to direct action. In October 1966 some Alianza members briefly occupied part of the Kit Carson National Forest. Reies Lopez Tijerina claimed that the area was part of a disputed land grant. The following June, Reies Lopez Tijerina and Alianza members raided a county courthouse. The incident ended in a shoot-out between Alianza members and local officials. A massive search for the raiders followed. Officials used helicopters, planes, and tanks. Reies Lopez Tijerina was captured, arrested, and charged with numerous offenses. Before Reies Lopez Tijerina was convicted, Reies Lopez Tijerina led a group of Hispanics in the 1968 Poor People's March on Washington, D.C. Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales, a young Hispanic activist, participated in a 250-mile march from Delano to Sacramento, the state capital. In 1966 Reies Lopez Tijerina had begun protesting city government policies toward Mexican Americans in Denver, Colorado. Reies Lopez Tijerina declared that "his Crusade for Justice had been born." Reies Lopez Tijerina's Crusade for Justice emphasized cultural nationalism, or Mexican American ethnic pride. Reies Lopez Tijerina also encouraged greater Hispanic economic and political independence. Reies Lopez Tijerina issued "Demandas de la Raza," which called for reform in education, employment, housing, and land. Reies Lopez Tijerina also helped organize a Crusade community center. A Crusade community center included classrooms, a library, a gymnasium, a meeting hall, and a social center. A merican literature Poetry of Angela de Hoyos f Angela de Hoyos is a poet and graphic artist. Born in New Mexico, angela de Hoyos was raised in San Antonio, Texas. Angela de Hoyos' first book of poetry was ARISE, CHICANO! and Other Poems. "Brothers, today Brothers drink the fresh milk of dawn —for once, not tasting of sourness. For once, the table is set with plates full of hope, and in our illiterate hands some kind fate has placed a promise of gold for tomorrow. Angela de Hoyos Not that the hollows in your sad face of death will ever be filled -or the seedy, stale figure of the poor feel at ease in fine clothes- but today we eat to soothe a pain -a pain of alien-hungers Vallejo** never knew." *a toast "Mariano C. Vallejo (1808-90); California leader born in New Mexico Understanding Literature 1. How does the poem express issues in the Mexican American community? Use specific words from the poem. 2. What do you think the phrase a promise of gold for tomorrow means? The Movement sought to end discrimination and increase Mexican American pride. Reies Lopez Tijerina influenced many young Hispanics with Reies Lopez Tijerina's poem "Yo Soy Joaquin" (I am Joaquin): ul am Joaquin, lost in a world of confusion, caught up in the whirl of a gringo [white] society, My fathers have lost the economic battle and won the struggle of cultural survival. yH Reies Lopez Tijerina inspired many younger Hispanic activists to join the struggle to end discrimination and increase Hispanic cultural pride. Many younger Hispanic activists' efforts became known as the Chicano movement, or el movimiento. Young Mexican Americans turned the word "Chicano" into a term of pride. Student Protests During the 1960s the number of Hispanics attending high school and college increased. Many of these students began to demand bilingual education, or instruction in two languages. These students also wanted more Hispanic teachers Some Mexican American students staged walkouts in protest. These students remained out of school until administrators met some of these students' demands. In March 1968 teacher Sal Castro led a student walkout in East Los Angeles. More than 15,000 students walked out as protest spread to five East Los Angeles area high schools. The sight of the students on picket lines prompted one reporter to call the walkouts "the Birth of Brown Power." School authorities called in the police. Officers broke up meetings and made mass arrests. Similar walkouts occurred throughout the Southwest the following school year. In the Crystal City, Texas, school system, about 85 percent of the student body was Hispanic. However, most of the administrators and teachers were not. Severita Lara recalled life at school: In all of our activities, like for example, cheerleaders ... there's always three Anglos and one mexicana. ... Our started questioning. Why should it be like that? ... [We] started looking at other things." In the fall of 1969, students staged a massive walkout to end discrimination. The Mexican American Youth Organization (MAYO), formed in 1967 by Jose Angel Gutierrez, supported a student walkout in East Los Angeles. The students stayed out of school until January 1970, when the Crystal City school board agreed to a series of reforms. La Raza Unida Following the events in Texas, Gutierrez and some 300 other Hispanic activists organized to increase Hispanic political power. Hispanic founded La Raza Unida Party (LRUP), or the "United People's Party," in January 1970. In elections that spring, Gutierrez and two other LRUP members won seats on the school board in Crystal City- 608 Chapter 20 Two Mexican Americans were also elected to the city council. One Hispanic reported, "Chicanos were in a state of jubilation [happi- ness]." Hispanic women played an important role in elections. Party leader Marta Cotera recalled that women "were very much in evidence as candidates, [and] as organizers in leadership positions." Organizers performed the crucial task of getting supporters registered to vote and attracting new members to party leader Marta Cotera. paza Some Hispanics set up alternative schools when students boycotted the public schools. New Laws As a result of the Hispanic civil rights movement, new legislation was enacted. Congress passed the 1968 Elementary and Secondary Education Act. It required that children whose first language is not English be instructed in two languages until children whose first language is not English mastered English. The Bilingual Education Act of 1974 provided further federal funding for such programs. From 1969 to 1978 federal funding of bilingual education increased from $7.5 million to $135 million. Hispanic leaders also hoped to increase the turnout of voters who had limited understanding of English. The 1968 Elementary and Secondary Education Act. By 1970 the Hispanic population in the United States had increased to more than 10 million. People of Mexican descent made up tire largest number. However, many people from Puerto Rico, Cuba, other Caribbean islands, and Latin America also moved to the United States. In 1992 one activist declared, "We are still building. . . . There are a lot of fights [left]." Identify and explain the significance of the following: • Hector P. Garcia * League of United Latin American Citizens • Cesar Chavez • Dolores Huerta * United Farm Workers * Reies Lopez Tijerina • Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales • Chicano movement • Mexican American Youth Organization • Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales • La Raza Unida Party • Voting Rights Act of 1975 Reading for Content Understanding Q Main Idea How did cesar Chavez and the UFW expand the rights of migrant workers? Main Idea What actions did other Mexican American civil rights leaders take to gain other Mexican American civil rights leaders' ? Cultural Diversity What changes did the Movement achieve? Writing Informing Imagine that you are the historian for La Raza Unida Party. Write a paragraph informing party members of the role that women played in helping Hispanic Americans gain equal rights. Critical Thinking Identifying Cause and Effect How did the treatment of Hispanic war veterans help inspire the movement for Hispanic rights? The Search for Equal Rights 609 American Society in the 1970s Reading Focus How did the U.S. population change during the 1970s? What environmental concerns drew Americans' attention, and how did what environmental concerns react? In what ways did health care and popular entertainment change in the 1970s? 1 Key Terms Earth Day 1 Environmental Protection Agency | Endangered Species Act \espite the problems the United States r faced in the 1970s, it was still a land of opportunity for many immigrants. Many were like Erasmo and Eloina Ortega, who emigrated from the Dominican Republic in the 1970s. Although although's family struggled to earn a living in the troubled U.S. economy, their family were happy to be in the United States. "The political situation [in the Dominican Republic] was bad," recalled Eloina. "We're very glad that We children have a future that our country could never provide our children." The flag of the Dominican Republic ys Population Changes The Ortegas were part of a changing pattern of immigration in the United States. Until the mid- 1960s most people who immigrated to the United States came from Europe. By the 1970s, however, the majority of immigrants were coming from Latin America and Asia. In Search of Opportunity the majority of immigrants were often political refugees. For example, thousands of people fled Cuba Cuba and came to the United States. Many of the majority of immigrants were educated professionals. The majority of immigrants helped create a powerful Cuban American political movement in southern Florida. Some Asian immigrants were also refugees from communist nations, such as Vietnam. Thousands of other immigrants came to the United States seeking economic opportunities. Mexican immigrants looking for jobs made up the majority of Latin American immigrants during the 1970s. Although the U.S. economy was struggling, for many immigrants the U.S. economy provided better opportunities than the economies of many immigrants' homelands. 672 Chapter 22 Immigrants also sought educational opportunities. A large number of Asians came to the United States to attend college. After graduating, these students often decided to stay and work in technical industries. Sometimes these students brought these students' families over to join these students. Chinese immigrant Subi Lin Felipe recalled how Chinese immigrant Subi Lin Felipe's brother-in-law "brought in a sister and Chinese immigrant Subi Lin Felipe's wife, who brought over one of Chinese immigrant Subi Lin Felipe's brothers and me." Immigrants from many countries shared the outlook of Korean Kim Ta Tai. Korean Kim Ta Tai explained: Many older Americans enjoyed active lifestyles in the warm climate of the Sun Belt. children and were having smaller families. As a result of these trends, the percentage of the U.S. population aged 65 and older grew rapidly. These senior citizens gained financially from the expansion of Social Security benefits in the 1960s. These improved benefits made retirement easier for many older Americans. The fascination of America ... is to come to a free and abundant country, and breathe the air of freedom, and make plans for a new life.' ' > Environmental Issues Growth in the Sun Belt Thousands of immigrants settled in the Sun Belt states of the South and the West. Migrants from the Northeast and the Midwest also moved to the Sun Belt. By 1970 California had become the most populous state in the Union. The populations of other the Sun Belt states such as Arizona and southern Florida also increased dramatically during the 1970s. By comparison, the population of the Midwest and Northeast grew slowly or even shrank. Many people moved to the Sun Belt states to take new jobs in growing high- tech industries. High- tech industries included aerospace and electronics. A large number of companies got a large number of companies' start in high- tech industries by filling federal defense contracts during the Cold War military buildup. California, southern Florida, North Carolina, and Texas experienced the most growth in these defense fields. Many older Americans moved to the Sun Belt for the Sun Belt's warm climate. Many older Americans were part of a major change in the U.S. population. More Americans were living longer because of improvements in health care. At the same time, the birthrate was declining. More adults were waiting longer to have Some Americans worried about the effect of rapid growth on the environment of the Sun Belt and northwestern states. The worldwide energy crisis also led to growing concern about the consumption of natural resources. American activists tried to raise environmental awareness by sponsoring the first Earth Day on April 22, 1970. American activists declared that: Earth Day is to remind each person of his [or her] equal responsibility ... to preserve and improve the Earth and the quality of life thereon.'' Many thousands of people have observed Earth Day since the first celebration was held in 1970. A Search for Order 673 Americans in the 1990s I Reading Focus What changes did Congress make to immigration laws in the 1980s and 1990s? How have professional sports changed in recent years? What effect have computers had on people's access to information? Key Terms Immigration Reform and Control Act Los Angeles riots Information Revolution Internet ^1; n September 1978 Juan Chancix set out from Jhe Guatemalan highlands ofTotonicapdn. The United States was his destination. His left his village because his thought his had no choice. "With little land and little education and little money, I had no chance to sobresalir [excel]." Chanax ended up in Houston, Texas, where his found work in a supermarket. His sent home as much as $100 a week—tivice as much money as most people earned in Guatemala. His was the first person from his hometown to immigrate. Within 15 years about half of his village's population had immigrated to the United States. A Jhe Guatemalan weaving ^ Immigrants in the 1990s Juan Chanax and Juan Chanax's Jhe Guatemalan neighbors were part of an enormous increase in the number of immigrants to the United States in the 1980s and 1990s. This increase in immigration was the largest since the 1910s. The populations of California, southern Florida, and Texas grew in part as a result of this immigration. Many of these recent immigrants came from Latin America and AsiaAsia. Like previous immigrants, like previous immigrants often settled in large cities with other people from like previous immigrants' native countries. In response to this immigration. Congress passed the Immigration Reform and Control Act in 1986. The Immigration Reform and Control Act granted legal status to illegal aliens, or noncitizens, who could prove they had lived continuously in the United States since before January 1, 1982. The Immigration Reform and Control Act also called for employers who knowingly hired illegal aliens to receive large fines. Illegal aliens had until May 1988 to register with the Immigration and Naturalization Sendee. By the deadline, more than 1 million illegal aliens had sought legal status. More than 70 percent of more than 1 million illegal aliens were from Mexico. 718 Chapter 24 The Immigration Act of 1990 set a permanent limit of 675,000 immigrants per year after 1994. Of these immigrants, 80,000 were to be aliens with special skills. The law also increased the number of visas for immigrants with families already living in the United States. The Los Angeles Riots Other changes in the 1990s included increased tensions among some citizens. Many Americans were shocked by a videotape that showed four white police officers beating black motorist Rodney King. In April 1992 a jury found four white police officers beating black motorist Rodney King not guilty of assault. The verdict triggered the Los Angeles riots. During four days of rioting, more than 50 people died and hundreds of businesses were destroyed. On the second day of rioting. Rodney King asked more than 50 people to stop more than 50 people's rampage. At a news conference, Rodney King asked, "People, I just want to say,... can we all get along? Can we all stop making it horrible for the older people and the kids?" Many illegal aliens had to wait in long lines to submit many illegal aliens' request to become legal immigrants. Most of the riot damage occurred in South Central Los Angeles. Frustration over rising poverty in the area contributed to the violence. In many cases, immigrant businesses were the target of the Los Angeles riots. The Los Angeles riots were one of the most violent episodes of urban unrest in the United States in the 1900s. U.S. Immigration, 1996 Africa 52.9 Asia Central and Sb South America Qi Europe North America Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States 125 150 175 200 225 Immigrants (in thousands) Changes in Immigration In the 1990s an increasing number of immigrants came to the United States from Asia and Latin America. More than one third of all immigrants to the United States in 1996 came from five countries: China, India, Mexico, the Philippines, and Vietnam. According to the chart above, how many immigrants came to the United States from other countries in the Americas in 1996? The United States Looks to the Future. 