Teacher's Wraparound Edition
American
History
The Modern Era Since 1865
DONALD A. RITCHIE
• i
Glencoe
McGraw-Hill
New York, New York Columbus, Ohio Woodland Hills, California Peoria, Illinois
Donald A. Ritchie is Associate Historian of the United
States Senate Historical Office. Dr. Ritchie received his
doctorate in American history from the University of
Maryland after service in the U.S. Marine Corps. He has
taught American history at various levels, from high school
to the university. He edits the Historical Series of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee and is the author of several
books, including Press Gallery: Congress ami the Washington
Correspondents, which received the Organization of American
Historians' Richard W. Leopold Prize. Dr. Ritchie has served
as president of the Oral History Association and as a council
member of the American Historical Association.
Glencoe/McGraw-Hill

A Division ofThcMcOnnv Hill Companies
Note to the Teacher: The Internet sites used in this text book are not under the control of
Glencoe/ McGraw-Hill, and, therefore, Glencoe makes no representation concerning the
content of tire sites and their Iinks.
Copyright© 2tX)l by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Except as
permitted under the United States Copyright Act, no part of this publication may be
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval
system, without prior written permission of the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
ISBN 0-07-821613-3 (Student Edition)
ISBN 0-07-821614-1 (Teacher's Wraparound Edition)
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 027/046 0504 03 0201
National Origins of the
American Colonists, 1760
100 200 kHomoters
75 W
Map
‘fStudy
The American colonies belonged
lo England, but immigrants rep-
resented a variety ol ethnic and
racial backgrounds What
immigrant group was pre-
dominant along the Atlantic
coast?
iciiires, tiuil sonic departcil
suddenly, but for the most part
they died of mere famine. There
were never Englishmen left in
a forreigne Countrey in such
miserie....	yy
By 1618, the company had expanded land
sales, extended English law and rights to the
colonists, and allowed settlers a representa-
tive assembly—the 1 louse of Burgesses.
Soon after, new recruits, including v arious
craftspeople, arrived in Virginia. Settlers,
however, continued to die in large numbers
from disease. Meanwhile the company
failed to realize any significant profits for its
shareholders. In 1624, King James I dis-
solved the company and took control of the
colony.
From nearby Native Americans, the set-
tlers learned to grow corn, beans, squash,
and tobacco, which soon became a prof-
itable cash crop. Thousands of settlers
streamed into Virginia, lured by the
promise of free, abundant farmland. One
source of workers for wealthy settlers
were indentured servants, who worked
for a set period of time to pay off their
Atlantic passage and then were free to
start their own farms.
In 1619 a Dutch warship brought 20
enslaved Africans to Jamestown. Virginians,
desiring an additional source of labor for their
tobacco fields, purchased the Africans. From
1600 to 1850, Europeans brought 15 million
enslaved Africans to the Americas.
Maryland
In 1632 King Charles 1 gave his friend
George Calvert, Lord Baltimore, a grant of
land north of Virginia that became the
colony of Maryland. The grant made Lord
Baltimore proprietor, meaning that he had
authority over the colony's government.
Baltimore's son, Cecil Calvert, established
Maryland as a refuge for Catholics. Pro-
testants, however, soon outnumbered
Catholics in Maryland. In 1649, the legisla-
tive assembly affirmed religious freedom to
all Christian settlers by passing the Tolera-
tion Act, the first of its kind in America.
Carolina
Profits from tobacco in Virginia and
Maryland lured settlers to Carolina, a pro-
prietary colony located farther south along
the Atlantic coast. In northern Carolina,
subsistence farmers grew only enough to
live on, while merchants exported tar, pitch,
and turpentine from the area's pine forests.
Southern Carolina, however, offered a better
harbor and attracted more settlers. Charles
Town—present-day Charleston—became a
major port city in the South. Settlers in
southern Carolina built large plantations to
24
UNIT 1 Creating a Nation: Prehistory to 1815
■ ■ D. 0.
ng machine, vulcanized rubber, and
am engine, had the greatest impact on
i industries.
(tie factories, powered by more effi-
tMeant engines, increased in size as sev-
1 operations were combined under
igle roof. Techniques invented and
by Eli Whitney and Simeon
h tor making interchangeable parts and
inj> down manufacturing into simple
tons now were applied in the mass
tion of clocks, watches, and farm
lets in Agriculture
kspile of industrial advances, two-thirds
14* nation's people in 1850 were still
1 in agriculture. Inventions, innova-
b, and government policies allowed agri-
ural productivity to keep pace with the
s fast-growing industries.
immigration. 1820-1860
The Midwest with its fertile plains
attracted farmers from the northeastern
United States and from Europe. Public-
lands there could be purchased for as little
as 25 cents an acre. The development of a
steel plow with replaceable parts enabled
farmers to cut through tree roots in recent-
ly cleared forestland and to turn the tough
sod of the prairies. With the new plow's,
farmers could plant more land than they
could harvest. To solve this problem, Cyrus
McCormick, a Virginia blacksmith, devel-
oped a mechanical "reaper," or grain har-
vester. These inventions were accompanied
by still others: a mechanical drill to plant
grain, the threshing machine, and the
horsedrawn hay rake.
Although the West benefited more from
these inventions than did the South, w'hich
still depended on slave labor, the Southern
economy also improved. Increased demand
for raw cotton by an efficient British textile
1 1 r
220.000	
210.000	
200.000	
190,000	
180.000	
170,000	
160.000	(/>
150.000	c *
140.000	fc_ cr.
130,000	E
120,000	£
110.000	o
100.000	k_ O
90.000	-C E
80,000	c 3
70,000	z
60.000	
50,000	
40,000	
30.000	
20,000	
10.000	
Immigration to the
United States Irom
Great Britain, Ireland,
and Germany
increased dramatical-
ly between 1820 and
1860 In what two
years was
immigration the
greatest?
Great Britain
Ireland
Germany
1825	1830	1835	1840	1845	1850	1855	1860
Year
Mr Jii4nal Stetnties ft the Umted States Cetoriml time* to 1970114751
I
CHAPTER 5 The Civil War Era: 1820-1865
179
industry brought prosperity to the Deep
South. By 1860 seven-eighths of the world's
supply of cotton came from the United
States, and raw cotton comprised three-
fifths of the nation's exports.
Increased Immigration
During the second quarter of the 1800s, a
great migration from Europe to America
began. Between 1840 and 1860, an average
of more than 200,000 immigrants reached
American shores each year. The reasons for
this migration were both political and eco-
nomic. Thousands of English, Irish, Scandi-
navian, and Dutch fanners and workers
made the often perilous voyage to escape
poverty' and starvation. Others, like German
thinkers and writers, came to avoid political
persecution. By 1860, about one out of every
eight Americans was foreign-born.
Some established Americans resented
immigrants with their different languages,
religions, and customs. Such bigotry was
accompanied by the fear that immigrants
would bring new and radical political ideas
into the United States. Secret societies, such
as the "Know-Nothings," formed to
demand restrictions on immigration and the
extension of the period of naturalization.
In spite of hardships and prejudice,
immigrants continued to flock to the United
States. Although some migrated West to its
rich farmlands, many immigrants remained
in the Northern port cities, such as New
York and Boston, where their ships had
Section 2 ★ Assessment
Checking lor Understanding
1.	Define popular sovereignty.
2.	Identify two differences between the economic
systems of the North and the South.
Critical Thinking
3.	Evaluating Policies Explain why abolitionists
opposed popular sovereignty.
4.	Organizing Information Re-create the diagram
shown here, list the inventions of this period.
A “Know-Nothing" song sheet cover
docked. One reason for this was that they I
had little money to continue their journeys.
Also, the South already had a source of
cheap labor—enslaved African Americans
The result was that immigrants supplied the
North's growing industries with a steadv |
stream of low-paid workers.
and briefly explain how they contributed to the
nation's economic growth.
INTERDISCIPLINARY ACTIVITY
5. Government Imagine you are a newspaper
reporter covering the election of 1848. Write
three questions you want the presidential
candidates to answer.
180
UNIT 2 Forging a Nation: 1815-1817
239
A 1884 First steel-skeleton
construction is begun,
mnkiitg it possible to
„ iuM skyscrapers
A 1892 Ellis Island becomes a
receiving station for immigrants
WJ5
UNIT 3 NewHofiTOns 1860-1900
There has been a Jewish presence in North America for hun-
dreds of years. Jews tended to gravitate to areas where they
met little prejudice—Rhode Island, Pennsylvania, and South
T [ |y| £ Carolina, for example. By the mid-1700s the largest concentra-
tion of Jews was found in South Carolina's major city.
Charleston. The Jewish population in the United States remained relatively small
until the late 1800s, when there was an influx of Jews from central and eastern
I Europe. Today, the United States has the largest Jewish population in the world.
! Germany, Austria, I
rf Italy form the Triple ■;
Iri-Jfj ^ 1894 Sino-fapmmse
War begins	1900 Boxer
rebellion begins
v 1899 Boer War
starts
1895 Cubans
revolt against
Sfxmish rule
Native American Population
Source: Paul Stuart, Nations Within it Nation (1987)
1850
1860
Graph
Study
1870	1880	1890	1900
Census figures show a declining Native
American population before 1900, The
United States Army fought the Plains
peoples Irom 1869 to 1890 In what
10-year period did this fighting
take its heaviest toll?
sectional rivalry caused delays. The South
preferred that the eastern terminal be locat-
ed at New Orleans; the North argued for
St. Louis or Chicago, in 1862, with South-
ern representation temporarily withdrawn
from Congress, the government passed an
act to encourage the building of a Pacific
Railroad.
The Union Pacific Company was to build
west from Omaha, while the Central Pacific
Company was to run lines east from Sacra-
mento. The federal government loaned
money to both companies at the rate of
$16,000, $32,000, or $48,000 per mile, accord-
ing to the terrain. Each company also
received land grants along the right-of-way
averaging 640 acres per mile.
Construction proceeded rapidly as the 2
lines raced to get more government money
and land. At the height of the competition,
the Union Pacific builders employed 10,000
workers. Irish immigrant crews working for
the Union Pacific and Chinese immigrants
working for the Central Pacific sometimes
laid as much as 10 miles of track a day—a
remarkable feat because the digging and
grading were done by hand. The Central
Pacific had a difficult time in the Sierra
Nevada ranges with snow that sometimes
collected in drifts 60 feet deep. Its heavy
equipment was carried from the East 19,000
miles around Cape Horn to California by a
fleet of 30 ships.
On May 10, 1869, the "wedding of the
rails" took place at Promontory Point, Utah.
The whole country celebrated as a transcon-
tinental telegraph reported the blow of a sil-
ver sledgehammer driving a golden spike to
complete the railroad. A magnetic ball
dropped from a pole on the top of the Capi-
tol in Washington, D.C.; in Chicago a seven-
mile procession paraded through the streets;
in small towns citizens rang church bells.
Other Railroads
The first transcontinental line was soon
followed by others—the Northern Pacific;
the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe; the
Southern Pacific; and the Great Northern.
Like other big businesses, the railroads
needed people of ability, imagination, and
drive. The greatest of the Western builders
was James |. Hill, a small, short-tempered,
red-bearded man of enthusiasm and ener-
gy. Beginning in 1879, Hill built the Great
Northern, connecting the state of Minneso-
ta and the Washington Territory, without
government help. By encouraging settle-
ment as soon as the rails were laid. Hill
ensured that his line would have cus-
tomers. He offered free transportation from
Eastern ports, credit, farm machinery, and
even free advice on how to improve crops.
Hill's careful construction of the Great
Northern kept maintenance costs down and
enabled him to charge lower rates. As a
result, his railroad became the leading car-
rier in the Northwest.
244
UNIT 3 New Horizons: 1860-1900
The American oil industry got its start in
It'S in western Pennsylvania when the first
sful well was drilled. By 1900 oil fields
ded as far west as Texas. Production
ladiisen from 2,000 barrels per year in 1859
million barrels per year in 1900.
(Growing Labor Force
The human resources available to Ameri-
j mtindustry were as important as the min-
eral resources. Workers came to new jobs in
;dties the way pioneers moved to new lands.
Between 1860 and 1890, America's popu-
fai more than doubled, rising from 31 mil-
I ton to nearly 75 million. The flood of
migration that had begun in the 1840s con-
d,contributing to this growth. Pulled by
nities in America—and pushed out
1 the lack of them at home—14 million
migrants arrived between 1860 and 1900,
? than twice the number of the previous
lU years. Many of these immigrants were
I idult males eager to find employment. These
nmers enlarged the labor pools that
nutated wherever jobs were available,
d that helped keep industrial wages low.
I Public Policies and
Private Investment
| American industry developed within a
tree enterprise system. Americans embraced
tyhilosophy of laissez-faire, which comes
inn the French phrase meaning "let alone."
SiKsult, American industries developed
hfew government restraints. In fact, some
~ment policies actually encouraged
Tization. Entrepreneurs, or business
nzers, sought and received special
i from Congress. Liberal immigration
‘is ensured a steady supply of cheap labor,
pghprotective tariffs encouraged American
▲ Office secretary in the iate 1800s
industries and raised manufacturers' profits
by keeping out foreign goods. The federal
government sold public lands containing
vast mineral resources for a small proportion
of their true value and assumed about one-
third of the cost of building Western rail-
roads. It gave railroads grants of money
totaling more than $700 million and gave
them public lands throughout the West
equaling the size of Texas.
While European entrepreneurs often
retired when they acquired enough money to
buy their way into the upper class, Americans
regarded moneymaking itself as a worth-
while goal. "Such opportunities for making
money," wrote Thomas Mellon, a Pittsburgh
judge who later became a banker, "never
existed before in all my former experience."
The money to be made in American man-
ufacturing and transportation attracted pri-
vate investors. The savings of New
Englanders—accumulated from the West
Indies and China trade, from clippers and
whalers, from textile mills and shoe manu-
kotnotes to History
Wages Working-class incomes varied
itlyduring the late 1800s. In 1889 a
liter earned $680 annually, a laborer,
980.and a Yeoman in a silk mill, $130.
___________________HISTORY
Student Web Activity
Visit the American History: The Modern Era Since 1865
Web site at me.glencoe.coni and click on Chapter 8—
Student Web Activities for an activity about immigration.
CHAPTER 8 The Rise of Industry: 1860-1900
267
CHAPTER 9
**★****★*★***★**★*★*★★★★★**★★**********★★**★**
An Urban Society
1860-1900
► Union symbol
Setting the Scene
journal Notes
What 30rne °f thC
major obstacle ***£
States in the la«
1&OOs? Note examples
you read the chapter.
Focus
One factor supporting indus-
trialization in the late nineteenth
century was the abundant labor sup-	_
ply. For workers, poor pay and working conditions led
to a renewed interest in labor unions. Efforts by unions such as the
Knights of Labor to improve conditions, however, were only modestly
successful. The union movement was also influenced by the influx of
millions of immigrants. These new arrivals crowded into America's cities
and brought with them the cultural heritage of their old world.
Concepts to Understand
★	How unity among workers led to the growth of unions
★	1 low conflict between workers and employers resulted in unrest
Read to Discover . . .
★	the difficulties experienced UlCTflDV OU
by labor unions in the
late ISCKIs.	xynline	i
★ the major factors	Chapter Overview
behind the migration	Visit the American History: The Modern Era
to American cities.	Since 1865\Neb site at me.glencoe.com and
	click on Chapter 9—Chapter Overviews to pre 1
	view the chapter information.
288
UNIT 3 New Horizons: 1860-1900
History
Hester Street
by George Luks. 1905
Hester Street in New York City—part of a Jewish
immigrant neighborhood—was filled with vitality and color.
Family at Ellis Island, early 1900s
•1883 Brooklyn Bridge in New York
1 1893 Columbian Exposition opens in
	i City is completed	| |	Chicago	| j
L_L	1880	'	1890
1 T	•1886 Haymarket Square riot takes place ' in Chicago	• 1892 Steelworkers' strike put down at the Homestead mill
11894 Pullman strike ends
CHAPTER 9 An Urban Society: 1860-1900
289
of them did not attend school; most worked
full-time jobs. Industrial work was neither
less difficult nor less dangerous for children
than it was for adults. As a Pennsylvania
newspaper, the Luzerne Union, reported in
January 1876:
a
During the past week, nearly
one boy a day has been killed,
and the public has become
so familiar nnth these
calamities that no attention
is given them after the first
announcement through a
newspaper or friend.
Job Insecurity
Always looming was the threat of pay
cuts or layoffs. Workers were vulnerable to
the business cycle—a recurring sequence of
change in business activity. Beginning with
a period of prosperity, business activity
declines until a low point, or depression, is
reached. A period of recovery follows when
business conditions become more active. A
period of prosperity is again reached. The
cycle is then repeated.
In the late 1800s, business went through
many such cycles. During slack periods
employers kept their costs down by reduc-
▲ Organizing the Workers Union leaders hoped
to improve conditions tor workers, such as these
immigrants working at home. What were the diffi-
culties that unions encountered in organizing
immigrants?
ing wages or laying off workers. Millions cf I
people lost their jobs or had their wages
slashed during the depressions of 1873,
1882, and 1893. Workers looked to labor I
unions for protection.
■ The Revival
of Labor Unions
The growth of labor unions during the
early 1800s had been halting and sporadic,
but conditions during the Civil War spurred
the revival of unionism. With hundreds of
thousands of workers not available while
sending in the army, unions were in a strong
position to demand better pay. During the
war the number of local unions rose dra-
matically. To strengthen local unions, labor
also began to organize on a national scale.
Problems With Organizing
Labor unions faced serious difficulties in
organizing because of the mobility and
diversity of the American labor force. Work-
ers who did not "stay hitched," but nuned
from job to job were difficult to organize.
The constant influx of large numbers of
immigrants—averaging more than one-
third of a million a year between 1870 and
1900—also presented a problem. Differences
in language, religion, and customs among
the immigrants made it hard to unite them
into an effective union.
Another problem was that different labor
leaders had different goals. Some leaders
envisioned uniting all workers into one
large union in order to promote widespread
reforms. Others believed that unions should
be organized by particular crafts or indus-
tries and work only for short-term benefits.
Unions also faced strong opposition from
employers. Workers were often required tu
take oaths swearing they would not join 3
union. It found to have been involved m
union activity, a worker would be fired ard
often could not get another job because of
blacklists, or records of "troublemaker?
kept by employers. Once blacklisted, a labor-
er could get a job only by changing residence
trade, or even name. Another way employers
292
UNIT 3 New Horizons'1860-1900
AFL to accept women, African Americans,
and immigrants—the majority of whom
were unskilled—into their union. Also, the
AFL organized workers into separate
unions, each covering a particular craft.
Fach union managed its own affairs with
only occasional help from the national orga-
nization. The AFL's fees were relatively
high, in order to restrict membership, build
up strike funds, and provide benefits to
members and their families in cases of sick-
ness, unemployment, or death.
The AFL might never have enjoyed the
success it did were it not for Samuel Gom-
pers, its president for 37 years. Born in Lon-
don, Gompers adapted some ideas of British
trade unions, the best established in the
world. Gompers, who prided himself on
being practical, was interested only in day-
to-day gains of AFL members-—higher
wages, shorter hours, and benefits for dis-
abled workers.
So effective was the organization and
leadership of the AFL that when hard times
hit again in 1893, its member unions not
only survived but thrived. Between 1890
and 1900, when other labor organizations
lost members, AFL membership rose from
190,000 to 500,000.
■ The Pullman Strike
To address the needs of unskilled and
semiskilled labor—and yet avoid the "one
big union" approach—a new type of labor
organization developed. This was the indus-
trial union, in which all classes of workers in
a single industry' are joined together. Among
those who saw the advantages of an indus-
trial union was Eugene V. LX*bs, an officer of
tire Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen,
one of several railway unions. He felt that
the separation of railway workers into dif-
ferent unions weakened their power. Con-
ductors and engineers, the "aristocracy of
labor," looked down on less skilled and
lower paid workers, and the unskilled had
no organization at all. Debs, therefore, start-
ed a new organization in 1893—the Ameri-
can Railway Union. This union included all
types of railroad workers—from conductors,
firemen, and engineers to telegraph opera-
tors and station clerks. Bv 1894 the American
Railway Union was powerful enough to
force James J. Hill, the owner of the Grv.it
Northern Railway, to restore wage cuts.
Protest Leads to Walkout
Hardly had the Great Northern strike
ended than the Pullman strike began in Pull-
man, Illinois, the company town built bt
George M. Pullman for his workers. Losing
profit because of a reduced demand for it-
railroad cars, the Pullman Palace Car Com-
pany la id off two-thirds of its employees and
cut the wages of the rest. It did not, howev-
er, reduce either the dividends it paid to
stockholders or the rents charged to workers
in the town. When a delegation of workers
met with Pullman to protest the pay cuts,
they were fired. At noon the following day,
10,(XK) Pullman workers walked off the job
The American Railway Union took up the
Pullman workers' cause. Debs's first move
was to propose that the dispute be referred
to arbitration. Pullman, however, replied,
"There is nothing to arbitrate." Realizing
that negotiating with Pullman was futile, the
union called for members to refuse to work
▲ Riding in luxury—The Pullman car
298
UNIT 3 New Horizons; 1860-1900
on any train that included a Pullman car.
"ay workers answered the union's call,
kirn 5 days 100,(X)0 railroad workers had
walked off the job. Railway traffic west of
, cago was almost paralyzed. Debs
warned his followers not to interfere with
to mail and appealed to them to be “order-
ly and law-abiding." A few mail trains were
ved, but there were few- disturbances.
Federal Intervention Turns the Tide
Quickly, President Grover Cleveland
ped in. Over protests by the mayor of
' ago and the governor of Illinois, Presi-
dent Cleveland sent federal troops to guard
nail trains. Immediately, rioting broke out
angry mobs, sympathetic to the strikers,
nted the soldiers. Members of the
rican Railway Union kept out of trou-
but nevertheless received the blame,
ten before the troops had arrived, the
eral government obtained an injunc-
tion or court order, forbidding the union
I continue the strike. Debs refused to
toy the injunction and was imprisoned.
Without Debs's leadership, the Pullman
ttrike collapsed and with it the American
’’way Union. From that point on,
foyers used the injunction as a means of
:_g up strikes.
Although labor unions lost more disputes
they won, and most workers remained
anized (only 4 percent of American
ws belonged to unions in 1900), work-
85made some gains in the late 1800s. Fed-
▲ Labor Leader The only major
labor union to endure into the
1900s was the American Federa-
tion of Labor, or AFL. It was
founded in 1886 by an immigrant cigar maker
named Samuel Gompers. What were the goals
of the AFL?
eral and state legislation reflected the grow-
ing political influence of labor. Wages began
to increase slowly, and the W'orkday w'as
shortened. Moreover, nearly every state
passed laws regulating working conditions
and requiring minimum standards of health
and safety.
Section 2 ★ Assessment
taking lor Understanding
4 Define arbitration, industrial union, injunction.
Summarize the difficulties faced by the Knights
of Labor and the American Railway Union.
Critical Thinking
1 Analyzing Issues Re-create the diagram
rihown here, and list the achievements of
labor unions in the United States during the
late 1800s.
INTERDISCIPLINARY ACTIVITY
4. Economics Create a collage of the
American labor force from media pictures
of people at work.
CHAPTER 9 An Urban Society: 1860-1900
299
SECTION 3
★★***★*****★*★★***★★*★*★★*★*★★*★*★★**★*★*★★
Patterns of Immigration
Guide to Reading
Main Idea
Looking to start new lives, millions of
immigrants, mostly from Europe, jour-
neyed to American during the late 1800s.
Objectives
After studying this section, you should be
able to
★ identify the reasons that immigrants tame
to the United States.
Reading Strategy
Organizing Information As you read
about the wave of immigration in the United
States, use a diagram such as the one shown
here to explain the difference between "old"
and "new" immigration.

Immigration to the U.S.
★ distinguish between
the "old" and
the "new"
immigration.
Key Terms
pogrom, anarchism
-OkT
s'
"	-;rt, 2
Spcr!6 ’ _e<t
► Advertisement urging immigration to America -»»r:
( yZ' he thirteen colonies had been
A £ settled mainly by English
y—^settlers. Other settlers from
Holland, Sweden, France, Scotland, Ireland,
and Germany came later. After 1815, howev-
er, increasing numbers of immigrants started
to arrive from Ireland. During these early
years, a total of only about 400,000 immi-
grants had come to America. Beginning in
the 1850s and continuing after the Civil War,
immigration rose sharply.
■ The "Old Immigration"
During the period of "Old Immigration,"
which started in the 1830s and reached a
high point in the 1840s, there was a great
wave of immigration to America's shores.
Between 1840 and 1850, an additional 1.5
million newcomers journeyed to the United
States. Nearly one-half were from Ireland,
which was suffering from a potato famine
Between 1846 and 1860, about 1.5 millkr.
Irish immigrated to America, settling in
New York and Boston, which functioned ,i>
ports of entry into the United States,
In the 1840s large numbers of Germans
also began to come to America. Some left I
their homeland because of crop failures.
Others came to escape political persecution i
after the failure of the Revolution of !$b
Still others were German Jews seeking reli-
gious freedom. Uarge numbers of German
immigrants settled on farms and in citiesm
the Midwest—areas that were rapidly grim-
ing and had job opportunities. The Germans
gave a distinctive flavor to such cities as
Cincinnati, Milwaukee, and St. Louis. Then,
in the 1850s, after the Gold Rush, Chinn
immigrants began to come to the P.wh
Coast Many were hired to help build the
railroads. About 100,000 Chinese had set-
tled in the West by the mid-1870s.

300
UNIT 3 New Horizons: 1860-1900
During the colonial period, most immi-
jrartis were readily accepted. Workers were
lly needed in all the colonies.
European agents of railroad companies
nd steamship lines described America as a
where riches could be had almost for
■ The "New Immigration"
Until the 1880s most newcomers had come
from the nations of northern and western
Europe. After 1885, however, large numbers
came from nations of southern and eastern
sir asking. Perhaps the most persuasive
ipnents for others to come to this country
rthe "America letters" written by recent
nigrants to their family and friends. "If
_j wish to be happy and independent,
bcome here," wrote a German farmer
his new home in Missouri. In the 1840s
1850s, however, some native-born
■ricans began to resent the newcomers,
•dally the Irish immigrants. Some
Bicans resented them because they
and sounded "different" and
cause they were Catholics.
Europe. The new immigrants were from
Italy, Russia, and Poland as well as from the
nations of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Italians were one of the largest groups of
new immigrants. Many came from Sicily
and the southern part of Italy. People in this
region faced economic misfortune. Unem-
ployment and overpopulation made exis-
tence perilous. Asa result, millions of Italian
Catholics chose to go to America.
Eastern European Jews were another siz-
able group of new immigrants. Although
scattered throughout many countries, the
Immigration to the United States. 1861-1920
1861 1865	1870	1875	1880	1885	1890	1895	1900	1905	1 910	1915	1920
northern and western Europe
(chiefly England. Ireland,
Germany, and Scandinavia)
central and eastern Europe
(includes Russia. Poland.
Austria-Hungary and Its
successor states. Romania)
southern Europe (chiefly
Italy but also Greece,
Spain, and Portugal)
Canada
Asia (chiefly Turkey in
Asia, China, and Japan
in the period covered)
irtcnaif Hathtia of the United Stair* Cobnkl Thun to J97IJ < 1975),
— Latin America and the
West Indies (no record
of Mexican immigration,
1886-93)
Note: Immigration from Africa and Australia seldom reached more
than a few hundred persons annually during the period covered.
■Graph i
Study
Beginning in the tale
1800s, immigration
from central, eastern,
and southern Europe
began to increase.
In what years did
immigration from
central and east-
ern Europe reach
its peak?
CHAPTER 9 An Urban Society: 1860-1900	301
Linking Past and Present
Italian Cuisine
Between 1890 and 1910
about 2.7 million southern Ital-
ians immigrated to the United
States. Among their contribu-
tions to America was a rich and
varied cuisine.
Then____________
Pizza and Pasta
Italian
bakery
ovens
produced
the first pizzas,
which had been a
strictly Neapoli-
tan item in Italy.
Opening in 1905,
“G Lombardi" on
Spring Street in New York’s Little
Italy became the first known
pizzeria in the United States.
Other Italian dishes be-
came lasting contributions to
American cuisine. Many peo-
ple came to love Italian pasta.
Macaroni, manicotti, spa-
ghetti, and lasagna were first
introduced to Americans by
the little shops nestled among
the blocks of big-city tenements.
NOW________________________
A Continuing Heritage
Americans continue their love
affair with Italian food today both
at home and when eating out.
Entire cookbooks are devoted to
Italian cooking. When polled by a
culinary news magazine, Ameri-
cans selected Italian food as the
second favorite restaurant fare
Among fast-food chains. Pizza
Hut ranks fourth and Domino's
Pizza ranks seventh in total sales

Jew's of eastern Europe were confronted
with many common problems wherever
they lived. For one thing they were often the
victims of religious discrimination. In many
regions Jews were not allowed to own land,
work in certain trades, or move out of areas
that had been set aside for them.
These limitations on Jews created wide-
spread poverty. In addition eastern European
Jews lived in danger of pogroms, or orga-
nized massacres. Jewish immigrants seeking
personal safety, religious freedom, and eco-
nomic opportunity came to America.
Slavs made up a third group of new immi-
grants. "Slavs" is a broad label given to a
people, generally from eastern Europe, who
have similar languages and customs. In the
late 1800s, large numbers of Slavs left Russia,
Poland, and other countries to escape eco-
nomic woes. Many Slavs also came in search
of political freedom.
These newcomers w'ore, for the most part,
poor. They hoped to find a better life in
America. In part it was their labor that
made the rapid industrialization of the
United States possible. For many people,
immigrating to the United States was the
only way for them to escape persecution in
their homeland. One Jewish immigrant
noted that "the only hope for the Jews in
Russia is to become Jews out of Russia"
Ethnic Neighborhoods
The new immigrants flocked to the rife.
There they lived together in ethnically
homogeneous neighborhoods such as "Lit-
tle Italy" or the Jewish "Lower East Side” in
New York City. There they practiced the
ways of life they were used to and spoke
their native languages. The communities
they established revolved around a number
of traditional institutions. They re-created
the churches, synagogues, clubs, and news-
papers of their homeland and adapted them
to their new environment.
302	UNIT 3 New Horizons: 1860-1900
Public Resentment
This huge influx of immigrants created
special social problems. Because immi-
grants lived in their own neighborhoods,
j practiced their own customs, and spoke
their own languages, many Americans won-
; dered if they could ever be assimilated into
American life. Some people, especially
[ workers, blamed them for low' wages. Oth-
ers resented that many immigrants were
Catholics or Jews.
The railroad strike of 1877 and the Hay-
market Square riot of 1886 resulted in
many people's fear of immigrants who, it
was thought, believed in socialism or even
anarchism, a belief in no direct govern-
ment authority over society. A few politi-
cs, notably Senator Henry Cabot Lodge
af Massachusetts, were strongly reac-
tionary in their response to the issue of
[immigration. They wanted immigration
(ram southern and eastern Europe to be
I stopped completely, in 1896, Senator Lodge
litgued for a bill that W'ould exclude all
[prospective immigrants who could not
wad or write at least 25 words of the Unit-
fed States Constitution in some language,
lodge concluded that such a test would
• • ... bear most heavily upon the
Italians, Russians, Poles, Hun-
garians, Greeks, and Asiatics ...
races most affected by the test
are those wliolml emigration
has ... swelled rapidly ... and
who are most alien to the great
body of the United States.
In the late 1800s, hostility grew toward
many of the new racial and ethnic groups
coming into the new country. The differences
in customs, dress, and language of the new
arrivals created a basic distrust of the foreign
born by many native-born Americans. Some
historians believe that this reaction was a
response to the rapid changes occurring in
America because of industrialization. For
those native-born Americans who were
uncertain and disturbed by social change,
immigrants became easy targets of hostility.
Organized Opposition
Some Americans formed groups to
counter what they considered the immigrant
threat. One of these groups, the American
Protective Association, was founded in 1887
▲ The New Immigrants During the late 1800s, new immigrants poured into the United
States, braving the long and difficult journey to start a new life. Why did many people
view these newcomers as a threat?
CHAPTER 9 An Urban Society: 1860-1900
303
to protest the large number of Catholic immi-
grants. In some parts of the country, local
laws were passed that prohibited immigrants
from holding certain kinds of jobs and
denied them other rights. Jewish immigrants,
for example, were denied admission to some
universities, hr addition the immigrants
faced actual physical attacks.
The anti-immigration movement was not
limited to groups such as the American Pro-
tective Association. Some well-known schol-
ars of the time were susceptible to these
feelings as well. Historian and future Presi-
dent Woodrow Wilson and frontier historian
Frederick Jackson Turner lamented tire less-
ening flow of immigration from northern
Europe and the rise in numbers of "inferior
stocks" coming to America. One writer con-
sidered the new immigration a plot by Euro-
pean governments to "unload tire sweepings
of their jails and asylums."
Anti-Chinese Sentiment
Public resentment was not limited to
newcomers from Europe, however. The Chi-
nese, too, suffered discrimination on tire
Pacific Coast. The discovery of gold in 1849
and the subsequent demand for cheap labor
first brought the Chinese to California.
Many found work in the gold fields or on
the construction of the Central Pacific Rail-
road. By 1852 there were some 25,000 Chi-
nese men, women, and children living on
the Pacific Coast and thereafter they came at
▲ Chinese family in California, early 1900s
the rate of 4,000 a year. By the end of the
1870s, there were almost 75,000 Chinese in
California alone. Their willingness to work
for low wages prompted a violent anti-Chi-
nese movement among the white workers
of California. Such feelings intensified dur-
ing hard economic times. During the
depression that followed the Panic of 1873,
unemployed workers in California attacked
the Chinese. Some Americans began to
demand that Chinese immigrants be
excluded from the United States.
In 1879 Congress forbade the importing
of foreign workers under contract—a law
aimed primarily at the Chinese. Then, in
1882, Congress, responding to pressure
from the western states, suspended nearly
all immigration from China for 10 years.
Section 3 ★ Assessment
Checking lor Understanding
1.	Define pogrom, anarchism.
2.	Identify two attempts that were made to decrease
immigration to the United States.
Critical Thinking
3.	Identifying Causes
Re-create the diagram shov
here, and list reasons why
Europeans migrated to the
United States.
4. Understanding Cause and Effect How did
religious prejudice create problems for some
immigrants?
304
UNIT 3 New Hortons: 1860-1900
ffs and national banks. The Republicans
xi to be old-immigrant Protestants—
; terians, Methodists, Congregation-
% or Baptists. The Republicans' problem
• to keep together its Eastern and West-
wings, which differed on such issues as
acks, free silver, tariffs, and banking.
The Republicans' "patron saint" was
ham Lincoln. As the party that had led
ng the Civil War, they had great pres-
in the North and the West. "The party
that saved the nation must rule it," they pro-
While critics attacked the Republicans for
g alive war hatreds by "waving the
y shirt," appeals to the memory of the
Civil War were much more than that. Repub-
i strength came from genuine devotion
the idea of the United States as a nation
:r than as a federation of states. Many
licans continued to be inspired by the
ysearly idealism. They felt that govern-
texisted to advance the public good.
icrats
I Democrats, too, looked back to the Civil
i From the end of Radical Reconstruction
dwell into the twentieth century. South-
states formed the "Solid South," never
aeerrng in its allegiance to the Democrats.
The Democrats could not have remained
Hal party with only Southern support,
er.The party depended on an alliance
ten white Southerners and Northern
Section 1 ★ Assessment
city machines. Democrats tended to get the
support of recent immigrants, many of
whom were Catholics or liturgical Protes-
tants, such as Lutherans or Episcopalians.
Their religious and cultural background was
quite different from that of evangelical
Protestants, such as Methodists and Baptists,
who formed the core of the Republican
party. The Democrats had allies among
Western farmers, especially when crop
prices were low, and among certain groups
of businesspeople and owners of import
companies who favored a lower tariff.
The Democratic party had two "patron
saints"—Thomas Jefferson and Andrew
Jackson. Like these leaders the Democrats
claimed to represent the interests of ordi-
nary Americans. In contrast to the Republi-
cans' view that the federal government
should take an active role in helping the
needy and shaping national growth, the
Democrats wanted to keep the federal gov-
ernment on a skimpy allowance and a short
leash. "That government governs best
which governs least" remained their motto.
During the entire period from 1865 to
1900, Democrats held the presidency for
only two terms. Although they usually lost
the White House, the Democrats were sel-
dom far out of the running. Democratic can-
didates often got almost as many popular
votes as their victorious opponents, and it
was rare that the Republicans did not have
to deal with Democrats in control of at least
one house of Congress.
Ming lor Understanding
lDefine graft, political machine, kickback, ward,
I lobbyist, township.
State how the Republican and Democratic par-
ties differed concerning the role of the federal
oernment.
Critical Thinking
i Summarizing Re-create the diagram shown
I fere, and list examples of corruption that
existed in government.
INTERDISCIPLINARY ACTIVITY
4. Government Assume the role of an
American living in one of the nation’s
largest cities during the late 1800s. Write
a letter to the mayor of your city express-
ing your concerns over overcrowdedness.
CHAPTER 10 The Gilded Age: 1865-1900
321

CHAPTER 12

Imperialism
1867-1908
Setting the Scene
Focus
Foreign policy before the late nineteenth century had been dominated
by two ideas. The first was President Washington's isolationist warning
against entering into "entangling alliances." The second was President
Monroe's warning to Europe against interference in the Americas. War
with Spain, however, resulted in a more aggressive foreign policy and
the acquisition of overseas colonies. Suddenly, the United States had
become a major world power.
Concepts to Understand
journal Notes
SZ~£2r
of ether countries?***
Mch country and the
Lor, formas you
read this chapter.
★	How increased United States economic and political power It'd to
the acquisition of an overseas empire
★	How confrontation with Spain resulted in war over Cuba
Read to Discover . . .
★
★
why Americans moved away from a policy of isolationism.
the problems and responsibilities
that victory in the Spanish*
American War brought the
United States.
Chapter Overview
Visit the American History: The
Since 1865 Web site at me.a!:
click on Chapter 12—Chapter thenm
preview chapter information.
•	1891 University of Chicago founded
•	1893 World's Columbian Exposition
is held in Chicago
1885
• 1893 Queen Liliuokalani of Hauvii
is overthrown
368
UNIT 4 Entering a New Century: 1867 1920
Lnp, he wrote that law should not bo an
»lute set of principles but a tool to meet
the needs of society- When Holmes was
painted to the Supreme Court in 1902, his
ideas began to influence its decisions.
Ths Muckrakers
Other, more popular, writers played a
major role in investigating and exposing a
nriety of social problems. President
sodore Roosevelt compared these writers
in it character in John Bunyan's book, Pil-
frim'i Progress, who constantly looked
nward and raked filth, and he labeled
them "muckrakers."
Most muckrakers were journalists who
wrote for popular magazines like McClure's
Upline, Cosmopolitan, and Collier's.
Allhough similar to the "yellow journalism"
nl the period, these articles were not written
w boost sales but to expose conditions the
Miters had found deeply disturbing. For
pie, in 1902 Lincoln Steffens wrote a
; of articles for McClure's Magazine that
r’bed shocking graft and corruption in
■p’ governments across the nation. He was
wed in the same magazine by Ida Tar-
's expose of the corrupt business prac-
. of the Standard Oil Company. In 1906
id Phillips shocked the nation with a
i in Cosmopolitan about links between
business and 75 United States senators.
Other muckrakers revealed the results of
(nr investigations in books. In 1906 John
>o's Tlw Bitter Crt/ of the Children wrote
t abuses of child labor, and two years
▲ The Muckrakehs The
investigative reporting of
journalists such as Ida Tarbell,
Ray Stannard Baker, and Lincoln
Steffens (above) made them frequent contributors
to national magazines. Why did President
Roosevelt call such reporters ‘muckrakers"?
later, Ray Stannard Baker’s Following the Color
Line revealed the long pattern of discrimina-
tion against African Americans in both the
North and the South. Still other muckrakers
were novelists who used fiction to criticize
existing social conditions. In The OctOfMs.
Frank Norris told how railroads dominated
wheat fanners in a rich Western valley.
Despite their revelations of society's ills, most
muckrakers were not activists. They merely
identified problems and argued for reform
but counted on others to accomplish it.
Section 1 ★ Assessment
1 (kecking for Understanding
I, Define social gospel, pragmatism.
| Critical Thinking
■ Understanding Cause and Effect What
I relationship do the ideas of philosophy professor
I Wiliam James have to progressive reform?
Jl,Summarizing Re-create the diagram shown
I here, and list five problems in American society
-
that muckraking journalists described in their
writing.
INTERDISCIPLINARY ACTIVITY
4. Economics Write a letter to a 1910 news-
paper that tells why you believe govern-
ment should or should not get involved in
wage reform.
CHAPTER 13 The Progressive Era: 1893-1920
401
SECTION 3
***A***************************************
Limits of Progressivism
Guide to Reading
Main Idea
While progressivism resulted in many
lasting changes, not all Americans
enjoyed the benefits of reform.
Objectives
After studying this section, you should be
able to
★ describe progressive attitudes about immi-
grants and racial minorities.
Reading Strategy
Organizing Information
As you read about the limits of
progressivism, use a diagram
similar to the one shown here
to describe progressive atti-
tudes toward immigrants and
racial minorities.
★ explain why African American leadership
he achievements of progres-
sive reform at the national
level were less far-reaching
than its successes at local and state levels. It
was more difficult to create nationwide
demands for reform than to organize effec-
tive campaigns on a smaller scale. The fed-
eral government also was more difficult to
prod into action. The Senate, chosen by
boss-dominated state legislatures until 1913,
was a highly conservative body. In the
House of Representatives, powerful figures
such as committee heads and the speaker
usually resisted change.
The Supreme Court became somewhat less
conservative titan it had been in the 1890s, as
progressives Oliver Wendell Holmes (1902),
Charles Evans Hughes (1910), and Louis D.
Brandeis (1916) were appointed to the Court.
Yet the majority of justices seldom were will-
ing to extend federal power into new areas.
Partly because of the attitude of the courts,
many of the evils described by the muck-
rakers were considered outside the constitu-
tional sphere of the federal government's
powers, making national reform nearly
impossible.
The benefits of progressivism were
spread unevenly in other ways, too. Many
middle-class progressives feared labor
unions almost as much as they did trusts.
So although progressives worked with
labor leaders to improve working condi-
tions, few objected when businesses orga-
nized effectively to prevent unions in then
plants—often with cooperation from local
courts and police. Therefore, wage gains
during the Progressive Era went only to
skilled workers. The earning power of
unskilled workers actually dropped because
prices increased more rapidly than their
rates of pay.
412
LIMIT 4 Entering a New Century: 1867-1920
I Reformers and
Immigrants
Among the many factors that held down
lie wages of unskilled workers was the
pitinuing flood of immigrants to the Unit-
slStates, averaging one million a year dur-
Rg the Progressive Era—largely from
jjuthem and eastern Europe. This "New
knigration'' caused widespread alarm, as
Migrant men and women competed for
unskilled jobs in American mines, mills.
Si factories.
In addition, the newcomers seemed to
pve more difficulty fitting in to estab-
fehed American culture than the "old
bmgrants" from northern and western
pope. Pressure from labor-union leaders
lad such organizations as the Immigration
■action League persuaded Congress in
UK?, 1913, and 1915 to enact laws requir-
k all immigrants to pass literacy tests,
fciJtoshow they could read English. All
pe laws were vetoed, but such a law
over President Woodrow Wilson's
in 1917.
Reform and Immigrant Cultures
Many progressives feared the socialist
ideas that immigrants brought from Europe.
As middle-class reformers, progressives
wanted to change capitalism, not abolish it.
Many also worried about preserv ing exist-
ing values and culture. Therefore, many pro-
gressive reforms were aimed at weakening
the political strength of immigrant numbers
and instilled in newcomers what reformers
thought were proper American values.
In calling for reform of city government,
one writer complained about:
a
[t]he mass of ignorant voters,
ioho now help the vicious bosses
to govern our cities.... A col-
ony of Italians, Scandinavians,
Germans, or Irish, preserving
their national language and
their national ideas, and living
as foreigners among as is very
difficult to reach, but their votes
count just as much as the votes
of the most highly educated
men among us.	y y
A Adult Classes Many businesses organized English classes for their employees. The
classes were held in the plant so that workers could attend at the end of their shift. Why
would employers consider learning English important?
CHAPTER 13 The Progressive Era: 1893-1920
413


A Stowing for Justice Booker T. Washington (right) and
W E B. Du Bois were among the most important African Ameri-
can leaders of the period. Both men had the same goals, but they
took different approaches to those goals. What organization did Du Bois help torm?
When progressives reformed government
by defeating political bosses and machines,
they also destroyed the system that provid-
ed immigrant groups with a political voice,
political jobs, and political power.
Education and Resistance
As reformers obtained child labor laws
and school attendance laws, they forced
immigrant children out of factories and into
classrooms. Many states made the study of
American history a required course in public
schools during the Progressive Era. Educa-
tor John Dewey advised that it was essential
to teach students to be good citizens.
With the great increase in immigration in
the late 1800s, other functions were thrust
upon the schools. Besides teaching intellec-
tual skills and citizenship, the schools
taught patriotism and gave Americans a
sense of unity. In this way, schools assisted
in the work of assimilating newcomers into
American culture by teaching the English
language and stressing American values.
In the late 1800s American education was
rapidly becoming free, public, and almost
universal. In fact, by 1900 most states had
compulsory education laws. These laws
required that children attend school for a
certain part of each year.
As a result, enrollment increased. In 1870
less than 60 percent of all children ages 5 to
17 were enrolled in elementary and sec-
ondary schools. By 1900 the figure was ever
72 percent. The number of public high
schools increased from about 150 in 1870 to
nearly 6,000 by 1900. The greatest growth
occurred in the Northeast and the Midwest
The benefits of public school education,
however, were not shared by everyone. Most
pupils were middle- and upper-class children
who chose to go to a public school rather than
to be privately educated. Many immigrant
children did not complete their schooling.
Many poor immigrants needed their children
to work to add to the family income. Forced
to work at an early age, they sometimes did
not even finish elementary school.
■ Progressives and Race
The most conspicuous limit to progres-
sivism was its attitude about race. Like most
white Americans at that time, most progres-
sives believed that nonwhite races were
inferior. Therefore, reformers did not objecl
414
UNIT 4 Entering a New Cenlury. 1867-1920
to the segregation of Japanese Americans in
Far, Francisco schools in 1906, nor did they
oppose sharp cuts in Japanese immigration
tot began in 1907.
oring the Problems of
lean Americans
In addition, progressives accepted wide-
ad discrimination against African
ricans. Although many progressives
thized with their plight, most reform-
agreed with Theodore Roosevelt, who
that Africans "as a race and in the
" are altogether inferior to whites."
Few progressives objected to the Jim Crow
•5 that Southern states had passed after
truction to restore segregation. In 1896,
the Supreme Court ruled in Piessy v.
'in that segregation was constitutional
long as separate facilities were equal, no
ive campaign was launched for
.While Southern whites were lynching
“n Americans and barring them from
g or holding public office, progressives
crusading for primary elections, direct
n of senators, and other reforms to
Td democracy. Like most whites, progres-
« generally accepted the South's Jim
S system, partly because erf indifference
partly because African Americans in the
also were restricted to low-paying jobs,
tion, and inferior social status.
Ida Struggle lor Equality Continues
| These circumstances help explain a shift
African American leadership during the
ssive Era. At tire turn of the century
Utmost influential African American leader
footnotes to History
ate but Equal For nearly 50 years
jbthePlessy decision, the separate but
ddoctrine was used to justify' segregation
‘(■(United States. In the late 1930s and the
the Supreme Court began to challenge
Vine in a series of decisions that have
aching implications. The most
't decision came in 1954 involving
American students in Topeka, Kansas.
was Booker T. Washington. Formerly
enslaved, Washington founded Alabama's
Tuskegee Institute in 1881 to train African
Americans in 30 trades. Washington argued
that equality would be achieved not through
campaigns for reform but when African
Americans gained the education and skills
to become valuable members of their com-
munities. In 1895 he spelled out this view':
44 ..
. [TJlie agitation of questions
of social equality is the extrem-
ist folly. _IPIrogress in the
enjoyment of all privileges that
will come to us must be the
result of severe and constant
struggle rather than of artificial
forcing. No race that has any-
thing to contribute to the mar-
ket of the world is long in any
degree ostracized.	yy
Yet as the great changes in society that
accompanied progressive reform bypassed
African Americans, a new leadership arose
that rejected Washington's approach to
achieving equality. The most prominent new
African American leader was W.E.B. Du Bois,
▲ Education Progressives believed in compul-
sory public education to keep children out of
factories and to provide them with proper
values. Why did many states require high
school students to study American history?
CHAPTER 13 The Progressive Era: 1893-1920
415
August 3 it declared war on France. The
an army crossed neutral Belgium on
way to invade France.
Responding to the invasion of Belgium,
at Britain declared war on Germany.
! was divided into two camps. Those
ting tor the Triple Fntente wen? calk'd the
Allies. Italy (which switched sides in 1415),
icc, Russia, and Great Britain formed the
kkbone of the Allies. What remained of the
hie Alliance—Germany and Austria-Hun-
oined with the Ottoman Empire and
lulgaru to form the Central Powers.
I United States Neutrality
As war consumed Europe, Americans
I the vast Atlantic Ocean would keep
m out of the conflict. President Wilson
lid that this was "a war with which we
tad nothing to do."
liking ol Sides
Despite a neutral stance, America could
help but take sides. Immigrants of Euro-
nationality groups gave many Amori-
roots that influenced their opinions,
y of the 8 million German Americans
sympathetic to their homeland. Many
Americans, seething from British dom-
>f Ireland, also hoped for a German
I. In general, however, the common
shared by the United States and
and America's historic links with
, put American public opinion on the
ot the Allies,
lion of
orv
&■'
lath Sides Strain Neutrality
I America's neutrality did not protect it
!mieither the Allies or the Central Powers.
The British imposed a blockade on the Cen-
to] Powers. They planted mines in the
jMiSea, forced nentral ships into port for
Kpeoticii, opened American mail, and
^defined contraband, or prohibited materi-
■ts?that not even food could be shipped
It GermanyCTrade betweeri~The United
■k?and the Central Powers shrank.
At the same time, exports from the Unit-
bStates to the Allies nearly quadrupled, as
war materials and food from America
helped the Allies. Ties between the United
States and the Allies became closer when
the United States government lent the Allies
$2 billion. The American public purchased
another 52 billion in British and French war
bonds.
To retaliate against the British blockade,
cut off Britain's war supplies, and starve
Britain into submission, the Germans relied
on a new weapon—the submarine. The "U-
boat" broke long-established rules of war-
fare by sinking unarmed ships. International
law required that unarmed ships not be
sunk without providing for the safety of
passengers and crews.
In 1915 the British passenger liner Lusita-
nia was sunk. Nearly 1,200 passengers
drowned—including 128 Americans. Some
Americans felt that this act was grounds for
war. But others thought that people who
traveled on ships of waning nations did so

▲ Assassination at Sarajevo The assassination ot
Archduke Ferdinand and his wife proved to be a
fateful event. Within a month, the continent of
Europe was ablaze with war. How did the United
States react to the start of war?
CHAPTER 15 World War I Era: 1914-1920
459
reached the Supreme Court. In the land-
mark case Scltenck v. United States (1919),
Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, writing for
a unanimous Court, stated:
^ ^ When a nation is at war, many
things that might be said in time
of peace are such a hindrance to
its efforts that their utterance
will not be endured so long as
Isoldiersl fight and that no Court
could regard them as protected
by any constitutional right....
The Court refused, however, to support
punishment when no "clear and present
danger" of hurting the United States existed
or when the accused was jailed for unpopu-
lar political beliefs.
Persecution of Germans
War fever was also to blame for the mis-
treatment and persecution of German
Americans. Despite Wilson’s insistence that
Americans were "the sincere friends of the
German people," anti-German sentiment
ran high. Many school systems banned the
teaching of the German language, and
orchestras stopped performing the music of
Beethoven, Schubert, and Wagner.
■ Wilson's Fourteen Points
While the war was foremost in the Presi-
dent's mind, Wilson never ceased to think
ahead to peace. In January 1918, Wilson
went before Congress to present his goals
for a lasting peace. With his Fourteen Points
(see Appendix), the President hoped to
establish a new world order.
The Fourteen Points were based on “the
principle of justice to all peoples." The Presi-
dent proposed to eliminate the general caus-
es of war through disarmament, freedom of
the seas, and open diplomacy instead of
secret agreements. Wilson also addressed the
right of peoples to live under a government
of their own choosing. Finally, he proposed
an international peacekeeping organization.
Although Wilson's words appealed to a
world weary of war, other Allied leaders
did not support him. They wanted German
territory and to punish Germany. A formi-
dable challenge lay ahead for the President
if he were to see his dream of peace realized
Section 3 ★ Assessment
Checking for Understanding
1.	Define victory garden.
2.	List the two ways the government raised
money for the war.
Critical Thinking
3.	Defending an Opinion Was government
action to suppress opposition to the war
justified? Explain your reasoning.
4. Analyzing Issues Re-create the diagram shewn
here, and list how the government tried to
silence war opposition.
INTERDISCIPLINARY ACTIVITY
5. Government Write a law that specifies who
is eligible to be drafted in wartime and what
to do about people who refuse to serve.
472
UNIT 5 Crusade and Disillusion: 1914-1932
▲ Anti-immigrant Sentiment A 1920 cartoon
shows immigrants taking jobs from Americans.
How did many Americans view labor leaders?
Labor Unrest
High prices also contributed to labor
unrest after the war, and when tire War Labor
Board disbanded, the truce between employ-
ers and organized labor ended. A record
number—3,600—strikes occurred in 1919,
most meeting with little success. Four of
them—the Seattle general strike, the Boston
police strike, the steel strike, and the coal
strike—were highly disruptive and had
effects that lasted well into the 1920s.
In January 1919, only 2 months after the
armistice, 35,000 shipyard workers from
Seattle, Washington, went on strike to gain
an increase in their wages. The next month
union workers in all Seattle industries
walked off their jobs in support of the ship-
yard strikers. Many city residents viewed the
strike as revolutionary. They responded by
hoarding food and fuel and by purchasing
guns. Seattle's mayor blamed the situation
on dangerous radicals and after 5 days used
the state militia to break the strike.
In September 1919, another major city was
lilt by labor unrest as Boston's police force
went on strike for better wages and working
conditions. Looters soon were in the streets,
smashing windows and stealing goods.
When the mayor was unable to restore order,
Massachusetts governor Calvin Coolidge
called out the state guard. A new police force
was hired, and Coolidge received national
acclaim for his view that "There is no right to
strike against the public safety by anybody,
anywhere, anytime."
Later that month more than 350,000 steel-
workers went on strike across the nation,
demanding better wages, an 8-hour rather
than a 12-hour day, and the right to join a
union. Two-thirds of the strikers were immi-
grants. Most of the office workers and super-
visors who refused to join the strike were
American-born. The companies blamed the
strike on radicals who told "these foreign-
ers ... that if they would join the union they
would get Americans' jobs." When the com-
panies hired replacement workers, violence
broke out, and federal trcxips were called m
to protect them. After 4 months, the strikers
gave up with no gains.
While the steel strike was under way,
450,000 coal miners walked off their jobs
nationwide. Overworked and underpaid,
the strikers demanded a 60 percent par
increase and a 30-hour week. Since at the
time coal was the nation's major energy'
source, the government responded quicklv.
Obtaining a court order, it forced the strikers
back to work. Eventually, however, coal
miners won a large pay increase to an aver-
age of $7.50 a day-
Red Scare
Many Americans had long suspected*
link between labor unrest and political radi-
calism. The strikes of 1919 helped fuel a
larger "Red Scare" than the United States
experienced after the war. When the Bolshe-
viks seized power in Russia in 1917, they
called on workers everywhere to revolt In
1919 communism seemed to have great
appeal among the poverty-stricken peoples
of war-tom Europe. Although the over-
whelming majority of American labor lead-
ers were not allied with the Communists,
nevertheless, many Americans suspected
them of planning revolution.
The same laws used to quiet opposition
and suppress civil liberties during the year
were now turned against radicals. Immi-
grants—especially those with Russian
476
UNIT 5 Crusade and Disillusion: 1914-1932
:ame under suspicion. Attorney
al A, Mitchell Palmer rounded up
immigrants that the government sus-
of being Communists and
expelled from the country—
y 600 of them. Some of the immigrants
)ed had become American citizens,
'some were deported without trials.
Ill Tension
ompanying the Red Scare was a wave
'racism Racial tensions rose as white sol-
1 returning from Europe found them-
’ competing for jobs and housing with
n Americans who had come north
gthe war. During the summer of 1919,
riots broke out in many Northern cities,
worst was in Chicago, where nearly 40
people were killed and more than 500
injured. One journalist described the scene:
a
During this wild week tnobs of
whites pursued and beat and
killed lAfrican Americans!.
Other mobs of lAfrican Ameri-
cans! pursued and beat and
killed whites. ... Armed bauds
in motor trucks dashed wildly
up and down the streets,
firing into houses....
99
Few cities in the United States escaped
racial violence in the early 1920s. Even after
the Red Scare died down, racial intolerance
lived on in organizations such as the Ku
Klux Klan, which spread from the South to
become a powerful national force.
Woman Suffrage Before 1920

Partial woman suffrage
No woman suffrage
Before the Nineteenth Amendment was ratified, hall the states had granted
lull or partial woman suffrage But state laws could change, so sutlragists
continued lo push (or an amendment What eflect did the war have
on the movement?
A Marching for the vote
CHAPTER 15 World War I Era 1914-1920
477
join a union. Labeled the "American Plan,"
in practice the open shop meant a shop
closed to union members. To further reduce
the power of unions, companies promoted
welfare capitalism, a system to make
employees feel more a part of the business
by enabling them to buy shares of stock, by
instituting profit sharing, and by providing
such fringe benefits as medical care, retire-
ment pensions, and recreational facilities.
Moreover, wages and conditions improved
somewhat during the 1920s. With some
improvement in their standards of living
and the relative weakness of unions, strik-
ing seemed pointless to many workers.
Strikebreaking
Although Herbert Hoover, secretary of
commerce, persuaded President Harding to
make a successful personal appeal to the
leaders of the steel industry to abandon the
12-hour day, the federal government was
usually on the side of the employers. Thus
Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty
helped to break railroad and coal strikes in
1922 by obtaining injunctions that prohibited
every conceivable union activity, including
picketing, making public statements to the
press, and jeering at strikebreakers. In 1919
the Indiana State Guard—and eventually
federal troops—protected strikebreakers at
United States Steel. In addition, the Supreme
Court continually whittled away at the pro-
tections that unions thought they had
secured by the Clayton Act of 1914. Once
again, injunctions were freely used to stop
strikes and boycotts.
■ Restricting Immigration
In the decade before World War I,
approximately 1 million persons a year
came to live in the United States, over two-
thirds of these from countries in southern
and eastern Europe. To slow down this tide
of immigration. Congress passed in 1917an
act requiring a literacy test, designed to
exclude large numbers of immigrants.
The act, however, had little effect. New
immigrants congregated in such cities as
New York and Chicago, where opportunities
for employment were greatest. Established
immigrants resented the new immigrants'
increasing political power. Even more, they
Immigration, 1921-1930
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
I Northern & Western Europe
I Southern & Eastern Europe
Canada
Latin America
1927	1928	1929
Asia
Other areas represent less
than 1 % of the total.
1930
Suurcir: Historical Statistics of the United Stales: Colonial Times to 1970 (1975).
The effect of the 1924
National Origins Act
on Asian immigration
is shown on this
graph During
which year did
immigration from
southern and
eastern Europe
reach its lowest
point?
488
UNIT 5 Crusade and Disillusion: 1914-1932
| kiwi that the newcomers, most of whom
•Catholic, would overthrow traditional
slant values. Conservative labor unions
I ww angered by the willingness of poor
ligrants to work for very low wages,
plovers, who had previously favored
1 unrestricted immigration as a means of hir-
ing cheap labor, now came to fear that the
1 *w immigrants were radicals who would
t for a communist revolution.
IK National Origins Act
During and after World War i, feeling
1st "hyphenated-Americans" was stim-
I by anti-German hysteria, by the Red
I vare, and by the Ku Klux Klan. When immi-
1 pants came to the United States, fleeing their
Iwar-tom countries in the hopes of finding
I wealth and opportunity. Congress took quick
n. In 1921 Harding signed the Emer-
' Quota Act, which cut tire number of
admitted to the United States,
ding to this act, only 3 percent of the
il number of people in any national group
dv living in the United States in 1910
I be admitted during a single year.
Three years later the National Origins Act
restriction a permanent policy. This
law temporarily reduced the quota still
her. It also provided that after 1927 a total
ily 150,000 immigrants would be ndmit-
I to the United States per year, their nation-
> apportioned on the basis of the 1920
8. This meant that more than 85 percent
new immigrants would be from
nainly from Great Britain, Ireland,
ny, and Scandinavia.
; intention of the National Origins Act
is clearly to discriminate against certain
aiities and races. This became even
t apparent when immigrants from Asia
Imd Africa were either assigned very small
las or barred entirely. Japanese immigra-
as completely excluded. The Japanese
ded the law as a national insult, and the
t went into effect was declared a day of
mourning and national humiliation
an. The incident discredited moderate
‘ politicians who sought to cooper-
fcwith the United States and advanced the
s of reactionary militarists in Japan,
History
«zr?>
▲ Th( Passion of Sacco and
Vanzftti by Ben Shahn. 1932
Many Americans rallied
to the delense of Nicola Sacco
and Bartolomeo Vanzetti. Why did this case
arouse controversy?
Sacco and Vanzetti
An event that for many came to symbol-
ize mistrust of immigrants in the United
States was the trial of Nicola Sacco and Bar-
tolomeo Vanzetti. These two Italian immi-
grants and anarchists were accused in 1921
of killing two men during a robbery in
Massachusetts. They were convicted, but
CHAPTER 16 The Decade ot Normalcy: 1920-1928
489
many thought they never received a fair
trial. It was believed that the trial judge was
prejudiced against the defendants because
of their ethnic backgrounds and political
beliefs. For years attempts were made to
obtain a retrial, but in 1927 Sacco and
Vanzetti were executed. In his final
statement in court, Vanzetti continued to
maintain his innocence of the crime, saying:
a
... IMly conviction is Unit I have
suffered for things that I am
guilty of. I am suffering because I
am a radical and indeed I am a
radical; I have suffered because I
was an Italian and indeed I am
an Italian....

The question of the guilt or innocence of
Sacco and Vanzetti has never been answered
with certainty. Their trial made many people-
think critically about the American justice
system, however.
■ Scandals Among
Harding's Advisers
Although President 1 larding was person-
ally honest, there was more corruption in
his administration than in any previous one.
Harding's poker-playing friends, known as
"the Ohio Gang," used their ties to the Pres-
ident and the attorney general to sell gov-
ernment appointments, pardons, and
immunity from prosecution.
Section 1 ★ Assessment
||!
rS'SKft?‘
vl BDVAM

less than 18 months
after Harding took
office, his adminis-
tration was racked
by scandal. It was
discovered that
Charles K. Forbes, ________
the director of the i TEA-POT D
Veterans Bureau
and a close friend of Harding, had made ille-
gal deals that had netted him hundred! of
thousands of dollars in commissions. When
this fact became public, the attorney for the
Bureau, who was also involved, shot himself
His suicide was closely followed by that of
Jesse Smith, a close friend of Attorney Gena-
al Harry M. Daugherty, who himself was lata
accused of corruption while in office.
The worst scandal involved Harding's
secretary of the interior, Albert B. Fall, who
secretly leased to private interests some oil
lands, which had been set aside for the navy
at Teapot Dome, Wyoming, and Elk Hills.
California. In return Fall received bribes
totaling more than $300,000. Eventually the
Senate investigated the Teapot Dome scan-
dal, and Secretary Fall went to prison.
When 1 larding learned what was going on,
he complained privately that he had bwn
betrayed. I le said that he had no troubles with
his enemies, but his friends—they were a dif-
ferent story. In the summer of 1923, Harding
traveled to Alaska, deeply concerned and
depressed over the scandals in his administra-
tion. C>n his return he became severely ilL He
died on August 2, shortly before news of the
scandals broke to the public.
Checking lor Understanding
L Define reparation, technological unemploy-
ment, open shop, welfare capitalism.
2.	Explain two foreign-policy problems the
United States faced after the war.
Critical Thinking
3.	Analyzing Changes Explain why Harding's
election fit America's ituxk) and how this
mood had changed since 1917.
4. Summarizing Re-create the diagram shown
here, and describe the scandals in the Harding
administration.
Harding Administration
Scandals

INTERDISCIPLINARY ACTIVITY
5. Math Select one of the years shown on
the graph on page 488. Display the infor-
mation for that year in a circle graph.
490
UNIT 5 Crusade and Disillusion: 1914-1932
SECTION 2
★★★♦★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★A*
The Coolidge Ena
Guide to Reading
Main Idea
President Coolidge maintained a conser-
vative approach to government as the
nation's economy continued to soar.
Reading Strategy
Organizing Information As you read
about the Coolidge years, use a diagram like
the one shown here to explain the Model T's
impact on both industry and society.
Impact on Industry	< Model T >	Impact on Society
		
(Kilidge had traits often associated
with small-town America. He was
conservative, cautious, and given
to few words. In public speeches and maga-
zine articles, he preached the old-fashioned
virtues of honesty, thrift, and hard work. His
philosophy of government was simple: econ-
omy and laissez-faire. To take as little action
as possible was with Coolidge almost a prin-
ciple of life; he once said, "Four-fifths of all
our troubles in this life would disappear if
we would only sit down and keep still."
■ The Election ol 1924
By 1924 the scandals of the Harding
administration had surfaced, hurting the
Republican party This presented the Demo-
cratic party with a ready-made issue for the
presidential campaign.
Objectives
After studying this section, you should be
able to
★ discuss the changes to industry Heruy
Ford introduced.
★	outline the problems
of farmers and the
government's
response.
★	describe the back-
ground and details of
the Kellogg-Briand Pact.
Key Term
domestic market
► Automobile advertisement. 1920s
The Democrats Are Divided
Tile Democrats threw away their chances
for victory at their national convention,
however. The party was deeply divided over
two issues: Prohibition—which the rural
regions favored and the cities opposed—and
more importantly, the Ku Klux Klan.
This secret society which took its name
and ritual from the Southern organizational
Reconstruction times, was designed to
intimidate African Americans, Catholics,
Jews, immigrants, and "foreign ideas," such
as the League of Nations. By the mid-1920s
the Klan had become a force in American
politics, despite its willingness to use terror
and violence.
At the 1924 Democratic convention, the
rivals for the nomination were William G.
McAdoo of California and Governor
Alfred E. Smith of New York. McAdoo
492
UNIT 5 Crusade and Disillusion: 1914-1932
White Ethnic Groups Do Well
In general, tine federal government
nded more favorably to white ethnic
ps, groups of people who shared the
same culture, religion, and customs. During
11930s the federal Office of Education
red a radio series called "Americans
I... Immigrants All." The show celebrat-
the cultural vitality of a democracy made
If of people from many lands. It also indi-
the Democrats' awareness of the polit-
power that ethnic groups could exercise
they were organized. Immigrants and
children made up 40 percent of the
r population at that time. They tended
vote in groups and could swing elections,
dally in large urban areas. Americans
Irish, Italian, and Polish descent became
'orpartners in the New Deal coalition.
■ Popular Culture
The 1930s were somber years compared
to the fads and frivolity of the 1920s. Litera-
ture and the arts generally turned to more
realistic themes about poverty and human
suffering.
Literature
Grim times provided powerful themes
for American authors such as John Dos Pas-
sos, whose trilogy' of novels called U.S.A.
focused on fictional characters who lost
their ideals and became hardened by soci-
ety. Perhaps the most powerful novel of the
era was John Steinbeck's Grapes of Wrath, the
story of a family who left their Oklahoma
farm in the dust howl and headed to the
migrant labor camps of California.
There was also much escapism in popular
culture, as people turned to entertainment
when things became grim. The best-selling
book of the decade was Margaret Mitchell's
Gone With the Wind. Although set in the
South during the Civil War and Reconstruc-
tion, it offered a hopeful account of Scarlett
▲ At the movies The decade of the 1930s was a golden era for motion pictures. Popular fare
included the Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers musicals and Disney favorites such as Snow
White and the Seven Dwarfs. How many Americans attended the movies every week?
i
CHAPTER 18 The New Deal: 1932-1939
569
It ★ ★ M ★ ★ ★	★ ★ ★
Ames	JICAN PORTRAITS
Charles Drew
1904-1950
Born and raised in the segre-
gated city of Washington, D.C.,
Charles Drew refused to let
racial prejudice bar him from
professional success. After grad-
uating from Amherst College in
Massachusetts, he earned his
M.D. degree at Canada’s McGill
University.
In the 1930s Drew conducted
pioneering research on blood
plasma, and he established a
model blood plasma bank.
When the United States entered
World War II, Drew was asked to
head the military’s blood plasma
program. By collecting, storing,
transporting, and transfusing
donated blood plasma, this pro-
gram saved the lives of count-
less wounded soldiers. But in
1942 Drew resigned when the
military refused to accept blood
donations from African Ameri-
cans unless their blood was
segregated from the blood of
white donors and was given
only to black soldiers.
land an end to discrimination in defense
sand the armed forces. In order to stop
[ match, Roosevelt established the Pair
yment Practices Commission to pn*-
(minority hiring in government offices
I in companies that had war contracts.
I while it opposed discrimination, the
ission did not reject segregation. Even
i military remained segregated, and
ugh hundreds of thousands of African
icans served in uniform in every
city from ax>ks to fighter pilots, most
1 in all-black units.
itlon ol Japanese Americans
most significant racial discrimination
war involved the removal of Japanese
ans from the West Coast. About 90
of all Japanese Americans, outside
lived in California and the Pacific
est. Because of immigration restric-
;after 1924, two-thirds had been born in
limited States and were citizens by birth,
ment officials were suspicious of
loyalty When war broke out, residents
forma, Oregon, and Washington
that with the Pacific fleet at Pearl
severely damaged, they were vul-
to invasion at any time. Californi-
ans, in particular, were concerned that their
neighbors of Japanese descent might engage
in sabotage. Army General John DeWitt
investigated and reported that:
u
The Japanese race is an enemy
race and while many second and
third generation Japanese horn
on United Strifes soil have
become 'Americanized,' the
racial strains are undiluted....
It, therefore, folloivs that along
the vital Pacific Coast over
112,000 potential enemies of
Japanese extraction are at
large today.
yy
Based on such reports, beginning in Feb-
ruary 1942, the government moved 110,000
Japanese Americans to detention centers
surrounded by barbed wire and patrolled by
soldiers and confined them there for the
duration of the war.
The order to evacuate Japanese Americans
from the West Coast came quickly. Detainees
had as little as 48 hours to make arrange-
ments for their homes, businesses, and
farms. Many had to sell their property at a
loss or abandon it. Bargain hunters descend-
ed on them, taking advantage of their plight.
CHAPTER 19 World War II: 1933-1945
603
▲ Internment of Japanese Americans During World War II. persons of Japanese descent
were sent to internment camps. More than 70,000 were Nisei, or American-born. Wow
did the Supreme Court rule on the detainees’ appeal to protect their rights?
Arriving at one of 10 detention camps in
isolated areas of Utah, Wyoming, Arizona,
and other sparsely settled Western states, they
were put to work at menial, low-paying jobs.
Their military guards searched their quarters
for "weapons," sometimes confiscating kitch-
en knives, scissors, and even knitting needles.
Entire families lived out the war in a single
room in army-style barracks furnished with
cots and bare light bulbs. Since the authorities
had no plans for running the camps, the
detainees established their own camp govern-
ments, schools, and newspapers.
Almost immediately detainees appealed
to the courts to protect their rights. When
the issue came before the Supreme Court in
December 1944, in Korematsu v. Untied
States, the justices upheld the government’s
policy as necessary for national security.
Despite their unhappy experience, most
Japanese Americans remained loyal to the
United States. Thousands served in segre-
gated military units. A Japanese American
army unit recruited from detention camps
fought in the Italian campaign and was the
army's most decorated unit in American
military history. However, the govern-
ment's policy toward Japanese Americans
at home became a blot on the nation's war
record.
Section 4 ★ Assessment
Checking (or Understanding
1.	Define wildcat strike.
2.	Explain how the productive capacity of Ameri-
can industries aided the war effort.
Critical Thinking
3.	Formulating Hypotheses Why were Japanese
Americans detained during the war while Amer-
icans of German or Ifalian descent were not?
4. Comparing and Contrasting Re-create the dia-
gram shown here, and describe the similarities
and differences between the lives of these
minorities during the war.
African
Americans (
Japanese'
) Americans
INTERDISCIPLINARY ACTIVITY
5. Economics Write a diary entry describing a |
day as a World War II defense worker.
604
UNIT 6 Times of Crisis: 1932 -1960

Changing social attitudes helped these
advances. The war against Germany and the
cold war both played a part. The horrifying
racism of the Nazis helped to make some
Americans more sensitive to racism in their
own country. They began to realize that not
only African Americans, but also Asian
Americans, Hispanic Americans, and other
minorities had been treated unfairly and
denied social and economic opportunities.
During this period, African Americans
worked hard to gain civil rights. During the
war, the membership of the National Asso-
ciation for the Advancement of Colored
People (NAACP) rose from 100,000 to
351,000. The NAACP hired teams of able
lawyers to bring a series of lawsuits to the
federal courts to end violations of the con-
stitutional rights of African American citi-
zens. Like women, however, African
Americans fell short of gaining full equality
in the 1940s.
In the North, African Americans often
lived in crowded inner-city areas. Wages
averaged about 60 percent of those paid to
white workers, African American workers
were still likely to be "last hired, first fired."
In the South old patterns of segregation and
racism remained. African American South-
erners resented that their children had to
attend separate schools that were often ill-
equipped and understaffed. They objected
to Jim Crow laws that forced them to use
segregated facilities. Even worse, most
African American Southerners were denied
the vote, either by custom or by law. Almost
none held political office.
■ Inflation in the
Postwar Years
Government spending on wartime mili-
tary programs and for postwar domestic
programs brought prosperity and inflation.
During periods of inflation the amount of
money in circulation increases and prices
rise sharply as the demand for goods
exceeds the supply.
Because increased taxes were not suffi-
cient to pay the costs of war, the federal gov-
ernment ran a large deficit during World
War II. The national debt rose from $50 mil-
lion to nearly $270 billion. The government
borrowed much of this money from Federal
Reserve Banks. Using the federal bonds that
the government gave as security, the banks
issued new money. As a result, there was
four times as much money in circulation in
1945 as there was in 1938.
As inflation drove prices up, the pur-
chasing power of paychecks decreased.
When consumers could not buy as much,
factories slowed production, returning to a
40-hour week, and employers stopped pay-
ing overtime. Workers, losing purchasing
power, demanded pay raises and often
went on strike. In 1946 there were nearly
5,000 strikes, in which nearly 4.6 million
workers took part—a record that is unlike-
ly to be surpassed. Some strikes hit indus-
tries basic to the national economy such as
steel, transportation, and coal. When rail-
road workers went on strike. President hu-
man asked Congress for power to draft
them into the army. Fortunately, however,
the strike ended before this measure was
necessary.
■ The Taft-Hartley Act
Union activities were a major issue in the
congressional elections of 1946. The anxiety
caused by the strikes in basic industries
helped conservative, antilabor candidates
The Republicans showed new vigor as they
ran on the slogan, "Had enough?" For the
first time in 18 years, they gained control oi
both the Senate and the House.
An immediate result of this swing toward
conservatism was the Taft-Hartley Act,
passed over President Truman’s veto m
1947. Intended to keep unions from abusing
their power, the act outlawed practices such
as the closed shop, which forced business
owners to hire only union members; juris-
dictional strikes, which forced businessestn
recognize one union instead of another
featherbedding, which limited workers
output in order to create more jobs; and high
fees charged to workers for joining a union
In addition, unions were forbidden to use
their money to support political campaigns.
624
UNIT 6 Times of Crisis; 1932-1960

American portraits
Betty Friedan
Betty Friedan (free»DAN) was
one of the first to analyze the
lives of women. When she began
her analysis, most women were
homemakers or worked in low-
paying jobs.
In 1957 she began a year-
long study of her Smith College
classmates. She discovered that
many of these well-educated
women were leading unhappy
lives. With additional research it
became clear to Friedan that
American women were failing to
find fulfillment in life. Instead,
they were succumbing to “the
feminine mystique”—a belief that
they were supposed to ignore
their talents and interests and
live only for the achievements of
their family.
In 1963 Friedan published The
Feminine Mystique, a book that
sparked the modem women’s
liberation movement. In 1966 she
helped found the National Orga-
nization for Women (NOW) to
lead the fight for equal rights.
ution ol Price Supports
tiower was reluctant to have the
nment continue to guarantee fanners
((prices for their products. The heart of the
according to the administration, was
em large-scale farms that covered 1,000 acres
or more. By 1959 half of the nation's farm-
land belonged to 4 percent of the farmers.
Seasonal Workers
:U
,,. whether our farms are to con-
tinue to he operated by freemen.
Orto offset some very real
ami obvious problems that farm-
ers now face, will government go
in the opposite direction and sub-
sidize agriculture in such a man-
ner that it also takes control?

il without strong price supports from the
nment, the small family farmer faced
nic ruin. Overproduction from better
ris, fertilizers, and mechanization kept
nprices low. Legislation reduced but did
it end price supports or the farm surplus,
lam small farm families gave up and
1 out to large farm owners who raised
3 single crop and used the latest
ery and agricultural methods.
of their efficiency, the large farm
s could cut their costs and still make a
k. More small farmers were unable to
ete with the agribusinesses, or mod-
There were other problems associated with
America's changing agricultural patterns.
Large farm owners hired seasonal workers to
cultivate and harvest their crops. Many of the
workers were Mexican Americans from Cali-
fornia and the Southwest, hut as many as
400,000 workers were Mexicans allowed into
the United States on short-term visas. Unpro-
tected by the National Labor Relations Act or
federal minimum wage laws, these migrant
workers labored long hours for little pay and
endured terrible living conditions. Their chil-
dren grew' up with little, if any, education.
Prosperity
and Recession
Much of the economic growth of the
1950s was due to a tremendous increase
in consumer credit. Effective advertising
enticed Americans to borrow more money
to buy houses, cars, and consumer goods.
CHAPTER 21 Search lor Stability: 1952-1960
641
vfrtongAc
|L %
t I M B
The United States has long been known as a nation of immi-
grants. Throughout its history, people from other countries
came to its shores seeking a better way of life. In the late 1980s,
the major sources of immigration to the United States were
Asia, the Caribbean, and Latin America. Among the countries
that sent the most immigrants were China, Colombia, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Guyana, Haiti, India, Jamaica, the Philippines, and South Korea. At the same
time, however, immigrants came from another 150 countries. It is not surprising then
that some people have called the United States the world in microcosm, or miniature.
1993 Israel-PLO
treaty signed
1999 u.N.
drives Serlv
from Kosovo
SECTION 1
★★★★★★★★★★★★-a-*****************
A New Beginning
Guide to Reading
Main Idea
Beginning in the 1950s, African Ameri-
cans escalated the effort to achieve
equality in society.
Reading Strategy
Sequencing Information As you read
about the beginning of the modem civil rights
movement, create a time line of major events.
Use the dates provided as a guide.
1954	1956
1955	September 1957
Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be
able to
★ discuss the effects of the Brown v. Board of
Education decision.
★ describe major events in the
early civil rights move-
ment.
Key Terms
nonviolent resistance,
federalized
► Or. Martin Luther King. Jr.
he end of Reconstruction left
African Americans economi-
cally and politically second-
class citizens. The sharecropping system
and "Jim Crow" segregation laws worked to
deny them their rights as citizens. African
American leaders began to work toward
restoring their full civil rights in the early
decades of the twentieth century, but the
movement did not come into full flower
until almost 50 years later.
During the 1950s and the early 1960s,
African Americans boldly rejected their sec-
ond-class status and the humiliating practice
of forced separation. They fought for equal
opportunities in jobs, housing, and educa-
tion. They fought against segregated schools,
buses, and trains; they fought against sepa-
rate facilities in restaurants, hotels, libraries,
and hospitals. They won an important ally
when the Supreme Court issued several deri-
sions against racial discrimination. But the
main force behind the civil rights movement
came from citizens—African American and
white—who handed together in an effective
protest movement.
■ Brown v. Board
of Education
One of the Supreme Court's most signifi-
cant rulings of the 1950s came in May 1954.
Three years earlier, Linda Brown's parents
had sued the school board of Topeka,
Kansas, for not allowing their daughter to
attend an all-white school, miles closer to
their home than the segregated elementary
school she was assigned to attend.
The Supreme Court ruled in Brown v. Board
of Education of Topeka, Kansas that it was
unconstitutional to separate schoolchildren
by race. The Brown decision reversed the
670
UNIT 7 Redefining America: 1954 - Present
SECTION 2
★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★
Successes and Setbacks
Guide to Reading
Main Idea
During the Kennedy-Johnson years, the
civil rights movement experienced both
successes and setbacks.
Reading Strategy
Organizing Information As you read
about the successes and setbacks or the civil
rights movement, use a diagram like the one
shown here to list the provisions of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964.
Objectives
After studying this section, you should be
able to
★	describe advances made in civil rights dur-
ing the Kennedy-Johnson administrations
★	describe the set-
backs and diffi-
culties the civil
rights activists
faced during the
1960s.
Key Term
sit-in
► "In a Free Government ...
_	s the 1960s began, leaders
f j\y\§ t°r the civil rights move-
's. ment—both African Ameri-
cans and liberal whites—stepped up the
tactics of nonviolent resistance throughout
the South. Although eventually many of
these tactics resulted in great gains for tire
movement, they generally were met with
violence. People were attacked and killed,
and only the federal government was strong
enough to do something about it.
■ Students Stage Sit-ins
During the winter of 1959 and 1960, civil
rights groups held marches, demonstra-
tions, and boycotts to end segregation in
public places. They especially challenged the
practice of not serving African Americans at
many southern lunch counters. In February
1960, four African American students sat
1 by Jacob Lawrence
down at a segregated lunch counter in a
local store in Greensboro, North Carolina.
They refused to leave until they were served.
Their action was known as a sit-in, and
before long students were staging sit-ins all
over the South. By September 1961, 70,000
students were using this tactic to produce
social change.
By 1960 the crusade for civil rights had
become a national movement. As a result,
many Americans were now beginning to
recognize the moral evil of racial discrimi-
nation. King wrote:
44
The law cannot change the
heart—hut it can restrain the
heartless. It will take education
and religion to change bad inter-
nal attitudes—but legislation
and court orders can control
their external aspects.	yy
676	UNIT 7 Redefining America: 1954—Present

Registration ol African
American Voters in the South
f_1 Less
than 25'
E3 25%
to 49%
■i More
than 50%
Map
^Study
The Voting Rights Act ol 1965
had a dramatic effect on registra-
tion of African American voters.
In which stales did African
American registration reach
50 percent by 1966?
of getting Kennedy's proposed bill passed.
It had passed the House of Representatives
in February 1964 but was stalled in the
Senate where southern segregationists in-
tended to kill it. Even though Johnson
himself was from the South, he had broken
with the segregationists early in his career.
Johnson was aided in his goal by national
remorse over Kennedy's assassination. To
take advantage of this, the President called
for speedy action:
Section 2 ★ Assessment
u
No memorial... could more
eloquently honor President
Kennedy's memory than the
earliest possible passage of
the civil rights bill....
V
On |uly 2, the I Resident signed into law
the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The strongest
civil rights act since Reconstruction stated
that all citizens should have equal access to
such public facilities as parks and librants
and to such private businesses serving the
public as restaurants and theaters. It forbade
discrimination in education and strength-
ened the right to vote. It also outlawed job
discrimination because of race, sex, religion,
or national origin. Passage of the Voting
Rights Act of 1%5 helped pave the way for
more African Americans to vote. Activist
John Lewis said:
a
These elections signal a new
level of maturation in American
politics. They demonstrate the
willingness of white voters to
set aside racial differences, and
they reflect the fact that many
minorities have gained the
broad political experience and
skills to make them solid candi-
dates for major office.

The Voting Rights Act of 1%5 also helped
other minorities. It set aside a New York
state law requiring voters to be able to read
English, enabling such groups as Mexican
Americans to vote.
Checking lor Understanding
1. Define sit-in.
civil rights movement during Kennedy’s
presidency.
Civil Rights Movement
Critical Thinking
2.	Evaluating Events The March on Washington
is seen as one of the major events of the civil
rights movement. Why is this so?
3.	Summarizing Re-create the diagram shown
hem to list the advances and setbacks of the
INTERDISCIPLINARY ACTIVITY
4. Government Create a poster encouraging
people to vote. Include a slogan.
680
UNIT 7 Redefining America: 1954-Present
? 32. In the 1960s and 1970s, NOW and
ilar groups helped increasing numbers of
women to enter professions. Banks, realtors,
i department stores were forced to grant
s, mortgages, leases, and credit that they
long had denied to female applicants.
The Equal Rights Amendment
Following intense lobbying by women's
ups, in 1972 Congress voted to submit
the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) to the
tes for ratification. This amendment stat-
I that "equality of rights under the law
1 not be denied or abridged by the Unit-
Sd States or by any state on account of sex."
Not all women supported ERA, however.
/His Schlafly, founder of STOP ERA, dis-
used the women's rights movement as "a
■ of sharp-tongued, high-pitched, whin-
ing complaints by unmarried women.” STOP
supporters contended that the ERA
Id force women to give up their tradi-
l roles as wives and mothers, and that
1 would lose certain legal protections in
Warmly and in the workplace. As a result of
rigorous campaign by STOP ERA and other
ups, the Equal Rights Amendment failed
obtain the votes needed for ratification.
linen Make Progress
Despite the failure of the ERA, women
’rued to make progress. Sexism—treat-
u people differently because of their gen-
et—was recognized and outlawed in the
kplace by 1971. Princeton, Yale, and
r traditionally all-male colleges began
open their doors to females.
Women were also becoming increasingly
“riant in the business world. By the
’-1970s, nearly half of all married women
ied outside the home; almost all who
graduated from college worked.
Wfomen also were becoming an important
^in politics in the 1970s. By the 1980s,
were more women than ever in both
Senate and the House of Representa-
, as well as on the Supreme Court, in
cabinet, and in state government offices.
1984, Representative Geraldine Ferraro
ne the first female major-party candi-
i run for Vice President.
Visualizing
history
▲ Hispanic Americans By the 1970s Hispanic
Americans were the second-largest minority in the
United States What group made up the largest
number ot Hispanics?
■ Hispanic Activism
At this time, Hispanics also became active
in campaigning for equal rights. By the 1970s
Hispanic Americans had become the second-
largest minority in the United States, next to
African Americans. Spanish-speaking people
made up almost 8 percent of the population
and were the largest minority group in sev-
eral states. New York City alone had about
2 million Spanish-speaking people. Part of
Miami, Florida, became known as "Little
Havana" because it was home to hundreds of
thousands of Cuban immigrants.
Mexican Americans made up the largest
group of Hispanic peoples. For years, thou-
sands of Mexican Americans labored as
Footnotes to History
Munoz Marin and Puerto Rico Puerto
Rican newspaper editor Luis Murioz Marin
formed bis own political party after Liberal
party leaders expelled him, partly because he
called for independence from the United
States. Munoz Marin founded his own party
and, in 1942, organized Operation Bootstrap to
attract mainland industry to the island. In 1948
Murioz Marin was overwhelmingly' elected
Puerto Rico's first governor. He persuaded
the United States to approve a commonwealth
status for the island in 1952. When he died in
1980, he was mourned as a national hero.
CHAPTER 22 The Civil Rights Era: 1954-1975
689
\Ui
A American Indian Movement Flag
migrant farm workers, moving from place
to place to harvest seasonal crops. They
were not protected by federal minimum-
wage laws, unemployment insurance, or
Social Security.
In 1965 Cesar Chavez organized a nation-
wide coalition and asked Americans to boy-
cott California grapes picked by nonunion
labor. After enduring five years of such per-
sistent protest, most California grape grow-
ers relented and agreed to sign a contract
with Chavez’s union, the United Farm
Workers.
During the 1970s, Hispanic Americans
began to organize. The League of United
Latin American Citizens (LULAC) won
suits in federal courts to guarantee Hispan-
ic Americans the right to serve on juries, to
send their children to unsegregated schools,
and to be taught in Spanish as well as in
English. The use of two languages is called
bilingualism. As their political strength
grew, more Hispanic Americans w’ere elect-
ed to local and state offices as well as to
Congress.
Russell Means.
AIM LEADER
■ Native Americans
Organize
Like the Hispanics, Native Americans
organized during the 1960s and 1970s. Their
plight captured national attention when a
1966 study revealed that Native Americans
suffered from malnutrition and disease to
such an extent that their life expectancy was
only 46 years. They had less formal educa-
tion than any other minority group, and
their family income was less than one-halt
the national average.
Termination Policy
After World War n, the federal govern-
ment tried to incorporate Native Americans
into white society. A new policy called 'ter-
mination" was established in 1953. This
meant that the federal government stopped
recognizing Native American nations as
legal entities that were separate from state
government. Now, the nations would be
subject to the same local gov ernments as
whites. The government in Washington
w orked to make Native Americans give up
their cultures and adapt to white society-
Native Americans were so angry that
they began speaking out more forcibly. A
group of younger Native Americans had
breathed life into the National Congress of
American Indians (NCAI), set up in 1944
As a result of their activity. President Eisen-
hower put a stop to termina-
tion without consent
Later Presidents did
690
UNIT 7 Redefining America 1954-Present
Cesar Chavez
1927-1993
American portraits
Bom to Mexican American
migrant workers, Cesar Chavez
picked crops in the Southwest
as a child and young man. At
age 25, he began organizing
farm workers to win better pay
and working conditions.
Early in the 1960s, Chavez
founded a union for migrant
farm workers and later merged it
with another to form the first
large-scale organization of farm
workers. He then organized a
strike against grape growers.
The strike drew national atten-
tion as Chavez borrowed tactics
from the civil rights movement—
marches and a 25-day fast.
Yet the grape growers would
not settle. The tide began to
turn in 1968 when Chavez
asked the American people to
boycott grapes. Growers’ prof-
its tumbled as consumers
began to side with the workers.
The strike lasted until 1970,
when the growers finally agreed
to settle.
---------\--------------
\
44
The United States contains an
underdeveloped nation, a culture
of poverty. Its inhabitants do
not suffer the extreme poverty
of the peasants of Asia ... yet
the mechanism of the misery is
similar.	% %
Most of the American people knew little of
the great mass of human misery, said Har-
rington. The poor were hidden away in the
slums of central cities, in rural areas, and on
Native American reservations.
Automation had done away with the jobs
of many workers, and small farmers could
no longer compete with agribusiness. Then,
too, displaced factory workers and farmers
did not have the opportunity for the train-
ing and work experience needed for new
jobs. Further, pensions and Social Security
did not adequately cover medical expenses
for older citizens.
JWWlfiu
L/niine ^
Student Web Activity
Visit the American History: The Modern Era Since 1865
Web site at me.qlencoe.com and click on Chapter 24—
Student Web Activities for an activity about poverty.
Johnson Declares War
Johnson announced his strategy in his
first State of the Union Address on January
8, 1964: "This administration , . . declares
unconditional war on poverty in America."
A new Office of Economic Opportunity
(OEO) aimed its billion-dollar budget at
illiteracy, unemployment, and disease. The
OEO-sponsored VISTA (Volunteers in Ser-
vice to America) sent workers to improve
conditions in poor neighborhoods. Job
Corps provided training for the unskilled,
while Project Head Start helped poor chil-
dren prepare for school. The Elementary
and Secondary Education Act of 1965 gave
direct massive federal aid to public and
parochial schools. A similar act provided
college scholarships for needy students.
The Great Society's War on Poverty
extended federal influence into areas that
had traditionally been handled by local gov-
ernments, private enterprise, or religious
groups. In some cases OEO was granted
power to overrule local governments.
The emphasis was not simply on relief but
on helping poor people help themselves. For
example, community action programs
taught people to organize protests and put
pressure on landlords, employers, and even
government agencies to effect change.
730
UNIT 7 Redefining America: 1954—Present
Medicare
After nearly 20 years of opposition by
those who believed that the government
should stay out of health care. Congress
passed the Medicare Act. Medicare provid-
ed people over age 65 with hospital care.
Medical centers were to be set up in areas
where such facilities were lacking. The act
provided funds for medical schools to
increase enrollments and reduce the short-
age of doctors.
■ Rising Costs End
Great Society
Great Society programs required large
sums of money. Federal spending for social
purposes rose from $54 billion in 1964 to$98
billion in 1968. Federal budget problems
and national inflation made Great Society
spending an issue for debate. Tire $20-bil-
lion-a-year cost of the Vietnam War made
things worse.
I Immigration Reform
To many thousands of immigrants, the
United States already represented a "great
rety"—a land of newfound opportunity
jnd freedom. The doors of this great society
had opened wide to immigrants from north-
western Europe and nearly closed to others,
because erf a quota system that the United
States established in 1924.
Out of 157,000 immigrants admitted each
rear, Great Britain and Ireland were allotted
”,000; India, with a population of 450 mil-
lion, and Andorra, with a population of
400, each were allotted 100. Presidents
Truman, Eisenhower, and Kennedy had
been unable to persuade Congress to
nge this system.
Standing beneath the Statue of Liberty,
which welcomed immigrants to the country,
nson signed the Immigration Act of
1%5. The law replaced national quotas with
I quotas and favored those with spe-
l skills. As a result, immigration to the
ted States from Asia and Latin America
ased sharply.
Under Johnson's leadership Congress
,“d a great number of other important
ts in a few months. "We did reach con-
“us," he concluded. "I think we did con-
' cc the vast majority of Americans that
ietime for procrastinating had passed."
His programs were well-received in part
*use people saw benefits for themselves.
Some businesspeople, for example, benefit-
from the War on Poverty because of the
~ased purchasing power of poor people,
aii’s program also included subsidies
|o farmers.
Guns and Butter
At first, Johnson tried to finance the war
with taxes, explaining that the nation could
afford both guns and butter. New social pro-
grams and rising war costs made the feder-
al deficit climb to $28 billion by 1968. The
President realized that without additional
taxes, either social or military programs
would have to be cut. He asked Congress
for a tax increase. Congress refused unless
the President would cut the budget. John-
son chopped $6 billion out of proposed
domestic spending, marking the end of the
Great Society.
End of an Era
Lyndon Johnson left office in January
1969 a discouraged man. Unable to build a
Great Society at home and wage a w'ar at the
same time, lie had to waive his chance for
another term. The American people had
rejected Johnson's policies in Vietnam. Sup-
porters of Nixon, he knew, were not sympa-
thetic to the Great Society programs. The
nation had become deeply divided.
The 1960s had begun as a time of youth,
optimism, and confidence in the future and
ended in war, riots, and extreme violence.
Three national heroes—President John F.
Kennedy, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and
Senator Robert Kennedy—had been assassi-
nated. Tens of thousands of young Ameri-
cans had been killed or wounded in the
most unpopular war the United States had
ever fought. The New Frontier and the
Great Society programs, designed to make
life better for the poor and the needy, had
also become casualties of the war.
CHAPTER 24 Camelot lo Watergale: 1960-1976
731
X
■ Economic Woes
in the Early 1990s
During the Bush administration, the econ-
omy grew more slowly than at any time since
the end of World War II. Among other factors,
sharply rising oil prices following Iraq's inva-
sion of -Kuwait threw America into a reces-
sion that persisted longer than expected.
The long recession was partly caused by
consumer and corporate debts incurred
during the Reagan era. Deregulation had
allowed banks and savings and loans
(S&Ls) to lend money more freely. Corpora-
tions funded mergers with junk bonds, or
high-risk bonds that offer high yields.
Consumers ran up large debts on credit
cards and home mortgages. The federal
government, too, spent far more than it
received. These debts limited the ability of
consumers, corporations, and the govern-
ment to spend and invest.
As a result, banks and S&Ls failed at rates
unseen since the Great Depression, Airlines
went out of business. Famous department
stores filed for bankruptcy Industries
announced plant closings and layoffs of
workers.
By mid-1992, almost 10 million Ameri-
cans were unemployed. Another 6 million
workers were underemployed. This means
that these people held part-time jobs while
looking for full-time work.
The Problem ol Homelessness
in America
As unemployment rose, people migrated
from one state to another in search of jobs,
and some found themselves homeless.
Homeless people included battered women,
runaway children, alcoholics, drug abusers,
deinstitutionalized mental patients, and
people lacking family support. Homeless-
ness reflected rising rents, lower wages for
unskilled workers, and the urgent need for
low-cost housing. Estimates of the number
of homeless people in America ranged as
high as 3 million.
The Los Angeles Riots
The recession, poverty, and homeless-
ness hit particularly hard at African Amer-
icans, Hispanics, and other minorities
living in inner cities. Racial tensions ignit-
ed after four white police officers in Los
Angeles who were videotaped beating an
African American man, Rodney King,
were acquitted. The city erupted violently
with acts of arson, looting, and rioting that
claimed more lives than had the 1965 riots
in Watts. Conservatives blamed the Los
Angeles riots on welfare programs that
weakened the family and individual initia-
tive. Liberals blamed the government's
general neglect of inner cities during the
Reagan-Bush years.
Section 3 ★ Assessment
Checking (or Understanding
1.	Define coup d'etat, drawdown, user tax, junk
bond, underemployed.
2.	Discuss the reason why the United States
resorted to force against Iraq.
Critical Thinking
3.	Identifying Alternatives In your opinion,
should Presidents concentrate more on domestic
issues or on foreign policy? Explain your answer.
4.	Summarizing Re-create the diagram shown
here to list the issues over which the legislative
and executive branches were gridlocked during
the Bush presidency
INTERDISCIPLINARY ACTIVITY
5. Government Choose three global
problems and write a plan explaining your
solutions.
768
UNIT 7 Redefining America: 1954-Present
CHAPTER 26
★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★
Toward a New Century
1992-Present
Haitian refugee boat
Setting the Scene
journal Notes
. Kk, w be an immigrant
tliher cou^ ex*
the 1990s? Note
^boutitify0^^
youread th=^aPwr'
Focus
As 1992 dawned, the cold war had ended
and a new world order was emerging.
Instead of being sharply divided by the East-
West conflict, nations were becoming more
integrated, and their leaders were acquiring a
more global outlook. As the United States struggled to define its role in
this new world, urgent concerns at home threatened changes in govern-
ment. Despite attempts by political leaders to be more responsive to the
needs of the American people, voter dissatisfaction continued to grow.
Concepts to Understand
★	What changes occurred in government as a result of Clinton's election
★	How Americans were dealing with the challenges they faced
Read to Discover...
★	how Clinton's policies—both domestic and foreign—affected Americans.
★	what challenges face the
American government
and people in the
future.
Chapter Overview
Visit the American History: The Modern Era
Since 1865 Web site at me.glencoe.cont and
click on Chapter 26—Chapter Overviews to
preview chapter information.
CULTURAL
1 Eric Clapton's "Unplugged
reins Grammy award
*	Americorps
helps student education
*	Projections show Hispanics as
largest minority by 2010
* Scientists estimate 1 miM
Americans have HIV
POLITICAL
•	Bill Clinton is elected
President
•	Yugoslav Federation breaks up
•	Israel and PLO negotiate peace ' ' • Israel and Jordan, (issi.siafij
with American help	United States, sign paitvm
•	Congress approves NAFTA	• Republicans sweep mdim
elections
772	UNIT 7 Redefining America: 1954—Present
t—
Drug Abuse
Drug abuse also spread toward the end
of the twentieth century. During the 1990s
a significant increase in marijuana use
occurred among high school students. The
head of Columbia University's Center on
Addiction and Substance Abuse, said:
^ . . . CTlhe most frightening thing is
that smoking marijuana is clearly
a stepping stone to more serious
problems. Children who smoke
pot are 85 times more likely to
use cocaine.
providing state services for illegal immi-
grants. Wilson argued, "We can no longer
allow compassion to overrule reason."
In California, where illegal immigrants
crossed the border from Mexico, voters in
1994 approved Proposition 187, which
banned illegal aliens from enrolling in
public schools and using nonemergency
medical care and other social services. In
1996 California Proposition 227 abolished
bilingual education in the public schools.
These propositions stirred protests among
legal immigrants, who reacted strongly to
what they considered ethnic prejudice.
Indeed, the use of cocaine and crack
cocaine, a more potent form of the drug
that is smokable, rose among men, women,
and young people. Moreover, some of the
women who used cocaine during preg-
nancy had babies who were bom addicted.
These children, sometimes called cocaine
babies, often suffered serious and lasting
health problems.
■ Diversity and Equal
Rights
Economic and political problems in
places such as Mexico, the former Soviet
Union, arid Haiti brought a new tide of
immigration to the United States. Between
1970 and 1998 the number of immigrants
living in the United States nearly tripled
from 9.6 million to 26.3 million. Some new-
comers were illegal aliens, people who enter
a country without legal permission. Total
legal immigration reached nearly 1 million a
year during the late 1980s, yet declined by
nearly 200,000 in the 1990s.
Illegal Aliens
Many Americans blamed increased
immigration for lost jobs and higher taxes.
Immigration took on especially emotional
tones in states with large concentrations of
illegal immigrants, such as Florida, Texas,
and California. For example, California's
governor Pete Wilson blamed much of his
state's economic problems on the costs of
The Treatment ot Legal Immigrants
Congress also limited the rights of legal
immigrants by limiting their access to wel-
fare benefits. Although immigrants applied
for welfare benefits less often than
American citizens, the number of legal
immigrants in the welfare system kept
rising. This growth in population increased
costs for the government.
As part of its welfare reform bill in 19%,
Congress barred legal immigrants who
were not yet citizens from receiving many
benefits, including food stamps and Social
Security. Family members who sponsored
immigrants were expected to bear more of
the financial burden. President Clinton
called these benefit cuts unjustified and
pledged to restore them.
The Question o! Diversity
Tied directly to the debate on immigra-
tion was the question of diversity. Some
Americans believed that the different peo-
ple who make up the United States should
retain their individual cultural heritages.
They saw tire United States as a multicultur-
al society in which everyone should respect
HISTORY
Student Web Activity
Visit the American History: The Modern Era Since 1865
Web site at me.qlencoe.com and click on Chapter 26—
Student Web Activities for an activity on Immigration.
CHAPTER 26 Toward a New Century: 1992-Present
791
each other's uniqueness. As Mayor Sharpe
James of Newark, New Jersey, said, "Our
diversity is our strength." Others believed,
as many had in years past, that the United
States should be a melting-pot society in
which immigrants from around the world
blend into one unique people.
Americans With Disabilities
Among the groups that sought equal
rights during the 1990s were Americans
with disabilities. In 1990 Congress passed
the Americans with Disabilities Act. This
law prohibited discrimination against the
more than 40 million Americans who had
physical, hearing, or visual impairments.
Television news correspondent John
1 lockenberry, who himself used a wheel-
chair, commented: "Our struggle for inclu-
sion in this society is a test of whether
American society truly wants diversity and
freedom for all."
■ The information
Superhighway
As the United States entered the twenty-
first century, a creative new form of
communication became available via com-
puter networks, forming an "information
superhighway." This superhighway carried
vast amounts of digitized information
across fiber-optic telecommunications cir-
cuits at rapid speed.
The cold war gave rise to the original
network, the Advanced Research Projects
Agency Network (ARPANET), in 1969.
ARPANET allowed the Department of
Defense to communicate with contractors
and universities working on defense projects.
By the 1990s millions of people gained
access to an international computer net-
work, the Internet. The Internet offered easy
access to information on a global scale, and
it grew rapidly toward the end of the centu-
ry. Users could browse library catalogs, read
magazines, listen to music, invest in stocks,
buy consumer goods, and chat electronical-
ly w'ith others who shared similar interests.
The World Wide Web provided a powerful
search tool that enabled users to retrieve a
limitless variety of information—whether
text, graphic, audio, or visual material—
from the Internet.
The Internet offered unprecedented free-
dom of expression. Anyone with a modem
could post information. This raised ques-
tions about the Internet's tendency to
spread rumors and misinformation along
with its more reliable services. Handled
with responsibility, however, the Internet
seemed poised to shape the future as the
most universal and democratic means of
global communication yet devised.
Section 3 ★ Assessment
Checking lor Understanding
1. Define ratification.
here to describe the components of the welfare
reform bill.
2.	Describe how the United States tried in the
early 1990s to stop illegal immigration.
Critical Thinking
3.	Evaluating Tactics Do you think the govern-
ment's efforts in the war on drugs should be
focused on stopping the supply of drugs from
other countries or on reducing demand?
4.	Summarizing Re-create the diagram shown
5. Government Design a poster that illus-
trates one of the issues mentioned in this
section. Make the focus of the poster why
young Americans should be concerned.
792
UNIT 7 Redefining America: 1954-Present
I
//
77T
merican Literary Heritage
Read to Discover
Analyze how the author's attitude toward books
changes. What difficulties did the author face? How
was a yearning to read more complicated, more adult
materials expressed by Rodriguez?
Reader’s Dictionary
A Richard Rodriguez
Hispanic Americans cher-
ish their heritage, and many
speak only Spanish among
their friends and family.
However, most of their chil-
dren's teachers speak only
English. As a result, Hispanic
students often find school
confusing and humiliating.
Richard Rodriguez describes
his struggle to become "edu-
cated" in his autobiography,
Hunger of Memory.
fellowship
bookish
companionship
fond of books or reading
Hunger of Memory (excerpts)
From an early age I knew that my mother and father
could read and write both Spanish and English. ... For
both my parents, however, reading was something done
out of necessity and as quickly as possible.... Their read-
ing consisted of work manuals, prayer btxrks, newspapers,
recipes----
... 1 privately wondered: What was the connection
between reading and learning? Did one learn something
only by reading it? ... [A sign said:] CONSIDER BOOKS
YOUR BEST FRIENDS. Friends? Reading was, at best, onlv
a chore. I needed to lcx>k up whole paragraphs of words in
a dictionary. Lines of type were dizzying, the eye having to
move slowly across the page, then down, and across....
What bothered me most, however, was the isolation read-
ing required. To console myself for the loneliness I'd feel
when 1 read, I tried reading in a very soft voice. Until:
"Who is doing all that talking to his neighbor?" Shortly
after, remedial reading classes were arranged for me with a
very old nun.
At the end of each school day, for nearly six months, 1
would meet with her in the tiny room that served as the
school’s library.... Most of the time we took turns. I began
with my elementary text. Sentences of astonishing simpli-
city seemed to me lifeless and drab: "The boys ran from the
rain.... She wanted to sing.... The kite rose in the blue."
Then the old nun would read from her favorite books, usu-
ally biographies of early American presidents. Playfully she
ran through complex sentences, calling the words alive with
her voice, making it seem that the author somehow was
speaking directly to me. I smiled just to listen to her. 1 sat
794
UNIT 7 Redefining America: 1954-Preseni