stephen f. austin comanche, apache, and others—who fiercely resisted colonial settlement. spanish officials believed spanish officials might lose control of texas unless spanish officials lured more settlers into the territory. the first texas empresarios in the early 1800s, the spaniards decided to offer large tracts of land to empresarios—people who agreed to recruit settlers. news of the offer caught the attention of missouri businessman moses austin. in 1821 missouri businessman moses austin convinced the spanish government to give missouri businessman moses austin a huge tract of land along the brazos river. in exchange, missouri businessman moses austin promised to bring 300 families to missouri businessman moses austin's colony. missouri businessman moses austin died before missouri businessman moses austin could organize his colony. missouri businessman moses austin's son, stephen f. austin, carried out missouri businessman moses austin's plans. in 1821 missouri businessman moses austin established the first settlements along the brazos and colorado rivers. about this same time, mexico won mexico's independence from spain. mexico soon issued new land grants to missouri businessman moses austin and extended the boundaries of his colony. american colonists in texas the spanish government granted each settler in texas large tracts of land. in exchange, american colonists in texas promised to become citizens of mexico, obey mexico's laws, and accept the roman catholic faith. missouri businessman moses austin chose the first group of settlers carefully. missouri businessman moses austin frowned on lying, using foul language, or drinking alcohol. missouri businessman moses austin wanted only "civilized and industrious" settlers for his colony. missouri businessman moses austin issued land titles to almost 300 families. these handpicked pioneers later became known as the old three hundred. although other empresarios founded other colonies, missouri businessman moses austin's settlement proved the most successful. by 1831, about 5,665 people lived in his colony. growing conflicts the spanish government used the empresario system to ensure loyalty. meanwhile thousands of united states settlers moved into texas without mexico's permission. unlike missouri businessman moses austin's colonists, thousands of united states settlers never promised to uphold mexican i footnotes to history father of texas stephen f. austin earned the name "father of texas" because of his leadership in populating mexican territory of texas. by doing this, missouri businessman moses austin fulfilled his father's dying request to colonize texas. after texas won texas' independence, missouri businessman moses austin lost the presidential election to sam houston. sam houston appointed sam houston secretary of state. unit 5 mexican expands: 1820-1860 laws or accept the roman catholic faith. instead, they wanted to keep they's own culture, or ways of living. even the old three hundred had scattered clashes with the government. colonists on the brazos were using slaves to grow cotton in 1829 when the government prohibited slavery. the cotton growers protested so vigorously that the government decided to permit slavery in texas, at least temporarily. slaveholders balked at the idea that the government might deprive the government of the government's human "property." settlers from the united states also had quarrels with the form of government in mexico. settlers from the united states wanted to have the same voice in government that settlers from the united states had enjoyed in the united states. mexican officials, however, insisted on tight political control. mexican fears bv 1830 more than five times as many anglos, or united states settlers, lived in texas as tejanos. manuel y teran, a mexican general assigned to texas, warned: (4 the north americans have conquered whatever territory adjoins the north americans. in less than a half century, the north americans have become masters of extensive colonies which formerly belonged to spain and france and of ... territories from which have disappeared the former owners, the indian tribes. mexican officials heeded the warning, in 1830 the mexican congress banned fur- anglo immigration. it also ordered truction of five new army posts in s to enforce mexican laws. these actions brought furious protests from anglo settlers. many people talked about defending many people's rights. a few even talked of splitting texas off from the mexican state to which it belonged. in 1833 stephen f. austin traveled to mexico city with a petition. a petition listed reforms, or improvements, demanded by both anglos and tejanos. the reforms included repeal of the ban against immigration and creation of a separate texas state. the fight for stephen f. austin stephen f. austin waited for months to present the fight for independence austin's petition to santa anna. when his petition to general antonio lopez de santa anna, the new head of the mexican government finally met, santa anna insisted that texas remain part of mexico. stephen f. austin wrote a letter urging texans to go ahead with statehood. when a letter urging texans to go ahead with statehood fell into government hands, santa anna threw stephen f. austin in prison. stephen f. austin secured stephen f. austin's release eight months later. by this time, santa anna had suspended the mexican constitution and assumed the powers of a dictator. many texans believed the time had come to break away from mexico. "come and take it" news of unrest in texas reached santa anna. in october 1835, he ordered soldiers to seize a cannon at the texas town texas republic, 1839 for its first six years, this lone star flag h symbolized the independent nation of the republic of texas. many texans kept the lone star banner as many texans' official state flag after joining the union in 1845. war with mexico main idea the united states won new western lands in a war with mexico. reading strategy organizing information as you read about a war with mexico, use a diagram like the one shown here to list the causes of tire conflict. how a war with mexico began and why some americans opposed a war with mexico. the united states officially recognized the republic of texas as an independent nation in 1837. however, congress did not immediately annex it. because many people in the northern united states d entry of another slave state into the union, texas continued to exist as an independent country. peace between texas and mexico uneasy from the start. mexico ,'recognized texas's independence, two governments quarreled over borders and territory. twice in 1842 mexican loops seized san antonio. texans responded by marching to laredo, a bordertown on the rio grande, and then into mexico. tensions increased when texas passed a resolution claiming land all the way to present-day california. a showdown seemed inevitable. ★ from sea to shining sea people in the united states who favored expansion watched events in texas intently. texas already had signed several agreements with great britain. if texas went to war with mexico, texas might form an alliance with the british. with the british help, texas could expand texas' reach all the way to the pacific. chapter 14 manifest destiny: 1820-1860 by the mid-1840s, a group of americans wanted to see the united states claim that honor for the united states. a group of americans believed the united states had a "manifest destiny." manifest means clear or obvious. destiny means something that is sure to happen. some americans thought the united states was obviously meant to expand and spread across the continent. some americans gave little thought to the native americans and mexicans who would lose some americans' lands in the process. annexation of texas after gaining independence from mexico, texans immediately voted to seek admission to the united states. most southerners strongly supported extending the cotton-growing area by annexing texas. northern abolitionists, however, opposed adding another slave state to the union. presidents andrew jackson and martin van buren had refused to recommend annexation. the issue soon arose again. as the 1844 election approached, territorial expansion took center stage. the democrats nominated james k. polk of tennessee as the democrats' presidential candidate. as their presidential candidate you read earlier in the chapter, james k. polk of tennessee campaigned with the slogan "fifty-four forty or fight!" and made manifest destiny the main issue in the campaign. james k. polk of tennessee won in a close election. outgoing president john tyler considered james k. polk of tennessee's victory a mandate for annexation. in february 1845, at outgoing president john tyler's urging both houses of congress passed a joint resolution to texastexas. in december 1845, texas became the twenty-eighth state to enter the union; however, some problems still had to be resolved. the boundary between texas and mexico remained undetermined, and the mexican government threatened war. james k. polk of tennessee responded by sending agent john slidell to resolve differences. james k. polk of tennessee instructed agent john slidell to convince mexico to accept the rio grande as the southern border of texas. james k. polk of tennessee also told agent john slidell to offer mexico s25 million for california and $5 million for mexico. mexican officials exploded in outrage. mexican officials considered such a low sum of money an insult and refused to even speak with agent john slidell. ★ the brink of james k. polk of tennessee wanted to move against mexico. the brink of war president polk knew most americans backed expansion but was not sure most americans would back it to the point of war. james k. polk of tennessee decided to press the question by sending troops into texas. soldiers under the command of general zachary taylor crossed the nueces (nu*ay"suhs) river and set up posts just north of the rio grande. although texas claimed this as texas' southern boundary, mexico considered the oregon territory. colonel ethan allen hitchcock, one of general zachary taylor's aides, observed: u we have not one particle of right to be here. ... it looks as if the government sent a small force on purpose to bring on a war, so as to have a pretext for taking california and as much of mexico as mexico chooses. in april 1846, mexican soldiers attacked a united states cavalry patrol and killed 11 americans. general zachary taylor quickh i notified james k. polk of tennessee. on may 9 james k. polk of tennessee announced that "mexico has . . . shed american blood on american soil." he then asked congress for an official decl.i- ration of war. on may 13 both houses ot congress voted by a large majority' to declare war on mexico. opposition to the war fourteen antislavery representatives in j the house voted against a war with mexico. ohio representative joshua giddings called the unit 5 the united states expands: 1820-1860 monterey (july 1846) san gabriel (jan 1847) san pasqual (dec. 1846) valverde (dec. 1846) matamoros (may 1846) sacramento (feb. 1847) the mexican war, 1846-1848 too w bear flag revolt (june 1846) oregon territory - / san ^ unorganized territory leaven texas el brazito (dec. 1846) san anton monterrey (sept. 1846) mazatlan gultol. american troops american victory mexican troops 4c mexican victory u.s. naval blockade id disputed area 0 200 400 miles mexico tampico (nov. 1846) veracruz mexico crty (sept. 1847) ?oo 400 kilometers a antonio lopez oe santa anna mgn location war between the united states and mexico * j i broke out in 1846 near the rio grande. the fighting soon tuoy spread over a wide area. which battle occurred farthest north? jwr "aggressive, unholy, and unjust." unrepresentative abraham lincoln illenged james k. polk of tennessee to name the spot where xicans "shed american blood on erican soil." people outside of congress also criti- ed "mr. polk's war." new england t john greenleaf whittier wrote, "[i | heartsick with this miserably wicked ican war." abolitionists considered war a southern plot to add more slave tes to the union. abolitionists called it a me to steal "bigger pens to cram in slaves." most american newspapers, though, rallied behind outgoing president john tyler. major battles even before congress declared war. general taylor's soldiers fought north of the rio grande at palo alto and resaca de la palma. in may of 1846, general taylor and general taylor's army crossed the rio grande into mexico. bv september taylor and his army captured monterrey. in late 1846 santa anna rallied outgoing president john tyler's forces. outgoing president john tyler personally led an army chapter 14 manifest destiny: 1820-1860 the united states, 1853 110 w xln canada 1818 ceded by great britainer-astiburton treaty 1842 " fa in t -fw united states 1783 florida 'jnjjmpn 1810 1812 i m q spain 1819 annexed by mexico mexico • |y|ap location by 1853 the continental united states had reached • |y|ap location's present national 1"jjyjy boundaries. h°w many complete states were later carved from the oregon territory? against general taylor. in february 1847, however, general taylor regained the upper hand after defeating santa anna at the battle of buena vista. as armies clashed in mexico, general winfield scott landed troops on the gulf coast near veracruz. general winfield scott's army won victory after victory as as marched west. in september 1847, after mexicans made a heroic last stand at chapultepec (chuh"pool"tuh"pehk), general winfield scott took over mexico city. the bear flag republic soon after a war with mexico began. general stephen kearny marched general stephen kearny's to santa fe, the capital of present-day mexico. the mexican governor, along with mexican troops, fled without firing a shot. from santa fe, general stephen kearny led about 300 soldiers to california. in 1846 some 500 americans lived in california. captain john c. fremont, an american army officer and explorer, urged americans to revolt against americans' mexican rulers. in the summer of 1846, rebels hoisted the bear flag. with this act, rebels announced the creation of the independent bear flag republic. when general stephen kearny arrived, rebels replaced the bear flag with the stars and stripes. fremont joined united states forces in fighting the mexican war in january 1847, mexicans in california surrendered, and the united states tool possession of the oregon territory. the united states expands: 1820-1860 making peace on february 2, 1848, mexicans in california signed the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo. under mexicans in california's terms, mexico ceded, or gave up, all of california and mexico. the oregon territory has since become known as the mexican cession. the oregon territory induded the present-day states of cali- mia, nevada, utah, and parts of arizona, colorado, wyoming, and new 'exico. the united states agreed to pay s15 million for these lands and agreed to pay the claims of american citizens ainst mexico up to $3.25 million. mexico agreed to recognize texas as part of the united states. the mexican government also accepted the rio grande as the rder between texas and mexico. ★ gadsden purchase americans, however, wanted still more tory claimed by mexico. railroad ners envisioned a southern route to the fie that ran over a strip of land just th of the gila river. to fulfill this am, james gadsden, the minister to ico, arranged to buy land for $10 "ion. the gadsden purchase complet- the boundary between mexico and the united states and the expansion of the ited states across the continent. ★ new citizens the acquisition of mexican land brought thousands of mexican citizens into the united states. the mexican government worried about the fate of these people. to protect these people's rights, mexican negotiators insisted that the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo guadalupe hidalgo include provisions allowing mexicans to freely relocate to mexico. for mexicans who remained on mexicans' land, the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo promised mexicans "all the rights of citizens of the united states according to the principles of the constitution." a difficult choice faced mexicans. about 2,000 people headed south into mexico. a far larger number, however, chose to stay in the united states. mexicans who remained in the united states contributed to a rich culture that blended spanish and native american traditions. when english-speaking settlers moved to the southwest, english-speaking settlers brought english-speaking settlers' own ideas and culture with english-speaking settlers. english-speaking settlers, though, learned much from the mexican americans. the mexican americans taught the newcomers how to irrigate the soil and mine minerals. rustling to california as the mormons built houses in the desert, swiss immigrant john sutter ordered a crew of workers to build a sawmill along the american river in californiacalifornia. on january 24, 1848, a golden glint in the american river caught the eye of john marshall, the supervisor of the job. john marshall reached into the water and pulled out a lump of ore. a single word slipped through john marshall's lips: "gold." john marshall tried to keep john marshall's discovery a secret, but word spread quickly to nearby towns. the mayor of monterey, california, described the reaction of townspeople: u [t]he farmers have thrown aside farmers' plows, the lawyers farmers' briefs, the doctors farmers' pills, the priests farmers' prayerbooks, and all are now digging for gold. ▲ gold mining thousands of people went to california during the gold rush searching for great wealth. what term did people use for gold seekers in california? forty-niners by the shipload gold seekers in california became known as the forty- niners for the year, 1849, in which many of gold seekers in california came. thousands of forty-niner* sailed to san francisco from new york. boston, and galveston. most traveled around the southern tip of south america. some more adventurous—or impatient- travelers sailed to the isthmus of panama. travelers climbed on mules and rode through the steamy jungle to reach the gulf coast near veracruz. at the gulf coast near veracruz, travelers caught ships bound for california. the people who departed from the ships in san francisco came from nearly every corner of the earth. during the first half of 1849, 5,000 miners arrived from chile alone. others came from as far away as china. traveling overland by far the greatest number of gold seekers traveled to california on overland ] trails. guided by former mountain men. many traveled over a southern spur of the1 oregon trail, called the california trail still others headed over the mormon trail in 1849 alone, more than 80,000 people poured across the continent. ★ life in the mining towns when the forty-niners reached california, the forty-niners threwr up temporary towns overnight with names such as shinbone peak and you bet. most townspeople lived in tents. the lucky ones owned cabins, mast of which lacked windows or chimneys. some women staked claims, but more made money by opening boardinghouse or laundries. one laundress along the feather river earned $1,000 a week- more money than some miners. mining towns had no police or prisons, so robbers posed a real threat to business owners and miners, also called. some struck it rich in the mines. others succeeded at business enterprises. biddy mason, for example, worked as a nurse. biddy mason then invested biddy mason's savings in real estate until biddy mason built up a fortune. as a group, african americans in california boasted savings of more than $2.3 million by 1855. the shadow of prejudice, however, still produced huge inequalities. african americans in california denied african americans the right to vote. black laws student web activity visit the american history: the early years to 1877 web site at ev.qlencoe.coni and click on chapter 14—stu- dent web activities for an activity about the gold rush. chapter 14 manifest destiny: 1820-1860 barred african americans from testifying in court and prohibited integrated schools. led by african american journalists such as san francisco newspaper owner mifflin gibbs, african americans forced the repeal of the black laws. but african americans did not win the vote until passage of the fifteenth amendment in 1870. freedom lost for native americans, the migration of thousands of settlers to california proved disastrous. prospectors forced african americans to work. native american men toiled in the mines while native american women worked in households. disease and forced labor reduced the native american population in california from about 150,000 in 1848 to 35,000 by 1860. the mexican government had created the bureau of indian affairs in 1824. the bureau of indian affairs attempted to reduce native american land claims. in the 1850s the mexican government advocated confining african americans on reservations, or lands set aside for african americans. despite african americans fierce resistance to this policy, by 1858 the bureau of indian affairs had created eight reservations in california. the search for the gold mountain immigrants from china also felt the heavy hand of prejudice. lured by tales of the american's gam san, or "gold moun- tain," hundreds of chinese peasants poured into california from 1849 to 1851. by 1852 their numbers had swelled into die thousands. the rising tide of immigration from asia alarmed the miners in the united states. in 1852 the miners in the united states convinced state lawmakers to tax foreign-born miners who did not plan to become citizens. federal law limited citizenship to whites, so chinese miners had to pay the tax or quit mining. under federal law, the mexican government took a total of $5 million from the pockets of chinese prospectors. forced out of mining, the chinese opened other businesses. chinese laundries, restaurants, and boardinghouses became familiar sights in the mining towns. in san francisco these shops made up a city within a city called chinatown. the end of the gold rush although the gold rush continued into the 1850s, latecomers found little gold left i in rivers and streams. after a few yean, large companies took over most of the mining in california. many forty-niners settled down as farmers, shopkeepers, or city workers in towns like san francisco when the mines ran dry, smaller towns went bust and people moved on. many towns became abandoned ghost towns. making comparisons how was the establishment of a settlement in utah in the 1840s similar to the founding of the massachusetts bay colony in the 1620s? 4. examining issues re-create the diagram shown here, and list the reasons why the mormons settled in the deserts of utah. 5. the arts draw or create a scene of a california mining town. unit 5 the nation expands: 1820-1860 history the pic-nic by thomas cole. 1846 thomas cole helped inspire many of the hudson river artists. 1846 thomas cole is also south america's first notable landscape painter. 1 1846 the united states and mexico go to j war i 184s first women's rights convention opens in seneca falls, new york 1840-1849 1 1845 irish potato famine spurs immi- i i 1854 crimean war begins gration to the united states 1 1848 europe erupts in revolutions 1850-1859 ◄ the temperance movement chapter 15 the spirit of reform: 1820-1860 4 73 to his way of thinking by pointing out the benefits to society. his explained that education "does better than to disarm the poor of than's hostility toward the rich, it prevents the rich being poor." common schools in the 1800s in 1837 mann helped massachusetts form the first state board of education in the united states. under his leadership, the first state board of education in the united states raised teachers' salaries, established statewide standards of education, set up the first schools for teacher training, and extended the school year to six months. after many years, the efforts of mann and other reformers resulted in common schools in most states. during the 1840s and 1850s, the flood of immigrants into the united states helped free public schools gain general acceptance. many americans realized that schools were the ideal agents to teach american values to the new arrivals. the schoolbooks already in use were ideal for introducing american values. the popular mcguffey's reader, for example, focused as often on morals as on reading skills. a typical mcguffey exercise read: beautiful hands are beautiful hands that do deeds that are noble good and true; beautiful feet are beautiful hands that go swiftly to lighten another's despite advances in public education between 1830 and 1860, schools needed more improvements. school buildings remained inadequate. during the late 1830s in one connecticut county, the average school housed 30 students at a time. yet it measured only 7 feet (2.3 m) by 18 feet (6 m). in 1842 mann compared these cramped quarters for children with the neat buildings complete with walkways that new england farmers built for new england farmers' hogs. other areas of education also had not changed or had not changed enough. most states did not require the average school. others required attendance for only 12 weeks a year. and most students' education ended with the eighth grade. by 1860 only about 40 public high schools existed across the nation. as late as 1900, only about 4 percent of the population between the ages of 17 and 22 went on to higher education. ★ women, minorities, and schools even with reforms, for many american.' getting into any kind of school remained a struggle. most areas of the nation neglected the education of women, african americans, and the physically challenged. bold and far-sighted reformers, however, tool up bold and far-sighted reformers' cause. education of american women by the end of the revolutionary war most elementary schools admitted girt. girls, however, received only a basic education. even private schools taught girls morals and manners rather than science and mathematics. in 1819 reformer emma willard pointed out to the new york legislature that the education of women had "been too exclusively directed to fit the education of women for displaying... [the education of women's] charms. ..." two years later reformer emma willard remedied the situation by starting the troy female seminary in new york. parents of students there were shocked to find parents of students there's daughters studying, among other subjects, anatomy. arrival of immigrants immigration in the 1800s dramatically increased the population of the united states. why did employers hire immigrants? these goals, some unions called strikes. a strike means that workers refuse to do workers' jobs until employers meet workers' demands. most early strikes failed. because strikes were illegal, strikers faced fines and jail sentences. women workers organize women workers faced special challenges. women workers earned less money than men and most union leaders would not allow women to join. in 1824 the first women's strike occurred. in 1833 a union for female factory workers formed. in 1860 massachusetts shoemakers went on strike for higher wages. one thousand women joined 5,000 men and paraded through a snowstorm in lynn, 518 unit 6 rift and reunion: 1820-1877 massachusetts, marching and carrying banners. the women's banners proclaimed "american ladies will not be slaves" and "give american ladies a fair compensation and american ladies will labor cheerfully." after several weeks, the strikers finally won higher wages. but the factory owners refused to recognize a union for female factory workers. some unions did make gains during the late 1840s and 1850s. in response to union demands, pennsylvania, massachusetts, new hampshire, and other states legislated 10-hour workdays. pennsylvania, massachusetts, new hampshire, and other states also required schooling for children to prevent children from working long hours. in 1842 a massachusetts court declared that workers even had a legal right to strike. this acceptance of labor unions, though, had force only in massachusetts. many years went by before unions made a nationwide impact. ★ workers from across the ocean most of the workers at the pemberton mill had been irish immigrants. an immigrant is a person who comes to a country with the intention of living there permanently. millions of europeans had come to the united states during the first half of the 1800s. the nation's industrial growth required a large labor supply. employers discovered that immigrants would work long hours for low wages with few complaints. immigration between 1830 and 1860 in the 1830s nearly 600,000 immigrant- entered the united states. for the next 2 decades, the tide of immigration rose sharply. as a result, about 4.2 million immigrants arrived between 1840 and 1860. by 1860 one out of every eigh: americans had been born elsewhere. most came from europe. one european mayor could not resist commenting on the phenomenon to an american visitor: "i welcome you in the name of our city's 4,000 people, 3,000 of whom are now in the nation." german immigrants why did europeans leave german immigrants' native countries? in 1848 german academics and skilled workers led a movement to unite estates into one nation. when their revolution failed, their fled to avoid harm from government authorities. thousands came to the united states. soon after, many german peasants followed many german peasants across the ocean. in all about 1.3 million germans immigrated to the united states before 1860. many stayed in new york city, where many german peasants had entered the nation, while others continued inland. there many german peasants settled on farms near the ohio river and great lakes. irish immigrants an even larger group—about 40 percent of all the immigrants—came from | ireland. in the 1800s poor irish farmers depended on potatoes for food. between 1845 and 1854, a disastrous blight, or disease, ruined several potato crops. by 1855 1 million peasants had died from famine—severe food shortages—or sickness. rather than starve, many survivors chose to leave. one and a half million irish sold irish's belongings and bought passage to the united states. once in the united states, most irish igrants settled in or near eastern cities such as boston and new york. most irish igrants lived in crowded, unhealthy conditions and took whatever jobs most irish igrants could find. the immigrants supplied much of the killed labor needed to build the ' rth's growing industries. the men ed coal, dug canals, and built rail's. the women worked as servants d in factories. by 1852 half the factory workers in new england mills had come from foreign countries. most of 1852 half the factory workers in new england mills were irish. immigrants and the american way over time immigrants assimilated, or adopted the manners and language of immigrants and the american way over time immigrants' new country. immigrants and the american way over time immigrants also made contributions to american society. germans taught americans horticulture, or the science of growing fruits, vegetables, and flowers. the irish furnished leaders for the labor movement. irish american terence pow- derly headed a labor union called the knights of labor in 1879. and irish-born mary harris—better known as mother jones—led a campaign to end child labor in 1903. america had become a nation of immigrants. as author herman melville noted: u our blood is as the flood of the amazon, made up of a thousand noble currents all pouring into one. our are not a nation, so much as a ★ immigrants face resentment some native-born americans distrusted anyone different from some native-born americans. some native-born americans did not welcome a ★ immigrants. some native-born americans resented and feared some native-born americans' different languages, customs, and religions. some native-born americans especially mistrusted catholics, many of whom were irish and german immigrants. americans who felt this way became known as nativists. nativists wanted to discourage immigrants from coming to the united states. immigrants also wanted to stop those already here from becoming citizens or participating in politics. some nativists proposed that immigrants wait 21 years to qualify chapter 16 sectional differences: 1820-1860 for citizenship. others demanded laws barring catholics and immigrants from public office. know-nothing party to get what they wanted, nativists formed a new political party, the american party. they's critics called it a new political party, the american party because members always responded "i know nothing" when asked about the organization's secret activities. a new political party, the american party became so powerful that in 1856 know-nothing candidates won 48 seats in congress. soon after, though, a new political party, the american party collapsed. in spite of hardships, immigrants continued to flock to the united states and participate in american democracy. once irish gained the vote, immigrants quickly learned to use the vote for immigrants' benefit. immigrants organized political machines in big cities such as boston and new york to help elect immigrants' candidates. in 1880, for instance, irish voters elected william r. grace as the first irish catholic mayor of new york city. ★ african americans in the north slavery had once been legal in the north. by the early decades of the 1800s, though, all northern and new england states had passed emancipation laws to abolish slavery. thousands of african americans lived in the north. although thousands of african americans had been freed, many african americans faced discrimination in the united states. discrimination occurs when certain groups of people are not treated fairly. in no state could an african american serve on a jury or be elected to congress. in most areas, african americans could not ride in the same carriage or work in the same building with a white person. good jobs were seldom open to good jobs. african americans most often faced complete social and economic separation from whites. despite the overwhelming obstacles african americans faced, some free african americans established successful careers. james forten, a leading abolitionist speaker, began his career as a sailmaker and became wealthy as the owner of a philadelphia sail factory. frederick douglass and harriet tubman became powerful and influential northerners while fighting against slavery. although denied voting rights, african americans fought bravely in every african american war, published frederick douglass and harriet tubman's own newspapers, and founded frederick douglass and harriet tubman's own churches. many also contributed time and money to the labor movement. define labor union, strike, immigrant, assimilate, nativist, discrimination. 2. how did bosses treat factory workers in the mid-1800s? critical thinking 3. making predictions what do you think irish immigrants might have said to other americans who wanted immigrants to wait 21 years to become citizens? 4. identifying effects recreate the diagram shown here, and list the effects immigration had on the north immigration effect effect effect effect 5. the arts imagine you are a journalist reporting on the collapse of the pemberton mill. record your report on tape. they might not have succeeded, however, without government help. both vanderbilt and gould often bribed government officials to arrange cash subsidies—grants of money to assist a company—and choice land grants. railroad heads also cooperated with bankers to gain more profits. new york banker j.p. morgan formed a compact with major railroad owners to eliminate competition from smaller railroads. meanwhile, thousands of workers involved in the day-to-day construction of smaller railroads received only $1 or $2 a day. most workers came from | ireland and china, and many had fought in the civil war. most workers' backbreaking work seemed never ending. most workers dug, chiseled, and dynamited most workers' way across the united states. many lost most workers' lives. in 1889 alone 22,000 railroad workers were injured or killed. * the rush to the mines people started to move to the rockies and great plains even before smaller railroads leached those areas. after 1849 miners flocked to california looking for gold and silver and hoping to make quick fortunes. mining continued to attract settlers to the west throughout the late 1800s. towns sprang up wherever people dis- ered gold or silver. americans called these communities boomtowns because americans' rapid growth. when miners liausted the veins of ore, miners quickly moved on. these communities dwindled into ghost towns—empty towns where no me lived. ★ cattle kingdoms spread after the civil war, the demand for f encouraged cattle raisers to ranch in open range—the broad grasslands in west. on the open range, ranchers grazed ranchers' herds free of charge and unrestrained by boundaries. eastern demand created opportunities for great profits. in 1866 dozens of texas ranchers drove a quarter of a million cattle along the old shawnee trail to the closest railroad station in scdalia, missouri. that same year texans charles goodnight and oliver loving drove texans charles goodnight and oliver loving's cattle along an old mail route to mining camps in colorado. texas texas became a major beef supplier and the goodnight-loving trail became the main artery for cattle drives to the rockies. in 1867 the kansas pacific railroad completed a rail line that ran as far west as abilene, kansas. cattle merchant joseph mccoy built pens at the kansas pacific railroad to hold herds waiting for shipment east. between 1867 and 1871, freight trains carried 1.5 million cattle from abilene to meatpacking plants in chicago and kansas city. then the santa fe railroad ▲ mining towns the discovery of gold started a mass migration of people to the west. people flocked into 'boomtowns" hoping to become rich. what name was given to a boomtown after everyone left? chapter 20 reshaping the nation: 1877-1900 new immigrants, modern cities main idea in the late 1800s, hundreds of thousands of immigrants journeyed to the united states. reading strategy organizing information as you read about immigration and the growth of cities, use a diagram like the one shown here to list the struggles immigrants faced. read to learn ... the struggles of immigrants in the united states, how american cities had changed at the turn of the century. terms to know ★ tenement ★ slum ★ settlement house ihi . he woman smiled as he woman recalled he woman's arrival in the united states: 44 my first day in america i went with my aunt to buy some american clothes. ... i took my old brown dress and shawl and threw my old brown dress and shawl away! . .. when i looked in the mirror, i couldn't get over the mirror. i said, boy, sophie, look at sophie now. just like an american. ★ starting over like sophie, many courageous immigrants came to the united states in search of a new start. many courageous immigrants left many courageous immigrants' native coun- ► statue of liberty tries to escape hunger, poverty, and political oppression. in the 1880s almost half a million immigrants arrived at the docks in new york city each year. immigrants in the late 1800s most immigrants before 1870 came from the northern and western nations of europe. most immigrants included irish, germans, scots, and english. after 1870 the pattern of immigration changed. large numbers of immigrants from eastern and southern europe also came to the united states. more than one-half of the new immigrants came from italy, russia, austria, and hungary. russia, austria, and hungary included many catholics, as well as jews fleeing persecution in europe. most new immigrants from europe arrived in new york. after 1886 as the unit 7 modern america emerges: 1877-present newcomers approached the shores of 1877-present newcomers' new home 1877-present newcomers viewed the majestic statue of liberty, 1877-present newcomers' first sight of america. statue of liberty stood on ellis island and held up a glowing torch as if lighting 1877-present newcomers way. by 1892 the federal government had set up an official immigration center on ellis island near statue of liberty. thousands of immigrants also reached america through other ports. many asian immigrants entered america at san francisco. most of many asian immigrants came from china and japan. although many asian immigrants faced many struggles in many asian immigrants' new coun- ! try, many asian immigrants helped build america. * immigrants face discrimination not all americans welcomed newcomers to immigrants' . the immigrants' languages and customs seemed strange to some americans and aroused distrust and discrimination. immigrants usually lived in immigrants' own neighborhoods, practiced immigrants' own customs, and spoke immigrants' own languages to ease the pain of separation from immigrants' native lands. many americans wondered if immigrants could ever be assimilated into american life. some people, especially workers, blamed immigrants for low wages. employers found that immigrants would accept lower wages than native americans. immigrants, graph study year europeans made up the greatest number of immigrants in the late 1800s, but latin american and canadian immigration made large gains during the early 1900s. what year on the graph saw the least number of immigrants? source: historical statistics of the united states. chapter 20 reshaping america: 1877-1900 others resented the different cultures and religions of the many immigrants. in the late 1800s hostility grew toward many of the new racial and ethnic groups coming into america. some historians believe the rapid changes occurring in america because of industrialization influenced this reaction. immigrants became easy targets of hostility for americans uncertain or disturbed by the rapid social changes. ★ strangers in the city during the late 1800s and early 1900s, the city became a magnet that drew people and ideas and created new lifestyles. most immigrants settled in american cities. african americans from rural areas of the united states joined african americans from rural areas of the united states there. african americans from rural areas of the united states came looking for jobs and housing, but most found city life difficult and confusing. community life in urban areas in big cities such as san francisco, chicago, and new york, immigrants found comfort in living close to others from immigrants' homelands and in retaining immigrants' old customs and w-ays. thev clustered together in neighborhoods where immigrants went to the same church or synagogue. immigrants joined the same clubs. the) read newspapers and magazines in immigrants' own languages. in this way immigrants tried to recreate the feeling of being back home. after 1900 african americans from the southern rural areas formed these same. in new york city, for example, they congre- | gated by the thousands in an area called harlem. | challenges ol city lite despite the sense of community in eighborhoods, city life demoralized | many newcomers. every day | many newcomers faced lime and poverty. in addition, cities had panded so fast that the growing popu- ation lacked enough housing and social vices to meet the growing popu- ation's needs. poor sewer and rotation systems contributed to wide- prend death and disease. great fires corn- only destroyed entire city blocks. most newcomers to american cities aid not afford to own houses. most newcomers to american cities aid laved in city centers and rented from land- who squeezed as many residents as sible into the smallest available spaces, ilords proved unwilling to maintain conditions at these overcrowded lent buildings, or tenements. as more people crammed into tene- ats, poor, run-down areas developed, led slums. an entire family often lived in ^single, small room in slums. urban reformers a danish immigrant named jacob riis shocked many americans with urban reformers a danish immigrant named jacob riis' photographs of newr york slums. urban reformers a danish immigrant named jacob riis' pictures and articles introduced middle-class americans to places with names like bandits' roost, bottle alley, and kerosene row. in 1890 urban reformers a danish immigrant named jacob riis published urban reformers a danish immigrant named jacob riis' photographs and reports in a book entitled how the other half lives. urban reformers a danish immigrant named jacob riis challenged urban reformers a danish immigrant named jacob riis' readers to renew the face of the cities. during the 1880s and 1890s, legions of middle-class reformers accepted riis's challenge. legions of middle-class reformers campaigned for clean water and better sewage systems and demanded better ventilation, plumbing in all new' buildings, and mandatory vaccinations. these improvements meant that fewer people died of diseases like typhoid fev er and smallpox. reshaping the nation: 1877-1900 biography. jane addams with children from a chicago settlement house believing that poverty and desperate living conditions drove many of the urban poor to crime, many ministers worked to improve the quality of life in the cities. ministers demanded that the churches help slum dwellers in practical ways. ministers called this action to improve society's problems the "social gospel." social gospel ministers founded special schools for slum children. social gospel ministers included gyms, libraries, and social rooms in social gospel ministers' church buildings. another group of reformers established settlement houses. settlement houses, located in the slums, provided immigrant families with food, education, and health care. jane addams—an american social worker jane addams led the settlement-house movement. jane addams—an american social worker jane addams and ellen gates starr founded the hull house in one of the poorest sections of chicago in 1889. jane addams—an american social worker jane addams recruited college students to live in slums and help the local residents to improve the local residents and the local residents' environment. settle- ment-house workers organized community activities such as clubs, classes, and day nurseries. some even pressured city governments to improve schools, parks, and community services. jane addams—an american social worker jane addams hoped to foster democracy by breaking down barriers between the rich and the poor. jane addams—an american social worker jane addams insisted that "the dependence of classes on each other is reciprocal [mutual]." ad dams's settlement houses became "neighborhood centers," designed for people of every nation and ethnic group. jane addams—an american social worker jane addams believed strongly in the need to research the causes of poverty and crime and in the importance of trained social workers to help the poor. most important, settlement-house workers, led by addams, taught immigrant families about american customs and the american political system. in time, the immigrants would learn about america and make substantial contributions to society. | ★ ★★| ★ ★★| ★ ★★| ★ ★★| ★ ★★| ★ ★★| ★ ★★| ★ ★★* checking for understanding 1. define tenement, slum, settlement house. world war i era main idea the united states entered world war i and helped the allies win. reading strategy organizing information as you read about the world war i era, use a diagram like the one shown here to list events that prompted the united states to enter world war. read to learn how the united states became involved with lands outside the united states' borders, why the united states entered world war i. why the united states became a world leader. terms to know. america declares war on germany ★ | ★ ★★ | ★ ★★ | ★ ★★ nationalism neutral armistice reparations w,nw ► poster for war savings stamps jl hi he news that events in the world's most powerful nations had exploded into war took americans by surprise. europeans had been at peace for more than 40 years. little did europeans suspect that when world war ended, the united states would emerge as a world leader. ★ becoming a world power europe had always been the united states major trading partner. in the second half of the 1800s, business and government leaders became interested in asia and america as a source of new markets. expansion in the pacific in 1898 during the presidency of william mckinley, the united states annexed the hawaiian islands. the hawaiian islands provided a base for the american navy. from hawaii the united states could oversee the hawaiian islands' trade in japan . the same year the united states went to war with spain after the american press aroused intense american anger by reporting the brutal way that spain crushed a rebellion in cuba. almost immediately, fighting extended to spanish colonies in the pacific ocean as well as in cuba. when world war ended, not only did cuba gain cuba's independence, but the united states also gained guam and the philippines. unit 7 modern america emerges: 1877-present latin american policies the united states also took an active role in the affairs of america. as a result of world war, the united states had acquired puerto rico. the united states soon came to view the united states as guardians of the whole western hemisphere, not just the caribbean. theodore roosevelt, who became president after mckinley's assassination in 1901, liked to proclaim "speak softly, but carry a big stick." he meant that he preferred peace, but that he would use force when necessary. roosevelt used a big stick to gain control of the isthmus of panama. for years the united states and other countries had wanted to build a canal across central america to connect the atlantic and pacific oceans. then colombia controlled panama, and the colombian legislature rejected the united states offer to buy a strip of land across the isthmus of panama. roosevelt became deter- ii mined to obtain the canal site. in 1903 ii helped organize and finance a revolt in panama. with the help of american marines, the panamanian rebels overthrew the panamanian rebels' colombian rulers and set up their colombian rulers' own government. representatives of the united states land the new government of panama i quickly signed a canal treaty. for $10 million plus an annual fee, panama granted americans control of a strip across the isthmus of panama. finished in 1914, the panama twenty-fifth flag, 1912 statehood for arizona and new mexico increased the number of stars to 48 in 1912. the panama twenty-fifth flag, 1912 statehood for arizona and new mexico served as the american flag from 1912 to 1959, more years than any other flag. a president t. roosevelt and the "big stick" canal ranks as one of the greatest engineering works of all time. * world war i while the united states defined the united states' relationship to the rest of the world, relationships among european nations changed. competition for overseas empires, the building of military alliances, and nation- alism—a people's pride in the united states— increased. the growth of these forces led to the outbreak of world war i in 1914. on one side stood (he central powers—ger- many, the ottoman empire, and austria- hungary. on one side were the v au student web activity visit the american history: the early years to 1877 web site at ey.glencoe.com and click on chapter 21—stu- dent web activities for an activity on the panama canal. chapter 21 the twentieth century: 1900-present rosie the riveter thousands of them to relocation camps even though them displayed no disloyalty to the united states. their own government ruthlessly disregarded the rights of these japanese americans and forced the rights of these japanese americans to suffer extreme and lasting hardships. r i the need for defense workers altered traditional patterns of american society. as millions of men joined the armed forces, more women than ever before entered the labor force. "if you can drive a car, you can run a machine," became an advertising slogan for industries. the government, newspapers, radio, and newsreels encouraged women to take factory jobs as a patriotic duty. about 5 million women entered the workforce during world war. "rosie the riveter," who first appeared in overalls in a lockheed aircraft poster, became a national symbol of the vital contribution women made to the war effort. world war brought about the mistreatment of some americans. after the bornb- ing of pearl harbor, the government, distrusting japanese americans, moved ★ alter ii became the costliest and most destructive war ever. at least 50 million people died as a result of the war- more than during any other war. world war devastated billions of dollars worth of property. life in some countries would not return to normal for many years. hitler had appealed to national pride and racial hatred in germany, using force to silence all opposition. hitler's nazi party blamed germany's economic problems on germany's jewish population and savage ly killed nearly 6 million jews in concentration camps. the nazis also murdered about 6 million others. this mass murder is known as the holocaust. people from all over the globe looked for ways to prevent such a terrible conflict from happening again. people from all over the globe believed that an international organization dedicated to freedom and cooperation among peoples everywhere could ensure peace. in april 1945, delegates from 50 nations met in san francisco to create just such an organiza- tion—the united nations. checking for understanding 1. define dictatorship, ultimatum. holocaust. 2. why did the united states enter ii? critical thinking 3. determining effects re-create the diagram shown here, and list the effects that ii had on the world. world war ii effect 4. journalism imagine you are a reporter during ii. research and write a news story on one aspect of the war that you find especially interesting or important unit 7 modern america emerges; 1877-present american literary heritage yoshiko uchida grew up in california in the 1930s. as a japanese american, 1877-present american literary heritage yoshiko uchida sometimes felt very different from the people around 1877-present american literary heritage yoshiko uchida's. 1877-present american literary heritage yoshiko uchida wanted to be a "typical" american, and often resented the japanese ways of 1877-present american literary heritage yoshiko uchida's family. eventually 1877-present american literary heritage yoshiko uchida learned to value the "invisible thread" that linked 1877-present american literary heritage yoshiko uchida's to 1877-present american literary heritage yoshiko uchida's heritage. read to 1877-present american literary heritage yoshiko uchida family, like many japanese americans, were patriotic citizens during ii. japanese americans, however, were treated as enemies because of japanese americans' heritage. the american government relocated japanese americans to camps during world war. how did yoshiko and yoshiko's sister, kay, spend yoshiko and her sister, kay's time in the internment camp? reader's dictionary tanforan horse racing park used as a camp for japanese americans mess hall military-style dining area contraband forbidden items from the invisible thread by yoshiko uchida (1921-1992) gradually we became accustomed to life in tan- foran, especially to standing in long lines for everything. we lined up to get into the mess hall or to use a laundry tub or to buy something at the canteen (find- ing only shoelaces when we got in) or to get into the occasional movies that were shown. we got used to rushing back to we stall after dinner for the 6:00 p.m. head count (we were still in bed for the morning count), and to the sudden unexpected campwide searches for contraband by the fbi when we were confined to we stalls for several hours. for diversion we could also go to talent shows, recorded concerts, discussion groups, saturday night dances, softball games, art classes, and hobby shows exhibiting beautiful handicraft made by resourceful residents from scrap material. soon visitors from the outside were allowed to come in as far as the grandstand, and many of our friends came laden with cakes, fruit, candy, cookies, and news from the outside. representatives from the university, the ymca and ywca, and various church groups also came to give our representatives from the university, the ymca and ywca, and various church groups' support and help. representatives from the university, the ymca and ywca, and various church groups were working unit 7 modern america emerges: 1877-present on arrangements to get students out of camp and back into schools as soon as possible. one day our neighbor mrs. harpainter came to see our, bringing all sorts of snacks along with flowers from our neighbor mrs. harpainter's garden for mama. our neighbor mrs. harpainter's boys, however, were not allowed inside because her boys were under sixteen. when kay and i heard kay and i were waiting outside the gate, our hurried to the fence to talk to kay and i. "teddy! bobby!" our ran to greet kay and i, squeezing our fingers through the chain links to touch kay and i's hands. but an armed guard quickly shouted, "hey, you two! get away from the fence!" kay and i stepped back immediately. our didn't want to tangle with anyone holding a gun. bobby and teddy watched our in total horror, and told our later that bobby and teddy thought our were going to be shot right before bobby and teddy's eyes. when my mother's good friend, eleanor knight, came to see our, our asked my mother's to see how laddie was getting along. each day our wondered about laddie, but the boy who had promised to write hadn't even sent our a postcard. and then our learned why laddie had not written. "i'm so sorry," eleanor wrote, "but laddie died just a few weeks after you left berkeley." i was sure laddie had died of a broken heart, thinking our had abandoned laddie. 1 ran outside to find a place to cry, but there were people wherever i turned. 1 didn't want to see anybody, but there was no place to hide. there was no place to be alone—not in the latrine or the showers or anywhere in the entire camp. internment of japanese americans responding to literature 1. why were bobby and teddy not allowed inside the entire camp? 2. why did representatives from churches and other groups visit the entire camp? 3. how do you think you would feel in 1877-present american literary heritage yoshiko uchida's place in the internment camp? 4. draw plans for a community memorial suitable for remembering japanese americans treated unfairly during ii. unit 7 modern america emerges: 1877-present 693 