Island and shallow Pamlico Sound and sailed instead into the broad, deep Chesapeake Bay. The settlers went up a river about 32 miles, landed on a peninsula, and began to build a town. Both the river and the town they named after their king. In selecting the spot for Jamestown these settlers showed poor judgment. The site was low and swampy—just what the company had warned against. But the 104 men and boys who landed in this wilderness on May 23, 1607, somehow thought the site would be easy to defend against the Indians and the Spanish. From the swampy ground came mosquitoes carrying malaria, and from their well water came dysentery. They would have been better off if they had faced their enemies on dry and solid ground. The council that governed the colony had no head. Members wasted time arguing, while no one had the power to make decisions. Disrupted by its squabbling council and weakened by disease, Jamestown was also menaced by Indian raids. These raids were brought on by rash acts of the colonists themselves. Still, the colony was blessed with a remarkable leader. Captain John Smith. He had been a merchant's poor apprentice in England. But adventure was his middle name, so he had joined armies and fought in distant Hungary and Turkey. He had the bad luck to be made a slave in Turkey. But he escaped, returned to England, and joined the new Virginia Company. Smith saved the settlers from themselves. With his courage and his wide experience he knew how to stop the settlers' quarreling. He worked to keep peace with the Indians. The Indians traded him the corn needed to feed the settlers till they could raise their own crops. Even then, more than half the colonists died of fever, starvation, or the arrows of Indians before the winter was over. Fortunately, the company back in London was committed to make the colony succeed. In 1608 they sent out new recruits—men, women, and children—and supplies. In 1609 alone about 400 colonists arrived. But then the colony lost its leader when John Smith was injured by a gunpowder explosion and was forced to return home. The woods were full of game and the soil was fertile for growing corn. But without their leader the colonists proved unable to feed themselves. The bitter winter of 1609- 1610 was called "the Starving Time." There were ghastly tales of cannibalism. Only 60 of the 500 settlers were left when spring arrived. Over the next years the company still poured in settlers and supplies. But the colony could not be self-supporting unless they could produce something they could sell. What they found was quite a surprise. Earlier, the Spanish had brought tobacco to Europe from America, and the English had quickly taken to smoking. They smoked not only because they enjoyed it. Doctors at the time said it would cure almost any disease. In 1612 John Rolfe, who later married the Indian princess Pocahontas, learned This painting shows Pocahontas, also known as Matoaka, in English clothes. She married John Roll'e and died in England in 1617 just as she was about to return to America. National Portrait Gallery, Smithsonian Institution w More from Boorstin: "It was claimed that smoking tobacco would heal gout and ague, cure hangovers, and reduce fatigue and hunger. The Jamestown Weed' (datura stramonium), which modern medicine has proved to be sedative and antispasmodic when taken in small uses, and narcotic and poisonous when taken in larger doses, was praised for its 'cooling' effect." (From The Americans: The Colonial Experience) how to grow a kind of tobacco in Virginia that English people especially liked. Because the English were eager to buy this crop, the colony now finally had found a solid economic base. A colony established. By 1619 the Virginia colony was well on its way to success. The company was sending out hundreds of craftsmen and laborers. New directors in London then decided to give the settlers more freedom. Up to then the colonists had lived under strict martial law. For example, every man and woman had to attend church twice daily and could be fined a full day's pay for one absence, whipped for a second, and put in jail six months for a third. Strict discipline helped the colony survive the early years. But it would scare away new settlers. The company sent out a new governor with orders to let the people work for themselves as well as for the company. The governor allowed the colonists to elect an assembly to help make their own laws. The House of Bur- gesses. as Virginians called it, met at Jamestown on July 30, 1619. It was the first elected legislative assembly in America. That same year saw the arrival of two groups who played a leading role in the colony's future. Jamestown was changed from a military outpost into a full community when the Virginia Company sent out from London a group of "respectable maidens" who soon married men of their choice. About the same time a Dutch ship arrived carrying twenty blacks. These were probably not slaves but indentured servants (like many of the white settlers). An indentured servant was a person who had signed an "in- denture," an agreement to serve a master for a certain number of years. (It was called an "in- denture" because the two parts of each agreement—one for master, one for servant—were indented to fit together.) Outright slavery probably did not appear in the English colonies until later. In the next few years the company sent many more settlers to Virginia—often without the needed supplies. Some 5000 arrived between 1619 and 1624. And yet by 1624 the total population in the colony had increased by only 200. Sickness killed most of the newcomers, starvation took some, and others fell to the tomahawk. In 1622 the Indians attacked in an all- out try to drive the European invaders from their land. The colony lost 350 lives (including John Rolfe), and the settlers were pushed back close to Jamestown. The men running the Virginia Company included some of King James's opponents in Parliament. He used the problems of the company to persuade his judges to annul the company charter. The settlement now became a royal colony with its governor appointed by the king. But after a brief pause the legislative assembly was allowed to continue. The London Company had founded the first permanent English settlement in America. Tobacco—its staple crop—gave the colony a firm economic base. And the settlers in Virginia had set the pattern of representative government for future English colonies. All this had been done at fearful cost in money and lives. Identify or explain: John Smith, John Rolfe, fhe Starving Time, indentured servant. 2. Locate Jamestown. 3. Why did England want colonies? 4. What problems faced the Jamestown settlers? 5. What significant events happened in Virginia in 1619? Why was each important? 6. Critical Thinking: Making Comparisons. Contrast Spains and England's colonies. See "Lesson Plan," p. 26E. 4. The Puritans come to New England The settlement of Virginia was mostly a business enterprise. Settlers of New England also hoped to make money. But their lives and their hopes were ruled by religion. The people who went there were called "Puritans" because they wanted to purify the Church of England. They _ 39 wanted to do away with the colorful robes of priests, with prayer books, and even with altars. Some Puritans remained inside the Church of England and worked for reform there. Others were known as "Independents" or "Separatists." They went out of the church— separated from it. The Pilgrims. Three centuries ago kings and queens believed that the religion of their people helped keep them loyal and obedient. Subjects who were allowed to make up their own minds about religion might also make up their own minds about politics—and even about whether to obey the king! James I began his reign by declaring that his subjects had to "conform" in religion or he would "harry them out of the land." The Separatist congregations of some little villages in the east of England were harried until in 1608 they took refuge in Holland. That was the only country in Europe where complete religious freedom was allowed. But after they had lived there for a few years, they began to fear that their children would forget the customs and speech of England. These Separatists decided to move on to the new land of America. They were given permission by the London Company to settle in Virginia. They went back to England, where they set out from Plymouth in the MagJlower on September 16, 1620, with 102 passengers. After a seven-week voyage in cramped quarters, they first sighted land in early November. They looked for a suitable place and finally landed on December 21, 1620. The winter was harsher than anything they had known in England. Their pilot brought them by mistake to Cape Cod. They had no right to own the land there, for that required a patent, or land grant. This New Testament title page (left) is from William Bradford's Bible. His autograph is above it. Bradford was one of the main leaders of the Pilgrims who settled in New England in 1620. Peregrine White, the first English child born in New England, slept in this cradle (below). His name and that of the Pilgrims comes from the Latin word meaning "to travel abroad." Pilgrim Society, Plymouth. MA had no power either to establish a government, for that required a charter. But they had something far better. They had a plan to build a purified society, and they had a guide in the Bible. This was important, for in the mysterious New World you would surely be lost unless you had some plans of your own. If you had goals, they would guide and encourage you while you were discovering what America was really like. Your plans had to be definite, but not too definite. You had to be willing to change your plans when you ran into trouble, or when the New World did not offer what you expected. You had to be prepared for disappointment. Yet you had to have self-confidence, faith in your mission and in yourself. The Pilgrims and other Puritans had all this. They were equipped, too, with just the right combination of hopes and fears, optimism and pessimism. self-confidence and humility to be successful settlers. And this was one of the most fortunate coincidences in our history. The Mayflower Compact. When the Pilgrims reached Cape Cod, they were outside the boundaries where they had permission to settle. Some unruly passengers noticed this. They threatened "that when they came ashore they would use their own liberty, for none had power to command them, the patent they had being for Virginia." But the Mayflower leaders, anxious to land and begin their colony, could not tolerate a community without government. Why should their plans be spoiled by a few roughnecks? So they decided on shipboard, then and there, to create a new government to serve their very special purposes. Their leaders included the steady William Bradford, who would be governor of Plymouth Colony for 31 years, and Captain Miles Standish, whom they had hired to head their militia. Like people making up rules for a club that already existed, they wrote out and signed an agreement, or covenant. This was the famous Mayflower Compact. In it they pledged allegiance to the king, combined themselves "into a civil body politic," and bound themselves to obey all the laws this new government might enact. They created an instant government. It worked surprisingly well for the infant colony, and later became the foundation for the state of Massachusetts. Squanto to the rescue. The Pilgrims and =£ other Puritans thought God was on their side when they settled in the wilderness. And often it seemed that He was. The Pilgrims might all have died if a remarkable Indian had not come to help them. Squanto was an Indian kidnapped a few years before by an English sea captain, who had sold him into slavery in Spain. He escaped to England, where he learned some English, and then returned to New England in 1619. There he found that his whole village had died of disease. Now, in March 1621. it was Squanto—of all the thousands of Indians in America—who happened to turn up in Plymouth! I le knew enough English to act as an interpreter. And he showed the Pilgrims how to plant corn (which was not known in England), how to fertilize the soil, where to catch fish, and how to trap beaver. No wonder the Pilgrims called him a "special instrument sent of God for their good beyond their expectation." The Plymouth Colony never grew very large, and in 1691 it was absorbed into the Massachusetts Bay Colony. But we still revere the Pilgrim Fathers as the first successful settlers of the New England shore, who began an American custom—finding a way of self-government for every occasion. The Massachusetts Bay Colony. Charles I's 3 1 archbishop. William Laud, and other high offi- Enrid| cials within the established Church of England tried to force the Puritans to conform to the pjieToP rules of the church. Many Puritans then made up their minds to leave England, and fortunately they had a place to go to. Some of them had received a charter from King James for a company that was allowed to create settlements in the Massachusetts Bay area in New England. The most significant point about this charter was that it did not say where the company headquarters had to be. It did not say where the company should hold its meetings to admit new members, to select officers, or to make laws. zr Continuity and Change: Conflict Tell students that by the early eighteenth century the friendly relationship between the colonists and the Indians was greatly eroded. This increasing conflict is illustrated by such events as King Philip's War (1675) and the Deerfield Massacre (1704). By 1810, the Indians of the northeast region of North America had lost nearly 48 million acres of territory to white settlers. (See pages 66 and 201.) This meant that if the company headquarters was transferred from England to Massachusetts, the stockholders in Massachusetts would be able to run the company. Since they were set- ders, it also meant that settlers would be governing themselves. In 1629 the company members voted to transfer the company to Massachusetts Bay. Certain strong Puritans, leaders like John Winthrop, were now willing to go there. From the start, Massachusetts Bay was a self-governing colony. One thousand settlers went out in the summer of 1630 and planted settlements around Massachusetts Bay. By the end of the first decade, 20,000 settlers had arrived. Among these, right from the start, were more people of means and influence than in any other group of colonists. When the settlers arrived, they soon founded settlements at Boston, Charlestown. Watertown, Lynn, Medford, Dorchester, and Roxbury. The Puritan religion was admirably suited for settling the wilderness. A church (by which the Puritans meant the members of a congregation) would receive a grant of land from the Great and General Court (a meeting of the company). Then it would move as a group to a spot already selected and surveyed. There a village would be built around a meetinghouse with the fields scattered outside the village. *> John Winthrop, whose portrait was painted by an unknown artist in England, provided strong leadership as governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony. American Antiquarian Society A City upon a hill. The Puritans had a grand purpose in America. John Winthrop, who was to be their governor for many years, spoke to them on the boat coming over: We shall be as a City upon a hill, the eyes of all people are upon us; so that if we shall deal falsely with our god in this work we have undertaken and so cause him to withdraw his present help from us, we shall be made a story and a by-word through the world. Winthrop was saying what many Americans then and since have felt. The American example could help shape the lives of people everywhere. With their beliefs, it would have been difficult for the Puritans to fail. Even the Devil, who was a lively presence for them, could not really defeat them. Sooner or later, they knew, God always won. He would see that His own people were not destroyed. The troubles of this world— New England blizzards, Indian arrows, the plottings of enemies in England, or the crimes of their own people—never overwhelmed them. The Puritans were ready for what wilderness America demanded. Rhode Island. The Puritans who settled Massachusetts Bay did not believe in religious freedom. They thought that they knew God's truth and that all reasonable men and women should be able to see that truth. If you disagreed with Critical Thinking Activity: Recognizing Ideologies What does John Winthrop's "City upon a ITM1 look like today? Have students list characteristics of the United States that they feel serve ® a Positive example to the rest of the world. Ask students to determine how closely their list omes to reflecting those qualities that John Winthrop envisioned in the seventeenth century. See "Lesson Plan," p. 26F. 6. The proprietary colonies Of the thirteen colonies that later united to form the American nation, all except Virginia and the New England settlements had been founded as proprietorships. This was halfway between a royal province and a self-governing colony. The king let control out of his hands, but he did not give it to a company or to the colonists. Instead it went to a man or a group of men. usually the king's personal friends. The "proprietors" then appointed the governor, set up law courts, and collected land tax ("quitrent") from the settlers. They also offered bonuses to lure settlers to their lands. They managed their provinces as business ventures, under whatever rules the king had put in their charters. The proprietors were also limited by elected assemblies. All the proprietors except the Duke of York (who finally agreed in 1683) allowed the people some form of self-government. They could not attract settlers on any other terms. Even the royal provinces had to allow assemblies. Starting with Maryland in 1634 a series of proprietary colonies was founded: the Carolinas in 1663, New Jersey in 1664, Pennsylvania in 1681, Delaware in 1702 (with the Penns as governors), and Georgia, first settled in 1733. Each colony faced its own problems, enjoyed its own successes, suffered its own failures. Maryland, a colony founded for Catholics, like Rhode Island allowed religious freedom from the first. It passed an Act of Toleration in 1649. This permitted religious freedom only for all who believed in the Trinity—God the Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost. It was the first legislative act of religious toleration in the colonies. The Carolina proprietors tried to rule their colony by an elaborate constitution called the "Grand Model" drawn up by English philosopher John Locke. But the philosopher's theories proved unfit for the problems of government in the wilderness. Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania was founded by Quakers, who were a special kind of Puritan. They rejected all ceremonies of worship and the authority of all priests, ministers, or bishops. They obeyed only the "inner light," which they said came to them direct from God. The Quakers believed in equality so strongly that they refused to bow or remove their hats in the presence of officials. It is not surprising, then, that royal officials became impatient with them and persecuted the Quakers for any reason they could think up. The Quakers were not welcome in England. William Penn, who had been jailed in England for his religious beliefs, decided to found an American colony for his fellow Quakers. Penn's father, a rich British admiral who was not a Quaker, had loaned money to King Charles II. That William Penn was more than just a visionary Quaker is apparent in this early portrait. The sternness, practicality, and pertinacity needed to found a successful colony all shine through. Historical Society of Pennsylvania v> See "Lesson Plan," p. 26F for Cooperative Learning Activity: Making Comparisons relating to the role of religion in the colonies. No doubt this helped young Penn, who was shrewd and persuasive, to secure a vast colonial grant from Charles. At the king's demand, the new land was called "Pennsylvania" in honor of Penn's father. There William Penn established religious toleration, and the colony soon became a haven for persecuted people from all over. Back in England, the Quakers had been strict pacifists. They opposed war and refused to fight for any reason, even in self-defense. There they were nothing but a small group of peculiar people. If they refused to fight, the country could still be defended by others. It was quite different in Pennsylvania. Here at first they were the majority, but they ran the government until 1756, long after they had stopped being a majority. In Pennsylvania, if the Quakers refused to raise an army, the countryside was left defenseless. This is precisely what happened. For some time, by various dodges, the Quak- (p. 46) ers did try to help defend the colony without violating their consciences. In one case they voted money "to feed and clothe the Indians" that they knew would go to defense instead. In another they voted "other grain" for a militaiy garrison, even though they knew "other grain" really meant a not-very-nourishing grain called gunpowder. But in 1755, dodges ceased to be enough. Total war broke out in western Pennsylvania. The Indians burned homes, ruined crops, and killed or captured men, women, and children. Panic gripped the land, and eastern towns were filled with refugees. The Quakers insisted on remaining pacifists even as western Pennsylvania ran red with blood. At that time the Quakers, although numbering only one-quarter of the colony's population, still held over three-fourths of the seats in the legislature. And they would not vote funds for defense. They insisted they could not violate iheir consciences by helping to fight a war. Now, however, the non-Quakers had had enough. They forced the Quakers to give up their control of the government. The Quakers never ruled the colony again. After that the Quakers became the gadflies and prophets of America. They remained pacifists, and spoke out against slavery and other forms of oppression. They were the voices of everybody's conscience. That was their strength and their weakness. They were not meant for governing a colony. Georgia. If Pennsylvania faced problems because of the beliefs of its settlers. Georgia suffered because of its English founders' ignorance and idealism. The 21 men in England who secured a charter for Georgia in 1732 thought they were very practical. The best known of them was James Oglethorpe. He was a tough-minded soldier who combined a passion for building the British Empire with a passion for reform. Oglethorpe and his friends had their eyes not so much on the Bible or on their own consciences as on the practical problems of their day. In London they worried over the growing unemployment and the increasing crime. The land south of the Carolinas was rumored to be a new paradise. There they would settle some of London's criminals and the drunken, idle poor. That also happened to be right where the empire needed to block the Spaniards, who were trying to push their settlements northward. In Georgia, named after King George II, these unlucky people could serve as a human barricade. At the same time in that tropical climate they could provide the exotic products needed at home in England. The founders even knew what the colony ought to produce—silk. At that time Britain was spending a fortune in gold and silver to buy silk. If the English could grow silk themselves, they would save their gold and silver and also provide work for the unemployed. The London promoters therefore ordered every settler in Georgia to grow mulberry trees so the leaves would be food for silkworms. Unfortunately, the black mulberry trees that grew in Georgia were not the kind the silkworms liked. This was a little fact that the London promoters had not bothered to notice. Plans bred more plans. The ill-informed trust- ft ees of Georgia, sitting in their easy chairs in London, went on drawing their plans. Not only did they require mulberry trees to be planted, More from Boorstin: "[The Trustees] investigated the moral character of applicants and the C|rcumstances which accounted for their distress. They even advertised the names of prospective emigrants in London newspapers a fortnight before departure so that creditors and oeserted wives might have ample warning. Very few, perhaps not over a dozen, imprisoned "ebtors were brought to Georgia. Even these were chosen because they showed promise of "Scorning sturdy colonists." New During these early colonial years, American ways of life began to appear. They emerged from how Americans defended themselves in war and governed themselves in peace. Challenged by a New World, they developed their own ideas about government, law, and politics. Still, the British colonists in America considered themselves loyal Britons. In 1763, at the end of the French and Indian War, few people anywhere would have predicted the break that was to come. The next twenty years were a time of surprising change. Before the colonists could realize it, they had made themselves into a new, self-governing nation. How did that happen? To understand how this New World novelty was created, we must look at the relations of Americans to each other, to England, and to the wars that France and England exported to America. John Smibert, who was born in Scotland, painted this panorama of Boston as seen from a hill across the harbor in 1738. It is one of the first paintings of the city. The long wharf jutting out from the city (left of center in the painting) was a much-noted wonder of early America. Childs Gallery, Boston Ways in a World Focusing on the Chapter: Have students identify the chapter logo. Discuss what unit theme the logo might symbolize. Then ask students to skim the 7 chapter to identify other illustrations or titles that relate to this theme. See "Lesson Plan," p. 50C. 1. Many kinds of Americans During the seventeenth century the English settlements in America grew slowly. One hundred years after the landing at Jamestown the colonies still held only 250,000 people. Then the 1700s saw immigration and a high birthrate create the first American population explosion. The number of people more than doubled every 25 years. By 1765 they counted two and a quarter million. These were no longer just European emigrants, but a new breed of people, shaped by a New World. v A land of many peoples. The people who lived in the thirteen colonies at the end of the French and Indian War came from many lands. But the population was more English than it would ever be again. Since about 60 percent of all the white settlers had come from England, it is not surprising that the English language, English customs, English law, and English ways of government dominated the land. Pennsylvania had the most mixed population of all. but even there the English stock made up at least half of the population. What transformed Britons into Americans was that here they had the challenges of living with Africans, Scots, Scotch-Irish, Irish, Portuguese Jews, Swedes, Finns, Swiss, and even a few Austrians and Italians. This made life here much more interesting than life back home. Of course it made some new problems, but it created new opportunities. These many peoples had come for many different reasons. Most came because they wanted to, some because they were forced. Some, like the Swedes, learned English and became Americans quickly. Others, like the Germans, tried to hold on to their own language and their own customs, even in this New World. Still others, like the indentured servants and many of the blacks from Africa, might have wanted to become full- fledged Americans but were not yet allowed that chance. Black Americans had been brought here against their will. Most were slaves, but at an early date there were a few who were free. In 1765 the colonies held 400,000 blacks scattered from Massachusetts Bay to Georgia. Over half worked on the tobacco plantations in Virginia and Maryland. Only 40,000 were found farther north. Besides colonists of English or of African descent, the largest group consisted of the Scots, the Irish, and the Scotch-Irish (the Scots who had tried to settle in Ireland). These hard- bitten, intelligent people took naturally to the frontier. They could usually be found in the "back country." This was a new American expression for the unsettled lands that stretched from Pennsylvania down through the mountains into the Carolinas. A smaller number were the Germans, industrious and thrifty, who settled mainly in Pennsylvania. So many came in the mid-eighteenth century that the English settlers there feared that the whole colony would become German. The Germans worked large farms on the rich limestone soil. Some of their descendants are still working the same lands today. They are often mistakenly referred to as Pennsylvania Dutch (from Deutsch, meaning German). They were ingenious and willing to tiy new ways. For hunting they replaced the old-fashioned musket with the accurate long rifle of frontier fame. For travel they built the sturdy Conestoga wagon, which took many pioneers west. And to warm their houses in the winters, which were much colder than those in Europe, they developed and improved the iron stove. The French Protestants, a small group, had an influence all out of proportion to their numbers. These Huguenots came to America after 1685 when the French government deprived them of their religious freedom and their right to take part in government. An older French law, the Edict of Nantes, which had once given them religious liberty, was repealed. Now they joined the stream of refugees who, over the centuries, came here to escape persecution. It was against the law for them to leave France, but they came anyway. Their intelligence and their skills enriched the colonies. One famous descendant of the French Huguenots was Paul Revere, who made the celebrated ride in 1775 to tell the people that British Continuity and Change: Social Change Explain to students that although many Americans are proud of the United States as a "melting pot," immigrants have not always been welcome. re|l students that in the latter part of the nineteenth century, some Americans formed 9r°ups, such as the Immigration Restriction League, to try to stop the immigration of people !rom particular countries. Throughout their history, Americans would periodically support leg- nation to control the number and nationality of immigrants. The National Origins Act (1924) was one such piece of discriminatory legislation. (See pages 443, 580.) Museum of Fine Arts, Boston Paul Revere's likeness was painted In 1765 by John Singleton Copley. It shows him in his silversmith's work clothes holding an elegant example of his craft. troops were on their way to Concord and Lexington. Revere made his living as a silversmith, and his elegant work can be seen in many museums today. Empty land creates opportunity. Most colonists found here a greater dignity and a better life than they had had before. At long last they could buy their own tract of land and run their own farm. The vote in all colonies was restricted to male landowners, but most adult white males did own land and thus could vote. Even poor people could eventually own land in America. Many immigrants, either before or after they arrived in the colonies, hired themselves out as indentured servants—sometimes for as long as seven years—to someone already here. In a few cases indentured servants were treated no better than slaves. Some of them ran away. But if they worked out their full term, they usually received clothes and tools, and sometimes a little cash or even a piece of land to give them a new start in life. In America the shortage of labor and the abundance of land spelled opportunity—the chance to become a landowner. Empty land creates slavery. To grow tobacco pi j economically a planter needed a large estate and a sizable work force. It was easy to find the land, but hard to find the workers. Many indentured ® 3 servants, once free, would go off and start their (P- 53) own farms. Why should they work for someone else? Since the planters could not fill their labor needs with Europeans, they turned to slaves from Africa or the West Indies. The institution of slavery was ancient and familiar in western Europe and throughout Africa. People defeated in war, instead of being killed, were often enslaved. In Europe, with the passing centuries, slavery became reserved for people who were not Christians. They were called pagans. To justify the institution, slaveholders argued that they were helping pagans by making them into slaves so in time they could become Christians. When Jamestown was settled, slavery hardly existed in England. But English ships plied the slave trade between Africa and the Spanish colonies. And when the planters in the English colonies needed workers, they were supplied with African slaves. Africans were not the only people who were brought to America by force. In England kidnappers seized unsuspecting poor people— children and adults—and then made a profit by selling them as indentured servants in the colonies. Political radicals, religious nonconform- ists—along with thieves and murderers—were "transported" to America as a punishment or simply to get them out of the way. When the term of their indenture was over, they were freed. But blacks, and sometimes Indians, were kept in slavery for life. Since Indians knew how to survive in the American wilderness, they could more easily run away. So southern See 'Lesson Plan," p. 50C for Writing Process Activity: Predicting Consequences relating to the experiences of Africans captured for the slave trade. president Adams's speech, promised to loan France $10 million, and paid a bribe of $250,000 to Talleyrand. When they heard these insulting demands, the envoys answered, "No! no, not a sixpence." Marshall and Pinckney returned home at once. There they stirred the nation's patriotism and fervor against France by the story of their treatment. The whole incident was known as the "XYZ Affair," because the Secretary of State had substituted the letters X, Y, and Z for the names of the agents whom Talleyrand had sent to ask our commissioners for bribes. Naval war with France. Republicans and Federalists alike rallied to support Adams in his measures to compel respect for our envoys as "representatives of a great, free, powerful, and independent nation." For a rare moment in his life, the peppery John Adams was popular everywhere. Fellow citizens applauded his language of defiance. They bellowed the new national song, "Hail, Columbia." They adopted as a slogan (to serve again and again later in our history) the toast proposed at a banquet for the returning hero John Marshall: "Millions for defense. but not one cent for tribute!" Preparations for war were begun. Again Washington was called to lead the army, (hough it was agreed that he would not be expected to leave his home at Mt. Vernon unless there was open battle. Hamilton was to be second in command. A new Navy Department was created by Congress. War was not formally declared, but Congress renounced the treaty with France that had been signed in 1778 and authorized our ships to Prey upon French commerce. Actually, during the two years 1798—1800 a state of war at sea existed with France. More than 80 French ships were captured. Talleyrand now saw that he could not threaten or bribe the United States. Not want- lng war, he hastened to assure our minister to Holland that a new American commission would be received with due respect. At that foment President Adams, to his everlasting Credit, resisted the demands of Hamilton and many other Americans (including his own Cabinet) that the nation should fight. That might have been a popular decision, but it would not have served the weak new nation. To the surprise of Federalist Hamiltonians, Adams sent a message to Congress simply nominating a new minister to France. He would send envoys to deal with this sly Talleyrand. Four days after the new envoys sailed, the upstart Napoleon Bonaparte overthrew the corrupt Directory. Napoleon, intent on establishing his power in France and Europe, wanted no trouble with the United States. In September 1800, therefore, he signed an agreement that ended the treaty of alliance of 1778, thus freeing the United States from any obligation to help France in war. In return the United States gave up all claims against France for damages done to our shipping by French cruisers since 1793. This fair bargain enabled the United States to enter the 1800s at peace. The Alien and Sedition Acts. 1798. In 1798 when anger against the French had become the most violent, the Federalists took advantage of the situation. They passed a series of laws to suppress Republican opposition and insure power for their own party. But, in fact, they misjudged the temper of the nation. Their oppressive measures outraged many Americans and helped lead to the downfall of the Federalist party. Leading Federalists believed—or pretended to believe—that most foreigners who came to the United States joined the Republicans. In the Naturalization Act, then, they extended the time it took to become a citizen from 5 to 14 years. In the Alien Act they gave the President at once the power to deport any alien he thought dangerous to the nation's security and then, in time of war, the power to deport or arrest all aliens who came from an enemy nation. The Sedition Act was especially harsh. It provided a heavy fine and a jail term for any person found guilty of "combining and conspiring to oppose the execution of the laws, or publishing false, scandalous, or malicious writings against the President. Congress, or the government of biTT'ty and Change: Government and Politics Point out to students that the motivations merit ,he federalists' Sedition Act of 1798, passed to control public criticism of the govern- tion rre s'milar to the motivations of the Democrats during Woodrow Wilson's administra- vnK who Passed their own Sedition Act of 1918 to control criticism of the United States' involvement in World War I. (See page 566.) the United States." These words were so vague and general that the Federalists could use the law to stop public criticism of the government by their opponents. This would spell the end of free representative government. Some Federalist leaders, including Hamilton, actually disapproved of these laws that were pushed through Congress by extremist members of their party. John Adams had not promoted the measures, but on the other hand he did not veto them or prevent their use against gj the Republicans. The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions. The Sedition Act was used to silence Republican writers and newspaper editors who criticized President Adams. For example. Thomas Cooper, who later became president of South Carolina College, wrote a pamphlet in which he said Adams "was hardly in the infancy of politi- "Preparatlons for a War to Defend Commerce," William Birch entitled his 1800 engraving. It shows work on the frigate Philadelphia, which was not completed in time for the undeclared naval war with France. 3. N. Phelps Stokes Collection. Prints Division, New York Public Library. Aslor, Lenox and Tllden Foundations f3 See "Lesson Plan," p. 148E for Writing Process Activity: Expressing Problems Clearly relating to the Alien and Sedition Acts. _ 265 $ neW way of manufacturing. Soon the Interchangeable System was used to make all sorts 0f things. Even before the Civil War, locks and watches were actually cheaper in the United States (where they were made by this system) than they were in countries blessed by many skilled locksmiths and watchmakers. This is what we mean by "mass production." It means producing masses of items of exactly the same kind. It means, as Whitney explained, using the skill of the machine instead of the skill of the worker. In France, for example, a young man had to work for years as an apprentice before he finally became a master gunsmith. But in America the machine became specialized, not the worker. Here what you needed was general intelligence so you could handle complicated machinery. Here the worker had to be quick to learn new ways. Since things produced in this way were cheaper, more people could afford to buy them. When there was a wider, more prosperous market, other people were encouraged to make still more inexpensive things to sell. Each worker's time was worth more, for now he could produce more of anything—guns or locks or watches— in a single day. The employer could afford to pay him more and still make a profit. Almost anything could (and would) be manufactured in this new way. Out of all this grew an American Standard of Living that astonished an envious world by giving more things to more people than ever before. See "Section 2 Review answers," p. 250D. section 2 Review 1. How were the Industrial Revolution and the Transportation Revolution linked? 2- What contributions did Lowell and his associates make to the development of the factory system? 3 What role did Eli Whitney play in the development of mass production? 4 Critical Thinking: Drawing Conclusions. How did the Industrial Revolution bring about a national economy? See "Lesson Plan," p. 250D. 3. America's leading import: People To occupy the land, to build the roads, canals, turnpikes, and railroads, to staff the factories, the United States needed people. It was not surprising, then, that the United States became a nation of immigrants. Reasons Jor coming to America. While Europe became more and more crowded, America offered open air and cheap land. When families in Europe could not find food or places for their children in school or as apprentices, they naturally thought of America. In Europe, too, it was an age of turmoil. Between the time of the American Revolution and the American Civil War, there were revolutions and dictatorships in France, Spain, Germany, Greece, Italy, and Belgium. And it was an age of floods and famines. There were lots of reasons why people in Europe might want to get away from their old world. The disasters of Europe made refugees by the millions. And there were plenty of reasons why someone would want to come to America. Of course. Samuel Waugh painted this colorful scene of immigrants debarking from a ship in New York Harbor around the year 1855. New York Public Library Multicultural Connection: Other people came at this time from Asia to become Americans. jn J?0u9h numerous Japanese seamen had been rescued from storm-wrecked ships caught rali7-iJapan Currents between 1638 and 1843, the first immigrant from Japan was not natu- jn until 1850. Hikozo Hamada (1837-1897) was brought to Baltimore after a shipwreck Ijg 50 He learned English and changed his name to Joseph Heco. He officially became a citizen on July 7, 1858. the old legends started in the early advertising brochures had enticed people to the colonies. These still brought people to the new nation. Now there were lots of new legends—of rich land, undiscovered mines, and fast-growing cities. And there was the real-life romance of a new nation with its doors open and its people's eyes on the future. When you had so little to lose, why not go to America? During the 1820s only about 500,000 people migrated to the United States. But then the pace quickened. In the 1830s and 1840s, 2.5 million men, women, and children arrived, and in the 1850s, 2.7 million. It was lucky that the United States had so much unfilled land. The overflow of the Old World could find a place in the New. Peoples who did not know one another or who had fought against one another could now live side by side. America would be called the "last best hope of earth." The story of European hopelessness is a story of American hope. In the years between the American Revolution and the Civil War, the two great sources of new Americans were Ireland and Germany. Events in those countries far across the Atlantic Ocean helped make the United States a world nation. The Irish and the potato famine. Potatoes were the main food of the Irish poor. But suddenly in the fall of 1845 a blight hit the potato crop and spoiled a third of it. In 1846 the blight destroyed the whole crop all over the country. The potato blight continued until 1850. Tens of thousands died of starvation. Weakened by hunger, hundreds of thousands died of disease. Death haunted the land. Even before the famine, the Irish had been coming to America by the thousands. Downtrodden by English rule, they had tried to revolt many times, but they were not able to throw off their English masters. So some Irish had come to America. The United States, in the phrase of the time, was "a sort of half-way stage to Heaven." To many Irish it seemed almost as hard to get here as to reach heaven, because the cost of a steerage ticket across the ocean (be- tween $12.50 and $25) then seemed so high. Letters written back to Ireland made everyone want to come. "This is the best country in the world," wrote one Irish girl from New York City in 1848. One new arrival wrote back with glee that the Irish here "eat the pig themselves, and have plenty of bread to their potatoes." "Every day is like a Christmas Day for meat." And now the Irish came by the hundreds of thousands. Through the port of New York City alone, between 1847 and 1860, from Ireland there came over a million. That was nearly half of all the Europeans who landed in New York in those years. The Irish in America. But once the Irish had landed in Boston or New York or some other port city, they had very little choice about where to go. Few had the money or the desire to move to a lonely western farm. The farming they knew in Ireland did not make them lovers of the land. So most of them stayed in the port cities of the eastern seaboard where they could enjoy the fellowship of others recently arrived from the old country. Many of those who did move westward in the early years used their strong arms and sturdy backs to dig canals and build railroads. When the digging of the Erie Canal began in 1817. there were not many Irish around. But before it was completed eight years later, the Irish were arriving by the thousands. On the canal they were well known for their strength, courage, and willingness to work. Irish contractors organized teams of their fellow immigrants. When the Erie Canal was finished in 1825. the enterprising and industrious Irish immigrants moved on to help build other canals and then the railroads. They helped bring life to many new western cities. Soon people could say that "of the several sorts of power working at the fabric of the Republic—water-power, steam- power, and Irish-power," none had worked harder than Irish-power. The Germans emigrate. The other large group of new arrivals in the years before the Civil War was the Germans. Nobody planned it that way, but whenever and wherever the people of Europe suffered, the United States ffl More from Boorstin: "In 1860, in the nation of thirty-one and one-half million, over a third of the total population was in the South. But, of the four million white foreign-born in the nation as a whole, over eighty-five percent lived north of the Mason-Dixon Line . . . Refugees from serfdom did not want to compete with slaves . . . Good cheap farm land, free employment, and the opportunity to rise in the world were all scarcer in the South than in the expanding North and West." (From The Americans: The National Experience) The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Harris Brisbane Dick Fund. 1941 Many Irish immigrants helped to build the Erie Canal, This lithograph shows the excavation process at Lockport, New York. A horse drives the treadmill that powers the primitive crane. somehow gained. Over there, 1816 was the terrible "year without a summer. " The Rhine River flooded, floating away barns and livestock. Autumn storms uprooted fruit trees. Hunger and misery cursed the farmer. We cannot be surprised then that during the following year about 8000 Germans arrived in American ports. Again in 1829—1830, the winter was one of the worst in the history of Europe. People froze because there was not enough wood to burn in fireplaces. Food was scarcer than ever, and prices went up. By 1832, more than 10,000 Germans were coming to America in a single year. As suffering in the German countryside deepened, it became Plain that their government was not going to help. Then Germans started coming to America by the tens of thousands. They continued to arrive in vast numbers till nearly the end of the 1800s. In 1854 alone (when Germans were half of all immigrants to the United States) they numbered nearly a quarter-million. The move to America became a craze. Overnight, people would decide to leave Germany, and they would depart the next morning. A 13-year-old boy with a pack on his back walked 300 miles to the French port of Le Havre in order to find passage to America. The Germans revolt. Throughout these years, revolutions were brewing in Germany. In 1815 at the end of the Napoleonic Wars the rulers of Europe met at the Congress of Vienna to shuffle boundary lines and restore the old monarchies. Nearly 40 German states were organized into a loose German Confederation dominated by Austria. Wanting democratic rule and freedom from Austria, students formed secret ® See "Lesson Plan," p, 250D for Writing Process Activity: Recognizing Ideologies relating to German and Irish immigrants in the United States. 268 societies and studied new constitutions. Peasants refused to pay taxes and roughed up tax officials. In central Europe. Prince Metternich, the clever and calculating Austrian foreign minister, was in charge. He had seen the terror of the French Revolution of 1789. and he hated democracy, which he imagined was always government by a mob. He organized tyranny in Germany. But even Metternich could not prevent protests like that in May 1832 when 25,000 people gathered in a small German town to drink the health of Lafayette (the hero of the American Revolution) and to demand a republic. Mettemich's policies created a rising flood of refugees. By 1848 there was civil war and a full- fledged revolution in Germany. The land was in turmoil, and many had to flee when the rebellion collapsed. The political refugees. These political refugees from Germany were not many—perhaps only a few thousand. But they included some, like the daring Carl Schurz, who became eminent here and helped to build in the United States the democracy they could not build in Germany. Back in Germany he had joined the rebel forces against the government. When the leader of his movement was put in prison, at the risk of his own life he helped his friend escape. When the German Revolution failed, Schurz came to the United States. His career covered the whole country. After becoming a lawyer in Milwaukee, he campaigned for Lincoln in 1860 and fought as a general on the northern side at Gettysburg. He was minister to Spain, senator from Missouri, and then served in the Cabinet as Secretary of the Interior. As the career of Carl Schurz and many other liberty-loving Germans showed, Germany's loss was America's gain. New Americans from Germany built whole cities like Milwaukee, and helped make Milwaukee a brewing center for American beer. They spread all over the country, becoming farmers, teachers, professors, lawyers, doctors, and journalists. The flags of the United States and Germany decorate the menu cover for a party on March 2. 1899. honoring Carl Schurz. Carl Schurz fought on the Union side in the Civil War. The Germans brought with them some new ideas for schools. They believed in physical education, and many early physical education teachers were German. They persuaded Americans to build gymnasiums attached to schools. Until the Germans came, it was not usual to send children to school before they were old enough to read. The Germans brought over the Kindergarten (a German word meaning "gar' den for children") where children as young as lour years old could learn by playing. The idea caught on. and soon there were American kindergartens everywhere. The great migration. In the half-century be fore the Civil War, although the largest num " Critical Thinking Activity: Recognizing Cause and Effect What contributions did immigrants make to the growth and development of the United States? Ask students to list some of the ethnic groups represented in their school and in the community. Have students think of specific contributions these ethnic groups have made to the community, such as architecture, art, music, festivals, foods, education, and working skills. Then discuss the contributions that early immigrants made to the developing United States. jjers came from Germany and Ireland, immigrants were coming from other places, too. Thousands came from the Scandinavian countries. from the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, France, Italy, and elsewhere. The nation was growing by a great migration. And these other new Americans, like the Irish and the Germans, worked in factories and on farms. They, too, helped dig the canals and build the railroads which transformed the United States from a land of farmers into an industrial giant, a leader of the world. See "Section 3 Review answers," p. 250D. Section 3 Review 1. Name some factors that led 5 million immigrants to enter the United States between 1820 and 1860. 2. What part did the Irish play in the Transportation Revolution? 3. Critical Thinking: Recognizing Cause and Effect. How was civil unrest in Europe related to immigration to the United States? See 'Lesson Plan," p. 250D. 4. The rise of the West Between 1815 and 1850 the lands west of the Appalachian Mountains became the nation's breadbasket. American workers would eat better than ever before. The farmers of the American West also fed the factory laborers of Europe. Though the South did not realize it, wheat— not cotton—was king. The moving American. "In the United States," the young French traveler Alexis de Tocqueville noted during his visit in the 1830s, a man builds a house in which to spend his old age, and he sells it before the roof is on." The People of the United States had become Americans by moving from other lands. They contin- Ue<3 to move after they reached the New World. Cver the next hill, round the next bend, in the ne*t state, there they hoped to find the will-o- the-wisp "success." In their constant movement these migratory people transformed half a continent. They cleared the forest and broke the thick turf of the prairies with the improved steel plows of the Industrial Revolution. They cut the grain with new mechanical harvesters. In 1810 only one American in seven lived west of the Appalachians. By 1840 more them one in every three lived there. Most of these Westerners still lived on farms in the forest or on the prairies, where they grew corn and wheat and raised meat for home and market. To serve them and handle their crops, new cities sprang up and began to dot the land. Instant cities. In places where people still alive could remember the sound of the Indian war whoop and the shadow of the virgin forest, there sprouted cities. On riverways and the joining of rivers appeared Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, St. Louis, Louisville, Memphis, Minneapolis and St. Paul, Davenport, Des Moines, Omaha, and hundreds of others. On the Great Lakes and at the river entrances to the Lakes, men and women created Rochester, Buffalo, Cleveland, Toledo, Detroit, and Chicago. An astonishing crop of cities sprang up quickly in the lands west of the Appalachians. When before had so many cities grown so fast? In the years between the Revolution and the Civil War, Americans went west to start new cities. Many hoped to make their living out of city-building. Some hoped to make money out of selling the land. The wilderness was worth very little, but once a city was there, land became valuable. Then some people would want to buy land for houses, others for farms to raise vegetables and chickens and eggs for the people of the nearby city. The great cities of the Old World had been built on their rich past. People had come first, and then there followed newspapers to give them news, inns to house the travelers, theaters and opera houses to entertain the crowds, colleges and universities where learned men could gather and the young could be educated. But that was much too slow and haphazard for impatient, purposeful Americans. Western city-builders wanted their city first. They wanted to see it even before the people were Critical Thinking Activity: Drawing Conclusions What sparked the growth of cities in the west? Have students look at the maps of the United States on pages 948 and 949, and ask 'nem to locate the following cities: Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, St. Louis, Louisville. Memphis, Minneapolis, St. Paul, Davenport, Des Moines, and Omaha. Ask students to carefully examine !Pe locale for each city, noting geographic features, roadways, etc. How did these factors influence the development of each city? Ask students to summarize their findings in a written Paragraph. Growth of the United States to 1853 Names of the Thirteen Original States are Underlined: GA. The conquest of New Mexico and California. In June 1846, upon hearing of the war with Mexico, the explorer John C. Fremont and his band of frontiersmen helped American settlers in California to set up a republic under the famous "Bear Flag." But soon the navy arrived and the flag of the United States replaced the Bear Flag. Meanwhile, soldiers under General Stephen Kearny marched from Fort Leavenworth to Santa Fe and raised the United States flag over New Mexico. Then, with a small unit of cavalry, Kearny continued on his 1800-mile journey to California. When they came out of the mountains in December 1846, Kearny and his little force met brief but stiff resistance from Mexican Californians. With the aid of the navy, Kearny was able to put down this opposition and give the United States complete control of California. The peace treaty and the Gadsden Purchase. In the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848) Mexico dropped all its claims to Texas and agreed that Texas belonged to the United States. But that was only the beginning of Mexican losses. In addition it handed over all the lands between Texas and the Pacific. That included California, New Mexico, and most of the present states of Utah, Nevada. Arizona, and Colorado. In return, the United States paid Mexico $15 million and assumed claims of our citizens against Mexico of some $3 million. After the Webster-Ashburton Treaty (1842) had finally resolved the long-disputed border between Maine and Canada, the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848) nearly filled in the outlines of the present United States except for Alaska and Hawaii. The final piece, a small strip of land south of the Gila River in Arizona and New Mexico, was bought from Mexico in 1853 for $10 million in the Gadsden Purchase (p. 312). This piece of land was believed to offer the best rail route across the southern Rockies to the Pacific. ® Geography and History: Regions Have students look at the map above. Ask: Why are the names of certain states on the east coast underlined? (They are the original thirteen states. This is shown on map key.) During what ten-year period did the United States seem to be the most active in acquiring territory? (Between 1845 and 1853) Florida was acquired in how many stages? (Three) What were the dates of these stages? (West Florida became part of the United States in 1810 and 1813. The rest of Florida was added in 1819.) By A. J. Fountain Jr. Courtesy of Gadsden Museum, Mesilla, N. M., A. D. & Mary V. Alexander By the Gadsden Purchase, the United States added 30,000 square miles of desert lands south of the Gila River to the southern borders of Arizona and New Mexico. This contemporary painting shows Americans and Mexicans celebrating the purchase in Mesilla, New Mexico Territory, on July 4, 1854. The lands (including Texas) taken from Mexico after the war were larger than all the Louisiana Purchase or all the United States when the Constitution was adopted. This should have ® satisfied any American's yen for expansion. Yet (p. 301) when President Polk asked the Senate to approve the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, a dozen senators voted against it because they wanted to annex the whole of Mexico. "We believe it is a part of our destiny to civilize that beautiful country," the New York Herald proclaimed. Antislavery men also opposed the treaty, as did Whigs who envied Polk and the Democrats their success. So the treaty only squeaked through the Senate by 38 to 14, just 3 more votes than the necessary two-thirds. It took no prophet to predict that more western lands spelled more trouble. Every new acre was a subject for debate, for a quarrel—or even for a battle. Southerners and Northerners alike thought of nothing but whether the new lands would spread the Slave Power. In the bitterly divided nation, every stroke oi national good luck struck a note of discontent. Each section somehow was afraid that the other would gain more. Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote in his journal as the United States invaded Mexico, "The United States will conquer Mexico, but it will be as the man swallows the arsenic, which brings him down in turn. Mexico will poison us." See "Section 5 Review answers," p. 278F. ection 5 Review 1. Identify or explain: Zachary Taylor, Winfield Scott, John C. Fremont, "Bear Flag." 2. Locate: Nueces River, Rio Grande, Monterrey, Buena Vista, Mexico City, Gadsden Purchase. 3. Critical Thinking: Recognizing Cause and Effect. Flow did the Treaty of Guadalupe Hi- dalgo change the geography of the United States? Kansas-Nebraska Free Stales and Territories Slave States and Territories Open to Slavery under Compromise of 1850 Open to Slavery under Kansas-Nebraska Act Angry rallies were held across the North in protest over the Kansas-Nebraska Act. The question of slavery in the United States had now been transformed into a battle over whether slavery should be allowed to spread into the territories. Expansion and slavery. There was one odd ® but significant truth about the bitter congres- (p. 316) sional battle over the spread of slavery into the territories. It was a battle over slavery where it did not exist and might never go. This did not make the struggle any less heated. Yet it did conceal an important fact. Many Northerners, of course, were against the expansion of slavery because they hated the "peculiar institution." But many others opposed its spread into the territories not so much because they disliked slavery as because they did not want to live near or compete with blacks. Several midwestern states such as Illinois and Indiana had even put in their constitutions a ban against blacks moving into their states. These restrictions were seldom enforced. Many Northerners would have been willing to guarantee slavery where it already existed in order to be sure they would never run into blacks—slave or free—in the western territories. Southerners failed to recognize the extent to which the opposition to the spread of slavery was actually opposition to blacks. They saw ii as an attempt to bar them and their property (slaves) from the territories. To them it appeared to be just one more way the power of the North was being used to injure the South and prevent it from growing. The new Republican party. The Kansas- Nebraska bill was greeted by anger in the North. Public meetings were held in many states. At one such meeting at Ripon, Wisconsin, the members decided to organize a new party to resist the extension of slavery. To show their connection to Jefferson's Democratic-Republican party, they now chose the name "Republicans," which had been dropped by the Democrats. On July 6, 1854, the party was launched at a meeting in Jackson, Michigan. Its platform (1) declared that slavery was "a great moral, social, and political evil," (2) demanded the repeal of the Kansas-Nebraska Act and the Fugitive Slave Act, and (3) resolved to sink all political differences and unite in the battle against the extension of slavery until the fight was won. During the summer and fall of 1854, conventions in Maine, Vermont, Massachusetts, Ohio, and New' York organized units of this new' Republican or "Anti-Nebraska" party. The congressional elections in November 1854 produced a revolution in American politics. The old Whig party—which in recent years had been held together by nothing but the desire for office—was shattered. Its northern members deserted and moved into the ran^s ° other parties. The Democratic party stagger but did not collapse. Of the 42 northern Demo' crats who had voted for the Kansas-Nebraska Act. only 7 were reelected to Congress in 185 The Democrats had held a substantial majority in the 1852 Congress, but in 1854 there were only 83 Democrats to face 108 of these new publicans and 43 representatives of anot new' party—the Know-Nothings. The Know-Nothing party. Numerous Part*j quickly appeared and as quickly disappea^ during the active year of 1854. Only of these new parties proved significant Republicans and the Know-Nothing party. The Know-Nothings were a reaction to the ever- increasing flood of immigrants into the country- The party grew out of the Order of the Star- Spangled Banner. This was a secret association formed in 1849 to combat the political influence of "foreigners," especially Roman Catholics. Its real name was the American party, but everyone called it the Know-Nothing party because its members evasively replied, "I don't know," when asked about the party's activities. Ever since then, "Know-Nothing" has been a name for people who refuse to face the real issues of their day and instead seek refuge in hate and prejudice. In the election of 1854 the Republicans and the Know-Nothings together won enough seats to control Congress. It was not always clear, in fact, who was a Republican and who a Know- Nothing, since the Know-Nothings were still partly secret. It appears that nearly a majority of the members of the House were both Republican and Know-Nothing. Bleeding Kansas. When the Kansas- Nebraska bill became law, Douglas boasted that "the struggle over slavery was forever banished from the halls of Congress to the western plains." He was wrong about the halls of Congress but right about the western plains. For the Kansas-Nebraska Act would bring bloodshed to Kansas. The major problem with the doctrine of "pop- ular sovereignty" was that it did not say when a territory could decide about slavery. As a result, there was a race for Kansas from South and North. The first to gain control, the first to create a majority—of Northerners or South- erners—would decide the fate of slavery in the territory. Antislavery New Englanders organized and raised money to rush Free-Soil emigrants to During the 1850s Kansas was known as "Bleeding Kansas." In this lithograph, the Battle of Hickory Point, a village about 25 miles north of Lawrence, is shown. A band of proslavery men. armed with a cannon, are attacking the settlement of Free-Soilers. Anne S. K. Brown Military Collection. Providence, RI (detail) companies, the lands were worth little or nothing. They only became valuable after the railways were built. Then these lands would become prosperous farms and profitable sources for the nation's iron, copper, and oil. Standard time. Americans loved speed. And railroads made it possible for them to race across the continent faster than ever before. The trains that sped from city to city brought ® strange new problems. One trouble which had not been noticed till then was that every town had its own clocks set to its own particular time. The astronomers said that it was "noon" when you saw the sun reach its zenith—the highest point in the heavens. Since the earth was constantly in motion, and since the sun rose sooner when you were more to the east, then whether it was yet noon obviously depended on where you were. Imagine what this meant for a railroad! The Pennsylvania Railroad tried to use Philadelphia time on its eastern lines. But that was 5 minutes earlier than New York time and 5 minutes later than Baltimore time. In Indiana there were 23 different local times. In Illinois there were 27, and in Wisconsin 38. Most railroads used the local time for their arrival in each station. In between cities there was the greatest confusion. Yet for speeding trains a few minutes could make the difference between a clear track and a fatal collision. Finally it was suggested that instead of using "sun time" they should use a new kind of "rail- road time"—which would be "standard time." For the United States as a whole, you could mark off on a map a few conspicuous time belts—up and down the whole countiy. You would only need four—eastern time, central time, mountain time, and Pacific time—each several hundred miles wide. Standard time would be exactly the same for all the places within each zone. At the edge of each belt the time would change by a whole hour. These time ' zones would be marked on maps, and then everybody could know exactly what time it was everywhere. This was a sensible plan, but it took a long time to convince everybody that they ought to The Thomas Gllcrcase Institute of American History and Art, Tulsa In the oil painting above, Chinese workers cheer as a Central Pacific train heads into a snowshed built to protect it from heavy snow in the Sierras. tamper with "God's time." Finally, at noon on November 18, 1883, the plan for standard time was adopted, and people everywhere set their watches to the new time. Standard gauge. Standard time helped to draw all the nation's railroads together. But other steps were needed too. In 1860 there were about 350 different railroad companies and about 30,000 miles of railroad tracks in the United States. Yet there was not really a national railroad network. The main reason was that the many railroad lines were not on the same "gauge." The gauge is the distance between the two rails measured from the inside of one rail to the inside of the other. There were many different gauges. Some railroad builders put their tracks six feet apart, but some put them closer together. There were at least eleven gauges in general use. A railroad car that would just fit one gauge would not run on narrower or wider gauges. If you wanted to send a package any distance by railroad, it had to be taken out of the car that fitted one gauge and moved into a car to fit the gauge of the next railroad. In 1861 a package Critical Thinking Activity: Making Comparisons How have our daily lives benefited from standardization? A standard time ancf a standard gauge are only two of the many uniformities that industrialization has demanded. Have students make a list of everyday items that have been standardized (e.g" telephone lines, highway signs/symbols, computer systems, etc.). Tell students to write a paragraph about one of these items, explaining its function and why the item has been standardized. See "Lesson Plan," p. 436C. 1. The growth of an urban nation During the years after the Civil War there was not only a movement westward to settle the Great Plains, but also another great movement of people from the country to the cities. When the Civil War began, only one American in five was living in a city. By 1915, cities held half of all Americans. Between 1860 and 1915 the nation's rural population just about doubled, but the urban population grew more than 700 percent. Farmers move to the city. The new cities grew mainly in the East, the Middle West, and the Far West, but they could be found wherever industry was developing. The new city-people came from everywhere. Railroad builders sent salesmen overseas to boast the wonders of the American farms and persuade immigrants from European cities and farms to come settle along their tracks in the West. At the same time, many American farmers in the East and Midwest were moving away from the land to the city. Behind them in the countryside they left ghost villages. One such village in New England had a population of two inhabitants, one living on each side of the broad street. The abandoned church and the dilapidated schoolhouse were being taken apart for lumber and for kindling wood. Some of the farmers had gone west, but most had gone to the cities. By 1910 more than a third of the people living in American cities had moved in from American farms. Immigrants come to the cities. Of the 25 million immigrants who came to the United States between the Civil War and World War I, most set^ tied in the cities. Outside of cities many of them would have felt lonely and lost. They loved the friendly bustle and wanted to be close to people like themselves. And some of them had no choice. They had spent everything to cross the ocean and had no money left for a trip west. Within the big American cities there sprouted little immigrant cities. By 1890 New York City held as many Germans as Hamburg, twice as many Irish as Dublin, half as many Italians as State Historical Society of Wisconsin Immigrant women gather in the market square of a middlewestem town In the 1890s. One (far left) has adopted an American-style hat. Naples. And besides, there were large numbers of Poles, Russians, Hungarians, Austrians, Norwegians, Swedes, and Chinese. Four out of five New Yorkers either were born abroad or were the children of foreign parents. The Germans and Irish who had come before 1880 were found nearly everywhere in the United States. There were also lots of Canadians in Boston and Detroit, Poles in Buffalo and Milwaukee, Austrians in Cleveland, and Italians in New Orleans. The urban mixture. Cities were sometimes called the nation's "melting pots." Perhaps they should have been called "mixing bowls," The adult immigrant sometimes became Americanized only slowly. But very quickly a whole colony found its special place in American life. Just as the new United States had first been made from thirteen different colonies, now a great nation was being made from countless colonies of immigrants. Wherever you came from, you could find a neighborhood in New York or in the other big cities where you could feel at home. Whether you were from Germany, Italy, Hungary, or Poland, you could shop in your own old-country ^ Continuity and Change: Social Change Point out to students that most of the immigrants arriving in the United States between the Civil War and World War I were drawn to the cities. This was unlike the immigrants arriving from 1820 to 1850, who went out into the countryside to work on the new roads and canals and to buy the inexpensive land. This flocking of new immigrants to cities contributed to the United States' shift from a rural to an urban society. (See p. 265.) units in this democratic nation. In New York City during the days of Boss Tweed between 1866 and 1871, the city was looted of some $100 million by the boss and his underlings. Other political groups, "rings" as they were called at the time, robbed Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and other cities. Many reformers blamed this state of affairs on the immigrant who, they said, was "a European peasant whose horizon has been narrow, whose moral and religious training has been meager and false, and whose ideas of life are low." But Philadelphia, where 47 percent of the population was native born of native-born parents, was as corrupt as New York, where 80 percent of the residents were of foreign birth or for°ign parentage. The immigrant and the politician. Immigrants did tend to vote for the boss and the followers of his political "machine." But this was because the machine members—often aider- men, or city councillors—provided friendly help. They supplied government jobs and money and advice. A new arrival who was arrested for a petty crime could turn to the aider- man of his ward to find him a lawyer or to persuade the judge to let him off. The alderman Everett Shinn, who began his career as a newspaper artist, painted "Cross Streets of New York" in 1899. He was one of the group of painters known as the "ashcan school" because they chose scenes from everyday city life as subjects for their canvases. The collection of the Corcoran Gallery of Art. Gift of Margaret M. Hitchcock 442 organized benefit dances. The money paid for dance tickets would go to some worker who had been crippled at his work or to a widow who had no way of supporting her children. The aider- man found doctors for the sick and brought groceries to the poor. He reached into his pocket to give a few dollars to needy orphans or to men wanting a new start in business. He was a one-man United Fund. No wonder immi- lil grants voted for him and for the machine again and again. The disappearing frontier. The problems of the Gilded Age—corruption in government and business, strikes, and labor violence—worried Americans. Why was it all happening? One bright young historian. Frederick Jackson Turner, who had been raised in the backwoods of Wisconsin, thought he knew the reason. The Census of 1890 had announced that the United States no longer had an unbroken line of wilderness frontier. Turner proposed the theory that this disappearance of the frontier explained many of Ihe country's troubles. According to Turner, what had made America the Land of Promise was not cities but the frontier. The free land out west, he said, had also been a safety valve. In earlier times if a family in an eastern city wanted a second chance, they could move out west. But now that the country Austrian-born J. Kepplers lithograph cartoon from the magazine Puck shows a group of well-to-do Americans barring the entry of a new immigrant. The Newcomer sees what ttie Oldcomers cannot— the shadows looming behind them of their own immigrant fathers. Culver Pic lures ffl More from Boorstin: "Machine politics was a natural product of the emigrant frame of mind. What is the main difference between a political machine and a political party? A party is organized for a purpose larger than its own survival. A political machine exists for its own sake; its primary, in a sense its only, purpose is survival. A political party may succeed and make itself obsolete by attaining the purpose for which it was organized ... [A] political machine succeeds only by surviving." (From The Americans: The Democratic Experience) __ 443 was being filled up, it was no longer possible to find a second chance by going out to the edge of civilization. Now if you were an unlucky newcomer in a slum, there appeared to be no escape. Oldcomers versus Newcomers. For a while it seemed that the country might be divided between Oldcomers and Newcomers. Oldcomers themselves, of course, had come from immigrant families, but their families had been here for a long time. Among them were the rich and famous. Few of them were crowded into slums. In the older eastern states that still controlled Congress, the Oldcomers were in charge. They were most of those who had money and education and power. But the Oldcomers did not agree on how to cure the country's ills. Some tried to help the immigrant learn new ways, but some were simply frightened. They wanted to keep the country the way it was. They blamed the troubles on the Newcomers. Their answer was to slam the door. Simply because their families had been here longer, they felt that the whole nation belonged to them. At Harvard College a group of New England blue bloods thought that their world was coming to an end. Three young men in the class of 1889, Charles Warren, Robert DeCourcy Ward, and Prescott Farnsworth Hall, had been taught by their professors that there was an "Anglo- Saxon race superior to all others. The race was supposed lo be separated from other races not by color but by their homeland. The "superior" People were supposed to be from England and Germany. And that just happened to be where families of Warren and Ward and Hall had eome from! These young men had been raised near Bos- Their parents were horrified by the hordes ^Igar" immigrants and especially by those "dth unfamiliar ways from Ireland and from j^uthern and eastern Europe. These New Eng- nd aristocrats said that the nation's problems md be solved by keeping out all people who Cpe n0t themselves. ive years after their graduation, Warren and Ward and Hall formed the Immigration Louis Stein Collect lon/California Historical Society Chinese immigrants, dressed in traditional clothes and with their hair in long pigtails, walk down a street in San Francisco's crowded Chinatown about 1880. Restriction League to persuade Congress to pass laws to keep out all "undesirable" immigrants. In their League they enlisted famous professors and writers. Their real object was to keep out the "new" immigrants—the Newcomers. These new immigrants, they argued, were the main cause of the increasing crime, the strikes, and most of the troubles of the country. The literacy test. To keep out "undesirables" they proposed a "literacy test." According to their proposed law persons over fourteen years of age who wanted to come into the United States would have to prove that they could read 1862 Uhltural Connection: The first national immigration legislation was passed on May 6, law ' Darr|ng persons ineligible for citizenship from immigration to the United States. Tne Exciy^T specifically directed at Chinese immigrants, and became known as the Chinese the Unit>nCjAct' 11 was the *'rst 'mm'9ration act 10 bar a particular national group from entering ffi and write. They did not have to know English, provided they could read and write their own native language. At first sight the test seemed harmless enough. Actually it was aimed against people from certain countries, such as Italy and Greece, where poor peasants had no chance to go to school. The Boston blue bloods believed that because Newcomers from such countries were not "Anglo-Saxons" they must be "inferior." But in their proposed law they did not dare list particular countries. There already were many people in the United States from those countries. They would be insulted—and they, too, elected members of Congress. Year after year the Immigration Restriction League tried to persuade Congress to pass a literacy test. But even when they finally pushed their bill through Congress, they did not manage to make it into a law. One President after another vetoed the bill. President Grover Cleveland called the law "underhanded," because it did not say what it really meant. President William Howard Taft said the United States needed the labor of all immigrants and should teach them to read. President Woodrow Wilson agreed. All three Presidents said the law was un- American. The United States had always been "a nation of nations." It made no sense to keep out people simply because they had been oppressed. America was a haven for the oppressed. Here the starving could find bread, and the illiterate could learn to read. In 1917, however, when the war in Europe was frightening Americans, the literacy test finally had enough votes in Congress to pass over President Wilson's veto. Out on the West Coast, Oldcomers feared Newcomers from Asia. They worried about imaginary hordes that might come across the Pacific. And they had persuaded Congress to pass a Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882. Then, in 1907, President Theodore Roosevelt without the use of any law against the Japanese persuaded the Japanese government to stop their people from emigrating. This un-American agreement came to be called the "Gentlemen's Agreement. " And this became the slang expression for any agreement to discriminate against people when you were ashamed to admit what you were really doing. See "Section 1 Review answers," p. 436C, Section 1 Review 1. Identify or explain: "melting pots" and "mixing bowls," dumbbell building, Tweed Ring, political machines, aldermen, Turner's frontier thesis, Immigration Restriction League, Chinese Exclusion Act, Gentlemen's Agreement. 2. What movements accounted for the growth of cities after the Civil War? 3. Describe a typical tenement house. 4. Why and how was a start made on limiting immigration? 5 Critical Thinking: Recognizing Cause and Effect. Why did immigrant colonies form in the cities? Why did they lose their separateness? See "Lesson Plan," p. 436D 2. Reformers and self-helpers Not all the Oldcomers were frightened. Some became reformers. If the country had too many strikes and too much crime, they said, that could not be blamed on those who had just arrived. It was mainly the fault, they said, of the Americans who had been here longest and who had had the most chance to make the country better. Who had built the cities and the slums where the poor were condemned to live? Who were the members of Congress and the leaders of business and the police officers? It was not the immigrants' fault if the nation was not prepared to receive them. Jane Addams. One of the most remarkable of the reformers and one of the most original Americans of the age was Jane Addams. She was born with a deformity of the spine which made her so sickly that after graduating from college in 1882 she had to spend two years in More from Boorstin: "[Robert Hunter's] Poverty (1904) which H. G. Wells called "compulsory reading for every prosperous adult in the United States," was an instant success. He described the extent and the consequences of poverty in the United States by drawing on the statistics of pauperism, of charitable society caseloads, of pauper burials, and of wage rates. His shocking conclusion was that in a total population of some 80 million, there were no fewer than 10 million persons living 'in poverty."' (From The Americans: The Democratic Experience) workers to return to their jobs. In extreme cases, he took over the plant. Employers, on their part, were forbidden to discharge workers for union activities. Wherever possible, the government insisted on reducing the workday to eight hours. As a result of government support, the membership of labor unions doubled. In spite of a 50 percent rise in prices between 1914 and 1918, labor's real income rose 20 percent above the prewar level. Mobilizing minds. The government also wanted to enlist the minds of the people in the war effort. Millions of Americans had opposed our entry into the war. Some German Americans, naturally enough, did not want to fight against the land of their ancestors. Some Irish Americans felt themselves traditional enemies of the English. Socialists declared that the war was only a capitalist dogfight. Midwest Progressives said the nation should devote itself to reform rather than war. And then there were the pacifists who said that war—only murder under another name—could never be justified. How could the government convert these reluctant citizens? How could it whip up enthusiasm for our friends and hatred for our enemies? How could it sell war bonds and keep people hard at work? For these tasks President Wilson created the Committee on Public Information. George Creel, a journalist, was appointed chairman, assigned to "sell the war to America." In May 1917 the Creel Committee began publishing a daily Official Bulletin of the war news that the administration wished to make public. The committee hired professors, writers, artists, and lecturers by the thousands. Their job was to convince and to reassure Americans that the war was a crusade for freedom and democracy. The Germans were portrayed as hateful beasts, barbarous "Huns" out to dominate the Western world. This effort helped create a war fever with sad aftereffects which long outlasted the war. It stirred up spy scares and a frantic hunt for traitors. Otherwise sensible Americans now refused to play Beethoven or Wagner. They dropped German courses from the schools. They turned "sauerkraut" into "liberty cabbage" and converted "hamburger" into "Salisbury steak." But this anti-German madness was really anti-American. For without the hundreds of thousands of immigrants from Germany the nation would have been much poorer. The United States—"a nation of nations"—had been created by people from everywhere and was enriched by all their languages and cultures. The attack on civil liberties. The Espionage Act of 1917 gave the President powers of censorship. It enacted heavy penalties against anyone who handed out information about any place connected with the national defense. To urge resistance to the laws of the United States, to refuse to do military duty, or to hinder the draft now became crimes punishable by prison terms. The Trading with the Enemy Act of 1917 obliged any newspaper printed here in a foreign language to furnish the Postmaster General with English translations of everything it published about the war. The Sedition Act of 1918 went even further than the infamous Sedition Act of 1798 against which Jefferson and Madison had protested. For the 1918 law imposed penalties on anyone who used "disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive" language about the United States government, flag, or uniform. It empowered the Postmaster General to refuse to deliver mail to anyone who, in his opinion, was using the postal service in violation of the act. With this barrage of propaganda and new laws, Americans who disagreed in any way with the activities of the government were hounded and harried. In 1917 more than 1100 striking copper miners who were members of the radical Industrial Workers of the World were taken forcibly from Arizona to New Mexico, where they were interned. IWW leaders were thrown into jail. Eugene V. Debs, the many-time Socialist candidate for President, was sentenced to jail for ten years for denouncing the war in 1918. While still in jail he ran for President in 1920. His sentence was finally commuted in 1921. This was a strange way to fight a war for freedom and democracy. How could the nation im- Critical Thinking Activity: Drawing Conclusions How did the mobilization of the war effort at home change Americans' daily lives? Tell students that women, black Americans, and American labor were each affected by the United States' entry into the war. Ask students to select one of these groups and write a diary entry using this group's point of view. Remind students to focus on the changes that their lives have undergone as a result of the war. Have students share their work. This activity could be extended to diary entries covering different aspects of the war and treaty ratification. Hislurkal Pictures Service. Chicago This cartoon pokes fun at the government by suggesting that it might let Socialist Eugene V. Debs out of jail if only he would apologize. prove its war effort if citizens were not allowed to criticize the government or the armed forces? In fact, opposition to the war was slight and scarcely hampered the war effort. But the mania of these times would last even after the war. The virus of witch-hunting and super- patriotism was not easy to cure. See "Section 3 Review answers," p. 546D. Section 3 Review 1. Identify or explain: Selective Service Act, Liberty Loans, War Industries Board, Bernard Baruch, Herbert Hoover, National War Labor Board, Committee on Public Information, George Creel, Espionage Act, Trading with the Enemy Act, Sedition Act, IWW. 2. How was industry mobilized for war? 3. How did the war affect consumers? Farmers? Women workers? Organized labor? 4. Describe wartime attacks on civil liberties. 5 Critical Thinking: Recognizing Cause and Effect. How did the government encourage patriotism? What were some results? See "Lesson Plan," p. 546E. 4. Losing the peace When the Germans agreed to the armistice in November 1918, they believed that the peace would be generous—and based on Wilson's high-minded Fourteen Points. They were in for a brutal shock. The Versailles Treaty. President Wilson, announcing that he would go to the Peace Conference in Paris, gave ammunition to his critics. He said his only purpose was to help achieve the goals of his Fourteen Points. They said he was more anxious to be the Preacher to the World than to be the Protector of the United States. No President while in office had ever before gone to Europe. In Paris the three Allied leaders whom Wilson had to bargain with were clever and tough. They were Prime Minister David Lloyd George of Great Britain, Premier Georges Clemenceau of France, and Premier Vittorio Orlando of Italy. Each of them remembered the enormous cost of the war to his country. Each wanted to get as ® much as possible in lands and wealth and (p. 56! power for his own country. Each hoped to punish the enemies so that they would never rise again. Wilson irritated the other members of the "Big Four." They saw him as a self-righteous leader who always said he was worrying about "all mankind." They compared the Points that Wilson had announced from Washington with the Commandments given to Moses on Mount Sinai. "Mr. Wilson bores me with his Fourteen Points," Clemenceau sneered. "Why, God Almighty has only ten!" The Versailles Treaty that came out of the Paris Peace Conference, was not as selfish or as vengeful as the European leaders would have wished. Nor was it nearly as just and noble as President Wilson might have hoped. Each victor got land it had been promised in secret treaties. The German colonies were parceled out among the Allies. Yet, at the same time, some new smaller republics—like Czechoslovakia and Po- land—were created so that at last these people could govern themselves. The provisions most poisonous for the future w See "Lesson Plan," p. 546D for Cooperative Learning Activity: Checking Consistency relating to the American war effort during WW I. Following his example, excitable citizens were roused to vent their fears and their hates W against any Americans who seemed "different." These included blacks, Jews, and Catholics, along with all reformers. Somehow, forgetting that the nation had been built by immigrants. Palmer and his followers aimed their blasts against all "foreigners." The Jear of foreigners. During the war the Immigration Restriction League had finally obtained passage of the law that every immigrant must be able to read to be admitted to the United States (p. 443). But they were not interested just in literacy. They had strong racial, religious, and ethnic prejudices. In fact, they wanted to cut down immigration from Russia, Poland, Italy, and the other countries of eastern and southern Europe. The nation had been enriched by the thousands who had come here from those countries between 1890 and 1910. But the restrictionists had an odd theory of their own about "superior" and "inferior" races. They pretended that it was a science. Really it was only a way of dressing up their prejudices. Their own ancestors happened to come from northern and western Europe. They liked to think, therefore, that all the best people came from there. The restrictionists included university presidents and were led by eminent New Englanders. It would take many years to remove the stain they left on our immigration laws. The nation seemed to have forgotten its own origins! Free immigration had made the United States a free nation. Then In 1921 national quotas for immigrants were introduced. The National Origins Act of 1924 reduced quotas until, in 1929, only 150,000 immigrants were allowed to enter the United States each year. The quota from each country was based on the "national origins" of the people of the United States in 1920. This favored northern and western Europe, since the large immigration from other parts had come more recently. The National Origins Act barred all Chinese, Japanese, and other Asians. It is not surprising that in Japan there were "hate America" meetings held on "Humiliation Day," July 1, 1924. On the other hand. Canadians and Latin Americans were exempt from the law's provisions The 1920s saw the first large immigration to the United States of Mexican Americans. The "new" Klan. While the Immigration Restriction League used the laws, another group was using terror and violence to enforce their prejudices. A new Ku Klux Klan appeared in the South and the West. It pretended to be in the old southern tradition to defend the rights of the "best" people. But in fact it was led by a collection of roughnecks and human dregs, with some respectable followers, who made a career of harassing blacks. Jews. Roman Catholics, and all "foreigners. " Somehow they were able to enroll about 4.5 million "native born, white, gentile Americans." These included many who wanted someone to blame for lack of jobs and many who were worried by the turmoil of postwar Europe. Somehow the Klan came to dominate the politics of several states. To enlist and keep its members, the Klan shrewdly used all sorts of hocus-pocus. They had passwords, marched about in white sheets, and held secret meetings. But they were no laughing matter. They whipped and killed innocent citizens. They burned buildings and brought terror to whole communities. Yet they seldom went to jail for their crimes, because they bullied sheriffs and judges into joining them. The conviction in 1925 of the Indiana Grand Dragon for murdering his secretary marked the beginning of the end of the "new" Klan. The newspapers then began to expose the crimes of the Klan. and respectable Americans avoided it like the plague. Sacco and Vanzetti. Every epoch of American history has had its martyrs. Their names enter the folklore. John Brown was a willing martyr of the fight against slavery. In this later age Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, two Italian- born immigrants, became unwilling martyrs in the struggle for equal justice for all. In 1920 a holdup took place at a South Brain- tree, Massachusetts, shoe factory. A paymaster W More from Boorstin: "When famine struck Russia in 1921, . . . soon after Attorney General Palmer's reckless arrests and deportations of communists and alleged communists, the efforts to keep charity separate from policy were strained. Herbert Hoover took the lead. . . . In 1922, his organizing talent brought medicine, food, and clothing to some 10 million destitute Russians. ... At an official banquet in Moscow, the President of the Council of People's Commissars, whose government was still not recognized by the United States, honored Hnnvnr" (From The Americans: The Democratic Experience) See 'Lesson Plan," p. 642C. 1. Problems on the farm But it was far easier for Eleanor Roosevelt to sing with the Bonus Army or for FDR to speak warmly to "my friends" over the radio than for the government to change the daily lives of people in trouble. The problems of the farmers, for example, were varied and complicated. No single law could give all they needed. Some farmers needed electricity. Some were fighting dust storms. Others, working as tenants, were not getting a square deal from their landlords and had no way to share in the government's bounty. Many could not afford to buy the tractors or combines to make their land profitable. Still others, who lived on worn-out land, had no money to buy fertilizer. Nor did they know how to renew their land by planting diverse crops. Their problems seemed as overwhelming and unmanageable as nature itself. S The dust storms. In the 1930s the Great Enrich- Plains began to blow away. Bountiful rains in SuDDort **le 1920s had encouraged farmers to plow the ie Topic fragile grasslands without worrying about the future. Then the rains ceased. Drought cursed the whole mid-continent from Canada to Mexico. The sun baked the land into a brittle, powdery crust. Nineteen states in the heart of the nation became one enormous "Dust Bowl." Crops shriveled. Cattle died. When the wind blew, the topsoil—with no living roots to hold it in place—swirled into the air. Great, dark, yellowish clouds filled the sky, choking the nose and throat, blotting out the sun and causing street lights to be turned on at midday. The precious soil of the Great Plains blew all the way to the East Coast—even sifting into the White House—and on out into the Atlantic Ocean. Many families whose fields grew only dust gave up. They loaded their old cars with what they could carry and left the land where they had been raised. The "flivver" that Henry Ford had invented no longer carried them to a holiday in town. Now instead it took them on their desperate quest for a better life—anywhere. They moved in all directions, without a clear destination and with no real plan. The "Okies" from Oklahoma and the "Arkies" from Arkansas headed west. A third of a million people from those states and from Texas, the Dakotas, Kansas, and Nebraska hit the road. Thousands ended up in California as migrant laborers picking fruit and vegetables and living in squalid camps. Their hard journeys and their frustrated lives can never be forgotten, for they became the long-suffering heroes of John Steinbeck's powerful novel. The Grapes oj Wrath. The mild climate and the legend of its golden land made California the number one goal of the migrants. In 1939 that state tried to stem the tide by passing a law forbidding poor migrants to enter. But two years later the Supreme Court declared the law unconstitutional. A quarter-million Mexicans seeking work went to California during the 1930s. Other Mexicans, along with Filipinos, Okies, Arkies, and other migrants—at least another 100,000— moved north into Colorado, Wyoming, and Montana to work in the sugar beet fields. But, unlike the Okies, they had no Steinbeck to tell their story. Conserving the land. FDR's own experience had shown him the need for soil conservation. The land on his ancestral estate at Hyde Park, New York, had been worn out by centuries of unscientific farming. He renewed that land by planting thousands of trees "in the hope that my great grandchildren will be able to try raising corn again—just one century from now." Trees would help stop the dust storms on the Great Plains. Farmers across the nation followed their President's example. With seedlings from the government they planted 200 million trees across the expanse extending from the Dakotas to Texas. For years experts had said no trees would grow on the western plains. But these trees took root. Their growth surprised the experts and helped other farmers, too, by making new "shelter-belts," conserving water and holding in place the precious topsoil. The New Deal, from its start, tried new ways to help the farmer. As early as 1933 a Soil Erosion Service was set up to preserve the farmer's most valuable resource. Farmers and CCC boys were taught terracing and contour farming. Then the Soil Conservation Act of 1936 aimed University of South Carolina at Aiken During the 1930s the number of women working increased from 10.6 to 13 million. Many worked in factories and were able to join the CIO. Firestone Rubber, General Electric, and some major textile firms signed CIO contracts. Unions would play a strong new role in American industrial life. As never before, workers would look to them to hear their grievances and protect their rights. The power of factory owners over their workers was much reduced. Through the NLRB, the federal government supported the unions. Challenged by the success of the CIO, the AF of L swung into action to expand its membership. Between 1936 and 1938 membership in all unions increased from 4 million to 6 million. Soon big labor would face big business. New union members. The membership of the old-line craft unions of the AF of L had been mostly Americans of the older immigration— English, Scots, Germans, Irish, and Scandinavians. Out of fear and from prejudice these unions commonly excluded the later comers from southern and eastern Europe in addition to blacks and women. The new CIO unions welcomed all these groups with their theme song, "Solidarity Forever." Women found new openings in the factory because the CIO began to recruit workers without regard to sex. Within a few years nearly a million women joined the unions. But even in the unions women were not yet quite equal. For example, the liberal Amalgamated Clothing Workers still allowed women to be paid less than men for the same work. The unions themselves showed dramatic changes. The International Ladies Garment in Workers Union, whose members had been largely Jewish at the end of World War I, now in the mid-1930s was nearly half Italian, Before 1940 many of its members were Puerto Ricans. By opening their doors the unions had the power to open opportunity for new immigrants and the children of immigrants. The labor movement continued to harbor large pockets of prejudice. Despite the example of the CIO, certain unions—especially in building trades—continued to exclude blacks, Puerto Ricans, Mexicans, and others whom they considered "different." Farm laborers, migratory workers, and domestic servants remained outside the ranks of organized labor. Neither the unions nor the New Deal could bring an end to unemployment. Even after the mobilization for war in 1940 had provided thousands of new jobs, there were still 6 million out of work in 1941. Not until 1943 would the nation reach full employment. See "Section 4 Review answers," p. 642E. Section 4 Review 1. Identify: John L. Lewis, Samuel Gompers, William Green, CIO. 2. How did some employers try to break strikes? 3. What gains did American labor unions make in the years 1936-1938? 4. What groups formerly left out of unions made big gains through the efforts of the CIO? 5. Critical Thinking: Making Comparisons. How did an industrial union differ from a craft union? Ill More from Boorstin: "The first market for typewriters was among authors, editors, and ministers, and it was assumed that the machine would be mainly a tool for the world of letters. Mark Twain boasted of his willingness to use this curious new machine, and The Adventures of Tom Sawyer is reputed to be the first typewritten manuscript to be set into a book. (By 1930, union printers were refusing to set books from any other kind of manuscript.)" (From The Americans: The Democratic Experience) mend action to bring racial equality Into the armed services. By 1949 the army, navy, and air force had abolished racial quotas. They finally realized, as The Crisis had said during World War II, "A jim crow army cannot fight for a free world." In the Korean War of 1950—1953 Americans of all races fought side by side. Black Americans and the homejront. One of the most effective fighters for racial equality at home was the black labor leader, A. Philip Randolph. Bom in Florida, he attended the City College of New York, founded a magazine, and became active in the Socialist party. He created the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters in 1925 and after a bitter fight won recognition from the Pullman Company, which manufactured and ran the sleeping cars on American railroads. The march on Washington that Randolph organized in 1941 threatened to bring 100,000 blacks to the capital to protest against racial discrimination in wartime hiring. Under this pressure, even before the march could take place, President Roosevelt issued his historic Executive Order 8802. This outlawed any discrimination on the basis of race, creed, color, or national origin in the federal government or in defense factories. A Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC) was appointed to enforce this policy. Roosevelt's order did not end discrimination. But substantial progress was made in both industry and government. As in World War I the flood of blacks from the South to northern cities for jobs in the booming war factories increased racial tensions. In 1943 there were race riots in a number of cities. The worst of them, in Detroit, left 25 blacks and 9 whites dead. After World War I about 80 percent of all blacks in the United States still lived in the South. But by 1950 nearly half of them lived in other parts of the country. During the war, black Americans, like other Americans, were becoming more and more citified. Outside the South nearly all of them were living in cities. And in the South they too were moving off the farm. Along with other Americans, they were churning quickly and easily around the country. It was harder than ever for the old South to keep its old ways. Japanese Americans are interned. Japanese S and Americans of Japanese ancestry had long Enrich- faced discrimination on the West Coast. After TMent Pearl Harbor their situation became much pj|P jopjC worse. For no good reason, other citizens blamed them for what the Japanese militarists had done and even began to suspect that they might be helping the enemy across the Pacific. Western politicians and frightened military men pressured FDR to remove them from the coastal states. President Roosevelt gave in. Early in 1942, under the excuse of national security, 110,000 Japanese Americans were rounded up. There was no evidence that these Americans were disloyal. They were forced to sell their homes and businesses on short notice and at sacrifice prices. They then were confined in camps, watched by armed guards, and treated as if they were dangerous. Not until after the presidential election of 1944 did the government change its policy and begin to release these innocent citizens. Despite this humiliating treatment, 1200 men volunteered from the camps to serve in the United States armed forces. In a segregated unit these soldiers in the 442nd Regimental Combat Team fought heroically in Italy. Another Japanese American battalion was recruited from Hawaii, where there was no internment because there were so many Japanese. In time of war it is harder than ever for a free nation to preserve its freedoms. Defending the country becomes a matter of life and death. Dissenters are open to the charge of being traitors. !( This is a true testing time of democracy. In World War II, except for the disgraceful treatment of Japanese Americans, the nation's record was far better than it had been in World War I. Women and the war effort. The need for workers opened economic opportunities for women. Now, instead of being dissuaded from Critical Thinking Activity: Demonstrating Reasoned Judgment Can the internment of Japanese Americans during World War II be justified? The text states, "In time of war it is harder than ever for a free nation to preserve its freedoms." Ask students to decide if this statement justifies the internment of Japanese Americans during World War II. What evidence would support or dispute this idea? Have students offer their viewpoint in an essay. Library of Congress Ordered to leave their homes and businesses on short notice by the United States government, anxious Japanese Americans wait in Los Angeles for a train to take them to an internment camp. taking jobs as they had been during the depression, they were urged to go to work. Six million women joined the 12 million already in the labor force. They took on a wide variety of jobs and surprised the men who had said they were too weak and delicate to be lumberjacks, blast furnace operators, stevedores, or blacksmiths. They proved that they could handle all these jobs. And they also operated complex machines in shipyards and airplane factories. Many for the first time could show their talents as doctors, dentists, chemists, and lawyers. "Rosie the Riveter" became an inspiration for all Americans. Black women benefited, too. Before the war a greater percentage of black women worked than white. But they were generally restricted to low- paying jobs as domestic servants or farm laborers. When war came, they found more interesting and better-paying jobs. Nearly half a million black women who had worked as domestics left that work during the war to take positions in factories. When World War II ended, it seemed that once again women might be forced to leave their jobs to make places for returning servicemen. But this time a much larger proportion was offered work in peacetime production. Prodded by war, the nation discovered its women and helped women discover themselves. W See "Lesson Plan," p. 674C for Cooperative Learning Activity: Demonstrating Reasoned Judgment relating to the role of women in World War II. A. Ramey/Woodfin Camp Nearly two thirds of all Spanish-speaking people in the United States are of Mexican origin. These people at a Mexican Independence Day parade in Los Angeles. California, are celebrating their cultural heritage. every kind of immigrant at some time had suffered some sort of discrimination! The social disease of discrimination lasted violently into the modern century. In the 1920s the Ku Klux Klan, along with its hocus-pocus and its costume of white sheets, terrorized Catholics, Jews, and blacks in the South and the Midwest. When the able A1 Smith ran for President in 1928, he lost votes merely because he was a Catholic. During World War II, FDR gave in to panic and put thousands of innocent Japanese and Japanese Americans into concentration camps. And when John F. Kennedy was nominated for President in 1960, political leaders wondered whether the time had yet come when a Catholic could be elected. Prejudice and discrimination, then, were not the monopoly of any one part of the country or of any one period in our history. Perhaps they would never be entirely cured. But the United £] States had made a good start. The traditional American open door policy at home gave refuge to oppressed people from the whole world. The Emancipation Proclamation and the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth amendments to the United States Constitution were long- overdue steps. In World War II the United States had fought the discrimination, barbarism, and racial superstitions of the German Nazis. Now Americans were ready again to move ahead. Civil rights laws, supported by Presidents of both parties beginning with Truman, signaled that the American conscience had been reawakened. In our land the twentieth century would be another century of progress for human equality. See "Lesson Plan," p. 844C for Writing Process Activity: Expressing Problems Clearly relating to discrimination against immigrants. It would take a long time to make opportunity equal for all Americans. There would never be perfectly equal opportunity, even with a whole system of free education for all. There would always be differences between families. Naturally, some parents would be more anxious than others for their children to go on with their education. And, of course, better-educated parents in homes where there were lots of books would be able to give their children a head start in the competition. Still, a great deal could be done to make opportunities more equal. In the southern states where slavery had flourished and where blacks continued to be treated as second-class citizens, the public schools were not equal at all. And in big cities in the North, segregated black neighborhoods tended to leave their children at a real disadvantage. When the Supreme Court of the United States in 1954 outlawed segregation in the public schools, it took a big step to insure that educational opportunities would be more equal. The 1962 law against segregation in federally funded public housing helped. After the anti-poll tax amendment to the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) was finally adopted in 1964 and the Voting Rights Act was passed in 1965, blacks in the South were able to use their votes to elect officials who would protect their rights and improve their opportunities. The years after World War II saw these and other strenuous efforts to fulfill the American dream of equal opportunity. Immigrant problems and immigrant inequality. The blacks were not the only Americans whose opportunities had not been equal. Every immigrant group except the English had their painful problems. They had been kept out of the best schools, the best colleges, the best neighborhoods, and the best jobs. With only a few exceptions, there had been no civil rights laws or constitutional amendments to protect them. In fact, as we have seen (p. 443), some of the most respectable, richest, and best- educated Americans actually formed organizations purposely to discriminate against new immigrants. When the Irish came here in the 1840s as refugees from the potato famine and from religious persecution, they were treated as intruders by some of New England's oldest residents. Factories and offices needing employees displayed the sign saying, "No Irish Need Apply." The Know-Nothing party, beginning as a secret society in New York City in 1849, organized discrimination against Catholics and immigrants. Its special targets were the new Irish Americans and the many German Americans who had been moving into the Middle West. Hatred against Catholics was again organized in 1887 in a group that called itself the American Protective Association. Its members poured slanders on the thousands of recent Italian and Polish immigrants. In 1894, when the flood of immigrants came from central, eastern, and southern Europe, many leading Bostonians (whose parents had immigrated some time before) joined with professors and university presidents from Harvard, Wisconsin, and California to form the powerful Immigration Restriction League. Among the groups most discriminated against were the Jews. Seeking refuge from ghettos and persecution in Germany, Poland, and Russia, Jews brought with them a tradition of learning and a reverence for books and education. Many were eager to pursue their studies in the best universities and medical schools. But the best universities, like Harvard and Yale, set up shameful restrictive quotas, which deprived Jews of their equal chances. Chinese, Japanese, and Korean immigrants, too, suffered discrimination—simply because they also wanted their full opportunities as Americans. The school board in San Francisco even tried to force their segregation in the public schools until President Theodore Roosevelt made them stop. At the dawning of the twentieth century there were 76 million people in the United States. Of these, more than 10 million had been born outside the country, and more than one-third of all Americans—26 million—had at least one for- eign-born parent. Although people boasted that this was a nation of immigrants, nearly Alex Webb/Magnum To bring about racial balance in northern schools, students were sometimes bused from one neighborhood to another. civil rights movement of the 1960s. It was designed first for blacks, and then for other minority groups and for women, to combat the continuing effects of past discrimination. It gave preference to women, blacks, and other minority persons for particular jobs or for college and professional school admissions, even though they were not better qualified than other applicants. This tended to produce "quota" systems. The programs meant, of course, that all equally qualified persons did not have an equal chance for these jobs or schools. The purpose of affirmative action, which many Americans approved, was to better the chances of people who, for centuries, had been forced to play the game with the rules stacked against them, people whose difficulties in the present could be traced to discrimination in the past. But people who were not in the "minority" groups now felt they were being discriminated against. They thought it was not their fault that women, blacks. Latinos, Native Americans, or Asians had suffered in the past. "Backlash" described a new kind of prejudice created by the efforts to remove old prejudices. Some white male workers and students could not understand why others were receiving special preference. They called this "reverse discrimi- nation," and brought lawsuits to secure their equal rights. The Supreme Court and affirmative action. The Supreme Court was unsure how to deal with affirmative action. In the Bakke case in 1978, it ruled that setting a specific quota for minority students in each class at a medical school that received federal funds was unconstitutional. But the Court said that some more flexible program might be legal. And the very next year, in the Weber case, the Court approved a job-training program designed to reflect the racial characteristics of the area surrounding a private company's factory. Under President Reagan, the Justice Department tried to stop affirmative action plans. Justice Department officials said that they wanted a "color-blind, gender-neutral society" where all paths were open and no special help was given to anyone. They were heartened when the Supreme Court ruled that the Memphis Fire Department could not ignore its seniority system to keep newly hired blacks while it laid off longer-serving whites. The Court said that the Memphis blacks could not show that JC they personally were victims of discrimination. In 1987, however, the Supreme Court upheld a lower court decision that allowed officials in Santa Clara County, California, to promote a woman over a man who had received a higher score in the job interview. The Court called the county's affirmative action plan "moderate and 'J Critical Thinking Activity: Expressing Problems Clearly How have the nation's courts legislated equality? Ask students to develop a list of examples of when the nation's courts have attempted to eliminate inequality on the basis of race. Ask students to discuss the success of this approach to eliminating racism. How is this approach dependent on the mood of the courts? How would the courts deal with the subject today? See "Section 1 Review answers," p. 844C. Section 1 Review 1. How did Jefferson's "natural aristocracy" differ from the Old World aristocracy? 2. What makes discrimination a "social disease"? 3. How is a system of free education, open to all, related to the ideal of equality? 4. Critical Thinking: Expressing Problems Clearly. Why do the twin American ideals of freedom and equality sometimes lead to social conflict? See "Lesson Plan," p. 844C. 2. Dealing with racism Righting past wrongs was not easy. Americans loved speed. They expected to accomplish in a few years what elsewhere had required centu- ries—or had never been tried. And Americans, too, had a faith that laws could cure almost anything. By the Eighteenth Amendment and the laws against alcoholic beverages, Americans showed that they believed laws could cure the social ills of drunkenness. In that they were disappointed. But could laws speedily cure discrimination? Congress and the states passed new laws and set up new commissions. Still, the problem was more complicated and deeper rooted than it seemed at first. Programs to cure past ills also created new problems. Trying to integrate the schools. The Supreme Court decision in 1954 outlawed racial segregation. Southerners fought a long, losing battle against the law of the land, but by the late 1970s legal segregation in the South had ceased. The age-old system of separate public schools and colleges for the races came to an end. But racism survived in the form of private schools that white parents set up to avoid integration. Increasing numbers of white students went to these private schools or moved to other school districts where there were fewer blacks. In some areas, schools which had been integrated after the Supreme Court decision came to be attended largely by blacks, which defeated the purpose of integration. In northern cities, neighborhoods were often racially segregated. Sometimes, too, school boards tried to prevent integration. They built new schools and drew the lines of school districts to keep the races separate. The courts held this kind of segregation just as unconstitutional as that of the separate schools in the South. To prevent segregation the courts took control in some cities. But the courts had no experience in running public schools. They ordered that students be bused to schools in other neighborhoods to provide a racial balance. Violence erupted in communities where white parents tried to stop the buses. Boston was scarred by the struggle. A judge there ran the school system for over ten years. School officials in Buffalo, New York, by contrast, aided by federal money and patient parents, peacefully integrated the schools. Buffalo showed how "magnet" schools with special programs could bring white students back to the public schools. In 1987 a judge found segregation again in Little Rock, Arkansas, just 30 years after federal troops had overseen the admission of black students to Central High. During those years, whites had moved to the suburbs and whole neighborhoods had become segregated. So the city and nearby school districts continued to battle in the courts over the best ways to integrate the city's schools. Busing was one method of counteracting segregation. But it brought many new problems. Some children had to waste long hours riding on buses. It was hard for parents to stay in touch with teachers who were no longer in their neighborhood. To avoid busing, many whites moved away and soon the schools were segregated again. All across the country parents disagreed. Some felt that the benefits of mixed schools outweighed all the problems. Others— white and black—missed their neighborhood schools. "Affirmative action" and "reverse discrimina- tion." Another new kind of problem was created by what were called "affirmative action" programs. Affirmative action grew out of the Williams Photography Sludio These two construction company owners in Richmond, Virginia, had a better chance of getting work before the Supreme Court struck down the city's affirmative action law. prevent discrimination in hiring practices, it did not, as some lower courts had assumed, prohibit discrimination at work. Still, even now, not every Court decision went against extensions of civil rights. In a case involving Kansas City, Missouri, the Court ruled 5-4 in April 1990 that a judge had the power to order a local government to raise taxes in order to carry out programs to reduce school segregation. And that June it upheld two federal affirmative action programs aimed at increasing the number of minority-owned television and radio stations. The Court said that the federal government had greater leeway in creating affirmative action programs than did state and local governments. In 1996, two developments renewed the fierce national debate on affirmative action. In California, voters passed an initiative, Proposition 209, that abolished state affirmative action programs. In Texas, a federal court ruled in Hopwood v. Texas that race could not be considered when admitting students to a state law school. Deep-seated problems. In education, and in the better jobs opened up by education, there was real progress for black Americans. By the 1980s blacks spent almost as many years in school as whites. Far more blacks were finishing high school and going on to college. But there was a troubling sign. The percentage of blacks. Hispanics, and Native Americans enrolled in colleges and universities peaked in the 1970s and then began to decline. Enrollments for blacks rose again in the late 1980s, only to fall in the 1990s. Graduation rates for blacks remained much lower than for whites. The percentage of blacks in skilled jobs rose fff in the 1960s by about 50 percent. Between 1960 and 1980, the number holding professional, technical, and managerial jobs skyrocketed. Law schools and medical schools vigorously searched for qualified students. Special scholarships were offered and colleges scrambled to find black professors for their faculties. Now there were many more blacks in the courts, in banks, and businesses. In the early 1980s, blacks gained places on the highest courts of ten states. Back in 1967 President Johnson had appointed the first black. Thurgood Marshall, to the Supreme Court. He also brought the first black into the Cabinet, when he named Robert C. Weaver as Secretary of the new Department of Housing and Urban Development. President Carter named a black woman, Patricia Roberts Harris, to that position in his Cabinet. Later Harris became head of the huge Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. When Thur- good Marshall retired from the Court in 1991, President Bush appointed another black man, Clarence Thomas, to take his place. In 1993, President Clinton named Ronald Brown as his Secretary of Commerce, Michael Espy as Secretary of Agriculture, Hazel O'Leary as Secretary of Energy, and Joycelyn Elders as the United States Surgeon General. They were the first black Americans ever to hold those posts. Hi More from Boorstin: "The voting power of the Negro had become so considerable . . . that in 1960 for the first time in American history, Negro voters were widely assumed to have played a decisive role in a presidential election. Some knowledgeable observers credited Negro voters for the narrow popular margin of 120,000 which elected President John F. Ken- nedy." (From The Americans: The Democratic Experience) flexible." This was the Court's first ruling on a plan intended to help women. The Supreme Court remained uneasy about affirmative action, and the Justice Department continued to push for a "color-blind, gender- neutral" approach to discrimination. As the Court's membership became more conservative under President Reagan and then, after 1988, under President Bush, the justices began to be more sympathetic to the Justice Department's view. In January 1989, in the case of Richmond v. Croson, a 5-4 majority came out firmly against most affirmative action programs. They struck down a law of the city of Richmond, Virginia, which ordered that 30 percent of all public works funds should go to minority-owned construction companies. The Court said that the law violated the rights of white contractors to "the equal protection of the laws" (sec. 1, XTVth Amendment). And the majority made it clear that they would view any law favoring blacks with as much suspicion as they would a law favoring whites. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, for the majority, wrote that any other approach would mean that "the ultimate goal of eliminating entirely from government decision making such irrelevant factors as a human being's race will never be achieved." The majority said that it would allow such laws only if they served the "compelling" purpose of correcting "identified discrimination." But they made it clear that any law of that type would be subject to "strict scrutiny"—that is, it would be looked at closely to see that it remedied only a specific problem and did no more. Few laws, followers of the Supreme Court noted, ever survived strict scrutiny. The minority objected strongly to the decision of the majority. Justice Harry A. Black- mun wrote, "I never thought that 1 would live to see the day when the city of Richmond, Virginia, the cradle of the Old Confederacy," wanting to limit "persistent discrimination," would be prevented from doing so by the Supreme Court, "the supposed bastion of equality." Later that same year the Court interpreted Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 in such a way that critics felt it had been nullified. While saying that they still agreed with their 1971 decision in Griggs v. Duke Power Co. the justices, in fact, turned it around. In Griggs the Court had ruled that an employer had to prove it was not discriminating. The Court ruled that Duke Power Co. had not proved that the high school diploma it required for employment was necessary. "Good intent or absence of discriminatory intent does not redeem employment procedures or testing mechanisms," it had said, "that operate as built-in headwinds' for minority groups and are unrelated to measuring job capability." But now in their 1989 decision in Ward's Cove Packing Co. v. Antonio, the Court said employers no longer had to prove that a requirement was necessary. Instead, the Court ruled that it was now up to applicants and employees to prove that a requirement was unnecessary and discriminatory. This made it extremely difficult to prove discrimination, civil rights lawyers complained. A few days later the Supreme Court ruled that even affirmative action settlements reached with the approval oflower courts could be challenged. The Court said, in Martin v. Wilks, that an eight-year-old agreement in Birmingham, Alabama, that had tried to open up senior positions in the fire department to blacks could be legally challenged by white firemen. Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote, "A voluntary settlement in the form of a consent decree between one group of employees and their employer cannot possibly 'settle,' voluntarily or otherwise, the conflicting claims of. . . employees who do not join in the agreement." This ruling, which also applied to agreements involving sex discrimination, seemed to open up again many agreements long thought settled. Civil rights activists were deeply disturbed by these decisions. The Court had now brought to an end, they feared, what some called the Second Reconstruction—the progress on civil rights that began with the 1954 school desegregation case, Brown v. Board of Education o f Topeka. Kansas. The Supreme Court further restricted civil rights laws when, in a 1989 decision upholding the Civil Rights Act of 1866, they limited its reach. They ruled 5-4 that while the act did 864 See "Lesson Plan," p. 844F. 5. Spanish-speaking peoples After women and blacks, the largest group to organize for equal rights in the 1960s and 1970s was the Spanish-speaking people, whom the census bureau called Hispanics. They had w come from many places and at many times. Some of their ancestors came to America with the Spanish conquerors in the century after Columbus, and their families had lived here for more than 400 years. Others emigrated to the mainland United States from Spain, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and other Caribbean islands, as well as from Latin American countries. The Mexican Americans. Nearly two-thirds of all Spanish-speaking people in the United States are Mexican Americans. They are both the newest of the new immigrants and the oldest of the old. The ancestors of many of them settled in the Southwest and California in the 1600s and 1700s (p. 29). Those early settlers were followed by millions of others. By 1990 there were over 13 million Mexican Americans in the United States and thousands more were entering the country every year. By far the largest number of them have continued to settle where their first settlements lay—in California, Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, and Texas. Their language and their culture give a special rich flavor to the food and shape the music, the architecture, and the literature in the whole region. Many Mexican Americans are descended from the intermarriage of Spanish and Indian peoples. They proudly trace their heritage back to the great Aztec and Mayan civilizations. They generally call themselves by a variety of names: Mexican or Mexicano, Mexican American, Chicano (a form of Mexicano), Hispano, Latino, mestizo, and sometimes just La Raza (meaning "the people"). Mexican Americans are largely Roman Catholic, with strong family ties, and they cling to the Spanish language. Cesar Chavez organized migrant workers in California into a union and led them in a long and finally successful strike against vineyard owners. He then tried to help other farm workers. Bob Fitch/Black Star •" See "Lesson Plan," p. 844F for Cooperative Learning Activity: Making Comparisons relating to the population of Spanish- speaking peoples in the United States in 1990. Although originally a rural people, now, like the whole nation, they are mainly urban. Fully 80 percent have settled together in city neighborhoods, which they call barrios. From the very beginning the differences of religion, language, skin color, and culture between the Mexican Americans and white Americans (whom they call "Anglos" or "gringos") created conflicts. Each group tended to think its own way of doing things was better. But in most areas Anglos were the majority, in control of government, courts, and schools. Mexican Americans were often discriminated against. Great numbers of them ended up in low-paying jobs where no training was needed. The rise of a "Brown Power" movement. The Mexican Americans organized to voice their needs. Their first civil rights group, founded in 1929, was the League of United Latin American Citizens. The thousands of veterans who had fought in World War II formed the Mexican G.I. Forum. Then, in the tumultuous 1960s, Mexicans began to speak out more loudly. During the 1960s there developed a Chicano " or "Brown Power" movement. Among its most outspoken leaders was the feisty Reies Lopez Tijerina, or El Tigre. Born in Texas, he led a fight in New Mexico for the return of the lands he said the Anglos had stolen from the first Spanish-speaking settlers. But many of the conservative Mexican Americans, like Senator Joseph Montoya of New Mexico, disapproved of Tijerina's radical program. And instead of "Chi- cano," which some of the young had begun to use as a symbol of pride, they preferred to be simply Americans. Another high-spirited leader was Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales of Colorado. He was a former prizefighter and once director of a war-on- poverty youth program. In 1965 his Crusade for Justice in Denver began to build Chicano pride by providing jobs and social services in Chicano communities. Organizing farm laborers. Many Mexicans and Mexican Americans worked as poorly paid farm laborers. Some of these braceros (a Spanish word meaning laborers) came north under contracts to work in the fields. Others entered the country illegally by slipping across the long and difficult-to-patrol border between Mexico and the United States. They were called "wet- backs" because some of them swam or waded across the Rio Grande. Farm workers had always been the most difficult laborers to organize into a union. Since they came to work only for a season, and were spread across the countryside, it was hard to bring them together for meetings. But the shrewd and eloquent Caesar Chavez decided to try. He had worked as a farm laborer himself. In 1962 he began to organize the migrant la- borers—brown, white, and black—into a union. In 1965, when 900 Filipino grape pickers in another union went out on strike, Chavez's union decided to go out, too. The following year, the two unions merged to form the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee. Chavez, like Martin Luther King, Jr., believed in nonviolence. He stuck to his principles through the long, painful years of the strike against the owners of the vineyards in Delano, California. This dedication won him public support from church groups, from other unions, and from political leaders like Robert F. Kennedy. A brilliant publicist, Chavez organized an ef- ® fective nationwide boycott of California grapes, (p. 866) When some of his followers resorted to violence, he protested by fasting for 25 days—and badly injured his health. But nonviolence prevailed. Finally, the opposition of the vineyard owners started to crumble. In 1970. after five years, many of them signed with Chavez's union. He had actually organized farm laborers into a union and won better pay and working conditions for them. Chavez had done what seemed impossible. Chavez himself stayed out of politics, but other Mexican Americans won high office. Both New Mexico and Arizona have elected Mexican American governors. Other Mexican Americans have been chosen for the Senate and the House, or to be mayors of large cities, like Henry Cisneros of San Antonio. Texas, and Federico Pena in Denver, Colorado. A Mexican American woman, Romana A. Banuelos, was 2C Critical Thinking Activity: Identifying Central Issues What forces shaped the "Brown Power" movement? Ask students to list factors that organizers of the "Brown Power" movement had to consider if they were to reach all members of the Mexican American community. Have students explain each of these elements as they relate to the background(s), economic classes, and degree of assimilation in the Mexican American community. Ask students to draw oarallels between this movement's oraanization and the "Rlaok Power" movement Wide World Photos Puerto Rican Day is a time for parades and celebration in New York City. named by President Nixon to be Treasurer of the United States. President Reagan appointed Lauro F. Cavazos as his Secretary of Education. President George Bush retained Cavazos and also appointed Manuel Lujan, Jr., Secretary of the Interior, and Antonia C. Novello, Surgeon General. After Bill Clinton was elected President in 1992, he appointed Federico Pena as his Secretary of Transportation and Henry Cis- neros as his Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. Puerto Rico and the Puerto Ricans. The Puerto Ricans were different from most other Hispanics because all of them were citizens of the United States before they arrived on the mainland. The special relationship between Puerto Rico and the rest of the United States allowed them to go back and forth to their home island at will. The island of Puerto Rico had been visited by Columbus in 1493, even before any Spaniards had come to mainland America. When Columbus arrived, the Arawak Indians were already there. During the colonial period the island was settled by Spaniards and by black slaves imported from Africa. The land and the climate were ideal for raising sugar cane. And from the sugar was made the famous Puerto Rican rum. In 1898, after the Spanish-American War, the United States took over the island. One of FDR's braintrusters, Rexford G. Tug- well, was sent to Puerto Rico as governor in 1941. There he and Luis Munoz Marin, a poetic and inspiring Puerto Rican political leader, produced "Operation Bootstrap." It was a program to improve agriculture and attract industry to the island. In 1948 Munoz Marin became the island's first popularly elected governor. He led the way toward a special "Commonwealth" status for Puerto Rico within the United States. The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico was proclaimed on July 25, 1952. The following years showed how the resourcefulness and intelligence of people might make up for the lack of other natural resources. Under the ingenious "Commonwealth" plan, Puerto Rico became an independent, self- governing state in voluntary association with the United States. Puerto Rico is represented in Congress by a resident commissioner who can speak but has no vote, except in committees. Puerto Ricans do not pay federal income tax on money earned in Puerto Rico, and they do not vote in national elections. By 1970, with the aid of "Operation Bootstrap," Puerto Rico had the highest per capita income and the best standard of living in Latin America. Still, Puerto Rican incomes were low compared to those in the mainland United States. After World War II when the population grew rapidly, producing widespread unemployment, thousands of Puerto Ricans moved to the mainland. The emigration slowed in the 1970s, but by the late 1980s more than 2 million Puerto Ricans were living in the continental United States. About one-half lived in New York City, where many worked in the garment trades. The city now held more than twice as many Puerto Ricans as the island capital of San Juan. They were citizens, but in other ways they suffered Multicultural Connection: Filipino Americans have a long history in the labor movement, dating from the 1920s. In the 1960s, when the AFL-CIO created the Agricultural Workers Organizing Committee, Larry Dulay Itliong (1914-1977) was chosen to organize field workers. In 1965, the Committee led the California Filipino agricultural workers in a strike against the Delano grape growers. (During the strike, Cesar Chavez's organization merged with them to form the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee.) many of the problems of earlier immigrants. Since they spoke another language, they felt strange and they formed their own neighborhoods where the signs were in Spanish. Strangers, without the advantages of money or education, they, too, joined the American quest for equal opportunity. Many Puerto Ricans were not satisfied. Some resorted to violence to try to win independence so that Puerto Rico could be a separate nation. Others wanted Puerto Rico to become a state in the Union. Still, in election after election the majority of Puerto Ricans voted to keep the unusual Commonwealth status. Meanwhile, Puerto Rico, with its delightful tropical beaches and its Spanish-American flavor, became a favorite vacation spot for thousands from the mainland. And Puerto Ricans, such as opera singers Martina Arroyo and Justino Diaz, guitarist Jose Feliciano, violinist Jose Figueroa, and actors Jose Ferrer, Rita Moreno, Chita Rivera, Raul Julia, and Hector Elizondo, were enriching the culture of the United States. The flight from Cuba. Throughout its history & the United States has been a refuge for people fleeing turmoil and repression. After Fidel Castro seized power in Cuba in 1959 and began to create a Communist state, over half a million islanders fled to the United States. Some went on to settle in other lands, but nearly 400.000 chose to remain here. Many stayed in Florida, especially around Miami. Some of these newcomers dreamed and planned only for the day when they could return to their Cuban homeland. But others became Americans and began a new life. The Cubans who came to the United States in the first years after Castro's takeover were generally well educated, and over two-thirds were trained for white-collar jobs. Hardworking and ambitious, some of them soon rose to head banks and businesses. Large sections of Miami became almost as Cuban as Havana itself. This first wave of refugees was joined in 1980 by more than 100,000 Cubans who fled when Castro suddenly allowed dissatisfied citizens to leave. These new migrants were called "Marielitos" because they had come to the Olivier Rebbot/Woodfin Camp & Associates In 1980 Fidel Castro suddenly allowed dissatisfied Cubans to sail from the port of Mariel for Florida. In a brief period 100,000 went by small boats across the dangerous waters to Key West. United States in a massive flotilla of boats that shuttled between the Cuban harbor of Mariel and Key West in Florida. These migrants, too, worked hard, built businesses, and often prospered. Once again the United States was a haven and a land of new opportunity. See "Section 5 Review answers," p. 844F. Section 5 Review 1. Identify or explain: La Raza, barrios, Joseph Montoya, Rodolfo Gonzales, Luis Munoz Marin, Operation Bootstrap. 2. What are the chief groups that make up the Spanish-speaking peoples of the United States? Locate at least three major areas of settlement. 3. How does the legal status of Puerto Ricans differ from that of other Hispanic immigrants to the United States? 4. Critical Thinking: Drawing Conclusions. How did the work of Caesar Chavez help bring about greater equality for all Mexican Americans? ® Multicultural Connection: Cuban-American Armando Valladares spent 22 years in a Communist prison in Cuba where he was tortured and beaten frequently. Upon his release he published an account of his long years in prison. His book, Against All Hope, was published in 1986 in several languages. President Reagan appointed Valladares to the U.S. Delegation of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in 1987. See "Lesson Plan," p. 844F. 6. New waves of immigration In the 1970s and 1980s, immigration continued, Refugees from war, revolution, persecution, poverty, and tens of thousands simply seeking a better life—all flocked to what they considered the New-World promised land. They, too, sought equality and freedom. They enriched the nation with their hopes and their efforts, but they added problems. In the 1990s, the United States sometimes decided to reduce the flow. Asians from many nations. The fall of South Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia to the Communists in 1975 set off a massive emigration by land, sea, and air. Refugees fled to Thailand, Malaysia, Hong Kong, the Philippines, and China. Many hoped to come to the United States. To help those who had aided the United States during the Vietnam War, 125,000 Vietnamese were allowed to enter the country right away. It seemed that this was enough relief at the time. With the rapid rise in the number of Asians in the United States, new Asian shops and restaurants catered to the tastes not only of the new immigrants but also of native-born Americans. Bart Bartholomew/Black Star But thousands more continued to flee. They filled the refugee camps in Southeast Asia and overflowed to the United States and other nations. By 1985, 728,000 of them had come to the United States. These new immigrants from distant lands did well. They were eager to become Americans. They worked hard and added a delightful new Asian spice to the life (and food) of the United States. Many Asian young people overcame the language handicap and did exceedingly well in school. President Reagan, in his State of the Union message to Congress in 1985, pointed to Jean Nguyen, who was seated in the balcony beside Mrs. Reagan. Just ten years before she had fled Vietnam with her family, and now she was about to graduate from the United States Military Academy at West Point. In 1988, in New York City, eleven of the fourteen finalists in a nationwide science competition were Asians. From other parts of Asia—from India, Taiwan, Korea, and the Philippines—they came by the tens of thousands. In the 1980s Asian Americans were the nation's fastest-growing minority, and the visible success of so many Asian Americans led some observers to call them "the model minority." In fact, many Asian Americans, particularly South East Asian Americans, experienced severe economic hardship in America, with low incomes and high rates of dependence on welfare for survival. Refugees from Latin America and the Caribbean. Another wave of unhappy people arrived from troubled Central America, and from strife-tom Guatemala, Nicaragua, and El Salvador. Many came in haste and terror without [2 passports or visas. A third wave came from the poverty-stricken and turbulent islands of the Caribbean. From Haiti, they were fleeing the brutal dictatorship of the Duvaliers, "Papa Doc" and his son "Baby Doc." Half the people had no jobs on that island of hunger. Even after the long Duvalier rule (1957-1986) ended, they still came. To check the flow, the government began to send back those who came without permits. Other refugees were detained in prisons and camps while courts decided whether they should be granted political asylum. £2 See "Lesson Plan," p. 844G for Writing Process Activity: Identifying Central Issues relating to government policy regarding illegal aliens. After the Haitian military overthrew President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in 1991, the exodus increased so dramatically that President Bush ordered the immediate return of thousands of people fleeing by boat. In 1993 and 1994, President Clinton continued that policy, while working with the United Nations to impose a trade embargo that he hoped would force the military to reinstate President Aris- tide. The military responded to international pressure with repression, and more Haitians, with no sure destination, left that troubled country's shores. In 1994, a new flood of refugees left Cuba for Florida. Cuba's economy was in tatters, and since the breakup of the Soviet Union (p. 930), Cuban President Castro had no strong ally. By creating a refugee crisis, Castro hoped to pressure the United States to end the trade embargo on Cuba. But President Clinton refused to end the embargo, or allow Cuban refugees to enter the United States, until Castro reformed his Communist dictatorship. Immigration reform. Immigrants came from Perspec- • rouble-spots on all continents—from Afghani- tives stan. South Africa, the Soviet Union, Ethiopia, Tjplc and Ireland. They came for a job and for a better life. Even if they had entered illegally they often found work. They were willing to take jobs that other Americans shunned, and they worked hard. Their children who were born here were citizens of the United States, according to the Constitution. And if they became legal residents, their relatives would be admitted to join them. But illegal immigration became an item of increasing national concern. By 1986 there were millions of illegal aliens in the United States. More came from Mexico every day. Many Americans felt that illegal aliens, many of whom received government assistance, took too great a toll on the nation's resources. Others disagreed, pointing out that the United States had been built by those seeking asylum from poverty and tyranny. How were we to maintain our tradition of welcoming those in need while responding to genuine concerns about the costs of illegal immigration? Congress responded with the Immigration Re- H form and Control Act. Illegal immigrants who Enrich- could prove that they had been in the coun- TMent try since January 1, 1982, were allowed to be- File Topic come legal residents. About 1.4 million illegal aliens became legal residents under this law. In 1990, Congress enacted the greatest reform of immigration laws in a generation. The Immigration Act of 1990 increased the number of immigrants allowed into the United States each year. It also created more openings for immigrants from Europe, and the number of skilled and wealthy immigrants allowed to enter the country. In 1996, Congress further modified immigration law. largely in response to public concern JC over illegal immigration. New laws doubled the number of border patrol agents and made it more difficult for illegal aliens to get jobs. To discourage immigration further, Congress restricted even legal immigrants' access to many government social programs. See "Section 6 Review answers," p. 844G. Section 6 Review 1. What major immigrant groups sought refuge in the United States in the 1970s and 1980s? Why did they leave their homes? 2. Why were many Americans in favor of reforming immigration laws in the 1970s and 1980s? 3. Critical Thinking: Making Comparisons. In what ways is the "sanctuary movement" of the 1980s like the "underground railroad" of the mid-1800s? In what ways does it differ? See "Lesson Plan," p. 844G. 7. New vistas of equality As other groups of people sought equal rights, Americans were forced to reexamine the meaning of the word equality. They discovered new opportunities and new problems. Gay and lesbian rights. This "minority" was not an immigrant group. It included Americans of all races, all religions, and both sexes. It was JC Critical Thinking Activity: Recognizing Cause and Effect How has immigration reform impacted the local community? Review the Immigration Reform Act with the class. Ask students to discuss ways that this legislation would affect their community. List the positive and negative effects on the chalkboard. Ask students to write a letter to the editor of the local paper on the subject of immigration reform. 