What a wild world it was! To see it properly, we must board a time machine and travel back into the Ice Age. The northern half of North America has vanished, buried beneath ice sheets two miles thick. Stretching south to Kentucky, they buckle earth's crust with their weight. . . . Animals grow oversize. . . . Elephant-eating jaguars stand as tall as lions, beavers grow as big as bears. South American sloths as tall as giraffes. With arctic cold pushing so far southward, walrus bask on Virginia beaches, and musk-oxen graze from Maryland to California. THOMAS CANBY, The Search for the First Amwicans," National Geographic, Seplemtiei 1979 Through the work of archaeologists, and the words of writers such as Canby, this world comes alive, and Americans today are able to see what it might have been like to live among the first Americans. In this chapter, you will learn about three complex societies that intersected in North America in the late 1400s: the European, the West African, and the Native American. There are several reasons to begin an American history book this way. First; the United States is a nation of immigrants, and this pattern of immigration has been present since the very dawn of American history. Second, in the last twenty years, historians have placed much greater emphasis on the interaction of European, West African, and Native American cultures in shaping the culture of the United States. Finally, studying how European, West African, and Native Americans came into contact starting in the 1400s helps to understand some of the challenges that face the United States today. It is with the ancient peoples of the Americas that the story of America truly begins. Thomas Canby Hunters roaming over 10,000 years ago in what is now southern Arizona used this large spear point to kill a woolly mammoth. Ancient Peoples Come to the Americas No one knows for sun* when the first Americans arrived, but it may have been as long as 40.000 sears ago. Whenever tht*y tame, it was at a time when the glaciers of the last Ice Age had locked up huge amounts of the earth's water, lowering sea levels and creating a land bridge between Asia and Alaska across what is now the Bering Strait. Ancient trailblazers trekked across the frozen strip called Bcringia into North America, where they hunted for food. Much later, their descendants developed agriculture, which allowed them to settle the land, HUNTING AND GATHERING It is not known whether these ancient explorers used tile Arctic land corridor as their sole route into the Americas. Experts suspect that most came by foot, but some groups may have edged down the Pacific coast in boats fashioned from the bones and hides ol animals—boats that are much like the kayaks used by modern-day Inuit. What appears more certain, from the discovers of chiseled spearheads and charred Ixmes at ancient sites, is that the earliest Americans lived as big-game 4 Chapter I A. Summarizing What were the important characteristics of Hew Netherland society? The B. Comparing How ho these Quaker beliefs compare with Puritan beliefs? Middle Colonies to 1700 - A DIVERSE COLONY Although the Dutch company profited from its fur trade, it was slow to attract Dutch colonists. To encourage settlers to come anil stay, the colony opened its doors to a variety of jx-o- ple. Gradually, more Dutch as well as Germans. French. Scandinavians, and other Europeans settled the area. The colony also included many Africans, free as well as enslaved. By the 1660s, in fact, one- fifth of New Netherlands population was of African ancestry The colony's population was so ethnically div erse that one visitor called it a great "confusion of tongues." The Dutch reputation for religious tolerance also drew people of many faiths, including Protestants, Catholics, Muslims, and Jews. These settlers generally enjoyed friendlier relations with the Native Americans than did the English colonists in New England and Virginia. The TM ^m m ' Dutch were less interested in conquering the Native Americans than in trading with them for furs. The first Dutch traders had the good sense not to anger the powerful and well-organized Iroquois, who controlled a large territory between Dutch traders to the south and French traders to the north. However, the Dutch did engage in fighting with various Native American groups over land claims and trade rivalries. What major river formed part of the border separating New Netherland from the English middle colonies? ENGLISH TAKEOVER To the English, New Netherland had become a "Dutch wedge" separating its northern and southern colonies. In 1664. King Charles II granted his brother James, the duke of York (who later became James II), permission to drive out the Dutch. When the duke's fleet arrived in New . . " Amsterdam's harbor. Peter Stuvvesant, the autocratic and unpopular Dutch governor, raised a call to arms, which the townspeople largely ignored. Severely outmanned, Stuvvesant surrendered to the English without firing a shot. The duke of York, the new proprietor, or owner, of the colony, renamed it New York. The duke later gave a portion of this land to two of his friends, naming the territory New Jersey for the British island of Jersey. Quakers Settle Pennsylvania The acquisition of New Netherland was but one step in England's quest to extend its American empire alter 1660. when the English monarchy was restored after a period of civil war and Puritan rule. The new king. Charles 11, owed debts—both financial and political—to his prominent supporters, including a sum of 16,000 pounds to William Penn's father. As payment for this debt, Cliarles gave the younger Penn a large property' that the king insisted lx* called Pennsylvania, or "Penn's Woods," after Penn's father. Following this, in 16S2, Penn acquired more land from the duke of York—the three counties that became Delaware. PENN'S "HOLY EXPERIMENT" William Penn well knew that England in the late 1660s was no place for Quakers. The Quakers believed that God's "inner light" burned inside everyone. They held services without formal ministers, allowing any person to speak as the spirit moved him or her. They dressed plainly, refused to defer to persons of rank, and embraced pacifism by opposing war and refusing to serve in the military. For their radical views, they were scorned and harassed by Anglicans and Puritans alike. From 1642 to 1649. England was torn apart by a great civil war between loyalists to the king and those who were loyal to Parliament many of whom were Puritans. The armies ot Parliament were victorious, and Charles I was executed in 1649 For a decade, England became a commonwealth, or republic, headed first by Oliver Cromwell, a Puritan, and then by his son Richard. However, the English grew weary of the rather grim and sober Puritan rule, and in 1660 the monarchy was restored under Charles II. Following the Restoration, new colonies took shape, including New York and Pennsylvania. In 1663, Charles awarded a group of key supporters the land between Virginia and Spanish Florida, which became North and South Carolina. The addition of these colonies, as well as Maryland, which had been chartered in 1632, and Georgia, later chartered in 1732, brought the number of England's colonies to 13. The American Colonies Emerge 59 More than any other colonial founder, Penn wanted to establish a good and fair society in keeping with Quaker ideals, lie saw his colony as a "holy experiment" in living, a place without a land-owning aristocracy. To achieve this goal, Penn guaranteed every adult male settler 50 acres of land and the right to vote. His plan for government called for a representative assembly and freedom of religion. As a lasting symbol of his Quaker beliefs. Penn also helped plan a capital he called the "City of Brotherly Love," or Philadelphia. Penn's constitution also provided for a separate assembly for the three southern counties along the Delaware Bay. Delaware thereby gained a somewhat separate existence. However, it continued to have the same governor as Pennsylvania. NATIVE AMERICAN RELATIONS Like most Quakers, Penn believed that people approached in friendship would respond in friendship—-sooner or later. So even before setting foot in North America, Penn arranged to have a letter read to die Delaware, the tribe that inhabited his settlement area. Aware that the Delaware had already been ravaged bv European diseases and war, Penn wrote, A 19th-century painting {above) portrays the signing of a peace treaty in 1682 between William Penn and the Delaware Indians—an event some historians believe never took place. A Quaker silver collar (top) offered to local Native Americans as a token of peace. Now I would have you well observe, that I am very sensible of the unkindness and injustices that has been too much exercised towards you by the people of these parts of the world, who have sought... to make great advantages by you, .. . sometimes to the shedding of blood... . But I am not such a man._ I have great love and regard toward you, and I desire to win and gain your love and friendship by a kind, just, and peaceable life. , . . WILLIAM PENN, quoted in A New World Like Roger Williams before him, Penn believed that the land belonged to (he Delaware and oilier Native Americans, anti he saw to it that they were paid for it. To be sure that his colonists treated the Native peoples fairly, he regulated trade with them and provided for a court comprised of both colonists anti Native Americans to settle any differences. The Native Americans respected Penn, and for more than 50 years die Pennsylvania colony had no major conflicts with Native Americans who lived in the colony. A THRIVING COLONY Penn faced the same challenge as the Dutch West India Company. As proprietor, he needed to attract setders-—farmers, builders, and traders—to create a profitable colony. After opening die colony to Quakers, he vigorously recruited immigrants from around western Europe. Glowing ailver- tisemeuts for the colony were printed in German, Dutch, and French. In time, setders came in numbers, including thousands of Germans who brought with them craft skills and farming techniques that helped the colony to thrive. Penn himself spent only about four years in Pennsylvania. And despite the colony's success, he never profited financially as proprietor and died in povertv in 1718. Meanwhile, his idealistic vision had faded but not failed. His own Quakers were a minority in a colony thickly populated by people from all oxer western Europe. Slavery was introduced, and, in fact, many prominent Quakers in Pennsylvania owned slaves. However, the principles of equality, cooperation, and religious tolerance on which lie founded his vision would eventually become fundamental values of the new American nation. Many Southern tobacco plantations were like small towns unto themselves, with outbuildings that might house carpenters. blacksmiths, or even a school for the owner's children. The ideal location was on a major waterway so that the owner could easily load his tobacco for shipment to London and other destinations. i f Sc Life in Southern Society As the Southern colonies grew, thev became home to diverse groups, as well as to many prosperous farmers and traders. However, life in the South—as elsewhere in the colonies—proved difficult for women and indentured servants. Colonial copper skillets such as this had long handles that let the homemaker remove the skillet from the fire without burning herself. A DIVERSE AND PROSPEROUS PEOPLE During the 1700s. large numbers of European immigrants traveled to North America in search of a new start. The influx of immigrants helped create a diverse population in both the Northern and Southern colonies. In the South, thousands of Germans settled throughout Maryland, Virginia, and as far south as South Carolina. There they raised grain, livestock, and tobacco. A wave of Scots and Scots-Irish also settled in tire South, residing mainly along the fertile hills of western North Carolina. While small farmers formed the majority of the Southern population, the planters—owners of huge profitable plantations—controlled much of the Souths economy. They also controlled its political and soc ial institutions. The activities at the* Carter mansion described by Philip Fithian reflected the luxury of planter life. Fithian recalled attending numerous halls, banquets, dance recitals, and parties that continued for several days. By the mid-1700s, however, life was good for many other Southern colonists, particularly those in the Chesapeake region. Due to a large growth in the entire colonies' export trade, colonial standards of liv ing rose dramatically in the years from 1700 to 1770. Colonists in the Chesapeake, where tobacco prices had rebounded after tumbling during the late 1600s, saw the greatest economic boom. From 1713 to 1774 tobacco exports there tripled, and many Chesapeake farmers and merchants prospered. THE ROLE OF WOMEN Women in Southern society—and Northern society as well—shared a common trait: second-class citizenship. Women had few legal or social rights: they could not vote, preach, or own prqpertv. Throughout the day, the average Southern woman worked over a hot fire baking bread or boiling meat. In between cooking tasks, she stepped outside to milk the cows, slaughter pigs for ham and bacon, and tend the garden. Back inside, she sewed, washed clothes, and cleaned. Women of the coloi Africa their c 72 Chapter 3 Philadelphia in 1720 was already a bustling colonial port. Ocean-going ships could reach the city by sailing up the Delaware River. Colonial Diversity African 11% Outch 4% Scottish 3% Other European 2% - English/ Welsh 80% and quantities of iron, lit the 1770s. the colonists had built one-third of all British ships and were producing more iron than England did. While at times the Norths economy dipped, many colonists prospered. In particular, the number oi merchants grew. By the tnid-1700s. merchants were one of tlx* most powerful groups in the North. URBAN LIFE Tin* expansion in trade caused port cities to grow. Only one major port, Charles Town, existed in the South. In contrast, the North boasted Boston, New York, and Philadelphia. In fact, Philadelphia eventually became the second largest port (after Ixmdon) in the British empire and was quite sophisticated by Standards of the 1700s: it had police patrols, paved streets, and whale-oil lamps to light the sidewalks. City streets grew ever more crowded—some people hurrying alxiut on foot, others on horseback, and others herding livestock to a butcher The high concentration of people caused problems not found in rural areas. Firewood and clean water were scarce. Fire and diseases spread rapidly because of the closely spaced buildings, and garbage and human excrement were difficult to dispose of. Cities also faced the problem of poverty. Some of the poor were immigrants too weakened by the grueling ocean voyage to work. Others were laborers hurt by economic downturns; still others were widows and orphans. In 1752. Boston minister Charles Chauncey fretted ox er "the Swarms of Children, of both Sexes, that are continually strolling and playing about the Streets of our Metropolis, clothed in Hags, and brought up in Idleness and Ignorance." A. Synthesizing In what ways ms the Northern economy diverse? African 20% German 7% Scots-lrish 7% Irish 5% Scottish 4% Dutch 3% Other European 2%, English/ Welsh 52% Source Tht Enduring Vition What new ethnic groups had settled in the American colonies by 1755? Northern Society Is Diverse Northern society was composed of diverse groups that sometimes had conflicting interests. Groups whose interests clashed with those of the people in power included immigrants. African Americans, and women. INFLUX OF IMMIGRANTS Even more so than the South, the Northern colonies attracted a variety of immigrants. During the 18th century, about 585,000 Europeans migrated to America. Before 1700, most immigrants came ;ls indentured servants from England, but by 1755 more than a third of European immigrants were coming from other countries. Dr. Alexander Hamilton, a physician, commented on the x.uietv of the people he observed in a Philadelphia tavern one night in 174-1: 'There were Scots, English. Dutch. Germans, ;md Irish; there were Homan Catholics. Church men [Anglicans). Presbyterians, Quakers, Newlightmen, Methodists, Seventh da\ men. Moravians. Anabaptists and one Jew." 78 Chatter 3 MTHKXIGH HfiTOn 8. Recognizing Effects What were the negative and mate effects of fi growing ethnic diversity in the colonies? The Germans and the Scots-Irish were the largest non- English European immigrant groups. Germans began arriving in Pennsylvania in the 1680s. Most were fleeing economic dev asta- tion that was the legacy' of a long war earlier in the century. 1 lowever, some German religious sects, such as die Mennonites, came to Pennsylv ania because of William Penn's policy of religious freedom and because they shared die Quakers' opposition to war. The Scots-Irish—descendants of Scottish Protestants who had colonized northern Ireland in the 1.500s and early 1600s— entered mostly through Philadelphia. "They commonly came as families, rather than as single males. Many established farms in frontier areas such as western Pennsylvania, where the)1 often clashed with Native Americans. Other ethnic groups included the Dutch in New York. Scandinavians in Delaware, and Jew's in such cities as Newport and Philadelphia. The different groups did not always get along well. Benjamin Franklin, echoing the sentiments of many English colonists, made the following complaint in 1751: Why should the [Germans] be suffered to swarm into our Settlements, and, by herding together, establish their Language and Manners to the Exclusion of ours? Why should Pennsylvania, founded by the English, become a Colony of Aliens, who will shortly be so numerous as to Germanize us instead of our Anglifying them? BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, "Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind" The English colonists were not the only ones to view other groups with suspicion. A German clergyman urged the young people of his communitv not to marry Scots-Irish. charging they were "lazy, dissipated [immoral], and poor." 1 lowever, in spite of this distrust, immigrants from mam countries lived side by side, thus furthering the evolution of a truly diverse American society. SLAVERY IN THE NORTH Because raising wheat and corn did not require as much labor as tobacco anti rice. Northerners had less Incentive It) turn "to slavery than did Southerners. However, slavery did exist in New England and was extensive throughout the Middle colonies, as were racial prejudices against blacks—free or enslaved. While still considered property, most slaves in New England enjoyed greater legal standing than slaves elsewhere in the colonies. They could sue anti he sued, and they had the right of appeal to the highest colonial courts. Unlike slaves in the plantation colonies—who could testily only against each other—-New England slaves also could offer testimony against white persons in cases not involving Africans. As in the South, however, slaves in the North led harsh lives and were considered less than human beings. I .aws forbade them to gather together or to cam weapons, and there wferc no laws to protect them from cruel treatment. Reacting to the harsh conditions, slaves sometimes rebelled. A slave uprising occurred in 1712 in New York, leading to the execution of 21 slaves. In 1741. a series of suspicious fires and robberies led New Yorkers to fear another uprising. Thev decided to make an example of the suspected ringleaders, burning 14 slaves alive and hanging 18—even though the main witness to the alleged conspiracy was a known liar. WOMEN IN NORTHERN SOCIETY As in the South, women in tin North had extensive work responsibilities but few legal rights. Most people in the colonies still lived on farms, and farm women faced unceasing labor: weaving cloth; sewing clothes; tending the garden and livestock; baking'and pre- Because Quakers believed that the divine spirit lives in every human being, they rejected a church structure that gave one group special privileges at the expense of another. One of the most extraordinary applications of their belief in equality was the role they allowed women. In contrast to Puritans and other Protestants, Quakers allowed women to speak out in church meetings [as in the painting below) and to participate in making important church decisions. HtlTOWf I Synthesizing towfiativaK Ulhonau's tspenence at Nttferi retied lentalist beliefs? Emerson's friend Henry Das id Thorcuu put the idea of self-reliance into practice. Abandoning community' life, he built himself a cabin on the shore of Walden Pond near Concord, Massachusetts, where he lived alone for two years. In Walden (1854), Thoreau advised readers It) follow their inner voices. I learned this, at least, by my experiment: that if one advances confidently in the direction of his dreams, and endeavors to live the life which he has imagined, he will meet with a success unexpected in common hours. ... If you have built castles in the air, your work need not be lost; that is where they should be. Now put the foundations under them. HENRY DAVID THOREAU, Walden Thoreau and Emerson clearly expressed the idea, at the root of most reforms, that human nature could Ih> remade. '"Trust thyself.' School and Prison Reform By the mid- 19th century , thousands of Americans holding a variety of philosophical positions had joined together to fight the various social ills that troubled the young nation. Some social reformers focused their attention on schools and other institutions. IMPROVING EDUCATION Before the 1850s, no uniform educational policy existed in the United States. School conditions varied across regions and school attendance was not compulsory. Classrooms were not divided by grade, so younger and older pupils were thrown together. Few children continued in school beyond the age of 10. In the 1830s. Americans increasingly began to demand tax-supported public schools. For example, in 1834 Pennsylvania established a tax-sup- ported public school system. Although the system was optional, a storm of opposition erupted from well-to-do taxpayers who saw no reason to support schools that their children, enrolled in private schools, would not attend. (Ipposition also came from some German immigrants who feared that their children would forget die German language and culture. Within diree years, however, about 42 percent of die elementary-school-age children were attending Pennsylvania public schools. Other states soon followed Pennsylvania's example. By the 1850s every' state had provided for a system of public elementary schools. In states farther west and in Southern states, however, it took years before the schools were established statewide. As a result, in 1860 only 15 percent of children in those areas attended school. One remarkable leader in the public school reform movement was Horace Mann of Massachusetts. After a childhood spent at work rather than in school, Mann declared, "If we do not prepare children to become good citizens, ... if we do not enrich their minds with knowledge, then our republic must go down to destruction, as others have gone before it." In 1537 he became the first secretary of the Massachusetts Board of Education. In the 11 years he served, Mann doubled the money that the state spent on schools, instituted curriculum reforms, and established teacher-training programs. REFORMING ASYLUMS AND PRISONS Like Horace Mann, Dorothea Dix was compelled by personal experience to join the movement for social reform. On visiting a Massachusetts house of correction. Dix was horrified to discov er that jails often housed mentally' ill people. Almost everywhere. DLx observed them "chained, naked, beaten with rods, and lashed into obedience." In 1843 she sent a report of her findings to the Massachusetts legislature, which passed If you had attended school during the mid to late 1800s. you probably would have used a McGuffey's reader William H. McGuffey. a teacher and preacher from Ohio, first published his popular grade- school reading books in the 1830s The readers, which had sold millions of copies by 1870, taught reading, writing, and arithmetic, as well as the democratic cultural values of hard work, honesty, and love of country. They contained little moral lessons to live by. such as "Idleness is the nest in which mischief lays its eggs." Reforming American Society 227 Workers Seek Better Conditions The swelling numbers of immigrants arriving at New York harbor in the mid- 19th century made common scenes like this one painted by Samuel Waugh in 1847. Female textile workers were not the only laborers seeking better wages and working conditions. As conditions for all workers deteriorated during the 1830s. skilled artisans, who had originally formed unions to preserve their own inter* ests, began to ally themselves with unskilled laborers. When Philadelphia coal workers struck for a 10-hour day in 1835, for example, carpenters, cigar makers, shoemakers, leatherwnrkers, and other artisans joined them in what became the first general strike in the United States. Although only 1 or 2 percent of workers in the United States were organized, the 18.30s and 1840s saw dozens of strikes— many for higher wages, lint some for a shorter workday. Employers won most of these strikes because they could easily replace unskilled workers with strikebreakers who would toil long hours for low wages. Many of these strikebreakers were immigrants who had just escaped even worse poverty in Europe. IMMIGRATION INCREASES European immigration rose dramatically in the United States between 1830 and I860. In the decade 1845-1854 alone nearly 3 million immigrants were added to a population that had numbered only about 20 million. While some emigrated from England. Scandinavia, Switzer land, and Holland, most of the immigrants were German or Trish. Most immigrants avoided the South because slavery limited their economic opportunity and Southerners were generally hostile to European, particularly Catholic, immigrants. The German immigrants clustered in the upper Mississippi Valley and in tlie Ohio Valley, primarily in Illinois, Ohio, Wisconsin, and Missouri. Most German immigrants had been farmers in Europe, hut some became professionals, artisans, and shopkeepers in the United States. Irish immigrants congregated in the large cities of the East, w here they per- fonned whatever work they could find. Nearly a million Irish immigrants had settled in America between 1815 and 1844. Between 1845 and 1854 Irish immigration soared alter a blight destroyed the peasants' staple crop, potatoes, which led to a famine in Ireland. The Great Potato Famine killed as many as 1 million of the Irish people and drove about 1.3 million more to new homes in America. Irish immigrants faced bitter prejudice, both because they were Homan Catholic and because they were poor. Frightened by allegations of a Catholic conspiracy to take over the country. Protestant mobs in New York, Philadelphia, and Boston rampaged through Irish neighborhoods. Native-born artisans, whose wages had f allen because of competition from unskilled laborers and factors' production, considered Irish immigrants the most unfair competition of all. Their willingness to work for low wages under terrible conditions made the desperate Irish easy prey for employers who sought to break strike's with cheap labor. Other Irish immigrants, however, stxin Iiegan to view unions as an opportunity to advance their prospects. In fact, Irish dockworkers organized New York City 's most famous strike of the 1840s. When Irish women tailors organized the THIItt Effects Hmt the influx dm immigrants ta^ Germany ft Ireland jfe circums&tm the MOftM 244 Chapter 8 o The Divisive Politics of Slavery • Wilmot Proviso • secession • Compromise of!85£ • popular sovereign • Stephen A. Doogt-; • Millard Fillmore LEARN ABOUT the controversy over slavery in the territories TO UNDERSTAND why the Compromise of 1850 was adopted. Senator Calhoun called on the North to give the South "justice, simple justice." He demanded that slavery be allowed throughout the territories won in the war with Mexico. If it was not, he declared, the South would secede, or withdraw, from the Union, Senator William H. Seward of New York disagreed, saying that "there is a higher law than the Constitution." Seward believed that freedom came from God. The North would not rest, he implied, until slavery had been abolished everywhere. Once again, the issue of slavery had brought about a political crisis, deepening the gulf between the North and the South. Senator John C. Calhoun was a sick man, so sick that he had missed four months of debate over whether California should enter the Union as a free state. On March 4, 1850, wrapped in flannels, he tottered onto the Senate floor. Explaining that he was too ill to deliver a speech that he had prepared, Calhoun asked Senator James M. Mason of Virginia to deliver it for him. I have, Senators, believed from the first that the agitation of the subject of slavery would, if not prevented by some timely and effective measure, end in disunion. .. . The agitation has been permitted to proceed , .. until it has reached a period when it can no longer be disguised or denied that the Union is in danger. You have thus had forced upon you the greatest and the gravest question that can ever come under your consideration: How can the Union be preserved? JOHN C. CALHOUN, quoted in The Compromise of 1850. edited by Edwin C Rozwenc John C. Calhoun Differences Between North and South Senator Calhoun argued that although the North anil the South had In-en politically equal when the Constitution was adopted, the "perfect equilibrium" between the two sections no longer existed. \l any rate, the two sections certainly had developed different ways of life by the 1850s. INDUSTRY AND IMMIGRATION IN THE NORTH The North was industrializing rapidly as factories turned out ever-increasing amounts of products, from textiles and sewing machines to farm equipment and guns. Railroad tracks— with more than 20,000 miles ol track laid during the 1850s—were reaching across the section. They carried wheat, iron ore, and other raw materials eastward and manufactured goods and settlers westward. Small towns like Chicago matured into cities almost overnight, due to the sheer volume ol goods and people arriving by railroad. Telegraph wires being strung along the railroad tracks tied the North together, providing a network of instant communication. Immigrants fleeing from famine and poverty in Europe—mostly from Ireland and Germany—entered the industrial workplace in growing numbers. Many immigrants became factory workers, while others moved westward to try their luck [ k Summarizing tthree factors Hat helped to atue the North as farmers and miners. In any case, they soon became voters—with a strong opp<"- sition to slavery. In their eyes, slaves represented unfair labor competition liecanse they could jx'ribrni work that otherwise would In* done by frrx* workers. For example, in Boston in 1850. nearly half of all Irish immigrants worked in unskilled jobs. These people often competed with African Americans for jobs. They feared the expansion of slavery for two reasons. First, it might bring slave labor into direct competition with free labor, or people who yy'ork for wages. Second, it threatened to reduce the status of white workers who could not successfully compete with slaves. Opposition to the expansion of slavery , however, did not mean that immigrant workers were sympathetic with the plight of black slaves. In 1850 in New York City, Irish immigrants marched to the polls shouting that African Americans should "go back to Africa, where they belong." AGRICULTURE AND SLAVERY IN THE SOUTH Unlike the North, the South remained a predominantly rural society , consisting mostly of plantations and small farms. The Southern economy relied on agriculture, especially on cotton produc- tion—which had become the staple crop of the South since Eli Whitney s invention of the cotton gin in 1793. In fact, though one-third of the nation's population lived in the South in 1850, the South produced only 10 percent of the nation's manufactured goods. At the same time that Northern railroad lines were expanding. Southerners were slower to take advantage of technological advances in transportation. mostly using rivers to transport gorxls. In addition, the population of the South greyv much more slowly than that of die North. Few immigrants settled in the South, liecause African Americans, whether enslav ed or free, filled most of die av ailable jobs for artisans, mechanics, and lalHirers. The conflict over slavery, however, rattled Southern society. Those few immigrants who did settle in the South presented significant opposition to slavery. For example, German Americans in Texas and Baltimore openly opposed slavery. German newspapers in these areas published editorials in favor of universal voting rights and freedom for African Americans. Furthermore, while blacks dreamed of an end to slavery, many whites feared that any restriction of slavery would lead to a social and economic revolution. Calhoun believed that such a revolution would condemn blacks as well as whites "to the greatest calamity, and the [South] to poverty, desolation, and wretchedness." African Americans in Southern Populations. IN TOTAL POPULATION Source US Census I860 In which Southern states were African Americans in the majority? How might a large population of freed slaves affect politics in the South? Slavery in the Territories On August 8, 1846. David Wilmot, a Democratic congressman from Pennsylvania, heightened tensions between the two sections. Wilmot added an amendment to a military appropriations bill that proposed that "neither slavery nor involuntary servitude shall ever exist" in any territory the United States might acquire as a result of the war with Mexico. In practical terms, the Wilmot Proviso meant that California, as well as the territories of Utah and New Mexico, would be closed to slavery forever. THE WILMOT PROVISO Northerners gradually came to support the Wilmot Proviso. Although most Northerners were not alxrlitionists, they were already angry over the refusal of Southern congressmen to vote for internal improvements, such as building canals and roads. They also feared that adding slave territory The Union in Peril 283 THE LURE OF SILVER AND GOLD The prospect of striking it rich was one powerful attraction of the West. The gold fever that had flared in California in 1849 never really died out. and the discovery of gold in Colorado in 1858 drew tens of thousands of miners to the region. The glitter of gold must have blinded prospective miners to other concerns because most mining camps and tinv frontier towns had filthy, ramshackle living quarters. Hows of tents and shacks with dirt "streets" and wooden sidewalks had replaced unspoiled streams and picturesque landscapes. Fortune seekers of every description—including Irish. German. Swedish. Polish, Chinese, and African-American men—crowded die camps and boomtowns. A few hardy, business-minded women tried their luck, too, working as laundresses, freight haulers, or even miners. Cities such as Virginia City. Nevada, and Helena, I Montana, originated as mining camps on Native American land. Many settlers traveled west in prairie schooners, sturdy descendants of the Conestoga wagon. The white canvas tops made the wagons look like ships sailing across the open plains. FARMING THE GREAT PLAINS Another powerful attraction of the West was the land itself. In L862. Congress passed the Homestead Act, offering 160 acres of land free to anyone who would live on and cultivate it for five years. From 1862 to 1900. between 400.000 and 600.0(H) families took advantage of the government's offer. They came from die South anti from New England, eager to exchange their worn-out fields for more fertile land farther west. Some German and Scandinavian farmers unable to earn a living in their native lands were lured to America by public relations campaigns sponsored by the railroad companies. Several thousand setders were exodus ters—African Americans who moved from the post- Reconstructiou South to Kansas in a great exodus. Free land alone was not enough to lure fanners onto the Great Plains, however. They also needed a reliable way to get there and a wav to ship their crops to growing urban markets. In 1862, Congress passed the Pacific Railroad Act, which granted huge government loans and land to the Union Pacific and Central Pacific Railroads. The Central Pacific began laying track at Sacramento in 1863. The Union Pacific began near Omaha in 1865. Both companies hired thousands of immigrants, many Chinese among them, to build bridges, dig tunnels, and lay- track. Before the railroads came west, hardy travelers rode west on horseback or in wagon trains that were cold in winter, hot in summer, and vulnerable to attack by Nativ e Americans and outlaws. Until completion of a transcontinental route in 1S69, long-distance travel was dangerous, uncomfortable, and slow. After 1869, however, people could ride from coast to coast in ten days or less. Still, the railroads were not for everyone. A "bargain fare from Omaha to Sacramento cost about $40—more than a mouth's pay for the average person. Yet the trains were relativ ely luxurious. All of them had indoor toilets, and most of the ears were heated. For $75. travelers could ride on padded seats. For another $4 per night, they could reserve a place in a Pullman Palace Car, complete with beds. Instead of heading west at the rate of 15 miles a day in a covered wagon, aspiring settlers could speed along at 50 miles an hour. The Government Restricts Native Americans While allowing more settlers to move westward, the railroads also influenced the governments policy toward the Native Americans who lived on the plains. In 1834, the federal government had passed an act that designated the entire (heat Plains as one enormous reservation, or land set aside for Native American tribes. In response to the increasing stream of settlers in the 1850s. however, the government changed its policy. In order to open up more land for white settlers, it began signing treaties that created definite boundaries for each tribe. s nun* nro Wl B. Antlym Causes f whites sudderift Great PIm' I 382 Chapter 13 Settling on the Great Plains When Esther Clark Hill was a girl on the Kansas prairie, her father often left the family to go on hunting or trading expeditions. His trips left Esther's mother, Aliena Clark, alone on the farm with her children, crops, and sheep. One spring, when the sheep got stuck on the wrong side of the river, Esther watched her mother drive the family wagon back and forth through the rising water until all the sheep were safe. Esther also remembered her mother holding on to the reins of a runaway mule team, "her black hair tumbling out of its pins and over her shoulders, her face set and white, while one small girl clung with chattering teeth to the sides of the rocking wagon." The men in the settlement spoke admiringly about "Leny's nerve," but Esther thought that daily life itself presented a greater challenge than either of those crises. Dunn's painting Wore*! Woman, had to and self-reliant. ThffU had to have a cleanmol of the future for their I families on the prairie I I think, as much courage as it took to hang onto the reins that day, it took more to live twenty-four hours at a time, month in and out, on the lonely and lovely prairie, without giving up to the loneliness. ESTHER CLARK HILL, quoted in Pioneer Women As the railroads penetrated the frontier and the days of the free-ranging cowboy ended, hundreds of thousands of families migrated west, lured by vast tracts of cheap, fertile land. In their effort to establish a new life, they endured extreme hardships and loneliness. Settlers Flock Westward to Farm If took 263 years—from the first settlement at Jamestown until 1670—to turn 400 million acres of forests and prairies into nourishing farms. Changing the second 400 million acres took only 30 years, from 1670 to 1000. Federal land policy and the completion of the transcontinental railroads made this rapid settlement possible. RAILROADS OPEN THE WEST From 1850 to 1871. the federal government made huge land grants to the railroads—170 million aeres. worth half a hillion dollars—for laying track in the West. In one grant, both the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific received 10 square miles of public land for every mile of track laid in a state and 20 square miles of land for every mile ol track laid in a territory'. In 1867, the two companies began a race to lay track. The Central Pacific moved eastward from Sacramento and the Union Pacific moved westward from Omaha. They hired Civil War veterans, Irish and Chinese immigrants, African Americans, and Mexican Americans to do the grueling labor. During the winter 396 ClIAPTKK 13 Age of the Railroa LEARN ABOUT the growth and consolidation of the railroads TO UNDERSTAND their influence on the expansion of industry. In October 1884, economist Richard Ely visited the town of Pullman, Illinois, just south of Chicago, to write about it for Harper's magazine. At first, Ely was impressed with the atmosphere of order, planning, and well-being in the town George M. Pullman had designed for the employees of his railroad-car factory. After talking at length with a dissatisfied company officer, Walter E. Burrows, Ely concluded that the town of Pullman had a fatal flaw: it restricted its residents. Pullman employees were compelled to obey rules in which they had no say. Ely concluded that "the idea of Pullman is un-American." It is benevolent, well-wishing feudalism [a repressive medieval social system], which desires the happiness of the people, but in such a way as shall please the authorities.... If free American institutions are to be preserved, we want no race reared as underlings.... [The town should include] cooperative features [that would] awaken in the residents an interest and pride in Pullman. transcontinental raite George M. Pullman Credit Mobilier Munn v. Illinois Interstate Commerce J THINK thi The town of A. Pullman was Issues carefully laid the ( out and stnof* I negai controlled RICHARD T, ELY. 'Pullman: A Social Study As the railroads grew, their influence extended to every facet of American life, including, as in the town of Pullman, the personal lives of its citizens. They determined the time standard of the country and influenced the growth of towns and communities. The unchecked power of railroad companies led to widespread abuses, however, which spurred citizens to demand and win federal regulation of the industry. Railroads Span Time and Space Chinese laborers did dangerous work blasting through the Sierra Nevada to lay track for the Central Pacific Railroad. Railroads had captured the imagination of Americans ever since die 1830s, when Horatio Allen imported the first steam locomotive from Britain. The iron horse could cross vast distances and terrains that exhausted horses and excluded riverboats. Rails made local transit reliable and westward expansion possible for business as well as for people. Realizing how important railroads were to the settlement of the West and the development ol die country, the government made huge land grants and loans to the railroad companies. A NATIONAL NETWORK Bv 1856. the railroads extended west to the Mississippi Riser, and three years later, they crossed the Missouri. A decade later, crowds across the United States cheered as the Central Pacific and Union Pacific Railroads met at Promontory', Utah, on May 10, 1869. A golden spike marked the Unking of the nation by the first transcontinental railroad. Other transcontinental lines followed, and regional lines multiplied as well. At the start of the Civil War, the nation had about 30,000 miles of track. Bv 1890. that figure was nearly seven times higher. ROMANCE AND REALITY The railroads lent romance to long-distance travel by bringing the dreams of unsettled land, adventure, and a fresh start within die 416 Chapter 14 .*a tMKN wuon k. Analyzing | am IVfiar were TfcpaMrw and wpist aspects ofrailroad txpamm? grasp of many Americans. Ibis romance was made possible, however, only at I lie expense of the railroad workers, whose lives were stark and harsh. The Central Pacific Railroad employed thousands of Chinese immigrants, and the Union Pacific hired Irish immigrants mid desperate, out-of- work Civil War veterans to lay track across treacherous terrain. Accidents and pneumonia and other diseases impaired and killed thousands of men each year. In 1888. when the first railroad statistics were published, the casualties totaled more than 2.000 employees killed and 20,000 injured. All railroad workers—whether surveyors, track layers, or engineers, firemen, and brakemen—faced difficult conditions and numerous hazards for very little pay. As an employee of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad complained, "We eat our haal bread and tainted meat two tlays old on sooty ears up the road, and when w'e come home, find our children gnawing on bones and our wives complaining that they cannot even buy hominy and molasses for food." Although the railroads paid all their employees poorly, Asians mid African Americans usually earned less than whites, The average pay for whites working a ten-hour day was $40 to $60 a month pins free meals. Chinese immigrants hired by the Central Pacific performed similar tasks from dawn to dusk for about $35 a month—and diey had to supply their own food. The immigrants' working conditions were particularly miserable as well. In 1866, for example, the railroad hired them to dig a tunnel through a granite mountain. For five months of that year, the Chinese lived mid worked in camps surrounded by 40 feet of snow. 1 hundreds of the men were buried in avalanches or later found frozen, still clutching their shovels or picks. As the railroads expanded, they left a lasting mark on American culture as well as on its economy. People hung pictures of famous trains on their walls and adopted railroad phrases such as "working up a full head of steam'and "getting sidetracked," The songs that railroad laborers sang as they worked, such as "I've Been Working on the Railroad" and "The Wabash Cannonball," soon gained widespread popularity. Tall tales, anecdotes, and romantic lore about hoboes who rode the rails spread faster than the lines themselves. Even the railroad companies got into the game. The Erie Railroad printed so many anecdotes, verses, and jokes on its timetables that passengers began calling it the "Erie Joke Book," RAILROAD TIME In spile of these difficult working conditions, the railroad laborers helped to transform the country from a collection of individual localities into a united nation. Though linked in space, each community still operated on its owm tune, with noon when the sun was overhead. The time in Boston, for example, was almost 12 minutes later than the time in New York. Illinois had 27 different local times and Wisconsin, 38. Travelers titling from Maine to California had to reset their watches at least 20 times. To remedy this problem, in 1870, Professor C. F. Dowd proposed that the earths surface be divided into 24 time zones, one for each hour ol the day. The zones would begin at Greenwich, England, which is at 0° longitude, lie suggested that the United States institute four zones: Eastern, Central, Mountain, and Pacific. The railroad companies endorsed Dowds plan enthusiastically, and many towns followed suit. Finally, on November 18. 1883, railroad crews and towns across the country synchronized their watches. In 1884. an international conference set worldwide Railroad workers in Armstrong, Kansas, show off their "iron horses" like prize thoroughbreds in a stable. The New Immigrants LEARN ABOUT why people emigrate and the challenges they face TO UNDERSTAND the impact of immigration on the United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. In 1871, 14-year-old Fong See came from China to "Gold Mountain"—the United States—to search for his father and brothers, who had immigrated here. Fong See found his father in Sacramento, and when his father returned to China, Fong See stayed, worked at menial jobs, and saved enough money to buy a business. Despite widespread restrictions against the Chinese, he became a very successful and influential importer and was able to marry, move to Los Angeles, and sponsor many other Chinese who wanted to enter the United States. Fong See had achieved the American dream. However, as his great- granddaughter Lisa See recalls, he was not satisfied. • Ellis Island • Angel Island • culture shock " melting pot • Chinese Exclusiw 1 • Gentlemen's Agit-- He had been trying to achieve success ever since he had first set foot on the Gold Mountain. His dream was very "American." He wanted to make money, have influence, be respected, have a wife and children who loved him. In 1919, when he traveled to China, he could look at his life and say he had achieved his dream. But once in China he suddenly saw his life in a different context. In America, was he really rich? Could he live where he wanted? . .. Did Americans care what he thought? ... The answers played in his head—no no no. USA SEE. On Gold Moon rain Fong Sef ISflJ from leftJ net family, 130! I Despite Fong See's success in America and his standing as a leader in the Chinese-American community, he could not, upon his death in 1957, be buried next to his Caucasian wife because California cemeteries were still segregated. C' IVIDEOl Fong See's American Dream Through the "Golden Door" Millions of immigrants like Fong See entered the United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries because they were lured by the promise of a better life. Some of these immigrants sought to escape difficult conditions—such ns poverty, famine, land shortages, or religious or political persecution—in their native countries. Others, known as "birds of passage," intended to immigrate temporarily in order to make money and then return to their homelands. IMMIGRANTS FROM EUROPE Between 1870 and 1920, approximately 20 million Europeans arrived in the United States, Before 1890, most immigrants came from countries in western and northern Europe, including Great Britain, Ireland, and Germany. Beginning in the 1890s, however, increasing numbers came from southern and eastern Europe, especially Italy, Austria-Hungary, and Russia. In 1905 alone, about a million people arrived from these countries through the "golden door" to the land of opportunity. Many of these new immigrants left their homelands to escape religious persecution. Whole \illages of Jews—businesspeople, intellectuals, workers, and fanners —were driven out of Russia by pogroms. These were organized anti-Semitic 438 Chapter 15 here They Came From and Where They Settled, 1900 New York campaigns that led to the massacre of Jews during the early 1880s and earh HXH )s. Other Europeans left because of rising population. Between 18(X) and 1900, the population in Europe more* than doubled to 432 million This population explosion resulted in a lack of land available for farming. Farmers as well as laborers often found themselves competing for too few industrial jobs. Some immigrated to the United Stales, where jobs were supposedly plentiful. Finally, there was a spirit of reform and revolt in Europe. especially after the political disturbances in France. Germany, Italy, and elsewhere in die lute 1840s. Many young European men and women who were influenced by the spirit of these movements sought to start independent lives in the United States. IMMIGRANTS FROM CHINA AND JAPAN While waves of Europeans arrived on the shores of the East Coast, Chinese immigrants came to die West Coast in smaller mmihers. Between 1851 and 1883, about 200,000 Chinese arrived. Many came to seek their fortunes after the discoverv of gold in 1848 sparked the California gold rush. The Chinese helped build the nation's first transcontinental railroad as well as other railroads in the West. When the railroads were Where did the greatest number of Italian immigrants serf/e? Which two states combined had about the same number of Irish immigrants as Illinois? mnwior l SBtunjriang pfWfJt'fiew Mrmacome completed, diey turned to farming, mining, and domestic service. Chinese immigration was sharply limited by a congressional ac t in 1882. In 1884, the Japanese government allowed Hawaiian planters to recruit Japanese workers, and a Japanese emigration boom began. When the United States annexed Hawaii in 1898, Japanese immigration to the West Coast increased. As word of comparatively high American wages spread in Japan, the number of Japanese who entered the United States each year reached about 10.000. By 1920. more than 200.000 Japanese lived on the West Coast. IMMIGRANTS FROM THE WEST INDIES AND MEXICO Between 1880 and 1920, about 260.1100 immigrants arrived in the eastern and southeastern United States from the* W est Indies. They came from Jamaica. Cuba, Puerto Rico, and I other islands. Many West Indians left their homelands because jobs were scares*. The Mexican population in the United States also increased. Unlike the Europeans. Asians, and West Indians, however, some Mexicans became U.S. residents without even leaving home. As a result of the annexation of Texas in 1845 and the treaty with Mexico in 1848, the United States acquired vast Immigrants and Urbanization 439 territories from Mexico. Many of the residents of these territories chose to become American citizens. Other Mexicans immigrated to the United States to find work or to flee political turmoil. As a result of the 1902 National Reclamation Act (also known ;ls tln> Newlands Act), which encouraged the irrigation of arid land, new farmland was created in many Western states, including Texas, Arizona, and California. This farmland drew Mexican farm workers northward to seek jobs. After 1910, political and social upheavals in Mexico prompted even more immigration. Nearly a million people—7 percent of the population ol Mexico at the time—came to the United States over die next 20 years. Life in the New Land No matter what part of the globe immigrants came from, they faced many adjustments. I lasing left behind all that was familiar, they were plunged into an alien—anti often unfriendly—culture. A DIFFICULT JOURNEY By the 1870s, almost all immigrants traveled by steamship. The trip across the Atlantic Ocean from Europe took approximately one week, while the Pacific crossing from Asia took nearly three weeks. For many immigrants, the long sea journey was stormy, uncomfortable, and frightening. Many immigrants traveled in steerage, or in die cargo holds below a ship's waterline. Raniv allowed on deck, immigrants spent most of the trip crowded together in the gloom, unable to exercise or catch a breath of fn*sh air. They often had to sleep in bee-infested bunks and share toilet facilities with many other passengers. Under these conditions, diseases spread quickly, and some immigrants died before they reached their destination. For those who survived, like Rosa Cuvalleri from Italy, the first glimpse of America could be breathtaking. think rxitm rat B. Analyzing Motives Whttx you think we/tfy most important reasons tor emigration? Many foreign governments issued passports to their citizens who were planning to emigrate. In this way they could control the number of trained professionals and young men of military age who left the country. America!. . . We were so near it seemed too much to believe. Everyone stood silent—like in prayer.... Then we were entering the harbor. The land came so near we could almost reach out and touch it.... Everyone was holding their breath. Me too. ... Some boats had bands playing on their decks and all of them were tooting their horns to us and leaving white trails in the water behind them. ROSA CAVALIERI, quoted in Rosa: The Life of an Italian Immigrant ELLIS ISLAND After initial moments of excitement, die immigrants faced loneliness. homesickness, mid die anxiety of not knowing whether they would be admitted to the United States. They had to pass inspection at immigration stations. such as the one at Casde Garden in New York, which was later moved to F.llis Island iu New York Harlxir. About 20 percent of the immigrants who arrived at Ellis Island were detained for a day or more before being inspected. Only about 2 percent of those who reached Ellis Island had to return home, however. The processing of immigrants on Ellis Island was an ordeal diat might take five hours or more. First, they had to pass a physical examination by a doctor. If they were found to have a serious health problem or a contagious disease, such as tuberculosis, they were promptly sent home. Those who passed the medical exam then reported to a government inspector. The inspector checked documents and questioned immigrants to determine whether they met the legal requirements to enter the United States. The requirements Included passing a literati test in their native language, proving that they' were able to work, and showing that they had at least $25. One think through C. fden Problem• difficuh immigrants gaining adr, to the Hv After a long voyage, many immigrants were subjected to tests like the one shown below. To prove their mental competence, they had to identify the four faces looking left in 14 seconds. Can you do it? % a Wia! teem drosion INWsd Sato' sudi inspector, Edward Ferro, an Italian immigrant liimself, gave this glimpse of the process. The language was a problem of course, but it was overcome by the use of interpreters. We had interpreters on the island who spoke practically every language. It would happen sometimes that these interpreters—some of them— were really softhearted people and hated to see people being deported and they would, at times, help the aliens by interpreting in such a manner as to benefit the alien and not the government. EDWARD FERRO, quoted in I Was Oreammg to Come to America From 1892 to 1943, Ellis Island was the chief immigration station in the United States. More than 16 million immigrants passed through its noisy, hustling facilities. During the peak immigration years from 1905 to 1907, as many as 11,000 immigrants a day hurried down the long staircase leading to the fern' that would take them to New York City and their new lives. ANGEL ISLAND While European immigrants arriving on the East Coast passed through Fllis Island, Asians—primarily Chinese— arriving on the West Coast gained admission at Angel Island in San Francisco Bay. Between 1910 and 1940, about 50,000 Chinese immigrants entered the United States through Angel Island. In contrast to the procedure at KUis Island, processing at Angel Island included harsh questioning and a long detention while government officials decided whether to admit or reject an immigrant. Angel Island consisted of filthy, ramshackle buildings in which Chinese immigrants were confined like prisoners. To protest these terrible conditions, some immigrants rioted in 1919. Others expressed their feelings by composing poems, which they wrote on the walls. Some of these poems express the diffic ulties of the journey, anger at being detained, and disappointment with their new home. One immigrant summarized it this way: "Everyone says travelling to North America is / a pleasure. / I suffered misery on the ship and sadness in / the wooden building. / After several interrogations, still 1 am not / done." An Angel Island 'wall poem" provides an intimate look at what Chinese immigrants experienced there. Immigrants and Urbanization 441 "T/iere she lies, the great Melting Pot." EXPERIENCING CULTURE SHOCK Immigrants also had to deal with culture shock—confusion and anxiety resulting from immersion in a culture whose ways of thinking and acting they didn't understand. Some con men and thieves took advantage of the newcomers' bewilderment and stole their money and possessions. Most immigrants faced the ongoing nightmare of finding a place to live, getting a job, and dealing with the problems of daily life while trying to understand an alien language and customs. Many immigrants reacted to culture shock bv seeking out people who shared their cultural values, practiced their religion, and spoke their native language. Ethnic communities sprang up in areas that had large concentrations of immigrants. Residents of San Francisco's Chinatown survey their adopted country from a doorway in Rag Alley. COOPERATION FOR SURVIVAL The ethnic communities were life rafts for immigrants, who often clung to them fiereeh. People pooled their moneyr to build a neighlNirhood church or synagogue. They formed social clubs where young and old could meet to share experiences, offer mutual support, anti enjoy one another's company. Groups of immigrants set up aid societies that furnished medical treatment for members and helped with medical costs. Thev founded orphanages and old people's homes and established cemeteries. They even published newspapers in their own languages. Committed to their own cultures hut also trying hard to grow into their new identities, many immigrants came to think of themselves as "hyphenated'* Americans. As hard as they tried to fit in. these new Polish- and Italian- and (Chinese-Americans felt increasing friction as they nibbed shoulders with people horn and raised in the United States. Native-born people often disliked the immigrants' unfamiliar customs and languages and viewed them as a threat to the American way of life. Immigration Restrictions At the turn of the century, many native-born Americans thought of their country as a melting pot, a mixture of people of different cultures and races who blended together by abandoning their native languages and customs. Many new immigrants, however, refused to give up their cultural identities in order to merge into American society. As growing numbers of immigrants entered the country, strong anti-immigrant feelings emerged, and the government reacted by passing legislation that restricted immigration. THE RISE OF NATIVISM One response to the growing numbers of immigrants in the United States was nativism, or overt favoritism toward native-born Americans. Nativist sentiments gave rise to anti-immigrant groups and led to a demand lor immigration restrictions. Others did not mind immigrants who came from the "right" countries—identified by one observer as "British, German, arid Scandinavian stock, historically free, energetic, progressive," However, many disliked immigrants from the "wrong" countries—"Slav. Latin, and Asiatic races, historically down-trodden ... and stagnant." Nativism gained support as suspicion and fear of foreigners grew. For example, many native-born Americans, the majority of whom were Protestants, feared the growing influence of Homan Catholics and Jews who were emigrating from Europe in increasing numbers. Nativist groups like the American Protective Association, founded in 1887, launched vicious anti-Catholic attacks, and many colleges, businesses, and social clubs refused to admit Jews. Some Americans believed that Anglo-Saxons—the Germanic ancestors of the Knglisli—were superior to other ethnic groups, an idea widespread in the 19th century. Acting on that belief, the Immigration Restriction mi* Donna D. C/arrfymj How did imrngrttam with the they keti! E. Analyzing Uines Why do t\mk Asians waved such Sistment m California? Ix*;igne, a nativist group founded in Boston in 1894, campaigned to keep out "undesirable classes" From southern and eastern Europe. At the leagues urging. Congress passed a bill in 1896 that required a literacy test for these new immigrants. Although President Cleveland vetoed the bill, it was a powerful statement of public sentiment. ANTI-ASIAN SENTIMENT On the West Coast, prejudice against Asians was first directed at the Chinese. This sentiment was particularly strong because the Chinese, in addition to having a "strange" language and unfamiliar customs, looked markedly different from most native-born Americans. In the 1800s and early 1900s, most Chinese men wore their hair in a long braid, called a cjueue, and dressed in quilted cotton jackets, broad cotton pants, and wide-brimmed hats. The depression of 1873 intensified anti-Chinese sentiment in California. Jobs were scarce, and native-born workers feared that work would go to Chinese immigrants, who would accept lower wages. Violent anti-Chinese riots erupted, and labor groups exerted political pressure on the government to restrict Asian immigration. Terence V. Powderlv, the head of the Knights of Labor, spoke forcefully for general restrictions on the Chinese. The founder of the Workingmen's Party, Denis Kearney, headed the anti-Chinese movement in California. He made hundreds of speeches throughout the state, each ending with the message, "The Chinese* must go!" In 1882. Congress slammed the door on Chinese immigration for ten years by passing the Chinese Exclusion Act. This act banned entrv to all Chinese except students, teachers, merchants, tourists, and government officials, In 1892. Congress extended the law for another ten years. In 1902, Chinese immigration was prohibited indefinitely; the law was not repealed until 1943. THE GENTLEMEN'S AGREEMENT The same fears that led to anti- Chinese agitation spread to include the Japanese and other Asian people in the early 19OOs. In 1906, the local board of education in ban Francisco segregated all Chinese, Japanese, and Korean children anil put them to special Asian schools. Anti-American riots erupted in Japan in response to this segregation, prompting President Theodore Roosevelt to intervene. He persuaded San Francisco authorities to withdraw the segregation order. In exchange, under the Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907-1908, Japan's government agreed to limit immigration to the United States. Although doorways for immigrants had been all but closed to .Asians on the West Coast, cities in the Fast and the Midwest teemed with European immi- grants—and with urban opportunities and challenges. sf hr** As the United States turned its back on Chinese immigrants at the end of the 19th century, a nationalistic group in China—the Boxers—was attempting to drive all foreigners from its country. In 1900, Russia occupied Manchuria, China's northern province, in order to intervene in the Boxer Rebellion. Four years later, when Russia had not retreated, the Japanese invaded the region, sparking the Russo- Japanese War. Japan won striking victories, but as its resources dwindled, it turned to President Theodore Roosevelt to mediate the conflict Roosevelt agreed, reasoning that it was in America's interest to contain both Russia and Japan. Japan's show of power increased distrust of the island nation and increased the level of anti-Japanese feeling in the United States. Ellis Island & NAMES 2. SUMMARIZING Create a diagram such as the one below. List two or more causes of each 3. FORMING OPINIONS Which group of immigrants faced the greatest challenges settling in the United States? Why? • the difficulties of travel to the United States • where the immigrants settled • the opportunities open to each immigrant group 4. SYNTHESIZING What arguments can you make against nativism and anti-immigrant feeling? • the personal qualities of immigrants • the reasons for anti-immigrant feeling • the contributions of immigrants to the United States Immigrants and Urbanization 443 What Is the American Dream? What is tin* American dream? A 17th-centurv colonist's setting sail in search of religions freedom? An 18th-century revolutionary's fighting for political independence? A 19th- ccntury African-American freedmans farming his own plot of land in Kansas? A 20th-century couples buying their first home or car? It is all of these—and more. The American dream has as many faces as there are Americans. And it's still being dreamed. European and Asian Immigrants Immigrants, hoping to escape religious persecution or to explore new economic opportunities, left their homelands by the thousands in pursuit of a chance for a better life. African Americans After the Civil War, many emancipated African Americans in the South became share-croppers or tenant farmers Others later moved north and west, looking for work and for opportunities for their children. 1890 1620 As immigrants flooded onto both coasts of the United States and white settlers pushed westward, many competing dreams collided. A group of people who wanted the freedom to practice their religion risked a treacherous voyage across the Atlantic to build a colony in an unknown land. 444 Chapter 15 Native Americans The Native Americans had their dream—their traditional life lived on the Western plains. Until the coming of the white settlers, they thrived on the land, free to move about or to cultivate its bounty. As America moves toward the millennium, minorities and other Americans—like this Latina owner of a tortilla factory in Texas—continue to overcome obstacles and hardships to realize their dreams. In the words of President Bill Clinton, "The American Dream that we were all raised on is a simple but powerful one— if you work hard and play by the rules, you should be given a chance to go as far as your God-given abilities will take you." IVriiKACT WITH HISTORY I ANALYZING ISSUES Think about the competing drBams presented in 1890—Changing Frontiers. What factors might determine whether an individual's American dream is realized? SEE SKH.LBUIl.DEB HANDBOOK. PAGE 1046 2. LIVING THE DREAM What is your American dream for the 21 st century? How do you plan to fulfill it? What conflicts or obstacles might you have to overcome? Write down your thoughts and save them in a folder for your American history portfolio. Revisit and revise your dream periodically. Immigrants and Urbanization 445 1950 After World War II, many people believed that their troubles were behind them. The American dream blossomed in the form of a new home, a big car, and a nuclear family. 1990 G The Problems of Urbanization • urbanization ■ row house • dumbbell tenement • Social Gospel move • settlement house • Jane Addams LEARN ABOUT the rapid growth of American cities in the late 1800s and early 1900s TO UNDERSTAND the promise and problems of urbanization. In 1870, at age 21, Jacob Riis left his native Denmark and arrived penniless in the United States. Like many other immigrants, he experienced hunger, homelessness, and life in the slums. Riis overcame the challenges of living in a new country, however, and eventually became a journalist and a tireless reformer. He used his talents to expose the conditions in which he had grown up—the overcrowded, airless, filthy tenements that still housed New York City's poor. t' V Be a little careful, please. The hall is dark and you might stumble over the children pitching pennies back there. Not that it would hurt them; kicks and cuffs are their daily diet. They have little else. ... Close? [Stuffy?] Yes! What would you have? All the fresh air that enters these stairs is from the hall-door that is forever slamming. ... Here is a door. Listen! That short hacking cough, that tiny helpless wail— what do they mean? ... The child is dying with measles. With half a chance it might have lived; but it had none. That dark bedroom killed it. JACOB RIIS, HoW the Other Hall Lives Making a living in the late 19th and early 20th centuries was not easy. Natural and economic disasters had hit farmers hard, both in Europe and in the United States, and the promise of industrial jobs drew millions of people to American cities. The urban population exploded, jumping from 10 million to 54 million between 1870 and 1920. This rapid urban growth not only revitalized the cities but also created serious problems. The lure that drew people to the cities was largely the same one that had attracted settlers to the West and immigrants to America—opportunity. In these hustling, industrialized centers, people saw a chance to work, escape poverty, and carve out a lx-tter life for themselves and their children. The technological boom in the 19th century not only revolutionized age-old occupations such as fanning hut also contributed to the growing industrial strength of the United States. New mills, factories, mines, and transportation systems needed millions of workers who lived close to the workplaces, most ol which were located in the northeastern part of the United States. While many settlers pushed westward to slart new lives on the frontier, thousands of other people were drawn to the Northeast and Midwest. The result was rapid urhani/Tition, or growth of cities, in those regions. IMMIGRANTS SETTLE IN CITIES Most of the immigrants who streamed into the United States in the late 19th century became city dwellers liecause cities were the cheapest and most convenient places to live. Most Irish immigrants, (or example, initially settler! in Boston, New York City, and Philadelphia not far from the ports where they landed. Cities also offered unskilled laborers steady jobs in IHttMt THROUGH B. Contr How t, Bxperii moving t simi differ African-An farm u and otfu wc 446 Chapter 15 I hotost | A. Analyzing (Why did i tend to 0 together fcoties7 j, Contrasting ] Am ms the ice of f to dies mitrand ent tor lean snorters i farm writers7 mills and factories and provided the social support of other immigrant families. By 1890, there vv'ere twee as many Irish residents in New York City as in Dublin, Ireland, and the worlds largest Polish population was not in Warsaw, Poland, but in Chicago. By 1910. immigrant families made up more than half the total population of IS major American cities. Immigrants often clustered in ethnic neighborhoods with others from the same country—or even from the same province or village. Living among people who shared their background enabled the newcomers to speak their own language and practice their customs and religion while learning about their new home with the aid of those who Inal come before. The cities became vibrant, colorful collages of various ethnic groups—"an extraordinary crazy quilt," as Jacob Hiis called the New York of 1890. Unfortunately, many native-born Americans felt threatened by these mushrooming ethnic- communities and expressed their fear by becoming hostile. Overcrowding soon became a problem as well, one that was intensified by the migration of new urban- ites from America's rural areas. Farming technology improved rapidly in the second half of the 19th century, which was good news for some farmers but bad news for others. Inventions such as the McCormick reaper and the steel-bladed plow made farming more efficient but meant that fewer laborers were needed to work the land. As use of the new equipment spread across the country, farms merged, and many rural people could not find jobs in agriculture. They left their land and agricultural way of life and made their way to cities to find whatever jobs they could. Many of the southern farmers who lost their jobs were African Americans. Other African Americans in the rural South also became aware of the opportunities in large cities. Between 1890 and 1910. about 200,000 African Americans moved north and west to cities such as Chicago and Detroit, as they tried to escape racial violence, economic hardship, and political oppression. Many found conditions in these cities only somewhat l>etter than those they left behind. Because of racial prejudice and their inadequate education, they were often forced to take low-paying factors jobs or to work as domestic servants. URBAN CULTURAL OPPORTUNITIES Although people moved to cities for economic reasons, cultural opportunities offered an additional attraction. In contrast to the relatively slow pace of life in both immigrants' native villages and American rural communities, life in the city was varied and exciting. Each citv had a personality all its own. In New York City, you had an opportunity to see the first moving pictures. In Chicago, you could join your neighbors on an outing to the Columbian Exposition or to Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show. In Ethnic Enclaves in New York City, 1910 Austrian German Irish Italian Russian Scandinavian Light tint indicates at least 20% ot population Darker tint indicates W% ol population or more Non-residential No group with more than 20% of population Boundary between Brooklyn and Queens PLACE What general pattern of settlement do you notice in this map of ethnic neighborhoods in New York City in 1910? Immigrants and Urbanization 447 THE SOCIAL GOSPEL MOVEMENT Sfx/iul welfare reformers targeted llirir efforts at relieving die poverty of immigrants and other city dwellers. An earlv reform program, the Social C.ospel movement, preached salvation through service to the poor. Social Gospel ministers such as Walter Hauschenlnisch of New York (atv and Washington Gladden of Columbus, Ohio, who called his teachings "Applied Christianity," inspired followers to erect churches in poor communities and persuaded some business leaders to treat workers more fairly. mwi F truly.TM y Him did m ' (Kurban y met the Mrges at We' THE SETTLEMENT-HOUSE MOVEMENT Inspired by the message of the Social Gospel movement, many 19th-century reformers responded to the call to help the urban poor. In the late 1800s, a few reformers established settlement houses, community centers in slum neighborhoods that provided assistance and friendship to local men, women, and children—especially immigrants. Many settlement workers lived at the bouses so they could learn firsthand about some of the problems caused bv urbanization and help create solutions. Run largely bv middle-class, college-educated women, settlement houses promoted education, culture, and smial services. They provided classes in such subjects as English. health, crafts, drama, music, and painting, and offered college extension courses. They sponsored reading circles in which volunteers read books aloud to help educate the illiterate. Settlement houses also sent visiting nurses into the homes of the sick and provided whatever aid was needed to secure "support for deserted women, insurance for bewildered widows, damages for injured operators, furniture from the clutches of the installment store." Early settlement houses in the United States, founded by Charles Stover and Stanton Coit, opened in New York Citv in 1886. Jane Addams and Ellen Cates Starr founded Chicago's Hull House in 1889, and Lillian D. Wald established New York's Henry Street Settlement House in 1893. In 1890. Janie Porter Barrett founded Locust Street Social Settlement in Hampton, Virginia the first settlement house for African Americans. By 1910, about 400 settlement houses were operating in cities across the country. The Social Gospel and settlement-house movements firmly established the need for social responsibility toward the urban poor and a means of addressing some of the ongoing problems of urbanization. A new type of political structure developed in <m attempt to deal with these urban issues. Rut it soon created problems of its own. nouse :d tenement Gospel ent house Addams 2. SUMMARIZING Re-create the spider map below on your paper. Write three urban problems on the vertical lines. Fill in details about attempts that were made to solve each problem. What effects did the migration from rural areas to the cities in the late 19th century have on urban society? • the reasons people moved to cities • the problems caused by rapid urban growth • the impact of urban growth on rural areas 1860-1935 Jane Addams was a community worker, a champion of organized labor, and a peace advocate. In all things, she believed that the best approach to problem solving was to "learn from life itself." During a trip overseas, she visited England's Toynbee Hall, the first settlement house. She viewed the problems of urban life firsthand—and resolved to do something about them. She co- founded Hull House in Chicago, where she began working to solve neighborhood problems. In time her concerns expanded. She became an antiwar activist, a spokesperson for racial justice, and an advocate for quality-of-life issues, from infant mortality to better care for the aged. In 1931 she was a co- winner of the Nobel Peace Prize. Until the end of her life, Addams insisted that she was just a "very simple person." But many who know what she accomplished consider her a source of continuing inspiration. 8. Analyzing i Why did fits support 'machines? precinct captains, ward bosses, ;ind the c ity Ihjsn worked together to elect their candidate and guarantee the success of the machine. THE ROLE OF THE POLITICAL BOSS The city boss controlled thousands of municipal jobs, including those in the police, fire, and sanitation departments. Whether or not a boss officially served as mayor, he controlled business licenses ;md inspections and influenced the courts and other municipal agencies. Bosses like Roscoc Conkling in New York used their power to build parks, sewer systems, and waterworks and gave money to schools, hospitals, and orphanages. Bosses could also provide government support for new businesses, a service for which they were often paid extremely well. It was not only money that gave city bosses the drive- to deal with urban issues. Bv solving problems, bosses could reinforce voters' loyalty; win additional political support, and extend their influence. IMMIGRANTS AND THE POLITICAL MACHINE Immigrants received sympathetic understanding from the political machines and in turn became loyal supporters. Many political bosses were first-generation or second-generation immigrants who had been raised in poverty. Few were educated beyond grammar school. They entered politics early and worked their way up Irom the bottom. They could speak to immigrants in their own language and understood tlie challenges that newcomers faced. The bosses not only understood the immigrants' problems but were able to provide solutions. The machines helped immigrants become naturalized, find a place to live, and get a job—the new - comers' most pressing needs. In return, the immigrants provided what the political bosses needed most—votes. "Big Jim" Pendergast, an Irish-American saloonkeeper, worked his way up from precinct captain to Democratic city 1 hiss in Kansas City' by aiding Italian. African-American, and Irish voters in liis ward. By 1900. he controlled Missouri state politics as well, because he effectively gathered political support. I've been called a boss. All there is to it is having friends, doing things for Reople, and then later on they'll do things for you. .. . You can't coerce people into doing things for you—you can't make them vote for you. I never coerced anybody in my life. Wherever you see a man bulldozing anybody he don't last long. JAMES PENDERGAST, quoted in Vie Pendergast Machine "All there is to it is ... doing things for people, and then later on they'll do things for you." Municipal Graft and Scandal Although the well-oiled political machines provided city dwellers with vital services, many political bosses fell victim to greed and corruption as their power and influence grew. ELECTION FRAUD AND GRAFT Since the power of political machines and the loyalty of voters were not always enough to cany an election, some political machines turned to fraud. They padded the lists of eligible voters with the names of dogs, children, and people who had died. Then, under these names, they cast as many votes as were needed to win. In a Philadelphia election, for example, a precinct with 100 registered voters returned 252 votes. Once a political machine got its candidates into office, it could take advantage of numerous opportunities for graft. For example, alter hiring a person to work on a construction project for die city, a political machine could ask the worker to turn in a hill Uiat was higher than the actual cost of materials or labor. The worker then "kicked back" a portion of the earnings to die machine. Taking these- kickbacks, or illegal payments, for their services made many political machines—and individual politicians—very wealthy. Immigrants and Urbanization 453 RACIAL DISCRIMINATION Although white enrollment in public' high schools surged after 1SS0, African Americans lor tin* most part were excluded from public secondary education. In i890, fewer than I percent of black teenagers attended high school. Two out of three of these students went to private schools, which received no government financial support. By 1910. about 3 per- j cent of African Americans between the ages of 15 and 19 attended high school, but most of these students still attended private schools. '7 believe that Education for Immigrants the motion Unlike African Americans, immigrants were not locked out of schools. In fact, they were encouraged to go to school. Ten million European immigrants settled in the United States between 1860 and 1890. Many Jewish immigrants lied poverty and oppression in Eastern Europe to pursue economic and educational opportunities in America. Years after she became a citizen, Russian Jewish immigrant Mary Antin recalled the large numbers of non-English-speaking immigrant children. By the end of the school year, they could recite "patriotic verses in honor of George Washington anti Abraham Lincoln, with a foreign accent, indeed, but with plenty of enthusiasm." Most immigrants sent their children to Americas free public schools where they quickly became "Americanized." Others were dismayed bv the prospect. Some people resented the suppression of their native languages in favor of English. Catholics were especially concerned because many public school sy stems had mandatory Bible readings from the King James (Protestant) version and refused to observe holidays in honor of V ^ q Catholic saints. Instead of sending their children to such schools. Catholic communities often set up parochial schools to give their picture is destined to revolutionize our educational system." w ■ wnoirt lAna/|tfmg utiKs What children a Catholic education. Thousands of adult immigrants attended night school to learn English and to qualify for American citizenship. Employers, too. offered daytime programs to Americanize their workers. At his Model T plant in Highland Park. Michigan. Henry Ford established a "Sociologs Department." Il sent caseworkers into immigrants' homes because "men of many nations must lie taught American w avs, the English language, and the right way to live." Ford's idea about the "right way to live" was not universally accepted, however. Labor activists often protested that Fords educational goals were aimed at weakening the trade union movement bv teaching workers not to confront management. Expanding Higher Education Although the number of students attending high school at the turn of the century increased, only a minority of Americans could claim a high school diploma. At the same time, an even smaller minority—only 2.3 percent—of Americas young people attended colleges and universities. With few exceptions, college students came from middle-class or wealthy families. College prepared well-to-do young men for successful careers in business or the professions. Between 1880 and 1900. more than 150 new colleges were founded. Between 1SS0 and 1920, college enrollments more than quadrupled. In addition, colleges instituted major changes in curricula and admission policies. CHANGES IN UNIVERSITIES Through most of the 19th century, the traditional college curriculum concentrated on classical languages In 1922, Thomas Alva Edison wrote, "I believe that the motion picture is destined to revolutionize our educational system and that in a few years it will supplant... the use of textbooks." Today's high schools show that the brilliant inventor was mistaken. Recently, some people have predicted that computers will replace traditional classrooms and texts. According to a 1995 survey, three-quarters of the nation's schools plan on installing at least two computers per classroom. Computers allow video course- sharing, in which students from separate schools view the same classes. Students also use computers to access up-to-the- minute scientific data, such as weather information. For many teens, though, the lure of using the computer to access the Internet is more social thBn educational. One small study revealed that only one-quarter of teens' e-mail messages related to schoolwork—most of their messages were social. Life at the Tarn of the Century 469 I Segregation and Discrimination LEARN ABOUT racial tensions in the late 19th century TO UNDERSTAND the persistence of racial discrimination in America. • Ida B. Wells • literacy test • poll tax • grandfather clause • Jim Crow laws • segregation • Plessy v. Ferguson • debt peonage African Americans clutched at their dreams of equality in the years following Reconstruction. In both the South and the North, though, a system of segregation and discrimination prevented equal access to schools, jobs, and housing. Ida B. Wells refused to accept this system. Born into slavery shortly before emancipation. Wells was raised in a well-respected and politically active African-American family. The death of her parents in a yellow fever epidemic rushed her Into an adulthood that included caring for her younger siblings. In the early 1880s, she moved to Memphis to work as a teacher, and she later became an editor of a local paper. Racial justice had been a persistent theme in Wells's reporting, but the events of 1892 turned that idea into a crusade. On March 9, three of Wells's friends were lynched. The men had opened a store called the People's Grocery that successfully competed with a nearby white-owned store. The competition escalated into violence and the three black proprietors were arrested. Later a white mob formed, grabbed the three men from the jail and killed them. Wells recognized lynching for what it was. Thomas Moss, Calvin McDowell, and Lee Stewart had been lynched in Memphis ... [where] no lynching had taken place before.... This is what opened my eyes to what lynching really was. An excuse to get rid of Negroes who were acquiring wealth and property and thus keep the race terrorized. IDA 8. WELLS, mioled In Crusade for Justice As Wells denounced the lynching, the local white press in Memphis called for her to be lynched. She decided she was no longer safe in Memphis and moved to the North, where she continued her fight against lynching by writing, lecturing, and organizing for civil rights. The racial hostility Wells encountered in Memphis was common in late-19th-century America. All African Americans faced constant threats to their civil rights—as workers, as consumers, and as citizens—throughout the United States. Nor were African Americans the only group to experience ! oppression. Native Americans, Chinese immigrants, and Mexican residents also encountered bitter forms of discrimination in the American West. Ida B. Wells African Americans Fight Legal Discrimination As African Americans exercised their newly won political and social rights during Reconstruction, they faced hostile, and often violent, opposition from whites. After the federal government lifted military authority over the Southern states in 1877, white Southern Democrats reclaimed control over their state governments and quickly instituted laws to subject African Americans to second-class citizenship. African Americans eventually fell victim to laws restricting their civil rights but never stopped fighting for equality. VOTING RESTRICTIONS For at least ten years after the end of Reconstruction in 1877, African Americans in the South continued to vote and occasionally to Life <il the Turn of the Century 473 hold political office. By the end of the century, however. Southern states had adopted a broad system of legal policies of racial discrimination and devised methods to weaken African-American political power. All Southern states imposed new voting restrictions. The Supreme Court generally refused to view such legislation as a violation of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments, and thus these new laws denied legal equality to African Americans. For example, some states required that prospective voters be literate. To enforce that requirement, voter registration officials administered a literacy test. Registrars often asked blacks more difficult questions than they asked whites, or gave them a test in a foreign language. The officials administering the test could pass or fail applicants as they wished. Another requirement was die poll tax, an annual tax that had to be paid to gain access to the voting booth. Black as well as white sharecroppers, who usually lacked the cash to pay the tax, were frequently unable to vote. To reinstate white voters who may hav e failed the literacy test or could not pay the poll tax, several Southern states added a grandfather clause' to their constitutions. Louisiana was the first to do so in 1898. The clause stated that even if a man failed the literacy test or could not afford the poll tax. he was still entitled to vote if he. his father, or his grandfather had l>een eligible to vote before January 1, 1867. The date is important because Ik'fore that time freed slaves did not have the right to vote. The grandfather clause therefore did not allow them to vote. During the 1870s and 1880s, tlve Supreme Court failed to overturn these laws—even though the laws surrendered all federal protections for African Americans' civil rights. For example, in United States v. Reese in 1876, the Supreme Court argued lliat the Fifteenth Amendment did not automaticalh give the vote to anyone. It simply made it illegal to use a person's race as a reason for denying the right to vote. Since laws establishing poll taxes and literacy tests said nothing about race, the Supreme Court allowed them to stand. JIM CROW LAWS At tin- same time that African Americans lost voting rights Southern state and local governments passed laws to separate white and black pt'ople in public and private facilities. These laws came to he known as Jim Crow laws after a minstrel show character who sang a comic song ending in the words "Jump, Jim Crow," By the earlv 20th century, the word segregation was used to describe this system of separating people on the basis of race. Racial segregation developed in schools, hospitals, parks, and transportation systems throughout the South. PLESSY V. FERGUSON Eventually a legal case reached the U.S. Supreme Court to test the constitutionality of segregation. Homer A, Plessy, classified as a black man in Louisiana because he was one-eighth African American, had l>een denied a scat in a railroad ear reserved for white passengers. Plessv What do you think Justice Brown meant when he said the Constitution would not put people "on the same plane"? How did Justice Harlan oppose Brown's 474 Chapter 16 Plessy v. Ferguson Justice John Marshall Harlan "The thin disguise of equal' accommodations for passengers in railroad coaches will not mislead anyone nor atone for the wrong this day done." Justice Henry P. Brown "If one race be inferior to the other socially, the Constitution of the United States cannot put them upon the same plane." *!*MH KBTOin l Summarizing tar 4) Messy v. effect the art rights of Americans? challenged the Louisiana law that required railroad companies to segregate white and black passengers. He contended that the law denied him his rights under Louisiana's constitution and took the issue to court. The railroad argued that the separate Facilities for black people were just as good as the ones for whites. The Supreme Court sided with the railroad. In 1896, in P/ess;/ v. Ferguson, the Court ruled that separation of the races in public accommodations was legal and did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment. The decision established the doctrine of "separate but equal," which allowed states to maintain segregated facilities for blacks and whites so long as they provided equal service. The decision permitted legalized racial segregation for almost 60 years. Unfortunately for African Americans, the "separate" part of the law was enforced far more often than die "equal" part, and facilities labeled "colored" rapidly declined in quality. Turn-of-the-Century Race Relations African Americans faced not only formal discrimination but also informal rules and customs, called racial etiquette, that regulated relationships between whites and blacks. Usually, these customs belitded and humiliated African Americans, affirming their second-class status. African Americans in the South had to show deference to whites, including children, and endure humiliating treatment. For example, blacks and whites never shook hands, which would imply equality. Blacks had to yield the sidewalk to white pedestrians, and black men always had to remove their hats for whites. Some moderate reformers like Booker T. Washington advocated gradual improvements for African Americans. Washington thought it was best to avoid demands for legal equality, which most whites staunchly opposed, and concentrate on creating economic opportunities. Washington earned support from whites because he tacitly- accepted segregation while he suggested whites and blacks work together for social progress. To those of the white race ... I would repeat what I say to my own race, "Cast down your bucket where you are." ... Cast down your bucket among these people who have, without strikes and labor wars, tilled your fields, cleared your forests, builded your railroads and cities, and brought forth treasures from the bowels of the earth, and helped make possible this magnificent representation of the progress of the South.... In all things that are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress. BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. Atlanta Exposition Address. 1895 Booker T. Washington's Atlanta Exposition address won the applause of whites throughout the country. Arguing for a gradual approach to racial equality, Washington suggested that 'it is at the bottom of life we must begin, and not at the top." Ten years later, W. E. B. Du Bois denounced this view of gradual equality and belittled it as the "Atlanta Compromise." Demanding full social and economic equality for African Americans. Du Bois founded the Niagara Movement in 1905 and announced that "persistent manly agitation is the way to liberty." In 1909 the Niagara Movement became the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People INAACP), and Du Bois became the editor of its journal, The Crisis, in 1910. He wrote, "We refuse to surrender... leadership. .. to cowards and trucklers. We are men; we will be treated as men." By helping to improve the economic skills of African Americans, Washington hoped to pave the way for long-term gains. People like Ida B. Wells and W. E. B. Du Bois. however, thought the problems of inequality were too urgent to ignore. VIOLENCE African Americans who did not follow the racial etiquette could face severe punishment. Minor breaches might be overhroked, or met with a mild reprimand. Serious violations could provoke serious, and often violent, response. If the offended white person complained to the African American's employer, the employee could lose his or her job. All too often, African Americans who were accused of violating the etiquette were lynched. Between 1885 and 1900. more than 2.5(H) African-American men I.ife at the Turn of the Century 475 and women were shot burned, or hanged without trial in the South. Lynching— an illegal execution, without a trial, carried out by a mob—peaked in the 18S0s and 1890s hut continued well into the 20th century. Lake the three friends of Ida B. Wells, blacks were often targeted for a lynching if they showed signs ol becoming successful. They were also in danger if someone accused them of showing too little respect for whites, especially white women. Crusaders like Ida B. Wells fought a nationwide struggle to remove impediments to racial equality. Although most African Americans lived in the segregated South, those in the North also faced discrimination in housing, education, and w ork. DISCRIMINATION IN THE NORTH Bv 1900, a small but growing number of African Americans lived in Northern cities. Many African Americans, who believed legends of harmonious race relations in the North, migrated to Northern cities in searc h of better paying jobs and social equality. But upon their arrival. African Americans experienced racial discrimination similar to that in the South. African Americans found themselves forced into segregated neighborhoods. Local residents and realtors prevented African Americans from moving into white neighborhoods. Blacks also faced discrimination in the workplace. Labor unions often denied them membership and employers hired them onlv as a last resort and fired them before white employees. Sometimes the competition between African Americans and working class whites became violent, as in the New York City race riot of 1900. Violence erupted when Arthur J. I Iarris, a young black man. killed a white police officer he believed w as mistreating Harris's wife. Word of the killing spread and whites demanded revenge. As one local reporter noted. "Men and women poured by the hundreds from the neighboring tenements" and attacked blacks wherever they found them. Northern blacks, however, were not alone in facing such discrimination. Nonwhites in the West also faced oppression. Discrimination in the West White Americans were not the only people to populate the West. Native Americans continued to live in the western territories claimed by the United States. Asian Americans traveled to the Pacific coast of North America in search of wealth and work. Mexicans continued to inhabit the American Southwest. African Americans were also present, especially in former slave areas such as Texas. Often these communities w ere culturally diverse as people of differing ethnic and racial groups worked and lived side by side. Still, racial tensions often made life uncomfortable for nonwhites. MEXICAN WORKERS Mexicans in the Southwest often faced difficult conditions because of racial discrimination. In the 1880s and 1890s. the Southern Pacific and Santa Fe railroads hired more Mexicans than any other ethnic group to construct rail lines in Arizona, southern California, Nevada, and New Mexico. Railroad managers hired Mexicans not only because they were accustomed to the Southwest's hot, dry climate but also because they were forced to work for less money than other ethnic groups. Mexican workers w ere also vital to the development of mining and agriculture in the Southwest. When the 1902 National Reclamation Act (also called the Newlands Act) provided government assistance for irrigation projects, many desert areas in the Southwest bloomed. Raising grapes, lettuce, citrus fruit, and cotton required manual labor, and Mexicans, who had worked so well for the ! railroads, provided a major source of agricultural labor. 476 Chapter 16 Contrasting Advays •deans, ■ins, and migrants Med iprarmilie Itoif States EXCLUDING THE CHINESE Between 1850 and 1880, the Cliinese immigrant population in the United States grew from 7,520 to more than 100,000. The Cliinese had come to the United States to work and formed a major part of the labor force in the West They helped to build the transcontinental railroad, and they were indispensable to important industries in California. More than half of all shoemakers, more than four-fifths of all cigar makers, and roughly one-third of all woolen-mill operators were Chinese immigrants. With so many Chinese people working, a growing group of whites feared losing out in job competition with them. Consequently, Chinese people often found themselves pushed into segregated schools and neighborhoods. A strong anti-Chinese immigration movement developed, and not only in tlie West. Congress overwhelmingly passed the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882. The act prohibited almost till further immigration of Chinese to the United States and suspended naturalization for those who were already present. While racial discrimination posed terrible legal and economic problems for nonwhites throughout the United States, that was not the whole story of turn- of-the-century America. Because of rapid industrialization anti improvements that made daily life and work easier, more people, especially whites, found leisure time lor new recreational activities as well as money to spend on a growing array of consumer products. These Americans began to be drawn to fads and fashions—and a mass culture was born. Anti-Chinese feeling was so strong that street riots against the Chinese were not uncommon. & NAMES 2. SUMMARIZING Use a cluster 3. IDENTIFYING PROBLEMS like this one to identify people, places, legal issues, and events related to discrimination at the turn of the century. Explain how segregation and discrimination affected the lives of African Americans at the turn of the century. Use details from the section to support your explanation. 4. CONTRASTING How did the challenges and opportunities for Mexicans in the United States differ from those for African Americans? Give examples to support your viewpoint. • the type of work each group did • the wages paid each group • the effects of government policies on each group These Mexican workers sometimes found themselves reduced to debt peonage, a system of involuntary' servitude in which the laborer is forced to work off a debt. After slavery yvas abolished, some Mexicans, as well as Af rican Americans in the territories of Neyv Mexico and Arizona, were forced into debt peonage. Not until 1911 did the U.S, Supreme Court declare involuntary peonage to be a violation <if the Thirteenth Amendment. Life at the Turn of the Century 477 j tax, and higher excise taxes on tobacco, liquor, and luxury goods. It raised the rest through public borrowing by selling war bonds. The government sold bonds directly to indiv iduals through tens of thousands of volunteers who never received any commission on the sale. Movie stars such as Douglas Fairbanks, Mary Pickford, and Charlie Chaplin spoke at rallies in factories, schools, and street comers. Newspapers and billboards carried advertisements for the bonds free of charge. Salesmen delivered speeches IkTM tween theater aets and film screenings. Towns held war-bond parades complete with flags, banners, and marching bands. All told, the government ran four great "liberty Loan drives and one "Victory Loan" drive. As Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo put it. only "a friend of Germany" would refuse to buy war bonds COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC INFORMATION To directly popularize tile war. the government set up the nation's first propaganda agency, the Committee on Public Information. The head of the CPI was a former muckraking journalist named George Creel. An imaginative individual. Creel mobilized the nation's artists and advertising people, who created thousands of paintings, posters, cartoons, and sculptures promoting the war. He persuaded choirs, social clubs, and religious institutions to join "the world's greatest adventure in advertis- ing." He recruited some 75,000 men to serve as Four Minute Men who would deliver a speech anytime, anv place. The Four Minute Men spoke about everything relating to the war: the draft, rationing, born! drives, victor)' gardens, and topics such as "Why We Are Fighting," "Maintaining Morals and Morale," and "The Meaning of America." It is estimated that by the end of the war, the Four Minute Men delivered more than 7.5 million speeches to 314 million listeners. Nor did Creel neglect the written word. He ordered a printing of almost 7 million copies of "How the War Came to America"—which included Wilsons wrar message—not just in English but also in Swedish, Polish, Italian, Spanish. Czech, and Portuguese. He distributed some 60 million pamphlets, booklets, and leaflets, many with the enthusiastic help of the Bov Scouts. He did not convince everyone, but he certainly succeeded in reaching them. Some wartime poster* encouraged Americans to help the war effort by saving resources—In this case, food. non mas she CPI Ml popi&mti i var? Attacks on Civil Liberties Early in 1917. President Wilson expressed some apprehension about U.S. altitudes toward the war. Once lead this people into war and they'll forget there ever was such a thing as tolerance. To fight you must be brutal and ruthless, and the spirit of the ruthless brutality will enter into the very fiber of our national life, infecting Congress, the courts, the policeman on the beat, the man in the street. Conformity would be the only virtue, and every man who refused to conform would have to pay the penalty. WOODROW WILSON, quoled In Cobb of 'The WiMhl' The presidents prediction was correct. As soon as war was declared, conformity indeed became the order of tire day. Attacks on civil liberties, both I unofficial and official, erupted. ANTI-IMMIGRANT HYSTERIA The main targets of the drive for conformity were Americans who had emigrated from oilier nations, especially those from Germany and Austria-1! angary. The most bitter attacks were directed against the two million Americans who had been born in Germany, but other foreign- born persons and native-born Americans of German descent suffered as well. 572 Ciivptf.h 19 As part of anti- immigrant hysteria. New York immigrants were forced to register with the authorities during the war. ion •ing did Many Americans with German-sounding names lost tlieir jobs. Orchestras refused to play the music of Mozart, Bach, Beethoven, and Brahms. Some towns with German names changed them. (One exception was Berlin, New 1 lampshire, whose citizens voted 933 to 566 to keep their town's original name.) Schools stopped teaching the German language and librarians removed books by German authors from the shelves. People even resorted to physical violence against German-Amerieans, hogging them or smearing them with tar and feathers. A mob in Collinsville, Illinois, wrapped a German Hag around a German-born miner named Robert Prager and lynched him. A jury later cleared the mob's leaders. Finally, in a burst of anti-German fervor, Americans changed the name of German measles to "liberty measles." Hamburger—named after the German city of I lamlmrg—became "Salisbury steak" or "liberty sandwich," depending on. whether you were buying it in a store or eating it in a restaurant. Sauerkraut was renamed "liberty cabbage," and dachshunds turned into "liberty pups." ESPIONAGE AND SEDITION ACTS In June 1917 Congress passed the Espionage Act, and in May 1918 it passed the Sedition Act. Under the Espionage and Sedition Acts a person could be fined up to $10,000 and/or sentenced to 20 years in jail for interfering with the draft, obstructing the sale of government bonds, or saying anything disloyal, profane, or abusive about the government or the war effort. Like the Alien and Sedition Acts of 179$, these laws clearly violated the spirit of tin1 First Amendment. Their passage led to some 6,000 arrests for loosely defined antiwar activities and 1.500 convictions, including the five anarchists of the Abrams case. One man. Walter Mathev, was imprisoned for attending an antiwar meeting and contributing 25 cents. The Reverend Clarence Waldron received 15 vears in the penitentiary for telling a Bible class that Christians should not take part in the war. Other results of the laws included the loss of mailing privileges for newspapers and magazines that opposed the w ar or criticized any of the Allies. By 191$ even mainstream publications like the New York Times mu I Tlu- Saturday Evening Past lost their mailing privileges, at least temporarily. The House of Representatives refused to seat Victor Berger, a socialist congressman from Wisconsin, because of liis antiwar views. Columbia University fired a distinguished psychologist from its faculty because he. too, opposed the war. A colleague who supported the war thereupon resigned in protest, saying, "If we have to suppress eveiythingwe don't like to hear, this country is resting on a pretty wobbly basis.'' "Nobody can nay we aren't loyal now." The First World War 573 T!ir Espionage and Sedition Acts targeted socialists and labor leaders. Eugene V. Debs was handed a ten-year prison sentence for delivering a speech in which he discussed the economic causes of the war, but was pardoned by President Warren (1. Harding after lie had served three years. Anarchist "Red Emma" Goldman received a two-year sentence and a $10,000 fine for organizing the "No Conscription League." When she left jail, the authorities deported her to Russia. "Big Bill" Haywood and other leaders of the Industrial Workers of the World were accused of sabotaging the war effort because the)' urged workers to strike for better conditions mid higher pay. Haywood received 30 years, while most of the other Woliblies received five to ten. Under such federal pressure, the 1WW faded away. On the whole, the civil liberties record of the Wilson administration was not one to make Americans proud. thim naan C. C/arifymj What was ft originalpi that SedtMkz' Social Changes During the War Wars often unleash powerful social forces. The period of World War 1 was no exception, and important changes occurred among African Americans and women. The war also contributed to one of the worst epidemics in hi store—the 1918 flu epidemic. AFRICAN AMERICANS AND THE WAR Black public opinion about the war was divided. On one side were people like W. E. B. Du Bois, who editorialized in the Crisis, the NAACP newspaper, dial blacks should support the war effort. Du Bois recognized the German imperial threat. That which the German power represents today spells death to the aspirations of Negroes and all darker races for equality, freedom and democracy. ... Let us, while this war lasts, forget our special grievances and close our ranks shoulder to shoulder with our own white fellow citizens and the allied nations that are fighting for democracy. W. E. B. DU BOIS, 'Close Ranks' " A panel from the mural series The Migration of the Negro by Jacob Lawrence shows three of the most common destinations for African Americans leaving the South. Du Bois believed dial it made sense for African Americans to cooperate with the Wilson administration because African-American support for the war would lend strength to calls for racial justice. On the other side were people like William Monroe Trotter, founder and editor of the Boston Guardian, who believed that victims of racism should not support a racist government. Trotter condemned Du Bois's accommudationist approach and favored protest instead. Nevertheless, despite grievances over continued racial inequality in the United States, most African Americans backed the war. THE GREAT MIGRATION In concrete terms, the greatest effect of the First World War on African Americans' lives was that it accelerated the Great Migration, the large-scale movement of hundreds of thousands of Southern blacks to American cities in (he North. .As earlv sis the late 19tli century, African Americans trickled northward to escape 574 Chapter 19 D. Analyzing Causes IVhat tie causes ol the Great Migration? die Jim Crow South, but in the decade between 1910 and 1920, the trickle became a tidal wave. Several factors caused the tremendous growth in black migration. First, many African Americans sought to escape die racial discrimination in the South that made it hard to make a living and often threatened their lives. Also, the boll weevil infestation, aided by floods and droughts, had ruined much of the South's cotton fields by 1916. In the meantime, in 1914 Henry Ford opened his automobile assembly line to black workers. Then the outbreak of World War 1 and the drop in European immigration increased job opportunities for African Americans in steel mills, munitions plants, and stocky ai ds. Northern manufacturers sent recruiting agents with free railroad passes through the South. In addition, Robert S. Abbott, publisher of the Chicago Defender, bornbarded Southern blacks with articles contrasting Dixieland lynchings with the prosperity of Northern African Americans. So Southern blacks boarded the trains and moved away from the South. Between 1910 and 1930, hundreds of thousands of African Americans migrated to such tides as Chicago, New York, and Philadelphia. The migration was heaviest from about 1915 to 1925. Author Richard Wright described the great exodus. We are bitter no more; we are leaving! We are leaving our homes, pulling up stakes to move on. We look up at the high southern sky and remember all the sunshine and all the rain and we feel a sense of loss, but we are leaving. We look out at the wide green fields which our eyes saw when we first came into the world and we feel full of regret, but we are leaving. We scan the kind black faces we have looked upon since we first saw the light of day, and, though pain is in our hearts, we are leaving. We take one last furtive look over our shoulders to the Big House—high upon a hill beyond the railroad tracks—where the Lord of the Land lives, and we feel glad, for we are leaving. RICHARD WRIGHT, quoted in 12 Million Black Voices Black migrants faced many problems in their new surroundings. They lived in crowded ghettos, often in one-room kitchenettes for which they had to pay exorbitant rents. Unskilled whites resented them, not only because of racial prejudice, but also because African Americans competed for jobs and Northern companies often used them as strikebreakers. At the same time, however, the concentration of African Americans in a particular area encouraged them to set up their own commercial institutions. Some were in businesses that provided personal services, such as hairdressing and undertaking. Others entered areas of finance that whites considered too risky—such as insuring blacks' lives and property or arranging credit for them. African Americans established thousands of such enterprises in Northern Racial prejudice against African Americans in the North sometimes took violent form. The press of new migrants to Northern cities caused overcrowding and intensified racial hatred. In July 1917, a race riot exploded in East St Louis, Illinois, when white workers, furious over the hiring of African Americans as strikebreakers at a munitions plant, rampaged through the streets. Forty blacks and nine whites died. Another bloody riot erupted in July 1919 in Chicago. The riot was sparked when a 17-year-old African American swam from the water off the so-called "black beach" to the water off the "white beach." There, white bathers threw rocks at him until he drowned. In retaliation, African Americans on shore attacked whites with bottles and fists and within a few hours mobs were fighting throughout several neighborhoods in the city State troopers finally restored order after three days of violence that involved about 10,000 persons. Thirty-eight people lost their lives (23 blacks and 15 whites) and 520 were injured (342 blacks and 178 whites). communities. WOMEN IN THE WAR While African Americans carved new lives for themselves in unfamiliar places, women increasingly found themselves filling unfamiliar social roles as they moved into jobs that had formerly been held exclusively by men. Women began driving cabs and delivery trucks. They became railroad workers, cooks, dockworkers, and bricklayers. They even mined coal and took part in shipbuilding. At the same time, women continued to fill more traditional jobs as nurses, clerks, and teachers. Many women worked as volunteers, serving at Red Cross facilities and encouraging the sale of bonds and the planting of victory gardens. In contrast, other women were active in the peace movement. For example, Jane Addams The First World War 575 1 j v ANTI-IMMIGRANT FEELINGS I t Immigration, Migration, and War People who have moved to various regions of the United States often felt "pushed" away from their homes because of poverty or oppression. Others felt "pulled" to a new land and the opportunities it promised. These "push-pull" factors have been a major factor in making the United States a nation of immigrants and migrants. Wars have often created these "push-pull" factors for immigrants and migrants. Sometimes they pushed people away front fighting or pulled them to regions where there was work. At other times, war affected migrants by forcing them to adjust to cultural change in their new homes. Many immigrants discovered that w ar unleashed forces that affected their lives in unpredictable ways. As war forced American society to evolve, immigrants and migrants created new roles for themselves as Americans and helped shape the way America would change. W l V/ u Throughout the 19th century, Americans continued their movement westward to the Pacific Ocean. Victory in the war with Mexico in 1848 greatly increased the amount of land under American control, and thousands of Americans were pulled to the West to take advantage of it. Two important consequences emerged from this movement. First following the discovery of gold in California, hundreds of thousands of people from around the world rushed in to strike it rich. Within a year, there were enough people in California to qualify it for statehood. Second, Americans disagreed over whether or not the new lands would be open to slavery. That disagreement culminated in the Civil War. The "new" immigrants of the early 20th centuiy- I unlike the "old-stock" Americans who traced their I ancestry to northern and western Europe—came J mostly from southern and eastern Europe, andthi) I often did not speak English. Many old-stock AmerdJ feared that the new immigrants posed a threat to I American culture. As a result, old-stock Americans I tried to "Americanize" the new immigrants by encouraging them to abandon their old customs si ] teaching them American ones. During World War I, Americanization effortshrt I their high mark. The Committee on Public InfomsaJ (CPI) was consequently concerned that new immigrants were not loyal to the United States.Trs I CPI set up Loyalty Leagues in immigrant communtaJ to foster American patriotism. George Creel, headf 1 the CPI. claimed that "not a pin dropped in the hot] of any one with a foreign name, but that it ran ft> I thunder on the inner ear of some listening sleuth.' I 582 Chapter 19 In 1964, 603 Vietnamese lived in the United States. A decade later, as the Vietnam War ended, hundreds of thousands of refugees, mostly South Vietnamese who had been allies of the United States during the war, fled their country. They used boats, braving stormy seas and pirates, to reach Thailand or Cambodia. There they lived in refugee camps for months before moving to other nations, including the United States. By 1985, there were 643,200 Vietnamese living across the United States. Although many of the hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese pushed from their homes in Vietnam have faced discrimination in the United States, most have overcome it. Chased from Vietnam by communist dictators, many Vietnamese have become successful entrepreneurs. In San Jose, for example, 40 percent of the downtown retail business is Vietnamese-owned, bringing new commercial vitality to the area. 1. SYNTHESIZING Based on what you have read about immigration, what generalizations can you make about the way war has affected immigrants and migrants in the United States? 2. EXPLORING YOUR COMMUNITY Interview family members and people you know in your community to find out about the history of immigration and migration: where people came from, and for what reasons. Try to record specific stories of people and events if possible. Share your findings with the class. LlL and nation The lities id of home like Throughout the 20th century, African Americans responded to "push-pull" factors as they moved across the United States. In the Great Migration of tf* early 20th century, they felt pushed out of their loroesinthe rural South by racial discrimination and the arrival of mechanized farming. Of the millions of African Americans who left, most wed to cities, usually in the North. The Second Migration, sparked by World War II, was an important part of this movement because it ilowed African Americans to take industrial jobs, many formerly held by whites, to support the war affort. This migration also had important Puences for the civil rights movement. African answho remained in the South often moved to Southern cities and developed organizations in their new urban communities that Helped them fight against segregation. r rey ricans The First World War 583 O "Normalcy" and Isolationism LEARN ABOUT the policies of the Harding administration TO UNDERSTAND the development of postwar isolationism and the immigration quota system. • Warren G. Ham-1 • Kellogg Bn.- • isolationist • Fordney-Mit: • quota system • Charles Emm - • Ohio gang • Albert B fall • Teapot Dome xu In the 1920s, when Ernesto Galarza was a little boy, his family came to California from Mexico to earn a better living. When they reached Sacramento, they went immediately to its barrio, the city neighborhood Inhabited by Spanish-speaking people. There they looked for jobs and for an affordable place to live. In his old age, Galarza recalled his barrio experience: Ours was a neighborhood of leftover houses. The cheapest rents were in the back quarters of the rooming houses, the basements, and the run-down clapboard rentals in the alley. ... Barrio people, when they first came to town, had no furniture of their own. They rented it with their quarters or bought a piece at a time from the second-hand stores, the segundas, where we traded... . Beds and meals were provided [to newcomers)... on trust, until the new Chicano found a job. On trust and not on credit, for trust was something between people who had plenty of nothing, and credit was between people who had something of plenty. ERNESTO GALARZA, quoted in The Hispanic Americans Galarza and his family were able to enter the United States only because they were from Mexico. Potential immigrants from outside the Western Hemisphere could not legally enter the country because of new restrictions on immigration. These restrictions reflected a new attitude that emerged after World War I. Wanting a return to the "normalcy" of pre-war days, Americans urged less government control over business and much less international involvement. "Keep America for Americans" became the prevailing attitude. A Return to "Normalcy" As the Republicans gathered in Chicago in the summer of 1920 to nominate their candidate for president, they wanted to retake the White House. The American public seemed tired of the push for reform that had marked the Progressive Era-particularlv the administration of President Woodrow Wilson. But none of the Republican candidates could gather enough support to win the nomination. Finally the party leaders turned to Senator Warren G. Harding of Ohio, Although his knowledge was limited and his judgment turned out to la- poor. he was a good-natured man who, according to one of his followers, "looked like a president ought to look, ' and the public loved his southing speeches. America's present need is not heroics, but healing; not nostrums, but normalcy; not revolution, but restoration; not agitation, but adjustment; not surgery, but serenity; not the dramatic, but the dispassionate;.. . not submergence in internationally, but sustainment in triumphant nationality. WARREN G. HARDING, quoted in The Roe of Warren Gamaliel Harding At election time, Harding and his running mate, Calvin Coolidge, swamped their Democratic opponents. James M. Cox and Franklin D. Roosevelt, 16 mil- 596 Chapter 20 lion votes to 9 million. The electoral count was even more of a landslide: 404 to 127. In his campaign speeches, Harding had promoted a "return to normalcy" on the domestic front. He wanted to return America to the simpler days before the Progressive Era reforms. A. Forming a Do you Hi tie goal of band Pact was mealtstic7 WORKING FOR PEACE In the aftermath of World War I, problems surfaced relating to war debts, arms control, and the reconstruction of war-tom countries. President Harding worked to solve these international problems and to maintain pence. In 1921, he invited four major naval powers and four smaller nations with interests in the Far East to a conference in Washington, D.C. Only Russia was left out because of its Communist government In his welcoming speech, the president appealed resoundingly for peace: "I can speak officially only for our United States. Our hundred millions frankly want less of armament and none of war." Then Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes took the floor and urged a tcn-vear holiday from the building of warships. In addition, he suggested that the five major naval powers—the United States. Great Britain. Japan. France, and Italy—scrap a significant proportion of their existing battleships, cruisers, and aircraft carriers. Conference delegates cheered, wept, threw their hats into the air—and adopted the proposal. It was the first time in history that such powerful nations had agreed to disarm. Eventually, by 1929, the United States succeeded in urging 64 nations, or almost all the nations then in existence, to sign the Kellogg-Briund Pact, which basically renounced war as an instrument of national policy. Americans were jubilant. However, there was no way to enforce the pact because it made no provision for the use of military or economic force against any nation that violated the agreement. Warren G. Harding looked respectably presidential— but he is considered by historians to have been one of the least successful presidents. HIGH TARIFFS AND REPARATIONS Behind the international glow of the Washington Naval Conference and the Kcllogg-Briand Pact, the Harding admin! istration was actually pursuing an isolationist foreign policy. Nevertheless, the United States was t lying to head off trouble in Asia and to reduce the amount :of money spent on armaments. At the same time, it was not retreating from its stand on war debts. Britain and France had borrowed more than $10 billion from American bankers during World War I and now were basing trouble repaying the loans while rebuilding their economies. They could raise the money in only two ways: by exporting j more goods to the United States or through reparations, wliich were payments made by Germany to the Allies for war damages. Neither alternative worked. For one thing, in 1922 the United States adopted the Fordney-McCumber TurilT, which raised the tax on imports to its highest level ever—almost 60 percent. The act was designed to protect American businesses. esjxxially chemical and metal industries, from foreign competition. As a result of such a high tariff, Britain and France were unable to sell their gtxxls in the United States and could not earn the revenue to repay their debts. The two nations then demanded that Germany pay its promised reparations, lint the economically mined Germany defaulted on its war payments. Then at the end of 1922, French troops marched into Germany's Ruhr Valley, its industrial region. To avoid a new war. the United States became involved in the situation. It sent American banker Gharles G. Dawes, soon to Ik1 President Coolidge's vice-president, to negotiate loans from American investors to Germany. Through the Dawes Plan, U.S. banks loaned Germany $2.5 billion, which Germany was able to use to pay reparations to Britain and France. Those countries then turned around and paid on their war debts to the United States. Thus, die United States, in effect, arranged to lx- repaid with its own money. This solution caused bad feelings all around. Britain anti France considered the United States a miser for not paving a fair share of die exists of Worltl War 1. Politics of the Roaring Twenties 597 Their people had died while America profited! At the same time, the United States considered the two nations financially irresponsible for being unwilling to repay their debts. As President Calvin Coolidge, who succeeded Harding, reportedly remarked. "They hired the money, didn't they?" Limiting Immigration SKILLBUILDEfl Which five geographical areas show the sharpest decline in immigrants coming to the U.S. between 1921 and 1929? What are the only areas to register an increase in immigrants to the U.S.? Nativist sentiment, an anti-immigrant attitude, had been growing in the United States ever since the 1880s. when new immigrants arrived from southern and eastern Europe. Nativist feelings were fueled by the fact that some of the people involved in postwar labor disputes were immigrant anarchists and socialists, who many Americans believed were actually revolutionary' radicals and Communists. In addition, die demand for unskilled labor in the United States decreased after World War I, especially in industries such as coal mining and the production of steel and textiles: immigrants generalh filled these jobs. With fewer unskilled jobs available, nativists reasoned, fewer immigrants should be allowed into the United States. Also, racist ideas like those expressed by Madison Grant, an anthropologist at the American Museum of Natural History in New York City, had an influence on attitudes toward immigration. The result of unlimited immigration is showing plainly in the rapid decline in the birth rate of native Americans ... |who] will not bring children into the world to compete in the labor market with the Slovak, the Italian, the Syrian and the Jew. The native American is too proud to mix socially with them. MADISON GRANT, quoted in United Stales History Ideas in Conflict thiki TKma B. Analy.m Issues Hu it the U S ksh bothaimi at lighter, the tm debt regitmt problem? Congress, in response to nativist pressure, decided the time had come to limit immigration from Europe. The Emergency Quota Act of 1921 set up a quota system. This system established the maximum number ol people who could enter the United States from any one foreign country. As amended in 1924, the law limited immigration from each European nation to 2 percent of the uuuiImt of its nationals living in the United States in 1890. This provision discriminated against people from eastern and southern Europe—mostly Roman Catholics and Jews—who had not started coining in large numbers until after 1890. Later, the National Origins Act of 1929 shifted the base year to 1920. but it reduced the total number of persons to Ire admitted in any one year to 150,000. The law also excluded Japanese altogether, resulting in much ill will between the two nations. Japan, which had faithfully kept the Gentlemen's Agreement to limit emigration to the United States negotiated bv Theodore Roosevelt in 1907, expressed anger over the insult. The national origins quota system did not apply to immigrants from the Western Hemisphere. During the 1920s, about a million Canadians and at least .500.000 Mexicans crossed the nations borders. The goal of the quota system was to sharply cut European immigration to the United States. As the chart on page 598 shows, the system achieved that goal. Scandal Hits Harding's Administration Harding opposed die federal government's role in business affairs, and he disapproved of most social reforms. However, he did set up the Bureau of the Budget to help rim the government more efficiently, and he urged U.S. Steel to abandon the 12-hour day. He also made some excellent cabinet appointments. HARDING'S ADMINISTRATION Harding appointed Charles Evans Hughes as secretary of stale. Hughes later went on to become chief justice 'of the Supreme Court. The president made Herbert Hoover the secretary of commerce. Hoover had done a masterful job handling food distribution and refugee problems during World War I Andrew Mellon, one of the country's wealthiest men, became secretary of the treasury and set about reducing the national debt. By 1923 the national debt had fallen bv about one-third. However, the cabinet also included the so-called Ohio gang, the president's rowdy, poker-playing cronies from back borne. Attorney General Harrx M. Daugherty, a lobbyist for tobacco and meat-packing companies, and Interior Secretary Albert B, Fall, a close friend of various oil executives, would soon cause Harding—and the country—a great deal of embarrassment. SCANDALS PLAGUE HARDING The president's main problem was that he didn't understand many lliings he had to deal with. He admitted as much to a secretary after listening to advisers discuss a federal money problem. In the late 1990s, mast immigrants came to the United States from North America (Mexico), Asia (Vietnam, the Philippines. South Korea, India, and China), the former Soviet Union, and the Caribbean (Haiti, the Dominican Republic, and Jamaica). Not many immigrants came from Europe or Canada In the 1920s, a quota system strictly limited immigration from most places. Thus, the number of immigrants coming to the United States dropped sharply between 1921 and 1929, especially from Italy, Yugoslavia, Austria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and other eastern and southern European nations The number Irom Asian countries was also very limited, but the number Irom the Western Hemisphere (Canada and Mexico) was quite large In 1965, the United States finally dropped the national origins quota system. Oceania 0.7% Asia 372% Africa 5.9% South America (L3% Europe 17JN -—a. North America, including Central _ America and Canbbaan 321% Source. 0$. Immigration end Naturalization Service A, Orawing Conclusions funding's Ijpohtmms witaius pigment John, I can't make a ... thing out of this tax problem. I listen to one side and they seem right, and then ... I talk to the other side and they seem just as right. I know somewhere there is an economist who knows the truth, but I don't know where to find him and haven't the sense to know him and trust him when I find him.... What a job! WARREN 6. HARDING, quoted in Only Yesterday Politics of the /{wiring Twenties 599 r New York Street Scene (1920), Joaquin Torres-Garcia. one historian. Small-town attitudes began to lose their hold on the American mind as the cits rose to prominence. Contrasting f How did ftownlife Ut differ? THE NEW URBAN SCENE At the liegiuning of the 1920s, New York, with a population of 5.6 million people, tupped the list of big cities. Next came Chicago, with nearly 3 million, and after that, Philadelphia, with nearly 2 million. Another 65 cities claimed populations of 100.000 or more, and they grew more crowded by the day. Uie in these booming cities was far different from the slow-paced, intimate life in America's small towns. Chicago, for instance, was an industrial powerhouse. home to native-lxtm whites, African Americans, and immigrant Poles. Irish, Itiissians. Italians. Swedes, Arabs, French and Chinese. The city's skvline Sparkled with 163 skyscrapers. Each day, an estimated 300.000 workers, 150.000 cars and buses, and 20,000 trolleys poured into the pulsing downtown. Speculators made fortunes on the stock market. At night, stylish Chicagoans crowded ornate vaudeville houses and theaters. For small-town migrants, adapting to the urban environment demanded changes in thinking as well as in everyday living. The cits was a world of competition and change. City dwellers took in new ideas at museums and art exhibits, plays and sports events, and nightclubs and movies. They read and argued alrout current scientific and social ideas. They judged one another by accomplishment more often than by background. City dwellers also tolerated drinking, gambling, anil casual dating—worldly behaviors considered shocking and sinful in small towns. For all its color and challenge, though, the city could l>e impersonal and frightening. Streets were filled with strangers, not friends and neighbors. Life was fast-paced, not leisurely. Social standards and values were hard to pin down in a world populated hv brash businessmen, the mingling of foreign cultures, and the pursuit of wealth and pleasure. The city demanded endurance, as a foreign visitor to Chicago observed. It is not for nothing that the predominating color of Chicago is orange. It is as if the city, in its taxicabs, in its shop fronts, in the wrappings of its parcels, chose the color of flame that goes with the smoky black of its factories. It is not for nothing that it has repelled the geometric street arrangement of New York and substituted ... great ways with names that a stranger must learn if he can. . . . He is in a [crowded] city, and if he has business there, he tells himself, "If I weaken I shan't last long." WALTER L. GEORGE, Hail Columbia I -How ya gonna keep 'em doicn on the farm, after they've seen Puree?" OF THE 1920s Tlic Roaring Life of the /,920s 613 Here were all these people living in old, rusted-out car bodies. .. . There were people living in shacks made of orange crates. One family with a whole lot of kids were living in a piano box. ... People living in whatever they could junk together. HJTOflT ding iHtctiHow in Great Qonmn the lives ofordrnary 'n cities nxf towns. Win firms' A vrertor to a shantytown outside Oklahoma City, quoted in Hard Times Even clay the urban poor could !>e seen scrounging for food, digging in garbage cans or begging on street comers. Soup kitchens (places where food is offered free to the needy) and bread lines (lines of people waiting to receive food provided by charitable organizations or public agencies) opened up in many cities to feed the homeless. One man noted the condition of men waiting for free food in New York City. Two or three blocks along Times Square, you'd see these men, silent, shuffling along in a line. Getting this handout of coffee and doughnuts, dealt out from great trucks.... I'd stand and watch their faces, and I'd see that flat, opaque, expressionless look which spelled, for me, human disaster. On every corner, there'd be a man selling apples. Men .. . who had responsible positions. Who had lost their jobs, lost their homes, lost their fami lies. And worse than anything else, lost belief in themselves. They were destroyed men. HERMAN SHUMUN, quoti'd in Hard Times People stand in a bread THE IMPACT ON AFRICAN AMERICANS AND LATINO AMERICANS line outside a soup kitchen Conditions for African Americans and Latino Americans in the cities were in Chicago in 1930. especially difficult. The unemployment rates for both groups were higher than for most other Americans, and the jobs these groups held tended to bring the lowest pay. The Depression years saw an increase in racial violence against African Americans by unemployed whites competing for the same jobs. Twenty-four African Americans died by lynching in 1933. Latinos—mainly Mexicans and Mexican Americans living in the Southwest—were also the targets of hostility. Unemployed whites, angered at losing their jobs, demanded that Latinos be deported to Mexico, even though many Latinos were native-born Americans. Bv the late 1930s, hundreds of thousands of people of Mexican descent had returned to Mexico. Some left voluntarily and some were deported by the federal government. Although the suffering of the 1930s was severe for many people, it was especially grim for African Americans. Hard times were already a fact of life. THE DEPRESSION IN RURAL AREAS Life in rural areas during the Depression was hard, but it did have one advantage over city life: most fanners could manage to grow some food to feed their families. Crop prices kept falling, however, and farmers continued to lose their land when they couldn't pav their debts. Between 1929 and 1932. about 4(H),(MM) farms were lost through foreclosure—where the mortgage holder took over the property because the farmer could not make the mortgage payments. Many farmers had no choice but to turn to tenant fanning and barely scrape out a living. THE DUST BOWL In addition, the drought that began in the early 1930s wreaked havoc on the Great Plains. During the previous decade, farmers from Texas to North Dakota—the region that became known as the Dost Bowl—had used tractors to break up the grasslands and plant millions of acres of new farmland. Then tliev exhausted the land through overproduction of crops, and the grasslands lrecame unsuitable for "The Negro was born in depression," noted one African-American man. "It didn't mean too much to him, The Great American Depression.... The best he could be is a janitor or a porter or shoeshine boy. It only became off icial when it hit the white man." Nonetheless, the African- American community was very hard hit by the Great Depression In 1932, the unemployment rate among African Americans stood at over 50 percent while the overall unemployment rate was approximately 25 percent The (.'.rent Depression Begins 651 Pedro J. Gonzalez came to this country from Mexico in 1924 and later became a United States citizen. Gonzalez soon was involved in the music business, both as a performer and as the first Spanish-speaking disc jockey in Los Angeles. During the 1930s, Gonzalez used his radio program to condemn discrimination against Mexicans and Mexican Americans, who were often made scapegoats for social and economic problems during the Depression. For his efforts, Gonzalez was arrested, jailed, and deported on trumped-up charges. Late in life (in 1984), he reflected on his experiences, Seeing how badly they treated Mexicans back in the days of my youth, I could have started a rebellion. But now there could be a cultural understanding so tha without firing one bullet, we might understand each other. We [Mexicans] were here t before they [Anglos] were, and we are not, as they still say, "undesirables" or "wet , backs." They say we come to this land and it's not our home. Actually, it's the other way around. - PEDRO J. GONZALEZ, from the f.01 Angela lima, December 9. 1934 ^Ik / Because of tus stand against discrimination, Pedro J Gonzalez became a hero to many Mexican Americans and a symbol of Mexican cultural pride. He criti- V v cized the prejudice of a large number of people in the United States toward A Mexican Americans who sought jobs. He also criticized government actions to TM | 1 round up people in Mexican-American neighborhoods to send them back to Mexico. His life reflected some of the difficulties faced by Mexicans and other minority groups in the United States during the Depression and New Deal era. V I D E O pedro J. Gonzalez and the Fight for Mexican-American Rights New Opportunities for Women In some* ways, tin- New Deal represented an important opportunity for minorities and women. Some New Deal programs and their administrators made a conscious effort not to discriminate in hiring or in distributing benefits. The elt administration appointed a number of women and African ms to key positions in the government, and it welcomed their input on .nt issues. rertlieless. gains for women and minorities during the New Deal were . Ding-standing patterns of prejudice and discrimination continued to Lie these groups and to prevent their full and equal participation in onal life. Most notable changes during le New Deal was the naming of several women to important official positions. For the first time, a woman. Frances Perkins, became a cabinet member. As secretary of labor, she played a major role in the cre- Frances Perkins was the New York state industrial commissioner in 1933. The New Deal 677 Many Mexican Americans were long-time residents or citizens ol the United States. Others came during the 1920s to work on farms in Texas, California, and Arizona. Valued for their low-cost labor during good times, these migrant workers became the target of hostility during the Depression. Many returned to Mexico willingly, while others were deported by the United States government. During the 1930s, as many as half a million persons of Mexican descent, many of them U.S. citizens, were deported to Mexico. Mexican-American Fortunes Mexican Americans also tended to support the New Deal, even though they received even fewer Irene fits than African Americans did. Large numbers of Mexican Americans had come to the United States during die 1920s, and had settled mainly in the Southwest. Most worked as farm laborers, an occupation that was essentially unprotected by state and federal laws. During the Depression, (arm wages fell to as low as nine cents an hour. Farm workers who tried to unionize often met with violence from employers and government authorities. Although the CCC ami WPA helped some Mexican Americans, these work programs also discriminated against them by disqualifying from their programs migrant workers who had no permanent address. Native American Gains Native Americans received strong government support from the New Deal. In 1924, Native Americans had received lull citizenship by law. In 1933, President Roosevelt appointed John Collier as commissioner of Indian Affairs. A strong advocate of Native American rights, Collier helped create (he Indian Reorganization Act of 19.34. This act strengthened Native American land claims by prohibiting the government from taking over unclaimed reservation lands and selling them to people other than Native Americans. Thus, the 1934 act was able to restore some reservation lands to tribal ownership. Some Native Americans who valued their tribal traditions hailed the ai t as an important step forward. Those who had become more "Americanized," as individual landowners under the previous Dawes Act, however, objected that the act would make it harder for Native Americans to improve their economic conditions and participate frilly in mainstream American life. A New Deal Coalition Although New Deal policies had mixed results for minorities, these groups generally backed President Roosevelt against his Republican rivals. In fact, one of FDR's great achievements was to create a New Deal Coalition—an alignment of diverse groups dedicated to supporting the Democratic Party. The coalition included Southern whites, various urban groups, African Americans, and unionized industrial workers. This new voting bloc enabled the Democrats to dominate polities throughout the 1930s ami 1940s. LABOR UNIONS FLOURISH Organized labor was a critical element of the New- Deal coalition. As a result of the Wagner Act and other pro-labor legislation passed during the New Deal, union members enjoyed lietter working conditions and increased bargaining power. In their eyes. President Roosevelt was a "friend of labor." Labor unions donated money to Roosevelt's reelection campaigns. and union workers pledged their votes to him. During the 1930s. and particularly after passage of the Wagner Act. the number of unionized workers soared. Between 1933 and 1941, union membership grew from 3 million to more than 8 million. Unionization especially affected coal miners and those in the mass production industries, such as auto- D. Recofr-ct) Effects Htm New Deal affect or labor? 680 Chaffer 23 1 Analyzing Why did issmen admitting 3 to the mhtary? The volunteers and draftees reported to military bases around the country for eight weeks of basic training. In this short period, seasoned sergeants did I heir best to turn raw recruits into disciplined, battle-ready CIs. (The term GI—meaning "Government Issue"—first applied to government-issued uniforms, weapons, and supplies but soon was used to describe soldiers as well.) According to Sergeant Deb Myers, however, there was more to basic training than teaching a recruit how to stand at attention, inarch in step, handle a riHe. anti follow orders. The civilian went before the Army doctors, took off his clothes, feeling silly; jigged, stooped, squatted, wet into a bottle; became a soldier. He learned how to sleep in the mud, tie a knot, kill a man. He learned the ache of loneliness, the ache of exhaustion, the kinship of misery. He learned that men make the same queasy noises in the morning, feel the same longings at night; that every man is alike and that each man is different. The military's manpower needs were so great that early in HI-12. Arms Chief of Staff General George Marshall pushed for the formation of a Womens Auxiliary Army Corps. "There are innumerable duties now being performed by soldiers that can actually lie done better by women," Marshall said in support of a bill lo establish the WAAC. Under this bill, women volunteering for the army would not receive the same rank, pay, or benefits as men doing the same jobs, nor could they expect to make the army a career. "Greetings. You are hereby ordered for induction into the Armed Forces of the United States_" During World War II, millions of Americans received letters from their local draft boards beginning with these words. The Selective Service System still exists today, although the draft ended with the establishment of an All-Volunteer Force in 1973. At present all male U.S. citizens and most resident aliens are required by law to register for the draft within 30 days of their 18th birthdays. The Selective Service System can no longer draft anyone into the armed forces, however, without Congressional approval. Even so. the hill ran into fierce opposition in Congress. "Take women into the armed services . . . asked one congressman, and "who then will do the cooking, the washing, the mending?" Another representative scorned the hill as "the silliest piece of legislation" he had ever seen. "A woman's army to defend tlie United States of America," he raged. "Think of the humiliation. What has become of the manhood of America, that we have to call on our women to do what has ever lieen the duty of men?" Despite this opposition, the hill establishing the WAAC liecame law on May 15, 1U42. Wlicn Oveta Culp I lobby, a Texas newspaper executive mid the first director of WAAC, put out a call for recruits a few weeks later, more than 13,000 women applied on the first day applications were available. In all, some 250.000 women served in this and other auxiliary branches during the war. MINORITIES IN THE ARMEO SERVICES For many minority groups—especially African Americans, Native Americans, Mexican Americans, and Asian Americans—the war created new dilemmas. Restricted to racially segregated neighborhoods and reservations and denied basic citizenship rights, some members of these groups questioned whether this was their war to light. "Why die for democracy for some foreign country when we don't even have it here?" asked an editorial in an African-American newspaper. On receiving his draft notice, an African American responded unhappily, "Just carve on mv tombstone, 'Here lies a black man killed lighting a yellow man for the protection of a white man.' " Two privates in the Fifth Army Forces sit at the entrance to an air-raid shelter at Anzio. Italy, where they held the beachhead against the Nazis. The United States in World War II 731 Still, minorities knew that no matter how badly they had been treated in the past, they were likelv to be worse oil under Axis control. "We know that under Nazism we should have no rights at all; we should be used as slaves." declared a Native American. The Congreso del Pueblo de Habla Espanola (Spanish Speaking Congress) agreed, proclaiming that "Our liberties, our homes, and our lives [are] directly threatened by Fascism.... VVe an* also children of the United States. We will defend her." In response, at least a half million Mexican Americans joined the armed forces. All-latino units saw heavy action both in Europe and Asia. While Mexican Americans in I ,os Angeles made up only a tenth of the city's population, they suffered a fifth of the city's wartime casualties. More than a million African Americans also served in the military Black soldiers lived and worked in segregated units and were mostly limited to noncombat roles. When 3,000 black troops were asked in 1943 if "Negroes are l>eing given a fair chance to do as much as they want to do to help win the war." more than half answered "No!" After much protest. African Americans did finally sec combat in the last year of the war. Asian Americans took part in the stniggle as well. More than 13,000 Chinese Americans joined the armed forces, or about one of every five adult Chinese males. An additional 33,000 Japanese Americans put on uniforms. Of these, several thousand volunteered to serve as spies and interpreters in the Pacific War. "During battles," wrote an admiring officer, "they crawled up close enough to he able to hear [Japanese] officers' commands and to make verbal translations to our soldiers." Some 25.000 Native Americans enlisted in the armed services, too, including 800 women. Their willingness to sen e led The Saturday Evening Post magazine to comment. "We would not need the Selective Service if all volunteered like Indians." For many Native Americans, the war presided their first opportunity to leave the reservation and meet non-Indians. A Chippewa wrote a poem describing his experience fighting with soldiers from very different backgrounds: "We bind each other's wounds and eat the same ration. / VVe dream of our loved ones in the same nation." Life on the Home Front Women perform inspection of mass- produced propellers in America's stepped-up war industry. Early in February 1942, newspapers reported the end of automobile production in the United States. The last ear to roll off an automaker's assemble line was a gray sedan with "victory trim." which meant the car had no chrome. This was just one more sign that the war would affect almost even aspect of life on the home front. THE INDUSTRIAL RESPONSE Within weeks of the shutdown in production, the nation's automobile plants had been retooled to produce tanks, planes, boats, and command cars. They were not alone. Across the nation, factories were quickly converted to war production. A maker of mechanical pencils turned out bornb parts. A bedspread manufacturer made mosquito netting. A soft-drink company converted from filling bottles with liquid to filling shells with explosives. Analyzing Uutet What "the race K" 1940s? 7 Legion of Merit awards, 65 Silver Stars, and 162 Bronze Stars for courage under fire. Likewise, the 99th Fighter Squadron, better known as the Tnskegee Airmen, won two Distinguished Unit Citations (the military's highest commendation) for its outstanding aerial combat against Hitler's LufUraffe AFRICAN AMERICANS AT HOME African Americans also made some progress on tin- home front. During the war. about 330.000 blacks left the South. The majority moved to the West Coast. There they found not only jobs, but good jobs. Between 1940 and 1944, the percentage of blacks working in skilled or semiskilled jobs rose from 16 to 30 percent. Wherever African Americans moved, however, discrimination followed, in 1942, civil rights leader James Farmer founded an interracial movement called the Congress of Racial Equalitv (CORE) to confront urban segregation in the North. That same year, CORE staged its first sit-in at a segregated Chicago restaurant. As new black migrants moved into already overcrowded cities, tensions rose. In 1943, a tidal wave of racial violence swept across the country. The worst conflict erupted in Detroit on a hot Sunday afternoon in June. What started as a tussle between blacks and whites at a beach on the Detroit River mushroomed into a full-scale riot when white sailors stationed nearby joined the fray. The lighting raged for three days, fueled by false rumors that whites had murdered a black woman and her child and that black rioters had killed 17 whites. By the time President Roosevelt sent federal troops into the city to restore order, 9 whites arid 25 blacks lay dead or dying. The violence of 1943 revealed to many Americans—black and white alike—-just how serious racial tensions had become in the United States. Bv 1945, more than 400 communities had formed committees to improve race relations. Progress was slow, but African Americans were determined not to give up the gains they had made. As African American Jesse Hall, who had moved his family to Detroit in 1942, put it, "We aren't going to go back to where we were before the war. We've shed our blood and proved our loyalty, and we're going to fight for all that is rightfully due us. We won't turn back." MEXICAN AMERICANS IN WARTIME Mexican Americans also experienced both progress and prejudice during the war years. In the military, most served in segregated units. Mexican-American soldiers distinguished themselves In combat, with 17 being awarded the Medal of Honor. An all-Chieano infantry unit—Company E of the 141st Regiment 36th Division—became one of the most decorated of the war. But while Mexican Americans were defending democracy overseas, they also had to defeud themselves against racism at home. In the violent summer of 1943, Los Angeles exploded in anti-Mexican "zoot-suit" riots. The zoot suit was a style of dress adopted by Mexican-American youths as a symbol of their rebellion against tradition. It consisted of a knee-length suit jacket and pleated p.uits nipped in at the cufT. Broad-brimmed hats were often worn with the suits. The riot l >egan when 11 sailors in Los Angeles reported that they had been attacked by Mexican Americans. This charge triggered two night s of violence involving thousands of servicemen and civilians. Mobs poured into Mexican neighborhoods, and grabbed any zoot-suiters they could find. The attackers ripped off their victims' clothes and beat them senseless. The city's response was to outlaw the wearing of zoot suits. Despite such unhappy experiences with racism. Mexican Americans believed that their sacrifices during wartime would lead to a better future. The exaggerated style of the zoot suits that many Mexican-American young men wore expressed their rebellion and made them easy targets for racial violence. The United States in World War 11 759 This war ... is doing what we in our Mexican-American movement had planned to do in one generation.... It has shown those "across the tracks" that we all share the same problems. It has shown them what the Mexican American will do. what responsibility he will take and what leadership qualities he will demonstrate. After this struggle, the status of the Mexican Americans will be different. MANUEL DE LA RA2A. quoted in A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural America JAPANESE AMERICANS IN A STRUGGLE FOR JUSTICE For Japanese Americans locked up in IT.S. internment camps, the war was a daily struggle to maintain their dignity in tin* face of injustice. Many young men escaped the camps by volunteering for military service. As William Hosokawa explained, they "felt it was their obligation to volunteer and go into service and do what they could to demonstrate that they were indeed loyal, and the government was wrong in putting them into camps." The all-Nisei 442nd Regiment, better known as "Go for Broke," became the most decorated combat unit of the war. In 1946, President Truman welcomed die 442nd home with these words: "You fought not only the enemy, you fought prejudice—and you won." Japanese-American internment Japanese-American internment was necessary for national defense. was an unnecessary and a racist act The United States was still reeling from the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor that had brought it into World War II—a threat, some felt, to its very existence. Tom Clark, assistant to the commanding general of the U S. Army's Western Defense Command and later associate justice of the Supreme Court, offered a justification for internment. "Soon after Pearl Harbor I was deluged by demands that, regardless of citizenship, every person of Japanese descent must be removed from the West Coast," he explained. "The threatening public attitude ... would permit nothing less than total mass relocation." Chief Justice Earl Warren pointed out, on the other hand, that many Japanese Americans held dual citizenship and were educated in both Japan and the United States. "Their affiliation in time of war worried us," he explained. War correspondent Walter Lippman offered more concrete reasons. "It is the fact that the Japanese navy has been reconnoitering the Pacific Coast. ... ft is the fact that communication takes place between the enemy at sea and the enemy agents on land." Historians Donald Pike and Roger Olmsted observe that only Japan among the Axis nations had attacked the United States, and "suddenly the Japanese .. . threatened our very national existence." "Our unjust imprisonment was the result of two closely related emotions: racism and hysteria," says Edison Tomimn Uno, a former internee. Uno says the claim that Japanese Americans were relocated for their own protection was 'itm hypocrisy" and denies that Japanese Americans posed t national security threat Instead, he calls the relocation t crime attributable to "racism [andj economic and political opportunism." "War makes for harsh measures," notes the historian Cm McWilliams, "but we cannot justify the evacuation even hi war measure. No such measure was taken against Germans Italian nationals." Another historian, Henry Steele Commager comment! D is sobering to recall that the record does not disclose e single case of Japanese disloyalty or sabotage during the whole war." In fact, more than 25,000 Japanese Americana served in the armed forces during World War II, and the it Japanese-American 442nd combat team inflicted more casualties and received more decorations than any other comparable army unit. Relocation left mwi Americans with a legacy of shame. Chief Justice Earl Warren eonfesiiCr his autobiography that he "deeply regretted- his testimony in lewis internment Tom Clart said, "It was a sad day in our constitutional history." INTERACT Willi IIISTOIt Y 1. FORMING OPINIONS Do you believe internment of the Japanese was necessary? Give reasons to support your opinion. Japanese Americans also fought for justice, both in the courts and in Congress. The initial results were discouraging. In 1944, the Supreme Court internment camps at the decided in Korernatsu v. United States that the governments policy of evacuat- end of the war. ing Japanese Americans to camps was justified on the basis of "military neces- sity." After the war, however, die Japanese American Citizens League (JACL) pushed the government to compensate those sent to the camps for their tost property. In 1965, Congress finally authorized the spending of $38 i million for that purpose—less than a tenth of Japanese Americans' actual losses. But the JACL did not give up. In 1978, die organization called for the payment of reparations, or restitution, to each individual who suffered evacuation and internment, "Restitution does not put a price tag on freedom or justice," the JACL pointed out. "The issue is not to recover what cannot be recovered. The issue is to acknowledge the mistake by providing proper redress to victims of injustice, and thereby make such injustice less likely to recur." Ten years later. Congress fimtlly passed a bill that gave $20,000 to every Japanese American sent to a relocation camp during the war. Each check was accompanied by a letter from President George Bush. Hiuorr D. evaluating ' vns Why id Congress award isadon to Japanese leans more HI years after war ended? A monetary sum and words alone cannot restore lost years or erase painful memories; neither can they fully convey our Nation's resolve to rectify injustice dnd to uphold the rights of individuals. We can never fully right the wrongs of the past. But we can take a clear stand for justice and recognize that serious injustices were done to Japanese Americans during World War II. In enacting a law calling for restitution and offering a sincere apology, your fellow Americans have, in a very real sense, renewed their traditional commitment to the ideals of freedom, equality, and justice. GEORGE BUSH, from his letter accompanying redress checks to Japanese Americans, 1988 America would barely have time to deal with the aftermath of war and to adjust to peace, however, when it began to mobilize against a new enemy without and within—fear and the threat of communism. Section Assessment •51 Bill of Rights •jimes Farmer •Congress of Racial Equality I CORE) ^Japanese American Cozens League 2. SUMMARIZING List the advances and the problems in the economy and in civil rights during World War II. Advances Problems Economy Civil Rights Which of these advances or problems do you think had the most long-term effect? What effect do you think World War II had on traditional attitudes and beliefs held by Americans? • the role of women in families and the economy • the relationship between the races • the impact of the federal government on society 4. COMPARING How were experiences of African Americans, Mexican Americans, and Japanese Americans similar during World War II? • the role of each group in the military • governmental actions toward each group • wartime changes that affected minority groups The United States in World War II 761 THE INNER CITIES While poverty grew rapidly in the decaying inner cities, many suburban Americans remained unaware of it. Some even refused to believe that poverty could exist in the richest, most powerful nation on the earth. And the urban poor had few advocates to call attention to their segregated ghettos. Many politicians, economists, anti journalists advanced the belief that poverty in America was on the road to extinction. An article in Forturu' magazine, for example, declared in I960 that poverty in the United States would be eliminated by the end of the decade. After living among the nations poor across America, however, Michael Harrington published a shocking account that starkly illuminated the issue of poverty. In The Other America: Poverty in the United States (1962), he not only confirmed that widespread poverty existed but also exposed its brutal reality. | HlilDDf I Analyzing s Y/by were profile unable :.tW decent g, despite ing boom tthe 1950s? The poor live in a culture of poverty. .. .The poor get sick more than anyone else in the society.... When they become sick, they are sick longer than any other group in the society. Because they are sick more often and longer than anyone else, they lose wages and work, and find it difficult to hold a steady job. And because of this, they cannot pay for good housing, for a nutritious diet, for doctors... [and] their prospect is to move to an even lower level .. toward even more suffering. MICHAEL HARRINGTON, from The Other America URBAN RENEWAL Although millions of new homes were built in the suburbs in the 1950s, few of them were available to the nations poor. Most African Americans. Native Americans, and Latinos not onlv could not afford homes in the suburbs, but also were rarely welcome there. Instead, they were forced to live in dirty7, crowded inner-city slums. A Texas newspaper described how almost 200.000 Mexican Americans in a San Antonio barrio lived like penned cattle in a stockyard "with roofed-over corrals for homes mill chutes for streets," One proposed solution to the housing problem in inner cities was urban renewal. The National Housing Act of 1949 was passed to provide *a decent home and a suitable Using environment for every American family." This act called for tearing down rundown neighlxir- hoods and constructing low-income housing. Although dilapidated areas were razed, parking lots, shopping centers, highways, parks, and factories were constructed on some of the cleared land, and enough new housing was not always built to accommodate all the displaced people. For example, a barrio in I os Angeles was tom down to make way for Dodger Stadium, in turn, poor people who w'ere displaced from their homes simply moved from one ghetto to another. Some critics of urban renew al claimed that it had merclv become urban removal. The poverty line, calculated each year by the federal government, is the minimum amount of annual income that an individual or a family needs in order to survive in the United States. In 1959, the poverty line for a family of four was $2,973; in 1996, it was SI 5.600 Originally, the poverty line was based on a food budget that provided just enough nutrition to maintain decent health. This number was multiplied by three because a third of a family's total household budget was typically spent on food Since 1969. however, the government has determined the poverty line by simply readjusting the previous year's figure to take inflation into account. Mexican Americans and Native Americans Despite ongoing poverty, during tire 1950s African Americans l*egan to make significant strides toward the reduction of racial discrimination and segregation. (See Chapter 29.) Inspired bv their role in the civil rights movement, other minorities of the nrraJ poor also began to develop a deeper political awareness and a voice. Mexican-American activism gathered steam after veterans returned from World War II. and a drastic change in government policy under Eisenhower's administration fueled Native American protest. Family of Four $20,000 $15,000 $10,000 $5,000 0 1959 1970 1980 1990 1996 Sourer U.S Bureau of me Census 1996 MEXICAN-AMERICAN ACTIVISM Many Mexicans had become citizens during the 19th century, when the United States had annexed the Southwest after The Postwar Boom 821 " /The braceros were a] highly regimented and effective labor force." the war with Mexico. Large numbers of Mexicans also had crossed the border to work in the United States during and after World War I. Most of them were miners, railroad workers, or migrant workers employed temporarily. When the United States entered World War II. the shortage of agricultural laborers spurred the federal government to initiate a program in 19-12 in which Mexican braceros, 'hired hands," were allowed into the United States to harvest crops. More than 200,000 braceros entered the United States on a short- term basis between 1942 and 1947. When their employment was ended, the braceros were expected to return to Mexico. However, many remained in the United States illegally. In addition to the braceros who remained past their work contracts, hundreds of thousands of Mexicans entered the country illegally to escape poor economic conditions in Mexico. To stop the flow of illegal migrants, in 1954 the United States launched Operation Wetback, a federal program designed to find and return illegal aliens to Mexico. (Manx Mexicans swam across the* Hio Granch' to reach the United States illegally, and were laheled with the derogatory name wetbacks.) Between 1953 and 1955, the United States government deported more than 2 million illegal aliens. Although Mexican Americans had played a major rule in the economic growth of the Southwest, they still encountered prejudice and discrimination. Change occurred after World War II. in which almost 350,000 Mexican Americans had fought for democracy. Returning to civilian hie. they were determined to keep fighting for democracy at home—to remedy poor living conditions and wage discrimination, Many w'ere hampered by poor job skills and lack of fluency in English, hut they wanted opportunities to become well educated and to earn a decent living. The body of Felix Longoria was buried in Arlington National Cemetery after a Texas undertaker refused to bury him. THE LONGORIA INCIDENT Some Mexican Americans were shocked into organized action by an insult to the family of Felix Longoria. Longoria was a Mexican- American World War 11 hero who had been killed in the Philippines. The only undertaker in his hometown in Texas refused to let the Longoria family use his funeral home because they were "Mexicans." To protest this and other injustices, Mexican-American veterans organized the American G.I. Forum in 1948. Soon after the Longoria incident, Ignacio Lopez, founded the Unity League of California to register Mexican-American voters anti to promote candidates who would represent them. In response to league actions. California outlawed segregated classrooms for Mexican Americans. Similar voter registration groups developed in Arizona and Texas. The Asociacion National Mexico-Americana anti the League of United Latin American Citizens coordinated efforts to end discrimination, giving Mexican Americans a nationwide political voice. NATIVE AMERICANS CONTINUE THEIR STRUGGLE Native Americans also continued to fight for their rights and identity'. From the passage of the Dawes Act in 1SS7 until 1934, the policy of tire federal government toward Native Americans had been one of Americanization and assimilation. In 1924, all Native Americans were made citizens of the United States, but they remained second-class citizens. In 1934, the Indian Reorganization Act moved official policy away from assimilation and toward Native American autonomy. Its passage signaled a change in federal policy'. In addition, because the government was reeling from the Great | Depression, it didn't want to continue subsidizing the Native Americans. The act ! mandated changes in diree areas—economic, cultural, and political. 822 Chapter 27 Building the Great Society In May of 1964, Johnson had .summed up his grand vision for America in a phrase: the Great Society . In a speech at the University' of Michigan, the president declared that "the Great Society demands an end to poverty' and ^ q yy racial injustice." But. he told the enthusiastic crowd, that was "just the THEN beginning." Johnson emisioned a legislative program that would create not only a higher living standard and equal opportunity but also promote a richer quality' of life. When President Johnson signed the Medicare bill in 1965, only half o( the nation's elderly had health insurance. Today, thanks largely to Medicare, most do. However, most experts agree that the country cannot afford to sustain Medicare in its present form for much longer, especially if the nation hopes to balance the federal budget. Three trends are fueling these concerns: (1) people are living longer, (2) health care continues to become more advanced and more expensive, and |3| the large baby boomer generation is moving toward retirement age. Medicare costs are increasing 10 percent a year. In 1994, federal spending on Medicare was about $160 billion; in 2002, without changes in the program, it could top $345 billion. Both Democrats and Republicans in Washington agree that cuts have to be made, but experience has shown that the issue is a political hot potato. Many people consider Medicare an "entitlement" that they expect to receive when they retire. Although most Americans want a balanced budget, a 1996 survey revealed that only 16 percent favored large cutbacks In Medicare to achieve it. The Great Society is a place where every child can find knowledge to enrich his mind and to enlarge his talents. It is a place where leisure is a welcome chance to build and reflect, not a feared cause of boredom and restlessness. It is a place where the city of man serves not only the needs of the body and the demands of commerce but the desire for beauty and the hunger for community. It is a place where man can renew contact with nature. It is a place which honors creation for its own sake and for what it adds to the understanding of the race. It is a place where men are more concerned with the quality of their goals than the quantity of their goods. LYNDON JOHNSON, -The Great Society," May 22. 1964 LBJ set lofty goals for his nation and for himself. Like his idol FDR, he wanted to change America. Me also knew that he had to act quickly to capitalize on liis new mandate. During the years 1965 and 1966. the Johnson administration introduced a Hum' of bills to Congress. Bv the time Johnson left the White Mouse in 1969, Congress had passed 206 of his measures. For most of them, the president personally led the battle to get them passed. LANDMARK LEGISLATION Johnson considered education "the key which can unlock the door to the Great Society." The Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 provided more than $1 billion in federal aid to help public and parochial schools purchase textbooks and new library materials. This was the first major federal aid package for education in tire nation's history. LBJ and Congress brought about tire first major change in Social Security since its adoption in 1935 by establishing Medicare and Medicaid. Medicare provides hospital insurance and low-cost medical insurance for almost every American age 65 or older. Medicaid extended health insurance to welfare recipients. Congress also appropriated money to build some 240.000 units of low-rent public housing and help low- and moderate-income families pay for better private housing, it established a new federal department, the Department of Housing and Urban Development (MUD). As secretary of the new department, Johnson appointed Robert Weaver, the first African-American cabinet member in American history'. The Great Society also brought profound changes to the nation s immigration laws. The Immigration Act of 1924 and the National Origins Act of 1929 had established immigration quotas that discriminated strongly against people from outside Western Europe. The Immigration Act of 1965 replaced die national origins system with an annual quota of 170.000 immigrants from the Eastern I Icmisphere and 120.000 from the Western Hemisphere. Within this overall quota, no more than 20,000 persons from anyone nation could enter the United States each year. Close relatives of American residents were exempt from tlie quotas. This act opened the door for manv non-European immigrants to settle in the United States. D. Company How are Medicrt and Medicaid similar'' United Farm Wert : Organizing Cornit * La Raze Unida • American tadian Movement LEARN ABOUT the problems faced by Latinos and Native Americans TO UNDERSTAND their campaigns for civil rights and economic justice. Jessie Lopez de la Cruz's life changed one night in 1962, when Cesar Chavez came to her home. Chavez, a Mexican-American farm worker, was trying to organize a union for California's mostly Spanish-speaking farm workers. Although Jessie's husband had been attending union meetings, Jessie had always stayed home. So she was surprised when Chavez sat down at her kitchen table and said, "The women have to be involved. They're the ones working out in the fields with their husbands. If you can take the women out to the fields, you can certainly take them to meetings." Jessie sat up straight and said to herself, "That's what I want!" Before long she was out in the fields, talking to farm workers about the union. Wherever I went to speak ... I told them about... how we had no benefits, no minimum wage, nothing out in the fields—no restrooms, nothing. I'd ask people how they felt about these many years they had been working out in the fields ... They would say, "I was working for so- and-so, and when I complained about something that happened there, I was fired." I said, "Well! Do you think we should be putting up with this in this modern age? ... We can stand up! We can talk back!... This country is very rich, and we want a share of the money those growers make [off] our sweat and our work by exploiting us and our children!" JESSIE LOPEZ DE LA CRUZ, quoted in Moving the Mountain: Women Working for Social Change The efforts of Jessie Lopez de la Cruz were just one part of a larger Latino movement during the turbulent and revolutionary decade of the 1960s. As African Americans fought for their civil rights, Latinos and Native Americans also rose up to assert their rights, preserve their cultures, and improve their lives. Mexican- American farm workers protest poor working conditions. The Latino Presence Grows Spanish-speaking Americans, or Latinos, have always been a large and diverse group. The country's Latino population includes people from several different areas: Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, other Caribbean islands. Central America, and South America. Because these groups all trace their roots back to Spanish-speaking countries of I .atin America, people often group them together. However, each Latino group has its own history, its own pattern of settlement in die United States, and its own set of economic, social, cultural, and political concerns. During the 1960s, the Latino presence in the United States greatlv increased. In the span of a decade, the Latino population grew from 3 million hi more than 9 million. During this time, the number of Mexicans settling in the United States rose. Mexican Americans, who have always made up the largest latino group in the United States, once lived mostly in the Southwest and California. Some were the descendants of the nearly 100,000 Mexicans who had lived in territories ceded by Mexico to the United States after the war with Mexico in 1S4S. Others were the children and grandchildren of the million or so Mexicans who settled in the United States in the decade following Mexico's 1910 revolution. Still others came 920 Chapter 31 u O Latino Population in the United States and Selected Metropolitan Areas, 1970-1994 United States 1970 Los Angeles Miami 1970 New York City Chicago Source: U S Biifiau ot ttw Census US Department of Commerce MfSTOUT Comparing ims did Imo groups share? more recently into the United States as bmceros. or temporary laborers, during the 1940s and 1950s. About a million Puerto Ricans have lived in the United States since the 1960s. Most have settled in the Northeast, with about (->00,000 in New York C !itv alone. Lacking the needed skills and education, many Puerto Ricans had trouble finding work and getting ahead. I lundreds of thousands of Cubans fled to the United States after the revolutionary leader Fidel Castro overthrew Cuba's dictator. Fulgendo Batista, in 1959. Most settled in or near Miami, turning that Florida city into a boom tow n. Large Cuban communities also formed in New York Cit\ and New Jersey Many Cubans who fled to the United States were academics and professionals escaping Castro's Communist rule. In addition, tens ol thousands of Salvadorans, Guatemalans. Nicaraguans, and Colombians immigrated to the United States after the 1960s to escape civ il war and chronic poverty. Wherever they settled, during the 1960s many Uitinos encountered ethnic prejudice and discrimination in jobs and housing. Most lived in segregated barrios, or neighborhoods. The Latino jobless rate was nearly 50 percent higher than that of whites, as was the percentage of families living in poverty. The majority ofLatinos found jobs only on die lowest rungs of the occupational ladder. 'We are first in janitors." said Senator Joseph Montoya of New Mexico, but "last in equal opportunity." Which city experienced the greatest percentage increase of Latinos between 1970 and 1994? In what two cities do Latinos represent more than one-third of the population? Latinos Fight for Change As the presence of Latinos in the United States grew, so too did their cries for greater representation and better treatment. During the 1960s. Latinos demanded not only equal opportunity, but also a respect for their culture and heritage. Long hours of backbreaking work for little pay and few benefits. Cesar Chavez believed that the only way to improve conditions for farm workers was to unionize them, so that they could An Era of Social Change 921 1927-1993 Cesar Chavez spoke from experience when he said. "Many things in farm labor are terrible." As a teenager, Chavez moved with his family from farm to farm, picking such crops as grapes, apricots, and olives. "The worst crop was the olives," Chavez recalled, "the olives are so small you can never fill the bucket" The seeds of protect grew early in Chavez, and one incident in particular seemed to signal his eventual climb to a life of activism. As a teenager, Chavez once went to see a movie, only to find that the theater was segregated—whites on one side of the aisle and Mexicans on the other side. "I really hadn't thought much about what I was going to do but I had to do something," Chavez recalled. The future union leader sat down in the whites-only section and stayed there until the police arrived and arrested him. o-<co/> bargain as one large group for improved conditions and better treatment. In 1962, (.'have/., along with Dolores Huerta, established the National Farm Workers Association. Four years later. Chavez merged this group with another union to form the United Farm Worker's Organizing Committee (UFWO( Chavez and his fellow organizers insisted that California's large fruit and vegetable companies accept their union as the bargaining agent for the farm workers. In 196.5. when California's grape growers refused to recognize the union. Chavez launched a nationwide boycott of the companies' grapes. Chavez, like Martin Luther king, Jr., believed in nonviolence to achieve his goals. Ilis strategy was to win, through peaceful means. American public support for l/i Causa, or the cause of social and economic justice for farm workers. The union sent farm workers across North America to convince supermarkets and shoppers not to buy California grapes. To call further attention to the workers' plight. Chavez, in 1968. went on a three- week fast in which he lost 35 pounds, lie ended his fast by taking communion with Senator Robert F. Kennedy. The efforts of the farm workers eventually paid off. Faced with growing financial losses and a deteriorating public image, the grape growers finally signed contracts with the UFWOC in 1970. The new contracts guaranteed union workers higher wages and other benefits long denied them. "The boycott of grapes was the most near-perfect of nonviolent struggles." said Chavez afterward. It "demonstrated to the whole country, the whole world, what people can do by nonviolent action." CULTURAL PRIDE The activities of the California farm workers helped to inspire other Latino "brown power" movements across the country. In New York, Puerto Ricans began to demand that schools offer Spanish- speaking children classes taught in their own language as well as programs on their culture. In 1968. Congress addressed the need for bilingual education by enacting the Bilingual Education Act. The act provided funds for schools to develop bilingual and cultural heritage programs for non-English-speaking children. Young Mexican Americans started to call themselves Chicanos or Chicanas—a shortening of "Mexicanos" that expressed pride in their ethnic heritage. Many Chicanos worked for educational reform. In 1968, about 15.000 Cliicano high school students in Los Angeles walked out of class in student strikes. Their demands included smaller classes, more Cliicano teachers and administrators, and programs designed to reduce the high Dili no dropout rate. At colleges and universities. militant Mexican-American students increasingly won the establishment of Cliicano studies programs. POLITICAL POWER Latinos also began organizing politically during the 1960s. Some worked within the two-party system to win support for Latino issues and candidates. For example, the Mexican American Political Association (MAPA), which sjxmsored candidates, registered and educated voters and lobbied for legislation that benefited the Latino community . In 1962, MAPA helped elect Los Angeles politician Edward Roybal to the House of Representatives. Roybal was the second Mexican American to serve in Congress. Henry Gonzalez, elected to the House of Representatives from Texas in 1961, was the first. Others sought to create an independent latino political movement. That was the dream of'Texan Jose Angel Gutierrez, who established la Ra/a Unida (the United People Party) in 1970. In the 1970s, la Raza Unida ran Latino THIMK THROtKM MRS B. Recognizing Effects IWat impact Mm grape toywsSM on grape gram1 922 Ciiaptkh 31 candidates in five states and won positions on school boards and cits councils, as well as several races for mayor. Still other Latinos took on a more confrontational tone, Keies Tijerina, a one-time evangelical preacher, argued that the United States had stolen some of the Latinos' land. In 1967, Tijerina founded the Alianza Federal de Mercedes (Federal Alliance of Land Grants) to help reclaim U.S. land taken from Mexican landholders in the 19th centurv. Native Americans Struggle for Equality C. Identifying Problems What problems have Native Jcans laced much of the M century? NATIVE AMERICANS SEEK GREATER AUTONOMY Despite their cultural diversity, Native Americans have shared many of the same problems throughout the 20th century. As a group. Native Americans have been the poorest of Americans and have suffered from the highest unemployment rate. They have been more likely than any other group to suffer serious health problems, such as tuberculosis and alcoholism. Despite an increase in the Native American population during tbe 1960s, the death rate among Native American infants was nearly twice the national average, while the life expectancy of Native Americans was several years lower than for other Americans. In an attempt to deal with these problems, the Eisenhower administration in 1953 enacted a termination poliev designed to relocate Native Americans from isolated reservations into mainstream urban American Many people view Native Americans, like Latinos, as one group, despite tbe hundreds of distinct Native American tribes and nations in the United States. These diverse tribes and nations, however, have shared a mostly bleak existence in the United States. During the 1960s, many Native Americans joined together to demand improvements in their conditions. life. The plan failed miserably, Most of the Native Americans who moved to tlie cities remained desperately poor. In addition, many Native Americans refused to assimilate, or blend into mainstream society. Native American nationalist Vine Deloria, Jr., expressed his opinion that young Native Americans viewed mainstream America as nothing more than "ice cream bars and heart trouble and neurosis and deodorants and getting up at six o'clock in the morning to mow your lawn in the suburbs." Deloria added that "when you get far enough from the reservation, vou can sex? it's the urban man who has no identity." What Native Americans wanted was greater opportunity to control and govern their own lives. In 1961. representatives from 67 Native American groups met in Cliicago and drafted the Declaration of Indian Purpose, which stressed the determination of Native Americans to "choose our own way of life." The declaration called for an end to the termination program in favor of new policies designed to create economic opportunities for Native Americans on their reservations. In 1965, President Lyndon Johnson responded to the Native Americans' call for more self-determination. As part of Iris Great Society program, Johnson established the National Council on Indian Opportunity to "ensure that programs reflect the needs and desires of the Indian people." VOICES OF PROTEST Despite a change in the government's policies, many voung N ative Americans were dissatisfied with die slow pace of reform. Their discontent led in part to die growth of the American Indian Movement (AIM), an often militant Native American rights Whereas many Native Americans, in seeking reforms, rejected assimilation with mainstream America, Ben Nighthorse Campbell has chosen to work within the system to improve the lives of Native Americans. In 1992, Campbell was elected to the U.S. Senate from Colorado, marking the first time since 1929 that a Native American had been elected to the Senate. Campbell's father was North Cheyenne, and his great-grandfather. Black Horse, fought in the 1876 Battle of Little Bighorn—in which the Cheyenne and the Sioux defeated Lieutenant Colonel George Custer, Campbell stated that while his new job called for him to address the problems of the entire nation, the needs of his fellow Native Americans remained a high priority. As a Native American, Campbell says, "you are measured by how much you've given to people, how much you help people." An Era of Social Change 923 The Movement of Migrant Workers Tlic nation's 3 million farm workers are responsible for harvesting much of the fruit and vegetables that families eat each das'. There are two types of produce farm workers in the United States: workers who remain in one place most of the year: and migrant workers, who move with their entire family from one region to the next as the growing seasons change. As the map shows, there were three major streams of migrant worker movements in the I9(i()s: the Pacific Coast, the Midwest, and the Atlantic Coast. While these paths may have changed slightly since then, the movement of migrant workers into nearly every region of the nation continues today. The Pacific Coast region, with its year-round schedule and large harvests, offers laborers more steady work. Workers along the Midwest ami bast Coast streams, where crops are smaller, must keep moving in order to Dud work. Due to the winters, migrant workers in most of the Midwest and Atlantic regions can find work for only six months out of the year. During the winter months, many workers return to the nations southernmost reaches, where they struggle to make a living, and wait until spring, when they once again head north. Because California's moderate climate allows for year-round harvesting, most of the state's farm workers work on California's large fruit farms for most of the year. In addition, California produces large amounts of table grapes, a delicate fruit that requires specialized and constant care. 926 Chapter 31 200M'te" 400 KitofliftC'k These workers picking strawberries in Michigan will soon move on. For example, one family will travel to Ohio for the tomato harvest and then return to Michigan to pick apples before heading back to Texas for the winter months. IVrKHACT WITH HISTORY Retrace the 12-month activity of migrant workers along the Midwest and Atlantic Coast streams. 2. APPLYING Use an outline map of the United States or While some workers along the Atlantic Coast stream remain in Florida, like the workers shown here picking beans, others travel as far north as New Hampshire and New York. There, they work from March through September, before returning to the South for the winter. of die world to trace work-related travel for some people in your community. Each student could track this information for a parent or a neighbor. The class could then place all of the results on a large map entitled "A Nation on the Move' and discuss certain aspects of the map. For mort ibout migrant worters. visit vwvw. me dougallitteil com All Era of Social Change 927 In the 1996 presidential campaign, affirmative action became an issue. Democratic candidate President Clinton favored current government policies supporting affirmative action, and Republican candidate Bob Dole opposed affirmative action. Presidents Reagan and Bush, like Bob Dole, actively opposed affirmative action and racial quotas throughout the 1980s.The Supreme Court's decision in Richmond v. J. A. Croson Company was one of a series of Supreme Court decisions in 1989 that made it harder for minorities and women to sue in job discrimination cases. In 1996, voters in California approved a referendum that did away with state affirmative action programs, but the referendum has been challenged on constitutional grounds in the courts. At the same time, however, the income gap Ix-tween whim Americans and African Americans was larger in 1988 than it hail been in 1968. Middle-class African Americans sometimes moved into professional and managerial positions, but the poor laced a future of diminishing opportunities. In 1989, the newly conservative Supreme Court handed down a series of decisions that reversed the nations course on civil rights. In the case of Richmond v. J, A, Croson Company, for example, the Court reversed its earlier endorsement of affirmative action. This policy was meant to correct the effects of discrimination in the employment or education of minority groups or women. It often set goals and timetables for hiring minorities and women. Other decisions by die Court outlawed contracts set aside for minority businesses. Sylvester Monroe, an African-American correspondent for Newsweek magazine, commented on the wav many African Americans saw the backlash against affirmative action. There's a finite pie and everybody wants his piece. Everybody is afraid of losing his piece of the pie. That's what the fight against affirmative action is all about. People feel threatened. As for blacks, they're passe. They're not in anymore. Nobody wants to talk about race. SYLVESTER MONROE, quoted in The Greet Divide LATINOS Latinos became the fastest growing minority during the 1980s. By 1990, diey constituted almost 9 percent of the population, and demographers estimated that Latinos would soon outnumber African Americans as the nation's largest minority group. About two out of three Latinos were Mexican Americans, yvho lived mostly in the Soutlmest. Puerto Ricans lived mainly in the Northeast, and Cubans Inert primarily in Florida, like African Americans, Latinos gained political power during the 1980s, when Toney Anaya became governor of Neyv Mexico mid Roliert Martinez became governor of Florida. Several cities, including Denver. San Antonio, and Miami, elected mayors of Latino background. In August of 1988, President Reagan appointed Laura Cavazos as secretary of education, and in 1990. President Bush named Dr. Antonia Coello Novello to the post of Surgeon General. Latino farm workers still suffered from loyv pay, unhealthy conditions, and high unemployment, but increasing numbers of Latinos held professional and technical positions. Latino music and salsa dancing gained widespread popularity, and writers such as Sandra Cisneros Dr. Antonia Coello Novello and Oscar Hijuelos won literary awards for their books. I .atino architecture and served as Surgeon General under President Bush. crafts—such as at lobe houses, walled courtyards, and vivid yvoven rugs—became popular elements of American style. Latino foods such as tapas, fajitas, tacos, jalapeno peppers, and jicama quickly found their way into mainstream American diets. Many latinos supported bilingual education. Some feared that abandoning Spanish would weaken their distinct culture. In the words of Daniel Villanueva, a television executive. "We xvanl to be here, but without losing our language and our culture. They are a richness, a treasure that xve don't care to lose." The Bilingual Education Act of 1968 and the Voting Rights Act of 1975 enabled Spanish speakers to go to school and vote in their own language, but by tlie inid- | 1980s, opposition to bilingualism was rising in some quarters. Critics argued that it slowed the rate at which Spanish-speaking people entered mainstream American life. They also feared that the nation yvouJd become split between English speakers and non-English speakers. 992 Chapter 33 IHIOUSH Mil TORT C. Contrasting I Contrast today's migrants to the 1 States with the immigrants who came around 1900 Immigration in the 1990s In addition to becoming increasingly suburban and elderly, the population of the United States has also been transformed by immigration. Between 1970 and 1995. the country's population swelled from 204 million to more than 260 million. Immigration accounted for much of that growth. As the nations newest residents yearned for U.S. citizenship, however, other Americans debated the effects of immigration on American life. A CHANGING IMMIGRANT POPULATION The most recent immigrants to the United States differed from immigrants of earlier years. The large numbers of immigrants who entered the country before and just after 1900 came from Europe. In contrast, about 45 percent of immigrants since the 1960s have come from the Western Hemisphere, primarily Mexico, and 30 percent from Asia. Most immigrants left their homelands because of economic problems, though some fled oppressive governments or political turmoil. The chief lure of the United States was the opportunity it gave immigrants to earn a better living than they could in their home countries. In Mexico, for example, between November 1994 and February 1995 millions of people fell into deeper poverty when the government decreased the value of die peso by 73 percent—making it harder to buy things because the peso was worth much less than lietbre. .As a result of this devaluation, almost a million Mexicans lost their jobs. The persistent lack of jobs motivated a portion of Mexico's young population—more dian half its 100 million people are under age 2-5—to head north of the border in search of jobs. The Census Bureau reported that patterns of immigration are changing the country 's ethnic and racial makeup. By 2001. California had become a majority minority state, with African Americans, Asian Americans, Latinos, and Native Americans making tip more than half its population. In 1996, 74 percent of the total U.S. population consisted of non-Latino whites; by 2050. that proportion is expected to drop to 53 percent. Latinos, 10 percent of the population in 1996, will be 25 percent in 2050 In that period. Asians will increase from 2 to H percent. and African Americans from 12 to 14 percent. U.S. Immigration, 1995 Destination ol Immigrants, 1995 L More than 100,000 El 40.000 -100.000 El 20,000-39,999 □ 10.000-19.999 ■ 6,000-9,999 IS Less than 2,000 "We are at a period of historic change—the way we work; the way we live; the way we relate to each other; the way we relate to others beyond (Mir borders." Which four states received the greatest numbers of immigrants? LOCATION Why do you think these states attract so many immigrants? Hawaii Alaska * "f; The United States in Today's World 1027 Candidates for U.S. citizenship are sworn in. DEBATES OVER IMMIGRATION POLICY Public opinion polls in 1994 revealed that only 6 percent of Americans believed immigration should be increased, while almost two-thirds (63 percent) wanted It) cut back immigration. Americans who opposed immigration argued that immigrants took jobs from other Americans or reduced wages because of competition, but many economists disagreed with that view. Opponents of immigration found a strong spokesperson in Patrick Buchanan, a former speeehwriter for President Nixon, lie ran unsuccessfully for the Republican presidential nomination in 1992 and 1996. I le then lost the 2000 election as a third-party candidate. Buchanan argued that the United States should erect a fence along the Mexican border to keep out illegal immigrants. He also opposed NAFTA, which he charged caused many Americans to lose their jobs to foreign competition. By the early 1990s. an estimated 3.2 million illegal immigrants had made their way to the United States. Most of these people had come from Mexico, hut others had traveled north from El Salvador. Guatemala, and Haiti. Many illegal immigrants also arrived from Canada. Poland, China, and Ireland. Most of these illegal immigrants took jobs many Americans turned down as sweatshop workers and domestic serv ants—often receiving the minimum wage or less and no benefits. Hostility toward illegal immigration peaked in California and Florida, two states with high percentages of immigrants. In 199-1, California passed Proposition 1ST. which cut oft all education and nonemergenev health benefits to illegal immigrants. A federal court later struck dow n the law as unconstitutional, however, and supporters hoping to win approval of a revised version were unable to place the new referendum on statewide ballots. In Florida, the governor sued the federal government for its failure to enforce immigration laws, but the Supreme Court denied the suit. D. Comparing How are current arguments agtmS immigration simlar to those used men past? America and a New Millennium For Americans, the last decade of each century since the nation's birth has l>eeii a time of challenge and change. In the last decade of the 1 St h century, the new nation was caught up in creating its national institutions and extending its reach to the West. As the 19th century came to a close, the United States was creating a new empire abroad, building new cities at home, rapidly industrializing, and becoming a world power. The end of the 20th century also marked the start of a new millennium, making the sense of change and challenge on the horizon all the more dramatic. CHALLENGES AHEAD As a new century began, Americans faced both new problems and old ones. Increasingly, terrorist acts posed a threat to Americans at home and abroad: the bornbings in New York Citv and Oklahoma Citv showed that people anywhere could use liighh destructive force for political reasons. In addition, environmental concerns had become a global Issue as scientists warned of global warming, acid rain, and the loss of the earths protective 1028 Chapter 34 1900s From 1890 to 1920, millions of southern and eastern European immigrants came to the United States. Many of them moved to cities and settled in neighborhoods populated by others from their country of origin, such as this neighborhood in New York City. This tended to foster cultural separation rather than cultural interaction—a situation that eased over time as the immigrants' children and grandchildren moved away from the old neighborhoods. In spite of this, most large U.S. cities still have many neighborhoods that retain a strong ethnic flavor. 1960s 000s Many school districts across the United States provide a glimpse of the nation's future—in which diversity will increase to the point that there is no longer a majority group The students pictured here are part of an advisory group helping the principal to address school problems in Los Angeles. As students such as these move into adulthood, the richness of their varied backgrounds and perspectives will help them make valuable contributions to America's economic and cultural life. During the civil rights movement's Freedom Summer in 1964, white and African-American volunteers worked together to register African Americans to vote in the South. To identify with the sharecroppers and tenant farmers they were trying to reach, some white student volunteers emulated the styles of speech and dress of Southern laborers. SNCC member Cleveland Sellers recalled volunteers rushing to buy bib overalls like the SNCC workers. Similarly, one volunteer remembers that "everyone ... got into talking like the SNCC staff ... 'diggin' this and 'messin, with' that." 1031 i>ti:rut with history ANALYZING MOTIVES Why do you think some groups have tried to repress the culture of others over the course of history? Why have many groups persisted in retaining their cultural heritage? Write a brief explanation of your opinion and share it with the class. SEE SKIueuilDER HANDBOOK. PAGE 1039. RESEARCHING YOUR PAST What kinds of contri buttons to the cultural diversity of the United States have your own ancestors made? Research your own family history and write a brief explanation of your findings. Share it with the class. For more about cultural diversity, visit www.mcdougallittell.com 