Growth in Immigration The labor force grew considerably in the 1830s as more than 300,000 newcomers I poured into the country. In 1860 more than 4.1 million Americans—about 13per- (oii of the population—were foreign born. These immigrants wanted equality and work Irish immigrants. The largest group of immigrants—more than 1.6 million by |U6I)—came from Ireland. Discrimination, hunger, and poverty had driven them km their homeland. Most of Ireland's Roman Catholic population rented land. A"lhe population grew rapidly, there was not enough land to go around. The situ- worsened in the mid-1840s, when disease wiped out the potato crop, s major food source. More than 1 million people in Ireland—or one out of eight—died from starvation or disease. Many Irish people who could gather the money for a steamship ticket came to Ac United States. Able to afford only the cheapest accommodations, Although most Irish immigrants had been farmers, few could afford to land in the United States. The majority settled in crowded city slums, where had to compete for even the lowest-paying or most-dangerous jobs, seldom sec a gray-haired Irishman" became a common saying in the TOs because the average life expectancy of Irish Americans was so short, men helped build the nations canals and railroads, mined coal, and freight. Irish women cared for children, cleaned houses, washed mended clothes, and worked in factories. Irish immigrants also struggle- against prejudice. Job listings in city newspapers often specified that to would not hire Irish workers. The Irish frequently faced difficult living conditions. Many lived in poorly ventilated tenements in Boston, New York, and other eastern Entire families crowded into single rooms, cellars, or attics. Diseases rapidly. Ironically, Americans were more willing to extend charity Irish overseas than to Irish Americans. New Yorkers raised $9,000 in few days to buy wheat and other food to send to "the suffering" They neglected, however, to offer assistance to their Irish n neighbors. Isolated by prejudice, many Irish living in eastern cities created their communities. They established Catholic churches that served as centers unity life. The Irish also actively participated in local politics. By the Irish Americans ran the local governments of several cities. In return Irish politicians helped poor and working-class Irish immigrants with emergency food and money, jobs, and legal aid. Evaluating What does Smith mean by "the hand of casual charity"? Advertisements like this one encouraged people to immigrate to the United States. The Irish Potato Famine The fungus that caused the failure of the potato crop in the 1840s probably traveled to Ireland on ships from North America. As a wind-borne fungus, it quickly infected the country's potato plants. Warn weather helped the fungus germinate and reproduce. As a result the 1846 crop was a complete failure. The 1847 crop survived, but the 1848 crop also failed, leading to widespread disease and starvation. What evidence might historians use to prove that the fungus arrived in Ireland from North America? Historians might point to the existence of a similar fungus in North America. They might also provide records showing a voyage from a fungus-infected point in North America to Ireland. BALL LEVELS: Ask students to identify the major immigrant groups in the 1830s and to describe what characteristics distinguished these immigrants from earlier waves of immigrants. (Students should mention that the Irish and Germans were major immigrant groups in the United States during the 1830s. Students might suggest that many immigrants were Roman Catholic and that German immigrants continued to speak German and retain German customs.) To help students understand how some Americans responded to increasing immigration, copy the following graphic organizer on the chalkboard, omitting the italicized answers. Ask each student to complete it. English Language Learners Increasing Immigration Nativist Response Violence against the foreign-born Nativism Favoring native-born Americans over the foreign-born z S'Nativist Response Wanted to restrict immigrants' voting rights and political rights J Nativist Response Anti-Catholic riots Nativist Response Creation of nativist organizations German Aid Societies. New immigrants faced many dangers in the United States, including scam artists and hazardous jobs. Benevolent societies attempted to help newcomers adjust and prosper. They also helped focus attention on poor traveling and housing conditions for immigrants. The German Society of the City of New York was one such organization. The group pushed for state and federal laws to protect immigrants, and succeeded despite heavy opposition. ACTIVITY: Tell students to imagine that they are members of the German Society in 1835. Have each student write a memo suggesting at least three ways to protect and help German immigrants in the United States. interesting! The German Society of the City of New York, the most important benevolent society for Germans in the 1800s, is still in existence today. Visual Record Answer Students might suggest that the German language was an important aspect of German American identity. 1851; 1854 German immigrants. This Pennsylvania birth certificate from the early 1800s was written in German. What does this document demonstrate about German American culture? German immigrants. In the mid-1800s the second-largest group of immigrants to the United States came from what is now Germany From 1831 to 1860, more than 1.5 million Germans arrived. The most in one year—215,000—came in 1854. Most of the German immigrants were Protestant. About a third were Roman Catholic, and some 250,000 were Jewish. Some came for political or religious reasons. Most, however, came in search of economic opportunity German industrialization had left many traditional artisans without jobs. Farmland in Germany was becoming scarce. Lacking economic opportunity at home, both farmers and urban artisans immigrated to the United States. Many German immigrants went into skilled occupations,; becoming bakers, brewers, butchers, cabinetmakers, cigar makers, machinists, or tailors. Most German-born women worked at home or on the farm. Women who sought outside employment tended to work in family shops or businesses that served the German immigrant community. Some of these immigrants enjoyed remarkable success, such as one young indentured servant couple who obtained their freedom. The wife spun and knitted, while the husband made shoes and hired himself out as a laborer. Within two years they paid off their debt and bought some land Eventually, die couple became the wealthiest in their county. Most German Jews remained on the East Coast. Other German immigrants settled in small towns and rural areas in Illinois, Missouri, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, Wisconsin, and elsewhere. Those in larger cities usually lived in tightly knit communities where they read German newspapers and even attended public Immigration to the United States, 1830-1860 source; Historical Statistics of the United States Interpreting Graphs Prior to 1800, most immigrants to the United States were British, This pattern changed in the 1800s as millions of Irish, German, and other non-British immigrants settled in the United States. H Skills Assessment In which year did Irish immigration reach its peak? In which year did German immigration reach its peak? Fair students and tell them to imagine that they are living in the Midwest in the early 1800s. Have each pair create a two-to-three-minute , dialogue describing how life has changed in its region. (Pairs mil include a discussion of the increased demand for crops, the toward crop specialization, the introduction of new agricultural technology, and the shift from home-produced goods to mc-bought goods.) Have volunteers perform their dialogues for the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning. Tell students to imagine that they are living in the Midwest in the early 1800s. Have each student write a one-to- two-page letter to a friend in New York City' describing how life has changed in the region. (See the Level I lesson for the correct changes.) Ask volunteers to read their letters to the class. schools that conducted classes in the German language. "Supplied with newspapers it their own language,... and associating mainly with each other .. observed Swedish immigrant Gustaf Unonius, "many [German immigrants] do not even trouble to learn the language [English] or teach it to their children." Hie Nativist Response Some native-born Americans protested the arrival of these immigrants. They were thus called the Know-Nothings. Her organization was nicknamed the Know-Nothing Parts'. The American Party widespread popularity and won numerous city and stale elections with its list platform. / READING CHECK: Analyzing Information Which immigrant groups were targeted by nativists, and why? Germans and Roman Catholic Irish; because larger numbers of them W"e arriving and because nativists disapproved of German customs and feared Irish political power Hie Midwest Mat)1 immigrants, particularly Dutch, Germans, Scandinavians, and Swiss, looked for opportunity in the newly prosperous Midwest. Alexis de Tocqueville wrote of Immigration, "No power on earth can shut out the immigrants from that fertile offers resources to all industry and a refuge from all want." Religious conflict Violent anti- Catholic riots rocked the United States in the mid-1800s. What do you think was the author's opinion of the rioters? Explain your answer. Samuel Morse and Nativism. Americans usually remember Samuel Morse as the inventor of the telegraph. However, he was also a crucial force in American nativism. Using the pseudonym "Brutus." he wrote a series of influential anti-immigrant newspaper articles. Morse claimed that the Roman Catholic Church in Europe was sending immigrants to the United States in order to populate the West subvert democracy, and ultimately control the nation. The articles were so popular that they were later published as a book. Historians believe that Morse's father, a minister who often condemned the Catholic Church, influenced his views. might Morse's legacy as a nativist be relatively unknown? ANSWER: Answers will vary. Some students might suggest that his reputation as a brilliant inventor outweighs his reputation as a nativism Visual Record Answer Students might suggest that the author had a negative view of the rioters, suggested by the word "awful" and the graphic scene of violence. LEVEL 3: Organize the class into two groups—one representing the Mexican government and the other representing Texans. Ask each student, in his or her respective role, to create a list of grievances that led to the Texas Revolution. (See the Level I lesson for the correct factors.) After students have completed their lists, have each group conduct a discussion of the individual grievances and come up with a master list of grievances. Then call on a representative from each group to present these arguments in a classroom debate. To conclude, have students discuss the arguments and vote on the most compelling one. Cooperative Learning B LEVEL 1: Conduct a discussion on life in the Republic of Texas and the problems that existed in the young republic. (The republic had a relatively small population, a poor infrastructure, widespread economic problems, and mam- conflicts with American Indians. Tejanos faced discrimination.} Then have each student assume the role of a Tejano or a (iernian immigrant in Texas after the revolution. Ask each student to use information from the textbook to write a journal entry on the problems he or she faced in Texas after the revolution. Ask volunteers to share their journal entries with the clast English Language Learners Ann Coleman in Texas Tears and Texas Sunshine "Dog Trot" Cabins. In 1832 Ann Coleman left England and sailed for Texas. Coleman was shocked at the cramped accommodations she encountered in Texas. She recollected: The ladies all laughed at us and said, By the time you have been in Texas a few months, if you travel in the country, you will have to sleep with the man and his wife in the house you visit,' as houses were only log cabins with two rooms, one for house servants, the other for the family.... This was the way most of the wealthy planters lived when we first arrived in Texas. A double log cabin with an entry running through the middle was their residence. To make money was their chief object, all things else were subsidiary to it". The wife of a Mexican officer, Francita Alavod saved some Texans by hiding them from Mexican soldktv Thereafter, Texans remembered Alavez as the 'Angel of Goliad." Victory at San Jacinto. The Texans, who had declared J independence on March 2, were hadlv shaken by that I defeats. On April 21, however, their luck changed dramaticallv. Led by Sam Houston, the commander of the Teat army, a force of approximately 900 rebels surprised Sum I Anna's troops. The Mexican soldiers were taking an afternoon nap near the San Jacinto River. Shouting''Remember! the Alamo!" and "Remember Goliad!" the Texans through Mexican lines, killing some 630 Mexican troops and taking Santa Anna prisoner in the Battle of San Jacinto. With his army weakened and supplies low, Santa Anna signed a treaty granting Texas its independence. Shortly thereafter he was removed from his position as the head of the Mexican government. A short time Inter in 1836, Texans elected Sant Houston as the first president of the independent Republic of Texas.The Mexican government refused to recognise the republic. Mexican officials argued that Santa Anna had been forced to sign the San Jacinto agreement illegally. The fighting Texans. After being taken prisoner in the Battle of San Jacinto, General Santa Anna surrendered to Sam Houston. What does the Texans' clothing reveal about the organization of their army? ✓ READING CHECK: Sequencing What events led to the Texas Revolution? Meriro closed Texas to U.S, immigration and importation of slaves: Santa Anna was elected president of Mexico and established dictatorial control; Stephen F. Austin was jailed Life in the Republic of Texas Texas petitioned the U.S. Congress for annexation in 1837. However, northern opposition to admitting another slave state as well as a cautious foreign polity j dents that Texas settlers called their houses "dog trot" cabins. I Why might they have used this name? ANSWER: Students might suggest that the settlers called their houses "dog trot" cabins because a dog could trot through the structure on the middle entryway. Visual Record Answer Students might mention that the army was informal and perhaps underfunded. 320 chapter to toward Mexico prevented Texas from being accepted into the Union immedutda From 1836 to 1845, Texas existed as an independent republic. It was known ns lb; Tone Star Republic because its flag had a single star. French and German immigration. One of the republic's first tasks to increase its population. In 1842 the Texas congress awarded Henri Castro,a French banker of Portuguese descent, an empresariogrant in central Texas. Two veanUh Castro brought 33 French colonists—many of them from the German-s rM region of Alsace—to found the town of Castroviile just west ot San Antonio. Mon than 2,000 settlers came during the colony's first year. They established farms, uanj j seeds and supplies provided by Castro. The Texas government also arranged for a German company to recruit settled I In 1845 the company's agent, Prince Carl of Solms-Braunfels, and several (krma I families founded the settlement of New Braunfels in central lexas. Over the rat few years more than 7,000 German immigrants came to live in what they calledtp Paradise of North America. Early living conditions in New Braunfels were less than ideal. Ferdinand Roetntt a German geologist and naturalist who traveled to Texas in the 1840s, described the homes in the new colony: LEVELS 2 AND 3: Organize students into two large groups, one representing residents of the new Republic of Texas and one representing eastern journalists preparing to interview them. Have students in each group prepare for their interviews. The Texas residents should create a list of descriptions about life in the new republic, and the journalists should prepare 5 to 10 questions about the problems that Texas faced after the revolution. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct problems.) Then pair students from the two groups and have them conduct their interviews. Ask volunteers to perform their interviews for the class. To conclude, ask students to think about the revolution and its participants. Do students think that those participants would have started the revolution if they had known about the problems that followed? Cooperative Learning on Czech Immigration to Texas Tell students that many people from Czechoslovakia immigrated to Texas and that these immigrants made important contributions to the new republic. Pair students and have them conduct research on Czechs in Texas. Suggest that pairs focus their research on music, food, or Czech-language newspapers. Ask each pair to prepare a short report on a selected aspect of Czech cultural life. Cooperative Learning, Block Scheduling NOTE: To help students make meaningful connections between events in U.S. history and those in their own hometown, use the Chapter 10 Hands-On History Activity, Religions in Your Community. __± ^Several families were packed into one house, no matter how small it was. The interior of such a house, where men, women, and children were cooped up with their unpacked chests and boxes, often looked like the steerage of an immigrant ship." —Ferdinand Roenier, Texas These crowded conditions were not permanent, however. Most families eventually moved out of town and settled on farms. Many kept their homes in town but used them only when they had business to conduct or community events to attend. With New Braunfels serving as a social and cultural hub, German settlers spread their customs, farming practices, and language throughout the Hill Country of central Texas. Gerntan- bnguage church services, newspapers, and local social clubs helped preserve the German language and customs for many tolerations. Tejanos did not fare as well as German settlers in the Lone Star Republic. A number of Tejanos had fought beside other Texans during the revolution. Alter Texas achieved independence, however, Tejanos became victims of violence and discrimination. Many had their lands and property seized by white Texans. Some were even driven from the country. As one descendant of a Tejano family put it, "These men who had favored the independence, suffered from the very beginning_Many lost their [land] grants, and all lost their ideal—The Republic of Texas." Juan Seguin (se-GEEN), a leading Tejano figure in the Texas Revolution, endured this suffering firsthand. Born in 1806 into a prominent San Antonio family, Seguin developed a strong interest in politics while still in his teens. He harshly criticized President Santa Anna's government during the 1830s. When the revolution began, he recruited a force of Tejano volunteers to fight Santa Anna and the Mexican army. After distinguishing himself in battle, be tome a captain in the Texas cavalry. I During the battle at the Alamo, Seguin slipped through the Mexican lines in a desperate attempt to find reinforcements. He then joined Sam Houston's army and fought bravely in the Battle of San Jacinto. After the war ended, Seguin served as row of San Antonio. He brought order to the town and attempted to protect its Ithough the majority of settlers in Texas came from the United States and Mexico, a significant number emigrated from Europe. Between 1830 and 1860, thousands of people from Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Ireland, Norway, Poland, and Sweden arrived in Texas. These immigrants formed new communities that reflected the unique cultural backgrounds of their founders. During the 1850s, for example, Czech immigrants began forming small farming settlements in central Texas. These immigrants lived and worked in close-knit family units that emphasized the importance of Czech culture to their younger members. Jan Horak, who arrived in Texas with his family when he was 13 years old, described some of his early experiences: Czech immigrants to Texas "Father bought a piece of land, and we farmed for two years___There was no public school. The priests preached and taught in Czech. In spite of the oxen they had to use for transportation and their bare feet the young people had a great time going to dances.*' Tcknos. Seguin later wrote about the conflict between U.S. settlers and Tejanos. Analyzing Primary Sources *frhe American straggling adventurers were ... beginning to work their dark intrigues [plots] against the native families, whose only crime was, that they owned large tracts of land and desirable property." —Juan Seguin, Personal Memoirs of Juan Seguin Identifying Bias Why did Seguin think that U.S. settlers turned against Tejanos? because Tejanos owned desirable land Slavery in Texas. The institution of slavery expande rapidly in Texas after it becarr an independent republic, pa ticularly in regions where thi fertile soil promised bountifi cotton crops. By 1850 there were 58,161 slaves in Texas; they comprised 27.4 percent of the state's population. Mar white Texans saw slavery as an essential part of the state future. At the 1845 Texas Constitutional Convention, a speaker declared that "the true policy and prosperity of this country depend upon th maintenance" of slavery. As in other southern states, mar Texas slaves tried to escape bondage. Most attempted to flee into Mexico, and thousands succeeded over time. Why might many slaveholders have decided to move to the Republic of Texas? ANSWER: Some students migl note that many Texas settler: were hostile to Mexico's ban on slavery, possibly leading other slaveholders to think that their "investments" were safer there. Have students complete the Section 2 Review on p. 327. Have students complete Daily Quiz 10.2. As Alternative Assessment, you may want to use the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo billboard or the treaty newspaper article in this section's lessons. Have students complete Main Idea Activity for English Language Learners and Special-Needs Students 10.2. Then have each student outline an essay in support of or opposition to Ulysses S. Grant's statement that the Mexican War was "one of the most unjust ever waged by a stronger against a weaker nation.'' English Language Learners Ask students to conduct research on one of the U.S. or Mexican military figures involved in the Mexican War. Have each student write a brief report on the chosen figure. Reports should include information about leaders' personal and professional lives and concentrate on the person's service during the Mexican War. Block Scheduling Mexican Americans Asa result of the Treaty of Guadalupe H idalgo, the United States gained some 80,1)00 Spanish-speaking citizens along with its new territory. Despite the treaty's guarantees, many Mexican Americans lost their lands. New U.S. settlers challenged Spanish land titles, and Mexican Americans whose families had lived in parts of New Mexico and California for generations had to fight costly legal battles to defend their claims. Many Americans looked down on the culture of Mexican Americans, Mth its blend of Spanish and American Indian influences. The resulting sphere of prejudice contributed to Mexican American rebellions in the thwest. Juan Cortina, a member of a prominent Tejano family in South Texas, headed one such rebellion. In 1859 Cortina shot and wounded a Texas al who was beating a Tejano. To avoid imprisonment, Cortina fled to co. Over the next six months, he and his supporters attacked ranches and sses and engaged in skirmishes with Texas law enforcement officers. Cortina 'tied his actions: Bear Flag Revolt-made California an independent republic; Veracruz-allowed Americans to attack Mexico City; siege of Mexico City-led to the U.S. victory 3a. the admission of Texas to the Union, the new placement of the Texas border, the Mexican attack on U.S. patrol b. increased discrimination and led to loss of land c. Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo-California, Nevada, Utah, and parts of Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico; Gadsden Purchase-parts of Arizona and New Mexico 4. Answers will vary. Some students might suggest that the war was fought simply to increase slaveholding territory. Other students might point out that U.S. politicians feared Texas becoming an ally of Great Britain. Organize students into pairs. Have each pair write a paragraph describing how the forty-niners affected California society. (Pairs' paragraphs should note that they introduced a rough-and-tumble culture, established cultural diversity, and introduced talented new residents.) Then ask each pair to create a cartoon illustrating life in the mining camps. Ask volunteers to discuss their cartoons with the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning SALL LEVELS: Organize the class into pairs or triads. Have each group compile a list of the ways in which the Gold Rush affected American Indians in California. (Groups should note that American Indians were forced off their lands, forced into service in the mines, and killed by other miners.) Californios-suffered discrimination, lost power: African Americans-suffered discrimination and violence; Chinese Americans-suffered discrimination and violence, found new jobs in mining camps; American Indians- suffered discrimination and f Whether they succeeded or failed, the forty-niners made California a much more diverse place. Nearly 80 percent were Americans—including some 4,000 African Americans—whereas about 8 percent came from Mexico. Others arrived from Australia, China, Europe, and South America. This international mix of gold seekers increased California's non-American Indian population from some 14,000 in 1848 to more than 220,000 in 1852. The large migration also attracted people in search of other types of economic opportunities. The miners needed supplies and services, which many clever busi- nesspeople were happy to provide. One such person was I.evi Strauss, a tailor who had immigrated to the United States from Bavaria in 1847. During the gold rush, Strauss traveled to California to sew clothes for miners, who had a hard time finding trousers that stood up to the harshness of the mines. Strauss made a new style of sturdy work pants from tent canvas. The pants held up so well that soon Strauss was flooded with orders. The pants were soon made from denim instead of canvas. Dyed with indigo, they came to be nicknamed blue jeans. Summarizing What effect did the forty-niners have on California society? They made society disorderly and dangerous but also more diverse because they came from many different countries. Conflict in the Mines Newly arrived gold miners camped on San Francisco's Telegraph Hill. Because they were the first to reach the goldfields, Californios scored some of the first major gold strikes. By late 1849, however, white American miners outnumbered all other groups and began to drive Californios from their claims. They posted notices declaring that "foreigners" had no right to be in the mines and must leave immediately. These white American miners ignored the fact that under the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, Californios were U.S. citizens. Many Californios who refused to leave the mines were beaten and some were even killed. Chinese and African American Miners. Chinese prospectors fared little better than Californios. Shortly alter word of the gold rush reached China, men from Guangdong (gwahng-doohng) Province headed for California, which they called Gam Saan, or Gold Mountain. When they arrived at the mines, however, white prospectors prevented them from staking claims. 338 chapter to Have students complete the Section 4 Review on p. 339. Have students complete Daily Quiz 10.4. As Alternative Assessment, you may want to use the Gold Rush dialogue or the forty-niner paragraph in this section's lessons. Have students complete Main Idea Activity for English Language Learners and Special-Needs Students 10.4. Then organize students into small groups. Have each group create two graphic organizers, one that shows the events leading to the California Gold Rush, and the other that shows the effects of the Gold Rush. Ask volunteers to present their graphic organizers to the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning Ask students to conduct research on different methods of gold mining, including modern methods. Have each student select one method and create a diagram or model of it. Ask students to present their diagrams or models to the class. Block Scheduling Frustrated by discrimination in mining camps, many Chinese returned to China. Others became field-workers, joined railroad construction crews, or ran small farms. Still others settled in towns, where they worked as grocers, merchants, storekeepers, or unskilled laborers. By 1852 California's Chinese population numbered more than 11,000. Many of these immigrants continued to associate with each other in groups based on kinship, clan, and village ties that originated in China. Fearing competition, white miners tried to ban African Americans from the mines and persuaded lawmakers to deny African Americans the right to vote. Despite these obstacles, some black miners made a living in California, and a handful even struck it rich. American Indians. The Gold Rush led to disaster for many American Indians in California. White miners forced Indians off gold-rich lands and sometimes forced them to work in the mines. Volunteer militia and regular army units in California raided Indian villages. In one incident, two miners found their camp ransacked and their five companions missing. Assuming that Indians were responsible, the miners raided several Indian villages, killing more than 130 people. Some California Indians took up arms against the forty-niners. For example, alter their lands in the Sierra Nevada and the San Joaquin Valley had been taken over byminers,the Miwok (MEE-wahk) and Yokuts (YOH-kuhts) began to raid the properties of white settlers in 1850. Lasting through 1851, these raids collectively became known as the Mariposa War. During the early 1850s, attacks by the Yuma and Mohave (moh-HAH-vee) kept some prospectors from crossing the Colorado River into the Indians' territory. In response, the U.S. Army built Fort Yuma and attacked several Yuma villages. By 1860 such attacks, along with disease and starvation, had reduced California's American Indian population to about 35,000. Miners. Miners at Auburn Ravine posed for this photograph in 1852. What does this image reveal about the people who came to California in search of gold? Categorizing In what ways did the California Cold Rush lead to conflict? White U.S. settlers drove Californios and Chinese from their gold claims; they also discriminated against African Americans and attacked American Indians. 1. Define and explain: forty-niners 2. Identify and explain: Californios John Augustus Sutter California Trail lames W. Marshall 3. Summarizing Copy the graphic organizer below. Use it to summarize the Cold Rush's effect on each of the major population groups in California. Jot/ Homework Practice Online la keyword: SD3 HP10 Finding the Main Idea a. How did the Spanish come to settle in California? b. What drew the forty-niners to California, and how did they get there? c. How might California have developed differently if gold had not been discovered there? Writing and Critical Thinking Making Generalizations Write a newspaper article describing how the forty-niners changed California. Consider: • who the forty-niners were • how they affected California society • how they affected California's economy violence, pushed into the interior; white Americans- some found great wealth while others did not 4a. Spanish priests and soldiers were the first Europear settlers in California. b. Forty-niners went to California to find gold; they journeyed there by the California Trail, by ship, and by a combination of ship and land. c. Answers will vary. Studenl might suggest that the popu lation would have stayed small and that the Californio would have retained control 5. Articles will vary. Student might suggest that the forty niners altered the physical landscape with mining, introduced new cultures, and created a climate of lawlessness. REVIEWlO ANSWER Creating a Time Line Each event should have an explanation and the correct date. Writing a Summary See the Reading Checks in each section for main ideas. Identifying People and Ideas 1. native Mexicans who live in Texas 2. businesspeople who received land grants in retui for bringing new settlers to Texas LEVELS 2 AND 3: Organize students into groups of four. Instruct half of the groups to act as Union military strategists and the other half as Confederate military strategists. Have each group draw up a list of its own strengths and weaknesses. (See the Level 1 answers for each side's strengths.) Then have each group speculate on how it can (1) best utilize its strengths and compensate for its weaknesses and (2) how it can defend against its opponent's strengths and take advantage of any weaknesses. Have each group put its recommendations in a strategy position paper and choose a spokesperson to read it to the class. Cooperative Learning _ HOMEWORK Have each student write a son ; ||g poem, or journal entry about the beginning of the Cn ~ War from the point of view of a person who has fami members fighting on both sides of the conflict. NOTE: To help students make meaningful connections betwee events in U.S. history and those in their own hometown, use tl: Chapter 12 Hands-On History Activity, Photography: Seein Your Local History. A writer for the London Times in Battle Cry of Freedom A Daunting Military Challenge for the North. During the opening stages of the Civil War, many observers thought that the Union army would be unable to conquer the entire Confederacy. The remarks of a writer for the London Times typified this opinion: "It is one thing to drive the rebels from the south bank of the Potomac, or even to occupy Richmond, but another to reduce and hold in permanent subjection a tract of country nearly as large as Russia in Europe.... No war of independence was ever terminated unsuccessfully except where the disparity of force was far greater than it is in this case." might the characterization of the Civil War as a "war of independence" have differed from Abraham Lincoln's view of the Civil War? ANSWER: Students might suggest that Abraham Lincoln viewed the Civil War as a war to preserve the Union or a war to put down a rebellion. Answers will vary. Students might suggest that he will fight for the South because of his relatives there. Lee's skill and bravery impressed his commander and earna him a promotion. After working as superintendent of West Poin from 1852 to 1855, Lee served briefly in Texas and eventually movedti Arlington, Virginia. In 1859 he led the federal troops that captured abolition ist )ohn Brown at Harpers Ferry. As southern states began to secede from the Union, General Scott adviset President Lincoln to ask Lee to command the Union forces. Faced with a diffiatl choice between country and state, Lee regretfully declined and resigned his com mission. Scott told him sadly, "You have made the greatest mistake of your life, bu This sword belonged to General I feared it would be so." Lee opposed slavery and secession, but he refused to figh Robert E. Lee. against Virginia. Lee wrote a letter to his sister. Analyzing Primary Sources Identifying Points of View Why did Lee resign from the U.S. Army? because he could not fight against his own relatives and state "with all my devotion to the Union and the feeling of loyalty and duty of an American citizen, I have not been able to make up my mind to raise my hand against my relatives, my children, my home. I have therefore resigned my commission in the Army, and save [except] in defense of my native State—with the sincere hope that my poor services may never be needed-l hope I may never be called on to draw my sword." —Robert E. Lee, letter to his sister, April 20,1861 Primary Source The armies. Lee eventually led the South's army. Both sides quickly built up their military strength. By the end of 1861 the Union had more than 527,000 soldiers and the Confederacy slightly more than 258,000. Most of these soldiers were between the ages of 18 and 29, with drummer boys as young as 9 years old. Estimates of how many men fought in the war vary because many men re-enlisted after their initial commissions expired. The U.S. government placed the official wartime enlistment in the Union army at 2,672,341, with another 105,963 men enlisted in the navy or Views of the Civil War When the Civil War began, many Americans felt caught in the middle. Many had relatives in the North and the South, The family of Theodore Upson, an Indiana farm boy, faced this situation. On which side do you think Upson would fight? "Father and I were husking out. When William Cory came across the field (he had been down after the mail), he was excited and said, 'Jonathan, the Rebs have fired upon and taken Fort Sumter.' Father got white and couldn't say a word.... I went in to dinner. Mother said, What is the matter with Father?' He had gone right upstairs. I told her what we had heard. She went to him. After a while, they came down. Father looked ten years older. We sat down to the table. Grandma wanted to know what was the trouble. Father told her, and she began to cry. 'Oh my poor children in the South! Now they will suffer!...' 'They can come here and stay,' said Father. 'No, they will not do that There is their home. There they will stay. Oh, to think I should have lived to see the day when brother should rise against brother.'" marines. According to U.S. government statistics, some 3,530 American Indians and some 180,000 African Americans served in the Union army. Noncommis- sioned African American officers numbered nearly 7,000. About 100 African Americans were commissioned officers. Historians estimate that some 750,000 men enlisted in the Confederate army. This figure included about 5,500 Cherokee, Creek, Chickasaw, and Choctaw. These American Indians included many slaveholders lured by the promise of an all-Indian state following the war. Some Mexican Americans from New Mexico and Texas fought during the war. Most supported the Union. READING CHECK: Comparing What advantages did the North and the South possess in 1861? The North had more people and money, and better transportation. The South had the easier strategy and superior military leadership. BALL LEVELS: To help students understand how the U.S. government promoted economic development in the West, copy the graphic organizer on the chalkboard, omitting the italicized answers. Have each student complete it. Then organize the class into triads and tell students to imagine that they are writers and artists hired to create full-page newspaper ads to publicize government programs designed to attract settlers and railroad companies to western lands. Tell students that their ads should combine appealing images with lists of incentives to attract settlers to the Great Plains. Have each triad present its advertisement to the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning Homestead Act Pacific Railway Act Morrill Act permitted "any citizen or intended citizen " to have 160 acres of land gave lands to railroad companies to develop a transcontinental railroad Unking the East and West Coasts granted more than 17 million acres of land to be sold to finance the construction of agricultural and engineering colleges The railroads. Railroad companies also lured settlers to the West. Between 1869 and 1883, four rail lines were built across the West. Within 10 years of the passage of the Pacific Railway Act, the U.S. government had given railroad companies more than 125 million acres of public land. State and local governments donated nearly 100 million acres of additional land. These grants limited the amount of land available to settlers under the Homestead Act. Government officials believed that railroad companies would promote western settlement and economic growth. Railroad companies sold any surplus land to homesteaders in an effort to ofiset the high cost of laying tracks. The homesteaders benefited from the nearby railroad lines, using them to ship their crops to distant markets. Eager to encourage settlement along their rail routes, railroad companies advertised in the East and in Europe. They offered to pay the fares of potential land buyers and sell them land on credit. Some railroad companies gave free trips to newspaper reporters, who then wrote glowing reports. One Indiana editor wrote about his trip: Visual Record Railroad Workers. Railroad workers for both companies, many of whom were immigrants from Ireland and China, braved severe weather and the threat of attack by American Indians as they laid more thai 1,500 miles of track across rough terrain. Hundreds of these workers died in explosions and other industrial accidents along the way. never saw finer country in the world than that part of Kansas passed over by the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe [rail]road. Com waist high, wheat in the shock [stacked], oats in fine condition, and vegetables in abundanceV —Indiana editor, quoted in The Farmers' Frontier, 1865-1900, by Gilbert C Fite The road west With tickets like this one, many migrants rode the rails to their new homes in the West, sometimes riding on flatcars to get there. What do you think travel conditions mere like for the migrants in this photograph? ✓ READING CHECK: Drawing Conclusions How did the U.S. government encourage the growth of private property ownership on the Great Plains? by passing the Homestead Act and granting 125 million acres of public land to railroad companies Moving West Three main groups traveled westward after the Civil War: white Americans from the East, African Americans from the South, and immigrants from foreign coun- tnes.Some sought economic opportunity. Others hoped to find racial tolerance. The majority of white settlers moved from states in the Mississippi Valley, Celand had grown expensive and difficult to obtain. Because of the high cost of porting supplies, it was mainly middle-class farmers and businesspeople who antld afford to move west. Some farmers came in search of more fertile soil. Civil War veterans, particularly those from the South, came to make a new start. A Nebraska newcomer explained, lT am well satisfied that I can do better here than 1 can in Illinois." Susan Lomax, who moved west with her family from Mississippi, offered a different reason: "We wanted to come to a new country so our children could grow up with the country." For African Americans, moving west offered a chance to escape the violence aid persecution they faced following the withdrawal of federal troops from the South in 1877. Kansas particularly appealed to African American settlers, as Bp Brown had fought against slavery there. The biggest exodus, or mass depar- ture,of black settlers with so-called Kansas Fever occurred in 1879. Some 20,000 to African Americans fled the South, where violence had broken out during This Schuttler Wagon Company advertisement depicts farmers migrating to the West in search of fertile soil. What other dangers might railroad workers have faced as they laid track? Students might mention dangers such as animal attacks and snake bites. The American Nation Linking the Nation; Teacher's Guide, pp. 69-74 Search 29399, Play to 33608 Videodisc 1, Side B Play Pause See Teacher's Guide for Spanish barcode Visual Record Answer Students might suggest that the travel conditions were uncomfortable and harsh. LEVEL 1: Pair students and assign each pair one of the following roles: white settlers from the East, African Americans from the South, Scandinavians, Irish, Germans, Russian Mennonites, or Chinese. Ask pairs to create advertising slogans urging people to move west. Remind students that their slogans should appeal to people like themselves. (Pairs should indicate that white Americans sought cheaper lands or to make a new start, African Americans wanted to escape persecution in the South, Scandinavians had "America Fever," Irish moved to the Plains after building railroads, Germans moved from the Mississippi Valley, Russian Mennonites moved after they lost military service exemption, and many Chinese came during the Gold Rush and turned to farming. ) Have volunteers present I their slogans to the class. Cooperative Learning, English Language Learners LEVELS 2 AND 3: Assign each student one of the roles mentioned in the Level 1 lesson. Have each student, in his or her assigned role, write a series of letters to a relative explaining his or her reasons for moving west. (See the Level 1 lesson for tin | correct reasons.) Students should describe what they thiii might surprise or disappoint their relative about life in the | West, and how they are faring there. Have volunteers share th letters with the class. Windmills. Daniel Halladay, a mechanic from Connecticut, invented the first commercially successful American windmill. Halladay's windmill featured broad, paddle-shaped wooden blades to catch the wind and use its power to pump water or grind grain. Unlike traditional European models, Halladay's windmill pivoted automatically so that it always faced the wind. Western farmers found this design feature to be particularly useful in the ever-shifting winds of the Great Plains. The windmill also controlled its own speed despite the strength of the wind—another feature that western farmers appreciated. ACTIVITY: Tell students to imagine that they are Nebraska farmers who have just installed their first Halladay windmill. Have each student write a series of short diary entries describing the windmill and its effects. Visual Record Answer Students might point to the sod house and the prairie grass. Exodusters. Many African Americans hoped to escape discrimination in the South by moving west What evidence can you see that this family is homesteading on the Great Plains? Some Chinese workers participated in a Fourth of July parade in Deadwood, South Dakota. elections in 1878. Known as Exodusters, these Affii American settlers trekked west, following leaders such a Benjamin Singleton, a 70-year-old former slave. European immigrants also flocked to the West. "Amelia Fever" infected thousands of Danes, Norwegians, and Swec In 1882 alone, more than 100,000 Scandinavians movedlo I the American West. In addition, many Irish who had J helped build the railroads and a great number of ( who had settled in the Mississippi Valley decided to t to the Plains. Russian Mennonites, members of a Protestant sect, also I migrated to the Great Plains. After the Russian czar ended the Mennonites'special privileges, among them exemption from military service, American railroad com-1 panies urged them to move to the United States. The Mennonites brought with them experience in farming wheat on the Russian steppes, or grasslands, indu a hardy wheat variety that thrived on the Great Plains. They may have also brouj the Russian thistle, a plant that became well known throughout the West as tumbleweed. Many of the Chinese immigrants who had come to the United States during the California Gold Rush had also turned to farming by 1880. In California alone, some 3,200 Chinese farmers raised crops in 1880. Throughout the West, Chiu immigrants worked as farm laborers, produce vendors, or sharecroppers. Son* I owned large farms. In 1870 one Chinese farmer in Sacramento County, Califoratr earned $9,500 from farming—an enormous amount for that period. READINC CHECK: Categorizing Why did various groups of people migrate to the West! economic opportunity, escape from violence and persecution, and railroad construction work Western Environments and Farming Although settlers homesteaded some 80 million acres of public land in theGre Plains between 1862 and 1900, the region did not immediately prosper. Sup] were expensive, and the environment posed problems for farmers. Scarce resources. Water was in shi supply throughout much of the West® parts of the Southwest, Hispanic and I ican Indian farmers had developed eftec irrigation systems that used canals, d and sloping fields to control water f They established farms that tanned out*] thin strips from water sources so that ti community members had access to wata New settlers adopted these methods,! Great Plains also had few water sourc Many farmers had to travel several miles# a river or stream where they would { large barrels and haul them back to tl farm. Digging wells proved difficult and B LEVEL 1: Pair students and have each pair create a graphic organizer that contains the problems western farmers faced and the solutions to those problems. !Pairs should indicate: lack of water, lack of trees, strong winds, ml harsh winters. Solutions should include: dry farming, buffalo manure for fuel and as a building material, irrigation, and new varieties of wheat suitable for the Great Plains weather.) When students are finished, ask volunteers to draw their organizers on the chalkboard and explain them to the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning LEVEL 2: Pair students and ask one to assume the role of a newspaper reporter and the other to assume the role of a Plains farmer. Have each pair develop a newspaper interview about how farmers adapted their farming practices and daily lives to the Great Plains environment. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct methods.) Ask pairs to prepare transcripts of questions and answers. Have volunteers present their interviews to the class. Cooperative Learning NOTE: To help students make meaningful connections between events in U.S. history and those in their own hometown, use the Chapter 14 Hands-On History Activity, Agriculture and You. time-consuming. One Nebraska farmer spent two years digging with a pick and shovel before reaching water 300 feet below the surface. Many settlers hired professional drillers who used drilling equipment developed by petroleum companies. Farmers also used new kinds of windmills to draw the water from their wells. These were wind-powered water pumps designed to withstand the region's strong winds. Trees were another scarce resource on the Great Plains. Settlers developed dever solutions to cope with the lack of wood for fuel or building materials. Some tamed dried buffalo manure, an excellent source of fuel. Settlers built sod houses, buildings made from chunks cut from the heavy topsoil that were stacked like bricks. A layer of soil covered the roof, which was made of a few scarce pieces of wood. Building with sod was difficult, however. A Kansas settler wrote, "The sod is heavy and when you take 3 or 4 bricks on a litter or hand barrow, and carry it 50 to 1150 feet, I tell you it is no easy work." Created in 1862, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) helped farmers adapt to their new environment. USDA experts sought out and publicized new varieties of wheat suitable for the Great Plains. These new wheat crops replaced the passes that had once covered the Great Plains. USDA agents also began teaching In farming—new planting and harvesting techniques that conserved moisture. For example, agents advised farmers to plow deep furrows to bring moisture to the surface and to break up the soil after a rainfall to prevent evaporation. New farming equipment The development of new farming equipment also taped the Plains farmers. lames Oliver's plow factory in South Bend, Indiana, products! thousands of plows with sharp, durable blades that could slice through the tough sod of the Plains. "Self-binding" harvesters not only cut wheat but also tied it tntobundles. The combine cut wheat, separated it from the plant, and cleaned the train all in one operation. Many of the new farming devices used steam-powered Bfnes. However, the new technology plunged many small farmers into debt when it)1 bought the equipment necessary to compete with larger landholders. Efficient new farm machinery and cheap, abundant land enabled some companies to create a new kind of large-scale operation, the bonanza farm. Most farms were owned by large companies and operated like factories, with inery, professional managers, and specialized laborers for different tasks. These large farms required front 500 to 1,000 extra workers at planting and har- itsingtimes. Most owners divided their vast enterprises into small units, with a *n in charge of each. Migrant workers, who were often unemployed cowboys ing"nothing but small bundles containing a clean shirt and a few socks," med much of the seasonal labor. The era of bonanza farming soon faded. When weather conditions were favor- bonanza farms produced large profits because of lower production costs, 'owners of bonanza farms bought seed and equipment in bulk, suppliers etten gave them special deals. However, in times of severe drought or low wheat ' es, bonanza farm profits fell. With fewer workers to pay and less money i in equipment, family farmers could better handle boom-and-bust cycles. ;the 1890s most bonanza farms had been broken up into smaller farms. /HEADING CHECK: Finding the Main Idea What technological innovations made tailing profitable on the Great Plains? plows, "self-binding" harvesters, and devices steam-powered engines m l!!l Windmills drew water from beneath the ground, allowing settlers to farm the Great Plains. The Global Grain Market As well as plunging into debl to buy necessary equipment, farmers on the Great Plains confronted declining grain prices during most of the late 1800s. Much of this decline was because of the increase! availability of grain on the world market. Along with the yield improvements brought about by mechanization, the opening of new farmland in Argentina, Canada, and Russi: helped lead to large increase: in global supplies of wheat and com. As a result the pria of wheat fell from $1.45 a bushel in 1866 to 80 cents in the mid-1880s and less than 50 cents in the mid-1890s. Besides supplies and equipment wha expenses might Great Plains farmers have had to meet in the course of raising and marketing their crops? answer.- Students might sug gest that farmers had to pay for the storage of their crops in grain elevators and the transport of their crops on railroads. A number of African American cowboys became well known for their extraordinary skills at the trade. Bill Pickett, a son of former slaves, achieved nationwide fame for inventing bulldogging, a rodeo event in which a contestant subdues a steer by grabbing its horns and wrestling it to the ground. Pickett toured the United States and abroad giving "bulldogging" demonstrations during the early 1900s, but discrimination often prevented him from competing on the rodeo circuit In 1972-40 years after his death in a ranching accident-Pickett became the first black honoree at the National Rodeo Hall of Fame. activity: Ask students to conduct research on a famous cowboy. Then have each student prepare a short oral report on his or her subject to present to the class. Visual Record Answer Students might suggest that the men's clothing indicates that they are Mexican or Mexican American. The Cattle Industry The workers who took care of a rancher's cattle were known as cowboys. Popular culture romanticized cowboy life, but it was difficult. Cowboys worked hard in all kinds of weather and made little money. Most worked the range for just seven years before settling down in towns or on farms. The cowboys. Many of the cowboys were Confederate veterans of the Civil War. African American, Mexican, and Mexican American cowboys made up about one third of the some 35,000 cowboys in the West. African American cowboys escaped most of the discrimination of the postwar era. A few even became trail bosses. African American cowboys were, however, more likely to be assigned unpleasant tasks. Mexican ranch hands known as vaqueros had worked with cattle and horses since long before the days of the cattle boom. In the 1880s most Mexican and Mexican American cowboys worked on ranches in Texas. Mostly sons of ranchers or farmers, vaqueros sometimes owned their own ranches. Although they were paid higher wages and treated better than those who handled menial ranch jobs, Mexican cowboys often encountered discrimination. In 1877 James Walker painted this scene, called Vaqueros of California Roping Horses in a Corral. From their clothing, what can you tell about the men in the painting? Life on the trail. Moving the cattle from Texas to the rail lines in Missouri and Kansas posed a major problem for cattle ranchers. To reach the railroads, cowboys herded as many as 3,000 cattle on long drives. These overland treks covered hundreds of miles and lasted several months. The trail usually ended in Kansas because the cattle in Missouri were not immune to Texas fever. Over the years, cowboys drove some 4 million cattle from Texas to Kansas. On a typical long drive, a trail boss managed a crew of about 10 cowboys. The cook rode in front of the herds in a chuck wagon that carried food and the cowboys' bedrolls. Managing the herd was a tough job. River crossings, where swift currents might drown hundreds of animals, proved particularly hazardous. George Duffield headed a long drive in 1866. He described one river crossing: "We worked all day in the river & at dusk got the last beefeover. There was one of our party drowned today... & several narrow escapes." The worst danger was a stampede. Almost any unexpected sound—a coyote's wail, a thunderclap, a sneeze—could panic the cattle. Cowboys learned to prevent stampedes by "circling around and around the terrified herd, singing loudly and steadily,... [with other cowboys] separating a bunch here and there." Cattle Towns Every long drive ended at a railhead, a town located along a railroad, where brokers bought cattle to ship east on railroad cars. They came to be known as cattle towns. Farther north and west, long drives ended in Cheyenne Wyoming, and Ogallala, Nebraska. B LEVEL 1: Pair students and have each pair create a before-and-after chart of the ways in which mining towns changed with the arrival of families. (Pairs should indicate the following relationships: before—mining towns were unstable, temporary residences; after—families brought stability, transformed towns into permanent towns; before—mining towns were violent, vigilante communities; after—arrival of families brought law and order, establishment of churches, newspapers, schools, and cultural establishments.) Then tell students to imagine that they are miners who witnessed a camp transform into a town. Have each student write a before-and-after paragraph expressing his or her impressions of that time. English Language Learners. Ask students to create a chart noting the differences in mining towns upon the arrival of families. Charts should discuss the decrease in violence and lawlessness, an increase in law and order, and the establishment of churches and schools. Tell students their charts will act as visual summaries and can include photographs, maps, or illustrations. * Life in Mining Communities. Miring camps sprang up overnight wherever news of possible wealth brought prospectors together. Prospecting teas typically not a family enterprise. Most camps consisted almost entirely of male residents. A visitor to one Colorado mining camp estimated the population to be about 4,000, with just 12 female inhabitants. The settlers. Mining camps drew a wide range of settlers. One newspaper reporter wrote, "Here were congregated the most varied elements of humanity belonging to almost every nationality and every status of life." In the mining regions of Southern California, many Californios, Chileans, Mexicans, and Peruvians maintained their own separate settlements. In other mining areas the mix of prospectors included U.S. citizens, miners from the Cornwall region of England, and Irish and Chinese immigrants. At first, life in the mining camps was crude, and comforts were few. Moreover, the atmosphere in most camps was one of intense competition. Prospector William Parsons remembered, Mining camps were often little more than a hastily constructed group of tents or shacks. "a mad, furious race for wealth, in which men lost their identity almost and toiled and wrestled, and lived a fierce, riotous, wearing, fearfully excited life; forgetting home and kindred [family], abandoning old steady habits." —William Parsons Such competition led to discrimination. Miners in the Cripple Creek camp in Colorado forcibly excluded eastern and southern Europeans as well as Hispanics. in 1882 a mob of masked men drove the Chinese inhabitants of Rico, Colorado, out of town. The local newspaper called the incident "one of the most shameful affairs that ever disgraced any so-called civilized country and would have met the heart)' approval of the most barbarous savage." Most Chinese miners left the Rocky Mountain camps because of such hostile treatment. Instability. Western mining camps were some of the most violent places in the United States during the late 1800s. Tensions between ethnic groups often led to I lighting. Gamblers and swindlers swarmed in, and conflicts over claims set off brawls. Deadwood, South Dakota, gained a reputation as a particularly rough town. An outlaw's haven, Deadwood became the final resting place of lawman Wild Bill Hickok, shot dead as he played cards. Legend has it that Hickok was holding a pair of aces and a pair of eights, which thereafter became known as the dead man's hand. The absence of law enforcement sometimes led people in mining camps to form vigilante committees to combat theft and violence. Montana newspaper editor Thomas Dimsdale claimed that it was "an absolute necessity that good, law-loving, order-sustaining men should unite for mutual protection and salvation of the community." However, vigilante committees often used violence to resolve the community's problems, hanging the accused after a quick trial. [j Analyzing Primary Sources Supporting a Point of View What evidence in this section supports Parsons's view? all-male camps, ethnic tensions, and violent behavior. Others labored in the-nation's canneries, mines, and shoe factories. Pauline Newman began working at a garment factory in New York in 1901 while still a child. Describing her experiences, she recalled, "It wasn't heavy work, but it was monotonous, because you did the same thing from seven-thirty in the morning till nine at night." Working Conditions Children in the labor force often faced terrible conditions. In some textile mills, for instance, children worked 12-hour shifts—often at night—for pennies a day. Low wages and long hours affected all industrial workers, however, regardless of their age, sex, or race. Conditions were particularly difficult for unskilled workers. Most unskilled white male laborers worked at least 10 hours a day, six days a week, for less than $10 a week. Many African American, Asian American, and Mexican American men worked the same number of hours for even lower wages. Furthermore, employers made few allowances for women and children, expecting them to work the same number of hours as men for sometimes as little as half the pay. Such long hours left workers exhausted at the end of the day. This fatigue made already unsafe working conditions even more dangerous. In 1881 alone, some 30,000 railroad workers were killed or Working conditions. Many child laborers worked long hours in factories with unsafe working conditions. What aspects of this child's working conditions might be dangerous? injured on the job. Most employers felt no asibility for work-related deaths and injuries.They made little effort to improve workplace safety. Many workers endured hardships that ntended beyond the factory. Some employers sought to increase their control over their workers. They built company towns, where the company owned the workers'housing and the retail businesses they used. Residents of company towns usually received their wages in scrip. This paper money could be used only to pay rent to the company or to buy goods at company stores. Prices at these stores were usually much higher than at regular Sores. Workers often spent entire pay- dwfoon necessities like food and clothing. Primary Source A European View of U.S. Workers. The New Immigrants iiAll of a sudden, me heard a big commotion and we came to America and everybody started yelling-they see the Statue of Liberty.... I remember my father putting his arms around my mother and the two of them standing and crying and my father said to my mother, you're in America now. You have nothing to be afraid oft " Esther Gidiwicz, quoted in EUis Island Interviews, by Peter Morton Goan Esther Gidiwicz and her mother immigrated to New York from Romania in 1905. Like many immigrants, Esther already had family members and friends in the United States, including her father. These friends provided a network of support for her. While urban life in New York for immigrants was frighteningly new and hectic, many immigrants settled in neighborhoods where residents often spoke their native language and provided a village-like community. Esther described her mother's first experience shopping in the United States. "The butcher was very nice to her, and she was so happy that they spoke to her. They spoke in her language." Immigrant passport The Lure of America Esther Gidiwicz was just one of the millions of immigrants who came to the United States in search of opportunity and a better life. These hopes brought a new wave of immigrants to the United States during the late 1800s. A new wave of immigrants. From 1800to 1880, more than 10 million immigrants came to the United States. Often called the old immigrants, most of them were Protestants from northwestern Europe. Then a new wave of immigration swept over the United States. Between 1891 and 1910, some 12 million immigrants arrived on U.S. shores. The increase was so great that by the early 1900s about 60 percent of the people living in the nation's 12 largest cities either were foreign- born or had foreign-born parents. About 70 percent of these new immigrants were from southern or eastern Europe. Czech, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Polish, Russian, and Slovak were among the nationalities represented. Most of these new immigrants were Catholic, Greek Orthodox, or Jewish. Arabs, Armenians, Chinese, French Canadians, and lapanese also arrived by the thousands. Like the old immigrants, many new immigrants came to the United States to escape poverty or persecution. Most of the Armenian and Jewish families fled their homelands to escape religious or political persecution. Most of the Italian and Slavic immigrants were men seeking economic opportunities in the United States that were scarce in their home countries. Many made enough money in the KM LEVEL 1: Discuss changes in immigration to the United States during the late 1800s. Compare the national origins, religious backgrounds, and reasons for immigration of new immigrants to those of old immigrant groups coming to the United States. Pair students and have each pair create a graphic organizer to list and characterize these changes in immigration. (Pairs should indicate that the majority of new immigrants came from southern and eastern Europe—old immigrants were primarily from northwestern Europe; new immigrants tended to be Roman Catholic, Greek Orthodox, or Jewish—old immigrants were mostly Protestant; new immigrants and old immigrants alike came to seek economic opportunity and religious freedom.) Ask volunteers to display their organizers and present them to the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning LEVELS 2 AND 3: Tell students to imagine that they work for a U.S. government agency that compiles immigration data in the year 1910. Pair students and have each pair create an informational pamphlet about how immigration to the United States in the late 1800s differed from immigration in previous eras. Encourage members of each group to illustrate their pamphlets and to include pertinent facts and statistics. (See the Level 1 lesson for answers.) Call on volunteers to present their pamphlets to the class. Cooperative Learning United States to return home and buy land. Others, however, put down roots and stayed. Carla Martinelli's father left a poor village in southern Italy for the United States. "My papa mia was a barber. He went to America twice, back and forth," she recalled. "I was young. He went to get work. Make money." As Carla explained, her reasons for immigrating were more complicated. "when I was sixteen, I was supposed to marry a man in Italy, but I didn't want him. My mama tell me, 'Either you marry this guy or you go to America.' But I told her, 'I don't like him.' She say, "Then you go to America.' That's why I came to America. There was nothing in Italy, nothing in Italy. That's why we came. To find work, because Italy didn't have no work. Mama used to say, 'America is rich, America is rich.' " —Carla Martindli, quoted in Ellis Island Interviews, by Peter Morton Coan Free Find: Immigrant Voices After reading the selection of immigrant stories on the Holt Researcher CD-ROM, write your own story about what you might have experienced as an immigrant coming to the United States. Hie journey. Many immigrants learned of available opportunities from railroad and steamship company promoters. These companies painted a tempting—and often false—picture of the United States as a land of unlimited opportunity. Some railroad companies exaggerated the availability of employment. Steamship lines also charged low fares to attract passengers. Most of the millions who answered these appeals found the ocean journey difficult. Most traveled in the poorest accommodations, called steerage. These accommodations were below deck on the ship's lower levels near the steering mechanisms. The quarters were cramped, with no privacy and little ventilation. Despite these conditions, many immigrants clung to their hope for a better life in the United States. /READING CHECK: Contrasting How were immigrants who arrived between 1891 and 1910 different from earlier immigrants? They were much more likely to be from southern or eastern Europe and to be Catholic, Greek Orthodox, or Jewish. Arriving in America Millions of newcomers in the late 1800s first set foot on U.S. soil on Ellis Island in New York Harbor or on Angel Island in San Francisco Bay. Both islands served as immigration stations during this period. Ellis Island opened in 1892. Upon arrival, many European immigrants caught their first glimpse of the Statue of Liberty, a symbol of hope for many. As one immigrant explained, "All of us [immigrants] ... clustered on the foredeck... and looked with wonder on this miraculous land of our dreams." All newcomers who passed through Ellis Island were subjected to a physical exam. Those with mental disorders, contagious diseases like tuberculosis, or other serious health problems were deported. Those who passed the physicals entered a maze of crowded aisles where inspectors questioned them about their background, job skills, and relatives. Those with criminal records or without the means to support themselves were sent back. The vast majority were allowed to stay. Ellis Island. In 1998 Ell Island was the subject of Supreme Court decision.! years earlier, the state of Jersey had sued the stati New York over control of island. The Supreme Cot, ruled that the original po of the island, some 3 acr belonged to the state of York, and the remaining portion of the island, son 24 acres, belonged to Ne Jersey. The 24 acres had added to the island durin years that it served as ar immigration center. In its ruling, the Supreme Cou cited an 1834 agreement between the two states t the waters surrounding t island belonged to New Jersey-thus supporting Jersey's claim to the add land. In a dissenting opii Justice John Paul Steven noted that the identity c: issued to immigrants wh arrived on Ellis Island no that they had arrived in I York, not New Jersey. agree or disagree with tl Court's ruling? Explain. ANSWER: Some students might argue that the 182 agreement between the states was binding, whih others might believe tha identity cards were comp evidence. about 290,000 LEVEL 1: Discuss what challenges immigrants faced as they settled in the United States in the late 1800s. Then pair students and provide them with the following list of answers: 1. railroad and steamship companies, 2. steerage, 3. Ellis Island or Angel Island, 4. physical exams, 5. immigration inspectors, 6. deportation, 7. Chinese applicants. Ask pairs to create a crossword puzzle with clues for the answers provided. (Pairs should provide the following clues: 1. often advertised U.S. opportunities to immigrants; 2. a ship's poorest accommodations; 3. points of entry for European and Asian immigrants; 4. immigrants had to undergo these to prove that they were healthy; 5. questioned immigrants about their backgrounds, job skills, and relatives; 6. fate for immigrants with serious dim 7. faced strict immigration laws. Have pairs exchange and solve each other's puzzles. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning LEVELS 2 AND 3: Tell students to imagine that they arena European or Asian immigrants to the United States in the late 1800s. Have each student write a letter to a family member or friend back home describing the challenges of his or her journey to the United States and the experience of passing through Ellis Island or Angel Island. Ask volunteers to read their letters to the class. t-dv Angel Island. In order to circumvent strict immigration laws, many Asian immigrants used false papers that claimed they were related to current residents. Immigration officials ruthlessly interrogated these "paper sons and daughters." The panel asked one 11-year- old boy 83 pages of questions, a process that took days. Immigrants who failed the Angel Island interrogations faced detainment and deportation. While detained, many carved poems in the walls of their cells. In the late 1970s, Victor "Trader Vic" Bergerson, a restaurant owner, donated a black granite monument to commemorate the immigrant experience on Angel Island. The inscription on the monument reads, "Leaving their homes and villages, they crossed the ocean/Only to endure confinement in these barracks/Conquering frontier and barriers, they pioneered/A new life by the Golden Gate." Other European Countries Asia North and South America Other Russia and the Baltic States Sources: Historical Statistics of the United Sfofes; INS Statistical Yearbook: 1998. Data reflect 1900 and 1998. Due to rounding, numbers may not add up to 100 percent Imprisoned and waiting for rulings in their cases, Chinese immigrants often carved poems such as this one on their cell walls. On Angel Island, thousands of Asian newcomers, who were mostly from China, underwent similar processing. Chinese applicants faced strict immigration laws. These laws limited entrance to certain skilled groups or to individuals who could show that their parents were born in the United States. Some applicants who could not meet the restrictions were deported. Others were detained on the island as they awaited a ruling on their cases. For most immigrants, the anxiety they experienced during processing gave way to a renewed sense of hope once they finally set foot on their adopted homeland I READING CHECK: Evaluating What purpose did centers on Ellis Island and Angel Island serve? to evaluate newcomers and to deport those who | could not meet minimum eligibility standards A New Life Many immigrants found life in the United States | an improvement on the conditions oftheir home* I land. Nevertheless, the newcomers frequently* endured hardships in their new home. Most immigrants settled in crowded cities where they could find only low-paying, unskilled jobs. Asa I result, they were generally forced into poor hous-1 ing located in crowded neighborhoods and slums. BALL LEVELS: To help students understand where new immigrants found assistance, copy the following graphic organizer on the chalkboard, omitting the italicized answers. Have each student complete it. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning ml Teacker to Teacker -r* Institutions That Helped Immigrants Adapt to Life in the United States Immigrant communities. Many industrial cities of the Northeast and Midwest became a patchwork of ethnic neighborhoods with numerous pockets of diverse immigrant communities. Social reformer Jacob Riis was himself a Danish immigrant. He noted that an 1890s map of New York City colored according to nationality "would show ... more colors than any rainbow." Settling in close-knit immigrant communities, newcomers found institutions and neighbors that made their transition more bearable both financially and culturally. In these neighborhoods, for example, residents often spoke the same languages and followed the customs of the old country. Religious institutions. Neighborhood churches, synagogues, and temples provided community centers that helped immigrants maintain a sense of identity and belonging. In Chicago religious organizations such as the United Hebrew Relief Association, which served lews, and the St. Vincent de Paul Society, which served mainly Irish Catholics, provided economic assistance to needy immigrants in their communities. Moreover, some churches, such as St. Georges Episcopal Church in New York City and Russell H. Conwell's Baptist Temple in Philadelphia, provided many services. They offered day care for children, gymnasiums, reading rooms, sewing classes, social clubs, and training courses lor new immigrants. Residents in many cities formed religious and nonreligious aid organizations, known as benevolent societies, to help immigrants in cases of sickness, unemployment, and death. The size and number of charitable organizations grew rapidly along with the boom in immigration. They attempted to provide an important function by helping immigrants obtain education, health care, and jobs. Some benevolent societies offered loans to new immigrants to start businesses. Others set up insurance plans that provided money for families whose breadwinners were sick or had died. "We visit our sick and bury our dead" was one society's slogan. Cultural practices. Immigrants were often urged by employers, public institutions, and sometimes even family members to join the American mainstream. Many older immigrants cherished Ronald Foore of Tulsa, Oklahoma, suggested the following activity: Conduct a class discussion about the resources and institutions that help new immigrants adjust to life in the United States. Then organize students into triads. Have each triad create an immigration handbook that contains information for new immigrants. Ask volunteers to present their handbooks to the class. Jnt Religious =Spirit^ Creek Orthodox icon Many new immigrants were members of orthodox religious communities. Orthodox religions generally follow traditional practices that strictly conform to the faith's religious doctrines. For example, Orthodox Judaism is based on the Torah, the Jewish holy book, and applies its principles to daily life. The Greek and Russian Orthodox faiths strictly follow ancient rites and teachings of the early Christian Church. The Creek and Russian Orthodox Churches grew out of a split between the Roman Catholic Church and the Christian Church of the Byzantine Empire in 1054. The split resulted from the breakup of the Roman Empire and controversies including the use of icons, or sacred images, and the role of the pope. The Greek Orthodox Church is particularly known for its intricate mosaics and decorative icons. The Russian Orthodox Church has a long tradition of missionary work. Russian missionaries established Orthodox churches in Alaska during the late 1700s when Russians were settling in the region. In 1864 the first Greek Orthodox church was established in the United States, in New Orleans. Orthodox churches, particularly in large cities, provided a community center and important services for immigrants. American culture. Some immigrant children embraced American culture as soon as they arrived in the United States. How do the activities portrayed in this photo of immigrant children support this argument? Americanization. Americans conducted bol public and private efforts promote the Americaniza of immigrants. The state t New Jersey provided civic and English language cla to newcomers. The North American Civic League c< ducted similar programs i many cities. The Immigrai Protective League offered classes in Chicago. Some I nesses also provided Engli classes to immigrant wor Why might so many businesse and organizations have attempted to Americanizt immigrants? answer: Some students might argue that busines and organizations intend! to assist immigrants. Othi might claim that America feared or disliked the imr grants' native cultures. Visual Record Answ Students might mention ti many of the children are holding American flags. Visual Record Ans (for p. 496) Students might mention that he sells food and oth grocery items. B LEVEL 1: Have students work in pairs to identify and list the various cultural and economic reasons that nativists used to justify their opposition to immigration. (Pairs should cite the following cultural reasons: immigrants had different religions, different languages, were held responsible for crime, poverty, violence, and radical politics; economic reasons: immigrants work cheaply to rob Americans of jobs and cause wages to be lowered.) Ask students to share their lists with the class. Then lead a class discussion about the nativist response to immigration to the United States during the late 1800s. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning. LEVELS 2 AND 3: Tell students to imagine that they must create an editorial page for an urban newspaper during the late 1800s or early 1900s. Pair students and have each pair write an editorial that summarizes and points out potential problems with the nativist view of immigration. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct nativist views.) HOMEWORK Distribute Cartoon 14, Attitudes Toward Immigration, from American History Political Cartoons. Have each student study the cartoon and answer the accompanying questions. Denis Kearney. Denis Kearney was born in Ireland in 1847. In 1872 he moved to San Francisco, became a U.S. citizen, and opened a trucking business. Although he lacked a formal education, Kearney enjoyed reading and publicly debating social issues. He initially supported Chinese immigration, but later led the call for legislation excluding the Chinese from the United States. In his speeches, Kearney bitterly condemned journalists, businessmen, and lawyers as the enemies of the working class and demanded an end to Chinese immigration. Ennssnnm why might Kearney, himself an immigrant, have opposed Chinese immigration? answer: Students might point to his fear of economic competition from the Chinese. The American Nation Community Ties: San Francisco's Chinatown; Teacher's Guide, pp. 75-80 Search 40729, Play to 48257 Videodisc 1, Side B Play Pause See Teacher's Guide for Spanish barcode. Analyzing Primary Sources Drawing Conclusions In what ways is Frowne's work dangerous? The machines run fast, the needles might stick her, and she is so tired that she might make more mistakes. Chinese immigrants. Barred from many occupations, Chinese immigrants often opened their own businesses. What services does this Chinese American merchant provide to his community? their ties to the old country. By contrast, their children often adopted American cultural practices and tended to view their parents' old-world language and customs as old-fashioned. A second-generation Polish immigrant expressed bittersweet feelings about his parents'way of life. He noted,"One day it would pass and then there would remain only Americans whose forebears had once been Poles." The immigrant worker. Whether they adopted American habits or remained tied to the traditions of their homeland, most new immigrants shared a common work experience. Many did the country's "dirty work." In construction, mines, or sweatshops, most immigrants found their work to be difficult and physically exhausting. Hours were long, and wages were low. At the age of 15, Sadie Frowne began working in a garment factory in Brooklyn, New York. In 1902, Frowne recalled her experience there. t4The machines go like mad all day, because the faster you work the more money you get Sometimes in my haste I get my finger caught and the needle goes right through it... At the end of the day one feels so weak that there is a great temptation to lie right down and sleep.'' —Sadie Frtiwne. quoted in The Independent. 1902 Some immigrants worked as many as 15 hours a day to earn a living wage. Even the best-paid workers made little more than the minimum necessary to support themselves and their families. Hie Nativist Response Immigrant workers played an important role in operating the factories that contributed to a strong U.S. economy. Nevertheless, many native-born Americans saw immigration as a threat. They agreed with poet Thomas Bailey Aldrich, who warned against a "wild motley [mixed| throng [crowd]." Many saw these newcomers as too different to fit into American society. Others went further, biarr immigrants for social problems such as crime, poverty, and violences! well as for spreading radical political ideas. Nativists also opposed immigration for economic reasons. Many charged that the immigrants' willingness to work cheaply robbed native-born Americans of jobs and lowered wages for all. Supportedby | nativist workers, labor unions began demanding restrictions on immigration. Nativists achieved the greatest success in the West. Chinese exclusion. For years Chinese laborers had been toler- ated—and taken advantage of—on the West Coast, particularly® California. However, as unemployment mounted following the Panic of 1873, workers grew less tolerant. The new Workingmens Party of I California angrily cried, "The Chinese must go." Denis Kearney, the party's leader, was himself an Irish immigrant. He addressed crowds I across the state, exciting them with his vicious speeches. Mobs | attacked the Chinese, killing some and burning the property of others Have students complete the Section 1 Review on p. 497. Have students complete Daily Quiz 16.1. As Alternative Assessment, you may want to use the crossword puzzle or letter to a friend or relative in this section's lessons. Have students complete Main Idea Activity for English Language Learners and Special-Needs Students 16.1. Then organize students into triads. Have each triad create an illustrated outline of Section i. Display triads' outlines around the classroom. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning Have students conduct research on nativist activities in the late 1800s and early 1900s. In addition to examining the Immigration Restriction League, students might analyze the American Protective Association, the Chinese Exclusion Act, or conflicts between native-born and immigrant workers in industries such as coal mining. Have each student share his or her findings in a report or narrative. Block Scheduling Leaders of California's Chinese community appealed to the authorities for protection. Help, however, was not forthcoming. In fact, the state's political leaders responded by amending the state constitution to forbid Chinese residents to own property or to work at certain jobs. In 1882 Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act, which denied citizenship to people born in China and prohibited the immigration of Chinese laborers. The act made conditions worse for Chinese Americans. In 1885 a mob in Rock Springs, Wyoming Territory, murdered 28 Chinese and drove out hundreds more. Neither the Chinese Exclusion Act nor the violence completely stopped Chinese immigrants from coming to the United States. Many Chinese immigrants still came to the United States only to be held for months at immigration stations. Immigration Restriction League. Immigrants endured additional discrimination as new organizations took up the anti-immigration cause. Founded in 1894 by wealthy Bostonians, the Immigration Restriction League sought to impose a literacy test on all immigrants. Congress passed such a measure, but President Grover Cleveland vetoed it, calling it "illiberal, narrow, and un-American." Over the next several years Congress tried several times— without success—to pass a similar measure. Despite efforts to impose restrictions, immigration continued. Contrary to nativists' arguments, the new immigrants made positive contributions to American society. The rapid industrialization of the United States in the late 1800s would have been impossible without immigrant workers. Their varied cultures added new dimensions to American life. ll!,lHJ:U,l.,Hl!l4lmiLll:H'd.l:b] Nativist response. Nativists believed that immigration robbed native-born workers of jobs. What does this 1886 soap ad reveal about the nativist reaction to Chinese Visual Record Ansui Students might suggest t the ad shows "Uncle San kicking the Chinese out. 1. Define • old immigrants, p. 492 • new immigrants, p. 49 • steerage, p. 493 • benevolent societies, p. 495 2. Identify • Denis Kearney, p. 496 • Chinese Exclusion Act p. 497 • immigration Restrictio League, p. 497 • Grover Cleveland, p. 4 3. differences-countrie: origin, religion; similaritii reasons for immigrating the United States immigration? ✓ READING CHECK: Drawing Conclusions What problems did nativists create for new immigrants? Nativists threatened immigrants' personal safety and restricted their ability to own property. 1. Define and explain: old immigrants new immigrants steerage benevolent societies 3. Comparing and Contrasting Copy the graphic organizer below. Use it to describe the differences and similarities of the old immigrants and the new immigrants. L Identify and explain: Denis Kearney Chinese Exclusion Act Immigration Restriction League Grover Cleveland Finding the Main Idea a. Imagine that you are a recent immigrant to the United States in 1900. What aspects of the journey to the United States and the adjustment to American life do you think were most difficult? b. Where did immigrants find assistance in adjusting to American life? c. How did new immigrants contribute to the diversity of American society? Writing and Critical Thinking Supporting a Point of View Imagine that you are a member of Congress arguing against nativist legislation like the Chinese Exclusion Act. Prepare a speech to support your cause. b. from religious institutions and benevolent societies c. They brought cultural practices from their nati' countries. 5. Answers will vary. Speeches should includt discussion of the econor and cultural benefits tha the Chinese contributed the United States and sh discuss racism aimed at the Chinese. B LEVEL 1: Have students work in pairs to identify the major changes in public education and colleges after 1860. Then have pairs write topic sentences that summarize the changes in the educational system and their benefits. (Sentences should mention the passage of compulsory education laws, new methods of teaching, an expanded curriculum and a greater number of colleges. Benefits included more students attending school, new subjects, and new opportunities for higher educa- tion.) Ask volunteers to read their topic sentences to the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning LEVELS 2 AND 3: Ask students to identify the changes in public education and colleges in the late 1800s. Then tell students to imagine that they are educational reformers in 1860. Have each student write a letter to the state board of education that advocates the changes that he or she has identified and explains how those changes will benefit students. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct changes and benefits.) Ask students to read their letters to the class. HOMEWORK Have each student write a poem about how the public education system changed in the late 1800s. John Dewey in Schools of Tomorrow Dewey on Education. Philosopher John Dewey changed the way people thought about education. "We exaggerate school learning compared with what is learned in the ordinary course of living. We are, however, to correct this exaggeration, not by despising school learning, but by looking into that extensive and more efficient training given by the ordinary course of events." This teacher instructs her students in a Washington, D.C., public school classroom in the early 1900s. Even with this drive to teach American values, children of many different cultures in most public schools during this era remained segregated by race. Most schools for African American, Asian American, and Hispanic I students were poorly equipped. State and local governments spent little money on them. The expansion of public schools, however, did create more j opportunities for young women. In 1900 about 60 percent of high school 1 graduates were female. The number of American colleges and their enrollments also rose dur- ] ing this period. At the end of the Civil War, the United States had approxi-1 mately 500 colleges. By 1900 that number had grown to 1,000 institutions.. Meanwhile, the enrollment in American colleges had expanded from 50,000 to 350,000 students. Although more students began to seek higher levels of education, colleges remained primarily accessible to wealthy and upper- middle-class students. t/ READING CHECK: Making Generalizations How did changes in education affect students in the United States? Compulsory education laws prompted a large increase in the number of children attending school. Why might Dewey have praised "training given by the ordinary course of events"? r Skill-Building Strategies Analyzing Information ANSWER: Students might suggest that Dewey appreciated the educational benefits of everyday life. Practicing the Skill 1. compulsory school laws 2. increased from some 7 million to some 15 million 3. founded schools and developed new educational theories 4. enrolled and taught in schools 5. became more available and included some reforms 6. strengths-tried to improve learning and offered more access for women; weaknesses-discriminated against minorities i i Much like comparing and contrasting, analyzing is a basic skill used in historical study. To analyze is to break a topic or issue down into its essential parts and examine the relationships between those parts. Analyzing enables one to gain a more complete understanding of a subject, particularly when the subject can be interpreted in varying ways. As a result, analyzing helps one to draw conclusions about the subject. How to Analyze Information 1. Identify the subject Identify the topic or issue that you wish to analyze. You may want to rephrase the topic or issue as a question to be answered. 2. Examine the facts. Examine each piece of information that your source material provides about the subject. Make sure to study any statistics or graphic information carefully. 3. Examine different points of view. If the subject can be interpreted in varying ways, identify the main idea expressed by each side. Then determine whether each idea is supported by facts, opinions, or a combination of both. 4. Draw condusions. Use your examination of facts and ideas to draw conclusions and evaluate any different points of view. If you rephrased the subject for analysis as a question, answer it. The U.S. government originally encouraged the increase in Chinese immigration in part to provide cheap labor for the transcontinental railroad companies. An 1869 U.S. treaty granted Chinese visitors and residents most-favored- nation treatment. Many Americans began to resent the growing Chinese population, however. In 1870 Congress banned Asian immigrants from naturalization. In 1882, under pressure from western states, Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act to completely bar the immigration of Chinese workers. Congress later expanded and extended the act. How might Chinese officials have responded to the exclusion of their emigrants to the United States? ANSWER: Students might suggest that Chinese officials disliked the ban and attempted to ban American visitors or emigrants to China. 1. In 1900 a smaller percentage of Chinese Americans lived in California than in 1870. By 1900 some had settled in the North Atlantic region. 2. Germany Conquering Distance Massive population shifts occurred in the United States in the late 1800s. Between 1860 and 1910, some 23 million immigrants crossed the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans to reach the United States (see map at right). Many of these immigrants joined the millions of people making the cross-country trek to settle the American West. Railroad lines and improved systems of communication aided this westward migration. They linked numerous western cities together, forming the basis of a modern transcontinental economy. Conquering Distance Overseas Chinese American Areas of Residence 1870 California Asian immigration. Immigrants from Asia had to travel twice as far as European immigrants to reach the United States. Although most Chinese immigrants initially settled along the West Coast, some eventually journeyed across the United States. In 1870 a Massachusetts factory owner began recruiting Chinese laborers from California to take the place of striking workers. As this practice caught on, more Chinese laborers made the trip to the East Coast. This migration led to the development of thriving Chinatowns in Boston and New York. Percentage of California's Chinese Population Living in San Frandsc: 1900 1870 1900 All other areas North Atlantic Sources: World Book Encyclopedia; Ronald Takaki, Strangers from a Different Shore Rest of Caltlonii j Sources: World Book Encyclopedia; Ronald Takaki, Strangers from a Different Shore Human Systems 1. What might San Francisco have been like in the absence c the California Gold Rush? ANSWER: Some students m suggest that San Francisci would have remained a sn town or that San Francisci would have boomed at a later date. 1. Answers will vary. Stud- might mention increased immigration, as well as thi growth of railroads and ot technologies. 2. Chinese, Czech, Danisf Dutch, Finnish, German, Ir Mexican, Norwegian, Polis and Swedish BALL LEVELS: Pair students and tell them to imagine that they live in a large U.S. city in the late 1800s. Have each pair develop a list of urban problems and needs. (Students should list the need for fire, police, and sanitation services as well as the need for stable jobs.) Briefly discuss the lists and ask pairs to write paragraphs explaining how these urban problems and needs led to the emergence of political machines in cities. (Students should note that by providing services and jobs to loyal supporters political machines continued to be supported by voters.) Then ask students to consider their lists and paragraphs. Would they have supported political machines, even if those machines were corrupt? Did the pressing need for services justify any political machine that supplied them successfully? Analyzing Information What role did political machines play in the growth of U.S. cities? They provided public services growing cities needed. Immigrants and Political Machines Because political machines helped the urban poor, new immigrants often became particularly loyal supporters of political machines. Machine politicians often met immigrants as soon as they arrived in the United States. They helped newcomers get settled in their new homeland. Tammany Hall, a political club that had gained considerable power in the 1860s and early 1870s, became a powerful Democratic political machine in New York City during the 1890s. It sent numerous party workers to Ellis Island to meet new immigrants. Party workers assisted immigrants by finding them temporary housing and jobs. Tammany Hall workers also helped immigrants become naturalized citizens and thus eligible to vote for Tammany Hall candidates. However, Tammany officials failed to offer any extensive programs to address poverty and poor housing conditions. Political bosses ensured voter loyalty among immigrant groups by providing jobs in exchange for votes. James Pendergast was a particularly well-liked boss in Kansas City, Missouri. He began his political career while running a saloon in the industrial river-bottom district where many immigrants lived and worked. Pendergast gained considerable political support by providing jobs and special services to his African American, Irish American, and Italian American constituents. "There is no kinder hearted or more sympathetic man in Kansas City than Jim Pendergast," said one Kansas City resident. "He will go down in his pockets after his last cent to help a friend. No man is more easily moved to sympathy or good sense than Jim Pendergast." Another immigrant described the efforts of a local political boss. "Tammany Bank." Place a coin in the Tammany politician's hand and he deposits it in his pocket. How does this bank reflect the political corruption of the 1870s? MTo this one he lends a dollar; for another he obtains a railroad ticket without payment; he has coal distributed in the depth of winter;... he sometimes sends poultry at Christmas time; he buys medicine for a sick person; he helps bury the dead.*' — Anonymous immigrant James Pendergast ran a political machine in Kansas City, Missouri. Public services. During the late 1800s political machines attempted to provide the public services required by growing U.S. cities. Political bosses such as Alexander Shepherd of Washington, D.C., financed expanded sewer and water systems, paved streets, and provided other public services. Between 1871 and 1873 Shepherd's board of public works spent $20 million, creating significant civic improvements and new jobs in the nation's capital. This boom of public-works projects meant that bosses could distribute many jobs among loyal supporters. By providing jobs, political favors, and services to local residents, political machines were able to win support from many poor and working-class city-dwellers. Political bosses and local precinct representatives often formed close relationships with local voters. Tammany Covernmenl The founders of Tammany Hall formed the organizatic in 1789 and named it after Tammanend, a powerful Delaware chief. They creati the group as a benevolent and fraternal organization to oppose what they saw a aristocratic dominance witl the Federalist Party. Overtir the society became a politi organization linked with th emerging Democratic Party might the founders of Tammany Hall have named the organization after Tammanend? ANSWER; Students might suggest that the founders probably wanted to portray the organization as powerfi just like Tammanend. internet connect TOPIC: Tammany Hall GO TO: go.hrw.com Have students access the Internet through the HRW Go site to conduct research on the Tammany Hall political machine in New York City. Then ask students to imagine that they work for a newspaper in New York City. Have each student create a newspaper article about an issue related to Tammany Hall politics. — i ALL LEVELS: Tell students to imagine that it is 1880 and that they are recent immigrants. Ask students to describe the ways in which political machines might help them survive and prosper in the United States. (Answers will vary. Some students might note that the machines provided services and jobs.) To help students understand why immigrants were important to political machines, copy the following graphic organizer on the chalkboard, omitting the italicized answers. Have each student complete it. English Language Learners Why Immigrants Were /important to Machines / • represented a huge supply of supporters and voters > tended to be particularly Political Machines and Immigrants Ways in Which Machines Recruited and Rewarded Immigrants • welcomed immigrants upon arrival > found immigrants temporary housing and jobs • helped immigrants become naturalized citizens ' helped immigrants with / finances, funerals, and so on George Washington Plunkitt in Eyewitnesses and Others The Secret of a Successful Boss. Political bosses provided far more than jobs and services to new immigrants. They also provided a sense of human contact and concern-a fact that endeared them to many people adjusting to a new country and a new society. One political boss said: "To learn real human nature you have to go among the people, see them and be seen. I know every man, woman, and child in the Fifteenth District.... 1 know what they like and what they don't like, what they are strong at and what they are weak in, and I reach them by approachin' at the right side. Here's how I gather in the young men. I hear a young feller that's proud of his voice, thinks that he can sing fine. I ask him to come around to Washington Hall and join our Glee Club. He comes and sings, and he's a follower of Plunkitt for life." activity: Have students suggest how modern-day politicians use similar strategies to reach their constituents. Most political machines maintained their political power with the support of immigrant voters. In some cities, however, immigrants became active members of political machines, serving as officeholders, organizers, and representatives. In Boston, for example, the Irish American population was highly influential in the local Democratic machine. During the mid-1800s Irish Americans in Boston accounted for more than one third of the city's voters. Because Irish Americans spoke English as a first language, they had slightly easier access to U.S. political processes than many other immigrant groups. Many Irish Americans who were loyal to the political machine in Boston were rewarded with jobs in the local police and fire departments. Ambitious Irish American politidans rose quickly through the ranks of the city's political machine. Second-generation immigrants John F. Fitzgerald—President John F. Kennedy's grandfather—and James Michael Curley both rose from the ranks of local boss to become mayor of the city during the late 1800s. Summarizing Describe the relationship between immigrants and political machines. It was a mutually cooperative relationship. The immigrants needed jobs; the political machines needed votes. Corruption. Working for the Tammany Hall political machine, these men are voting illegally. What does this photograph reveal about the way the men were paid for their votes? Graft and Corruption Political machines often resorted to corruption in their attempt to take control of city governments. Although political machines successfully got party members re-elected, machine corruption often interfered with the important functions of city government. Election fraud. For political machines to maintain their power, their candidates had to win elections. When jobs and political favors were not enough to build popular support during elections, some political machines turned to fraud. A New York resident testified before the U.S. House of Representatives on election fraud. "Gangs or bodies of men hired for the purpose, assembled at these headquarters where they were furnished with names and numbers, and under a leader or captain, they went out... in nearly every part of the city, registering many times each, and when the day of election came these repeaters, supplied abundantly with intoxicating drinks, and changing coats, hats, or caps, as occasion required to avoid recognition or detection, commenced the work of 'voting early and often. * —New York resident. US. House of Representatives Report No. 41 on Election Fraud in New York. DM Visual Record Answer Students might point out that they were paid with things they could use like new shoes and socks. Voting fraud was widespread in many U.S. cities. For example, during one election in Philadelphia, a voting district with fewer than 100 registered voters somehow returned 252 votes! Craft Once inside city government, political bosses often became even more corrupt. They looked for ways to increase their own political power and personal wealth. One way to get rich was to take advantage of the massive amounts of public funds involved in providing essential city services. Many city officials practiced r k Have students complete the Section 2 Review on p. 557. Have students complete Daily Quiz 18.2. As Alternative Assessment, you may want to use the labor law encyclopedia entry or list of union successes and failures in this section's lessons. Have students complete Main Idea Activity for English Language Learners and Special-Needs Students 18.2. Then have students write the section's headings and subheadings on a sheet of paper, leaving a space between each. Ask students to list the main ideas of each heading and subheading in the appropriate space. Suggest that students find partners and compare main ideas. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning Have students use the library or the Internet to conduct research on the growth and philosophical changes of the AFL (now the AFL-CIO) from the early 1900s to the present. Tell students to use the information they find to create an annotated time line on the subject. Block Scheduling Haywood denounced the AFL's cooperation with business owners and its failure to include unskilled workers. He vowed to organize lumber workers, migrant farm- workers, miners, and textile workers to overthrow the capitalist system. The IWW enlisted African American, Asian American, and Hispanic American workers. An IWW-led union in Philadelphia succeeded in raising wages for its largely African American membership from S1.25 a day to $4 a day. The IWW also actively recruited female workers and the wives of male workers. An IWW newspaper expressed optimism that union women working "side by side with men in strikes will soon develop a fighting force that will end capitalism and its horrors in short order." The Wobblies, as the members of the IWW came to be called, pursued their goals through boycotts, general strikes, and industrial sabotage. Their greatest hour came in 1912. That year, they led 10,000 workers in a strike against the textile mills of Lawrence, Massachusetts, to protest large cut in wages. After a bitter and much-publicized two-month strike, the mill owners gave in. Success was short-lived, however. Several later IWW-led strikes failed miserably. Most Americans grew fearful of the lWW's revolutionary goals and methods. As member Frederick C. Mills put it, the IWW "is trying to teach them [poor or unemployed workers] how to get their share of the goods of this world." The government cracked down on the union with increasing force. Disagreements among IWW' leaders also weakened the union's power. Within a few years the IWW' collapsed and eventually faded from power. IWW strike. The local militia was called in to break the IWW-led strike in Lawrence, Massachusetts. What does this picture reveal about the government's attitude toward strikers? What solutions would you have proposed to improve working conditions for women and children? b. How did the Triangle Shirtwaist Fire lead to improved workplace safety? c Contrast the Supreme Court rulings in Lochner v. New York and Muller v. Oregon. Writing and Critical Thinking £ Homework Practice Online Summarizing Imagine that you are a union organizer. Write a speech explaining why workers should join a union. Consider: • what the goals of employers were • what the goals of employees were • how meeting the goals of one group might affect the other group keyword: SD3 HP18 • socialism, p. 555 • open shop, p. 556 2. National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, p. 563 • National Urban League, p. 563 • Americanization, p. 564 • Society of American Indians, p. 564 3. improving garbage collection, housing, and health education; making safe and healthy public spaces; prohibition American Indian Jim Thorpe was one of the greatest athletes in U.S. history. 4a. Many believed alcohol caused crime and destroyed families. b. They organized to call attention to discrimination, to emphasize the successes of their ethnic groups, and to work for governmental change. The NAACP changed some laws; the SAI suffered from internal dissension and lost influence. c. He organized the NAACP to fight for equal rights and helped secure voting rights for African Americans. f American Indians organize. Demands for equal rights and greater opportunities for American Indians also surfaced during this period. The Dawes Act of 1887 had caused many Indians to lose their property to land speculators and fall deeper into poverty. Some progressives took up their cause. They wanted to slow down land allotment and maintain the reservation system for a time. In 1911 a group of 50 American Indians, most of them middle-class professionals, formed the Society of American Indians. Members discussed ways to improve civil rights, education, health, and local government. The society publicized the accomplishments of American Indians such as Olympic gold medalist Jim Thorpe. It also lobbied against the use of insulting terms for Indians. Some members supported strengthening native cultures, but most favored complete assimilation, or absorption, into white American culture. Society member and Seneca historian Arthur C. Parker urged American Indians "to strike out into the duties of modern life and ... find every right that had escaped them before." The organization s moderate positions on most issues led to disputes. Dr. Carlos i Montezuma, a Yavapai Apache member of the society, criticized the Bureau of i Indian Affairs for mismanaging reservations. Other members refused to take such a strong antigovemment stand, and the group's influence declined. Nevertheless, I the organization provided a forum for American Indian leaders. It also laid the groundwork for later attempts to improve conditions for American Indians. Summarizing What actions did African Americans and American Indians take to improve their economic and political positions during the Progressive Era? African Americans organized the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. American Indians established the Society of American Indians. Immigrants and Assimilation The progressive movement had mixed results for immigrants its well. Many reformers sympathized with the plight of the newcomers who labored in factories and were crowded into slum tenements. These reformers lobbied for laws to improve immi- j grants' lives, as well as conditions in the workplace and in city slums. At the same time, progressives criticized immigrants. They accused them of immoral behavior such as drinking and gambling and denounced immigrant support for big-city political machines. Some native-born Americans with progressive ideals favored restricting immigration. In 1916 a prominent New' Yorker named Madison Grant published The Passing of the Great Race. In this book he expressed I racist opinions about African Americans, Jews, and immigrants from southern I and eastern Europe. Yet Grant was also a progressive who supported environmed- I tal protection, urban planning, and other reforms. Many progressives supported Americanization, a process of preparing foreign-born residents for full U.S. citizenship. These efforts to assimilate immigrants, or to make them more like native-born Americans, focused on education, In schools, voluntary associations, and public programs, immigrants were taught to read, write, and speak English. They also learned about U.S. history and govern-1 ment. Several cities and states passed Americanization measures. William Maxwdl, a prominent New York educator, wanted to make the public school "a meltingpot which converts the children of the immigrants of all races and languages into sturdy, independent American citizens." Russian immigrant Eugene Lyons described the effects of Americanization on immigrants: Have students complete the Section 18 Review on p. 565. Have students complete Daily Quiz 18.3. As Alternative Assessment, you may want to use the graphic organizer or the civil rights platform in this section's lessons. Have students complete Main Idea Activity for English Language Learners and Special-Needs Students 18.3. Then ask students to write a question and answer that covers the main idea for each subsection in the section. Select students to read their questions to the class. Have the class try to answer each question. English Language Learners Have students conduct research on reformers who are questioning the impact of television, movies, music, and video games on society today. Have each student write a short essay comparing and contrasting the present-day crusade with reformers' efforts in the Progressive Era. Block Scheduling **We sensed a disrespect for the alien traditions in our homes and came unconsciously to resent and despise those traditions ... because they seemed [impossible] barriers between ourselves and the adopted land." —lugcne Lyons, Assignment in Utopia Chinese immigrant Victor Wong recalled that in school, teachers tried to "dissuade us... from everything Chinese. Their view of the Chinese ways was that they were evil, heathen, non-Christian." Some immigrants rejected the assistance of social reformers, because the reformers did not respect their cultural backgrounds. Some progressives welcomed the diversity of immigrant groups. In his 1924 book. Culture and Democracy in the United States, philosopher Horace Kallen supported pluralism. He envisioned a nation that would be home to a number of distinctive cultures. Some immigrants also supported Americanization that could be achieved without giving up their own ethnic identities. Poor immigrants and the political bosses who represented them supported middle-class progressives when they fought for practical reforms such as worker protection and public-health programs. For example, a New York state legislative committee that investigated factory conditions after the Triangle Shirtwaist Fire won strong backing from New York City's immigrant-based Democratic machine. In his autobiography, Frederic Howe asserted that New York City owed its playgrounds, public baths, and public parks, among other services, to Irish immigrants and their political machines. "Unconsciously aiming to shape the state to human ends," he declared, "the Irish have made New York what it is." Americanizing immigrants. This poster was created to encourage immigrants to learn English. Do you think that the poster shows respect for immigrants' culture? Explain your answer. Identifying Points of View How did progressives view immigrants? Some progressives wanted to help them but also accused many immigrants of behavior prohibition 2. Identify and explain: Lawrence Veiller Daniel Burnham Woman's Christian Temperance Union Billy Sunday Frances Willard Eighteenth Amendment W. E B. Du Bois National Association for the Advancement of Colored People National Urban League Society of American Indians Americanization nizational web below. Use it to explain the different approaches that progressives took in cleaning up cities. a. Why did progressives support prohibition and the elimination of saloons? b. What methods did African Americans and American Indians use to fight racism and discrimination, and how successful were they? c What impact did reform leader W. E. B. Du Bois have on American society? Writing and Critical T hinking Supporting a Point of View Imagine that you are an immigrant in 1910. Do you support the progressive movement? Explain your answer. Consider: • how some progressives treated immigrants • Americanization efforts • how some immigrants contributed to reform Homework Practice Online keyword: SD3 HP18 5. Some students might a against progressives becai they want to limit immigra rights. Others might argue progressives because they want to improve the overa quality of life. Creating a Time Line Each event should have an explanation and a con date. Writing a Summary See the Reading Checks in each section for main ideas. Identifying People and Ideas 1. a reform movement focused on improving urban life 2. journalists who wrote about corruption in politi- business, and society 3. activist who worked ft child labor restrictions 4. leader of the America Federation of Labor 5. system under which c eratives own the means i production and services 6. settlement-house wor who campaigned for impi housing 7. scholar who formed NAACP and worked for political rights of African Americans 8. leader of the Woman' Christian Temperance Union 9. group formed to add injustices and problems by American Indians BALL LEVELS: To help students identify the events that led to U.S. entry into the war, copy the time line to the right on the chalkboard, omitting the italicized events. Have each student complete it. After students have finished their time lines, ask students to rank the events in order of importance. Then ask students to name modern-day events that might encourage them to support a war. English Language Learners HOMEWORK Have each student write a newspaper headline for each of the events that led to U.S. entry into -1 the war. This note proves German hostility. Significance: United States p the war on he Allied side Military Service. As hostilities in Europe began to suggest the horrible possibility of a war, many U.S. leaders began thinking about how to prepare the military for a large-scale conflict. Some, such as Theodore Roosevelt and General Leonard Wood, advocated compulsory military training for all American men. Wood argued, "The volunteer system is not dependable because of the uncertainty as to returns, and in any case because of lack of time for training and organization." Others argued against compulsory service. Max Eastman, editor of The Masses, wrote, "For my part I do not recognize the right of a government to draft me to a war whose purposes I do not believe in. But to draft me to a war whose purposes it will not so much as communicate to my ear, seems an act of tyranny." On March 1, 1917, American newspapers published an intercepted cable from German foreign secretary Arthur Zimmermann to the German minister in Mexico. Dubbed the Zimmermann Note, the cable proposed a Mexican alliance with Germany. The cable offered German support to help Mexico "reconquer the lost territory in New Mexico, Texas, and Arizona." The note infuriated many Americans. As weeks passed, Wilson reluctantly concluded that the United States could no longer stay out of the conflict. On April 2,1917, the president addressed Congress and asked for a declaration of war. Congress declares war. In his speech Wilson condemned Germany's submarine warfare for its "wanton [vicious] and wholesale destruction." He also summoned Americans to crusade fora better world. **We are glad ... to fight thus for the ultimate peace of the world and for the liberation of its peoples,... for the rights of nations—great and small—and the privilege of men everywhere to choose their way of life_The world must be made safe for democracy.'' The Zimmermann Note. This telegram, sent to the German minister in Mexico, proposed an alliance between Germany and Mexico. Does this telegram look like an official document from the German government? Explain your answer. —Woodrow Wilson, "For Declaration of War Against Germany," April 2,1917 At these words, cheers and applause rang through the Capitol. Later, Wilson told an aide, "My message today was a message of death for our young men. How strange it seems to applaud that." The Senate declared war on April 4, 1917. The House followed two days later, The vote was not unanimous—six senators and 50 representatives opposed the declaration. Representative Jeannette Rankin of Montana was among the opposition. "I want to stand by my country," she explained, "but I cannot vote for war." Sequencing Create a time line of events that led to U.S. entry into the war. 1916—Sussex pledge from Germany; Congress approves the National Defense Act; 1917—the Zimmermann Note angers Wilson. He asks Congress to declare war on Germany. Mobilizing U.S. Military Power In his war message on April 2, President Wilson pledged all the nations material resources to the Allied war effort. What the Allies most urgently needed were fresh troops. Few Americans, however, rushed to volunteer for military service. Recruiting an army. Congress passed the Selective Service Act on May 18, 1917. It required men between the ages of 21 and 30 to register with local draft boards. This was later changed to men between the ages of 18 and 45. By the end of the war, some 24 million men had registered, and 2.8 million of them had been drafted. More than half of the almost 4.8 million Americans who served in the armed forces during World War I were draftees. Supporters of the draft argued that it would help build a more democratic United States by bringing together soldiers from different backgrounds. In reality, African Americans, American Indians, Mexican Americans, and many foreign- born soldiers faced segregation and often discrimination. Most foreign-born B LEVEL 1: Pair students and have each pair write several sentences explaining how the United States prepared its military for the war. (Sentences should indicate that Congress passed the Selective Service Act, recruited troops in other ways, and instituted a massive soldier-training program.) Ask students to share their sentences. Using these responses, compile a comprehensive list on the chalkboard. Then have pairs create recruitment or training posters. Tell students to imagine that it is 1917 and that they are new army recruits. Have each student write a series of short journal entries describing the ways in which the United States prepared its military for the war. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct methods.) Have volunteers read their entries to the class. To conclude, ask students to consider how the United States prepared its military for the war. Do students think that those methods were adequate? How else might military officials have recruited and trained troops? soldiers, for example, were assigned to separate units where they were taught civics and English. Some of the 10,000 American Indians who served during the war were not U.S. citizens. Their service contributed to Congress's decision in 1924 to grant citizenship to all American Indians. More than 370,000 African American recruits served. They were blocked from service in the marines and limited to kitchen duties in the navy. Most African Americans in the army served in all-black support un its commanded by white officers. African American draftees who were sent to army training camps in the South often faced harassment from the local population. Pressure from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and other African American organizations convinced the army to open up more opportunities for black soldiers. A school was established to train African .American officers, and more African American soldiers were assigned combat duty. However, the army made no effort to integrate black and white soldiers in the same units. Training the troops. Massive training camps had to be hastily constructed to house and train the new soldiers. In the summer of 1917, workers began building barracks at 16 separate locations. Completing the task in the planned 60 days seemed impossible. However, by using simple designs, a huge workforce, and mass-production techniques, thousands of buildings were ready by September. There were not enough uniforms and equipment for all the troops yet, but at least they had a place to live while training. The military hoped to use a similary accelerated process for the troops'training. Private Harry R. Richmond wrote about his training camp in New Mexico. **The burden of creating an army at short notice, falls most heavily upon the recruit The rookie is expected to learn now in three weeks, what his fellow soldiers acquired a year a^o in three months. We are drilled nearly 7 or A doughboy's pack contained the essentials for survival. 8 hours per day. —Private Harry R. Richmond, letter, August 1.1917 Upon arrival at a training camp, recruits underwent a series of medical examinations. They spent most of their days learning military rules, drilling with their equipment, exercising, and preparing for inspections. "Every man is supposed to be slicked up,shoes shined, clothes clean, and he must be shaved," recalled onerecruit."This is one thing they insist on in the army—every- thing must be clean." Soldiers also spent a lot of time learning how to fight. Recruits spent many hours on the rifle range and practiced hand-to-hand combat using bayonets. Frank Sweeney wrote that recruits faced dummies "hanging from large cross beams" and wre "taught the best method of approach and the proper jabs to get him before he gets us." Sweeney noted that "sometimes the In The Making The Doughboy's Pack By Paul Boyer Hi istory is much more than a study of dates, documents, or facts about famous people. . Ordinary objects also leave a historical record about an event or an era. For example, common items provided to soldiers during a war tell a story about how that war was fought. During World War I, U.S. infantry troops, nicknamed doughboys, carried all their necessary equipment inside a canvas "field kit" strapped to their backs. The around-the-waist design with pockets was adopted during World War I because of automatic weapons. Rifles could now fire as many as five bullets per minute, and a soldier needed easy access to large amounts of ammunition during the heat of battle. The gas mask filtered out poisonous fumes that could suffocate or blind a soldier. The steel helmet extended to the top of the ear line to help prevent head wounds. Soldiers also carried a tent, tent poles, a rain poncho, a bayonet, a blanket, a sewing kit, socks, identification tags, a compass, and a flashlight. Sturdy metal containers protected two days' worth of rations-hard biscuits called hardtack and dried meat-from rain, rats, and insects. On a long march, soldiers might have cursed their heavy packs, but they also knew that burden could mean the difference between life and death. WORLD war I African Americans i the War. African Ante soldiers faced officially tioned discrimination. Ir j 1918 memorandum, Co E. D. Anderson suggest i that most African Amer soldiers work solely as ers, thereby freeing up soldiers to train for batt Despite this discriminat many African American supported the war effor welcomed the opportur for travel, education, an l honor that sometimes a | panied the experience. To raise money and support for the war, the federal government became more involved in people's lives. b. Women worked in factories and organized war efforts, which helped lead to the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment. c Mexicans came for jobs; some fled the Mexican Revolution; African Americans wanted to escape discrimination and get higher paying jobs. 4. Answers will vary. Editorials should discuss free speech, wartime dangers, and Americanization efforts. i Socialists. Many Socialists questioned the reasons for fighting World War I. What does this button suggest about the goals of the Socialist Party? The Socialist Party also proclaimed its opposition to the war. To most part members, the warring nations were simply using working people as tools in a cap italist struggle for control of world markets. The Industrial Workers of the Worli (IWW) had a similar view and led strikes in a number of war-related industries. To silence opponents of the war. Congress passed the Espionage Act in lun 1917 and the Sedition Act a year later. These measures outlawed acts of treason am made it a crime to "utter, print, write, or publish any disloyal... or abusive Ian guage" criticizing the government, the flag, or the military. Opposition to the draft to war-bond drives, or to the arms industry also became a crime. The CPI rallied support for the war, while the Espionage and Sedition Act crushed opposition to the war. More than 1,000 people—including some 201 members of the IWW—were convicted of violating these laws. Socialist Part] leader Eugene V. Debs was sentenced to 10 years in prison for making a speed against the war. Many Americans, even some who supported the war, believed that the Espionage and Sedition Acts violated the First Amendment. The Supreme Court, however, disagreed. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote the opinion in the 191! landmark case Schenckv. United States. Analyzing Primary Sources Evaluating What effect did World War I have on the Court's ruling? It made the Court uphold laws that it would not have upheld during peacetime. United States. Evaluating How effective were the Espionage Act and the Sedition Act? They were very effective. They crushed opposition to the war. 1. Identify and explain: William McAdoo Food Administration Herbert Hoover War Industries Board Bernard Baruch National War Labor Board Harriot Stanton Blatch Juliette Gordon Low Great Migration Committee on Public Information Espionage Act Sedition Act 2. Sequencing Copy the diagram below. Use it to list the steps the U.S. government took to mobilize the economy for war. Organize students into two groups and tell them to imagine that they are modern-day participants in a roundtable discussion entitled Public Fears over the Red Scare of 1919-20. Have one group act as historians and the otlter group act as facilitators and questioners. Have members of each group prepare notes to assist them in their specific roles, and then conduct the roundtable discussion. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct causes.) Cooperative Learning NOTE: To help students make meaningful connections between events in U.S. history and those in their own hometown, use the Chapter 22 Hands-On History Activity, Labor Unions in Your Region. H LEVEL 1: Pair students and have each pair write a paragraph explaining why the trial of Sacco and Vanzetti aroused public interest. (Pairs should note that American society was deeply divided over the trial. Some people believed that Sacco and Vanzetti deserved punishment for their views. Others believed that the pair had been condemned to death because they were immigrant radicals and not because of the evidence presented.) Have volunteers read their paragraphs to the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning -i The Palmer Raids. In the first months of his role as attorney general, A. Mitchell Palmer strongly defended individual rights. After he received a mail bornb, however, he became a leading figure in the war against radicals-a war that many felt abridged individual rights. The Palmer raids began in November 1919 and soon led many Americans to call for the deportation of the supposed radicals. Palmer himself indulged these calls. In December 1919 an army transport ship called the Buford ferried some 249 aliens to Finland, where officials loaded them on railroad cars and sent them to the Soviet Union. might U.S. officials have ordered the supposed radicals to be sent to the Soviet Union? answer: Students might note that many radicals were suspected of Bolshevism. U.S. officials might have felt that the Soviet Union was an appropriate place for these radicals. Visual Record Answer (for p. 668) Students might note that the signs call for boycotts and strikes and criticize the executioners. Eugene V. Debs spread socialist political beliefs during his five bids for the presidency between 1900 and 1920. Socialist Party platform called for the collective ownership of industry, which was to be achieved by nonviolent means. In the 1912 election Debs received about 900,000 votes. When the Bolsheviks seized power in Russia in 1917, most American members of the Socialist Party joined Debs in refusing to support the violent overthrow of the government. A smaller number of American radicals did support the Bolsheviks. These Americans openly embraced Marx's revolutionary ideas. Some believed such a revolution should happen in the United States. Many Americans ignored differences between socialists and communists. After witnessing the massive strikes of 1919, many people believed that all radicals and labor activists were Bolshevik agents who wanted to overthrow the U.S. government. Some Americans believed that communists, or "Reds," were everywhere. Immigrants, particularly those involved in unions, came under great suspicion. Antiradical fears reached such heights that several elected members of the New York State Assembly were expelled because of their membership in the Socialist Party. fiSfes, ter —1 4iK.H,""u,tii "f Unte*1- OiPOTiW "" Sorf**'*' Attorney General A Mitchell Palmer waged a public campaign against all perceived radicals. The Palmer raids. Many Americans interpreted a series of bornb scares in 1919 as justification for their antiradical fears. In April postal clerks discovered 36 bornbs in the mail. These bornbs were addressed to prominent citizens, including lohnD. Rockefeller, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes of the Supreme Court, and Postmaster General Albert Burleson. Then, less than one month later, a bornb damaged the house of Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer. The bornber, an Italian anarchist died in the blast. The bornb scares intensified the Red Scare hysteria. Newspapers began demanding harsh action against radicals. Hoping to further his presidential ambitions, Attorney General Palmer launched an anticommunist crusade. He created a special government office to gather information on radical activities. Palmer placed J. Edgar Hoover, future head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, in charge. Palmer's most dramatic action was a series of raids to capture alleged radicals. The Palmer raids began in November 1919. They peaked on January 2, 1920, when federal officials arrested thousands of suspected radicals in 33 cities nationwide Although the government claimed that radicals were "armed to the teeth," just three pistols were seized during the raids. Most of those arrested were poor immigrants who had recently arrived in the country In most cases, there was no real evidence against them. Nevertheless, hundreds of foreigners suspected of radical activities were deported. Emma Goldman, a noted feminist, writer, and speaker, was among the deportees. By the summer of 1920 public hysteria over radicalism died down. What were the causes and effects of the Red Scare? causes—Bolshevik revolution, labor strikes, and mail bornb scares: effects—more racial hatred, mistrust of foreigners, Palmer raids on suspected radicals LEVELS 2 AND 3: Tell students to imagine that it is 1927 and that they are newspaper editors after the execution of Sacco and Vanzetti. Have each student write a short editorial that explains the public interest in the trial of Sacco and Vanzetti. (See the Level I lesson for the correct reasons.) Based on the evidence presented in this chapter, students should explain to what extent or in what ways, if any, the Sacco and Vanzetti trial should be considered in the context of the Red Scare and hostility toward immigrants. Tell students to read the quotation by if John Dos Passos on the following page. Have each stu- : - dent create a collage to illustrate the meaning of his observation in the historical context discussed in this section. on Anarchists in Film Have each student view a movie that portrays anarchist groups or individuals. Tell students to write a short analysis of the film's depiction of anarchists. Block Scheduling NOTE: For an additional teaching idea, see the Chapter 22 interrupted film lesson in the Creative Teaching Strategies handbook. Skill-Building | Strategies News stories are an extremely important resource for historians. Different types of news media contain an enormous amount of information that historians access regularly to help them create their accounts of the past. News stories, however, possess certain advantages and disadvantages as historical sources. Although the print media frequently provide news coverage that is thorough and analytically sophisticated, this coverage lacks the sense of immediacy that is conveyed through the broadcast media. In contrast, radio and television reports often sacrifice detail and in-depth analysis of issues to provide news coverage that is as current as possible. In any case, all forms of news media must be examined carefully for fairness and accuracy in their presentation of events. How to Evaluate a News Story 1. Become familiar with the source. First, determine whether the news story is presented through broadcast media or through print media. Then, if possible, find out about the historical background of the story's creator and the story's intended audience. 2. Assess the story's coverage of events. As you study the story, determine whether it covers its subject in sufficient depth. Check to see if it includes adequate background information and explores the possible consequences of events. I. Assess the fairness and accuracy of the reporting. Examine the story carefully for fairness and accuracy in its presentation of events. Determine whether the reporting "sticks to the facts," explains any differing points of view in a balanced way, or displays any recognizable biases of its own. Evaluating News Stories 4. Put the information to use. If possible, compare the story with other sources that address the same subject Then use the results of your analysis, along with your knowledge of the historical period, to form generalizations and draw conclusions. Applying the Skill Examine the following excerpt from a news story that appeared in the Atlanta Constitution on August 23, 1927. 4'state Prison, Charlestown, Mass—Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti were put to death today. They went to the embrace of the electric chair unswerving in the avowal of their innocence. They paid with their lives for the murder of a paymaster and his guard at South Braintree [Massachusetts] seven years ago. As the heavy voltage of electricity was shot through their bodies, bayoneted guards surrounded the ancient prison for blocks. In cities on three continents millions awaited word of their death, many of them convinced that the two were executed for their political beliefs, not for the South Braintree murders." Practicing the Skill Use the excerpt above to answer the following questions. 1. Does this excerpt cover its subject in sufficient depth? 2. Is the reporting in the excerpt fair and accurate? What biases, if any, does it display? 3. How does the excerpt contribute to your understanding of the Red Scare? Sacco and Vanzetti i the Red Scare passed, hostility toward foreigners and radicals persisted, (fee of the most sensational trials of the 1920s involved two Italian immigrants who ere convicted of murder and sentenced to death. Although both were anarchists, Let1 lived fairly quiet lives. Nicola Sacco was a shoemaker, and Bartolomeo Vanzetti peddled fish from a pushcart. Sacco and Vanzetti were charged with the murders of bpymaster and a guard during a 1920 payroll robbery outside a shoe factory near jkston Upon arrest, the police found the men armed with pistols. After an intense ration, the two were charged with murder. ► An Urgent Appeal. People across the United States and in Europe protested the decision in the Sacco and Vanzetti case. Government officials from France, Germany, Great Britain, and Italy sent pleas for a new trial. Anatole France, a well-known French author, published an appeal to the "People of the United States." He wrote, "Save Sacco and Vanzetti. Save them for your honor, for the honor of your children, and for generations unborn." might France have argued that saving Sacco and Vanzetti would save American honor? answer: Students might suggest that he meant that U.S. citizens would be dishonored by executing men who had not, in the opinion of many, been given a fair trial. Practicing the Skill 1. The excerpt contains little background information about the crime or Sacco and Vanzetti's political beliefs. 2. It seems to stick to the facts of the execution, the prisoners' claims of innocence, and the public's opinions. 3. It expresses certain bare facts and also implies that officials expected some violent action during the execution, perhaps by the prisoners' radical supporters. 667 i Have students complete the Section 1 Review on p. 668. Have students complete Daily Quiz 22.1. As Alternative Assessment, you may want to use the political cartoons or editorial in this section's lessons. Have students complete Main Idea Activity for English Language Learners and Special-Needs Students 22.1. Then organize students into triads. Have each triad create a detailed outline of Section 1. Display triads' outlines around the classroom and ask students to examine them. Have each student note the topics or areas that are still confusing or unclear. Ask volunteers to share their topics or areas and conduct a brief discussion to correct the misunderstandings. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning Organize the class into small groups. Have groups gather infoi mation about the Sacco and Vanzetti trial, the artifacts of the trial, and commentary on the trial during the 1920s. The trial and execution of Sacco and Vanzetti divided liberals and conservatives during the 1920s. How do the picket signs reflect the views of the supporters of Sacco and Vanzetti? 1. Define and explain: demobilization 2. Identify and explain: Seattle general strike Boston police strike United Mine Workers strike John L Lewis Red Scare A. Mitchell Palmer Palmer raids Nicola Sacco Bartolomeo Vanzetti Sacco and Vanzetti were tried before Judge Webster Thayer, who was known I for his strong dislike of radicals. The immigrants' radical political views and their avoidance of military service in 1917 helped turn the trial against them. Eyewitnesses who could offer alibis for Sacco and Vanzetti were dismissed. The jury returned a guilty verdict. Judge Thayer sentenced the two to death. He ended the trial with a bold statement. 4'This man [Vanzetti], although he may not actually have committed the crime attributed to him, is nevertheless morally culpable [guilty], because he is an enemy of our existing institutions. The defendants ideals are cognate [associated] with crime." —Judge Thayer, quoted in The Year the World Went Mad, by Allen EhurdiUl The verdict outraged defenders of civil liberties. They argued that the two nra had been convicted not because of the evidence presented but because they were | immigrants and radicals. The verdict and subsequent appeals drew worldw attention. In Paris, New' York City, and elsewhere, thousands of people marchedial protest. All pleas for a new trial failed. On August 23,1927, Sacco and Vanzetti were j executed. Many Americans believed that radicals like Sacco and Vanzetti deserved:| to be punished for their views. Others saw them as heroes. Some recently discov-1 ered evidence indicates that at least one of the men probably was involved in the | crime. What remains clear, however, is that antiradical views severely taintedtk j trial. The case reflected the deep divisions tearing at American society in the postwar era. As American novelist John Dos Passos declared after the execution,"Went j two nations." ✓ READING CHECK: Contrasting Who supported Sacco and Vanzetti and who did nol? Labor leaders and radical socialists supported them; people frightened by the Red Sure and antiradicalists opposed them. Identifying Cause and Effect Copy the graphic organizer below. Use it to explain the causes of the 1919 strikes and public reaction to them. Causes of 1919 Strikes Strikes U Public Reaction Homework Practice Online keyword: SD3 HP22 Finding the Main Idea How did the process of demobilization alter the lives J of many women, factory workers, and farmers? What impact did Socialist Party candidate Eugene V. | Debs have on American society? How did the political climate of the Red Scare influence the results of the Sacco and Vanzetti case?M" effect did the trial's verdict have on public opinion? Writing and Critical Thinking Analyzing Information Write a news article ref on how international political events and postwar domestic life in the United States led to the mounting hysteria associated with the Red Scare. Pair students and tell each pair to create three political buttons that describe how the NAACP, A. Philip Randolph, and Marcus Garvey worked to end discrimination or violence against African Americans. (Buttons should reflect that the NAACP organized an antilynching campaign, A. Philip Randolph established the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, and Marcus Garvey supported black nationalism and founded the UNIA.) Have students display their buttons around the classroom and explain them to the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning LEVELS 2 AND 3: Organize students into triads. Have each triad create scripts for radio commercials during the 1920s that publicize the campaigns of the NAACP, A. Philip Randolph, and Marcus Garvey to end discrimination against African Americans. (See the Level I lesson for the correct actions.) Have volunteers perform their radio commercials for the class. Cooperative Learning Ku Klux Klan. During the 1920s the Ku Klux Klan held rallies to build support for the organization. What is the significance of the symbols used by Klan members in their rallies? Klan targeted not only African Americans but also Catholics, immigrants, Jews, and suspected radicals. The Klan grew slowly at first, but as the Red Scare took hold, membership soared. The group reached its peak in the mid-1920s. At one time it had perhaps as many as 5 million members. The Klan staged mass rallies where white-robed members burned crosses and spoke out against groups and ideas they considered undesirable. It also worked to help candidates win elections in such states as Louisiana, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, and Texas. The group was particularly powerful in Indiana. The Klan's rapid rise during the early 1920s was followed by an equally speedy fall in the late 1920s. By 1930 KKK membership had dropped to some 9,000. The decline resulted from several factors. Particularly significant was a decrease in the hysteria surrounding the Red Scare. With the tcononiy booming in the late 1920s and anxiety about radicalism declining, the Ban's message of fear lost its appeal. Publicity about the Klan's terrorism and violence also led to its decline. Newspapers throughout the country published investigative articles exposing the violence of local Klan chapters. With the national leadership of the Ku Klux Klan unable to control the actions of its local chapters, many people began to speak out against the group. The Klan also suffered from corruption and scandals at the national level, igations revealed that Klan promoters were getting rich from membership lees and sales of various Klan products. In addition, Indiana Grand Dragon, or leader, David Stephenson was convicted of second-degree murder. In the face of such scandals, many local chapters broke away from the national organization. Nevertheless, the Klan did not completely die out. ✓ READING CHECK: Sequencing Chart the growth and decline of the Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s. started again in 1915; membership grew rapidly in early 1920s to peak in mid-1920s; then a speedy fall in the late 1920s African Americans Defend Their Rights Faced with continued violence and discrimination from the Ku Klux Klan and other groups, many African Americans took action to defend their rights. During the 1920s African Americans created several organizations dedicated to the prevention of discrimination and acts of violence. Afltilynching campaign. One early effort to stop the violence committed against African Americans came from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). The NAACP formed the Antilynching Committee to generate support for antilynching legislation. It also put pressure on law enforcement officials to investigate acts of violence against African Americans. The NAACP published lynching statistics and detailed stories of atrocities in The Crisis, Supporters of the NAACP campaign to end lynchings in the United States wore buttons such as this one to spread their message. i Jessie Daniel Ames. In the 1920s and 1930s many white southern women came together to convince southern men to stop participating in and condoning lynchings. | Jessie Daniel Ames, a white woman, helped found the Association of Southern Women for the Prevention of Lynching (ASWPLJ. Besides the usual writing, speaking, and community and church I organizing, Ames searched for innovative ways to help people understand the horror of lynching. She sponsored contests for plays that addressed racial violence. She persistently attacked the press for perpetuating notions of female vulnerability and African American inferiority. might the press have been a useful ally for Ames? answer: Students might argue that an alliance with I the press would lead to sympathetic stories. Visual Record Answer Students might note that the symbols emphasize the Klan's idea of keeping other ethnic and religious groups out of America. Pair students and have each pair write a short poem describing the actions that American Indians took in the 1920s to protect their land. (Pairs should note that American Indians organized to stop the Harding administration's attempt to buy back all tribal land. In 1922, Pueblo tribes organized to fight the Bursum Bill; during their fight the Pueblo appealed to and won the support of many Americans.) Have volunteers read their poems to the class. Students may wish to include their poems in their portfolios. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning LEVEL 3: Tell students to imagine that they are American Indian activists who fought government efforts to take Indian lands during the 1920s. KKK-targeted African Americans as well as other ethnic and religious minority groups; African Americans- encountered discrimination and violence; immigration restriction-enacted because people feared the economic and political effects of immigration 4a. The Red Scare made people afraid, so they joined the Klan for power; the diminishing power of the scare lessened the appeal of the Klan's message of fear. b. They feared economic competition and radical political ideas. c. the desire for more workers and the lack of immigration restrictions 5. Some students might suggest that most groups, such as the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, made small gains in defending their rights. r Ik henrytsantrey 'n l.EEDAVID ' M.WITma>V,"SCN& ^ "Ellis Island Blues" was one of the many songs written during the 1920s about immigrants. Analyzing Primary Sources Drawing Inferences Why might Mexicans immigrate to the United states if conditions were so harsh? job opportunities and the chance to get out of poverty Mexican American Victor Villasenor wrote about his family's experiences as immigrants in the 1920s. Shown here is the 1929 wedding of his parents. In 1921 Congress passed a law limiting the number of immigrants from each country allowed into the United States. The law set a quota of 3 percent for each nationality already in the country by 1910, except for Asians, whose immigration was virtually barred. Three years later, the Immigration Act of 1924 reduced this quota to 2 percent of the 1890 population figures for each nationality. This change limited southern and eastern European immigration because in 1890 most Americans traced their origins to Great Britain or northern and western Europe. The 1924 law excluded all Asian immigrants. In 1925 these restrictions reduced the total number of new immigrants from Africa, Asia, Australia, and Europe to some 153,000. l/ READING CHECK: Summarizing Why was immigration restricted in the 1920s? Some Americans believed that immigrants held radical views and were taking jobs from native-born Americans. Mexican American Migration The restrictive legislation of the 1920s did not affect Mexicans. Employers in the Southwest were eager to keep a steady flow of workers to fill low-wage jobs. As a result, during the 1920s some 500,000 immigrants arrived from Mexico, where poverty was widespread, jobs were scarce, and political upheaval from a revolution persisted. Mexicans who took agricultural jobs in the Southwest worked for low wages and typically lived in ramshackle labor camps. An observer described one camp. '^Shelters were made of almost every conceivable thing-burlap, canvas, palm branches.... We found one woman carrying water in large milk pails from the irrigation ditch.... This is evidently all the water which they have in camp. Some were drawn to well-paying factory jobs in cities such as Chicago and Detroit. Most, however, migrated to cities in the Southwest—such as Los Angeles, San Antonio, and El Paso, Texas. Usually men came alone. Once established, they sent for their wives and children. Many brought other relatives as well, establishing extended- family networks. These networks helped new arrivals find jobs and housing. Economic hardship caused many families® allow their young, unmarried daughters to work outside the home. Many found employment in bakeries, hotels, and laundries. Their newfound | independence, as one Mexican immigrant woman noted, brought young women "into conflict with their parents. They learn ... about the outside world, learn how to speak English, and then they become ashamed of their parents who brouf them up here." Despite such conflicts, these new immigrants contributed greatly to American life. ✓ READING CHECK: Evaluating Why did employers in the Southwest encourage Mexican immigration? Employers needed a steady flow of workers to fill low-wage jobs. LEVEL 3: Conduct a brief discussion on unemployment during the Great Depression, concentrating on the economic and psychological effects of joblessness. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct effects.) Then tell students to create a fictional depression- era character. This character should be unemployed and struggling to survive. Encourage students to fully detail their characters, creating fictional backgrounds, appearances, and so on. Then tell students to imagine that they are journalists during the Great Depression. Have each student write a profile of his or her fictional character, detailing the effects of unemployment on that figure. Ask volunteers to read their profiles to the class. Students may wish to include their profiles in their portfolios. bi. Teodier to Tmkir^ Janie Maldonado of Austin, Texas, suggested the following activity: Organize students into small groups. Have members of each group condud research on the ways in which charitable organizations in the community assisted the needy during the Great Depression. If possible, have groups obtain a copy of an organization's budget to determine how it allocated its resources. Have each group prepare an oral report to present its findings. Relief Efforts. Although city governments and charities tried to provide assistance to poor people, they simply could not meet the needs of the unemployed. New York City, for example, spent $79 million on relief in 1932—an amount that totaled one month's wages for the city's unemployed. In 1931 Chicago spent $100,000 a day on relief in an effort to replace lost wages that totaled some $2 million per day. might the relatively small aid amounts offered by some cities have affected public opinion toward city and state governments? ANSWER: Students might suggest that the small amounts of aid probably convinced some people that city and state governments did not care about their problems. interesting! In 1932 some 250,000 Americans lost their homes because they could not pay their mortgages. In desperation, one New York City couple moved to a cave in Central Park, where they lived for the next year. Visual Record Answer Students might mention despair, fatigue, and hopelessness. The homeless. During the depression, many city-dwellers lost their homes. In your opinion, what emotions does the artist portray in the characters of this depression-era painting? As homelessness increased, shantytowns of makeshift shelters spread into the vacant lots of American cities. been set outside the back door of a restaurant. American citizens fighting for scraps of food like animals!" During the early 1930s the federal government did little to assist struggling city-dwellers or their local communities. City governments, religious groups such as the Salvation Army, and charitable organizations including the Red Cross tried to provide direct relief to the needy. Neighbors also helped one another. One woman told a visitor, "My neighbors help me, by bringing me a little to eat, when they knows I ain't got nothing in the house to cook." Mexican American communities formed mutual- aid societies known as mutualistas to help each other. Some Chinese American communities set out open barrels of rice so that people could draw from them privately, without having to ask for handouts, Harlem residents organized "rent parties." These large social gatherings chargeda small admission fee to help pay a neighbor's monthly rent. Across the country, people engaged in a daily struggle to feed themselves and their children. Poverty-stricken men and women waited in breadlines for bowls of soup and pieces of bread given out by charitable organizations. Karl Monroe recalled standing in the breadline on 25th Street in New York City. "To my surprise, I found ... all types of men—the majority being skilled craftsmen unable to find work." Hunger was so widespread that by 1932 one out of every five children in New York City suffered from malnutrition. When one hungry schoolchild was told to go home for lunch, she replied, "It won't do any good__This is my sister's day to eat." Poor diets caused some Americans to suffer long- term health effects, such as problems with their teeth and eyes. In addition to hunger, homelessness was a serious urban problem during the depression. Faced with unemployment and falling wages, many urban residents were unable to pay their rent and were evicted from their homes. The homeless often gathered in shantytowns—collections of makeshift, shelters built out of packing boxes, scrap lumber, corrugated iron, and other thrown-away items. Shantytowns rose up outside most cities. Blaming an unresponsive president for their plight, the homeless mockingly referred to these shantytowns as Hoovervilles. Life on the Farm The impact of the depression spread all across the United States. It affected not only city-dwellers but also people living on farms. Increasing poverty during the ALL LEVELS: Write the following question on the yUV chalkboard: Would you rather have lived in the city or in IjHB the country during the Great Depression? Have volunteers answer the question. To help students understand how the depression affected both urban and rural residents, copy the Venn diagram at right on the chalkboard, omitting the italicized answers. Have each student complete it. English Language Learners The Great Depression in the City and the Country Urban Rural ' received some aid from charities • formed mutual-aid organizations experienced hunger • experienced homelessness experienced poverty • experienced diminished expectations faced lower prices for food products • forced to let crops rot and kill animals • faced farm foreclosures • Mexican aliens and immigrants faced deportation depression made it harder and harder for urban residents to purchase farm products. Shrinking demand for farm products caused prices to drop. Farmers found themselves with more goods than they could sell. While people in the cities went hungry, farmers in some areas were forced to let crops rot in the fields and to slaughter excess livestock they could not afford to feed. One newspaper editor, Oscar Ameringer, noted the irony of this situation. "While Oregon sheep raisers fed mutton to the buzzards," Ameringer recalled, "I saw men picking for meat scraps in the garbage cans in the cities of New York and Chicago." As their incomes fell, many farmers were unable to keep up their mortgage payments. Banks began foreclosing on farms. In some communities, residents banded together to fight the foreclosures. Often when a bank held a foreclosure auction to sell off a family's possessions, neighbors would arrive and bid absurdly low prices, such as 25 cents for a plow. In one example, a farm with an $800 mortgage was sold for S1.90. After the auction the neighbors would then give the goods back to the original owners. This tactic was so successful that several farm states, beginning with Iowa in 1933, passed laws that temporarily banned foreclosure sales. Conditions were particularly bad for tenant farmers in the South, where most rural residents already faced crippling poverty. Cotton prices fell from 16 cents per pound in 1929 to less than 6 cents in 1931. Many tenant farmers—mostly African Americans—were ruined. Some were forced off the land they had lived on all their lives. While farmers in the Midwest faced an overabundance of food, southern cotton farmers faced poverty and devastating harvests. Grade Turner, a sharecropper's wife, testified to the hardships of a tenant farmer's life in the 1930s. Farm life. During the depression, many farm families were evicted from their land. What economic circumstances do you believe this African American family experienced during the depression? <tThat's all there is to expect—work hard and go hungry part time_This year's been so hard we had to drop our burial insurance_All it costs is twenty-five cents... but they don't come many twenty-five cents in this house." —Grade Turner, quoted in Thar Arc Our lives, by the Federal Writers' Project Migrant farmworkers in the Southwest, most of them recent immigrants from Mexico, also experienced difficulties. Government officials and many Americans ranted to remove illegal aliens and recent Mexican immigrants from the United States. They believed that this would ease the strain of the depression. To avoid pay- the soaring cost of relief efforts for unemployed migrant farmworkers, local authorities provided funds to transport Mexican migrant farmworkers to Mexico. They pressured and even forced the farmworkers to return to their native land. During the 1930s approximately 500,000 people of Mexican descent—some of them U.S. citizens—were pressured into leaving the country. Those who remained often faced discrimination and harsh working conditions. Harry Terrell in Hard Times Trouble on the Farm. Harry Terrell, an Iowa resider described the sense of desperation that a group of farmers felt as they almost lost their farms to foreclosur "They came very near hangir that judge. Because they caught this judge foreclosin farm mortgages, and they had no other way of stoppin it. He had issued the whole bunch of foreclosures on hit docket.... They took the judge out of his court and took him to the fairgrounds and they had a rope around his neck, and they had the rope over the limb of a tree. They were gonna string him up in the old horse thief fas ion. But somebody had sens enough to stop the thing before it got too far." What might the farmers' response to the judge have indicated about the severity of the Great Depression? ANSWER: Students might mention that the farmers' response revealed the increi ible financial and personal stresses many people experi enced during the depressior Visual Record Answer Students might note that the loaded car and the rickety house suggest that the family experienced severe poverty. B LEVEL 1: Tell students to imagine that they are journalists preparing to write a series of articles about the effects of the Great Depression on family life and American attitudes. Have each student write three headlines for the series. (Headlines should note that the depression fractured some families, although it forced others to band together for survival. Divorce rates went up, and birthrates went down. Many Americans suffered psychological problems during the era.) Have volunteers write their headlines on the chalkboard. Discuss these headlines and the topic as a class. Students may wish to include the headlines in their portfolios. English Language Learners LEVELS 2 AND 3: Tell students to imagine that they are jou nalists preparing to write a series of articles about the effects < the Great Depression on family life and American attitude Have each student write the first article in the series. (See tl Level l lesson for the correct effects.) Students might choose i focus their articles on a particular family, for example, or l provide a general analysis of the subject. Ask volunteers to rea their articles to the class. Students may wish to include the articles in their portfolios. Have students prepare collages th< llBtf reflect how the Great Depression affected family Hi and the attitudes of Americans. Discrimination Against Mexicans. In May 1935 the governor of Colorado ordered sheriffs in the southern part of the state to prevent workers, almost all of whom were Mexican, from entering Colorado. The following year the governor declared martial law along the border. Officers prevented people front entering the state and took some in Colorado to the New Mexico border. This blockade and resettlement was illegal, but took place nonetheless. might the governor have wanted to deport Mexican workers from the state? Some students might suggest that the truck indicates that the depression left many Americans with virtually nothing. Free Find: Josefina Fierro de Bright After reading about Josefina Fierro de Bright on the Holt Researcher CD-ROM, write a short essay describing how growing up during the Great Depression affected her life. Photographs such as this one by Dorothea Lange captured the struggles many American families experienced during the depression. Some of the Mexican American families th: remained in the United States organized against di; crimination in the Southwest. One such activist vn Josefina Fierro de Bright, the daughter of migranl who had fled from revolution in Mexico to settle i California. The experience of growing up during th depression in the midst of poverty and ethnic discrirr ination had a profound effect on Fierro. As with man children of the depression, her life was unstable. He family moved often, causing Fierro to change school eight times. Throughout the hard times, however, her mother always encourage her to strive for success. "Rely on yourself, be independent," Mrs. Fierro advisee She also emphasized the importance of getting an education. In 1938, at age 18, Josefina Fierro entered the University of California at Lo Angeles. She had planned to study medicine, but activism on behalf of the Mexica: American community soon took up most of her time. Aided by her activist husbanc Hollywood screenwriter John Bright, she led boycotts of companies that did busines in Mexican American communities but did not hire Mexican American worker: Enlisting financial support from a few well-known movie stars, Fierro de Bright ab started a radio program for Spanish-speaking audiences. These activities brought her to the attention of a Mexican American grou] called El Congreso, which organized Hispanic migrants to resist oppressive condi tions. In 1939 El Congreso leaders asked Fierro de Bright to help them establish branch in Los Angeles. Over the next few years, she worked tirelessly, leadin, marches and hunger strikes, lobbying for expanded relief programs for Hispani Americans, and encouraging bilingual education for migrant children. "I used ti work so hard it used to kill me," she recalled. Throughout her life she never forgo the lessons her mother taught her during the depression. Those memories spurra her efforts to improve the lives of all working people. ✓ READING CHECK: Summarizing How did urban and rural residents cope during the depression? urban—fought for food, helped each other, waited in breadlines, and lived in shantytowns; rural—farmers let crops rot and killed animals they could not feed; many immigrant farmers were forced to return home Family Life in the 1930s The crisis of the Great Depression required that family members pul together to help one another cope with their difficulties. Farmers anc city-dwellers alike shared food and money and provided the suppor and encouragement necessary to get through hard times. In mam cases, relatives doubled up in small houses, and young adults moved back in with their parents. Frederick Lewis Allen reported on the changing roles of family members trying to survive the depression. He wrote, "Mrs. Jones, who went daily to her stenographic job, was now the economic mainstay of her family, for Mr. Jones was jobless and was doing the cooking and looking after the children." Family strains. Economic hardship took its toll on families, and some eventually broke apart under the strain. The marriage rate fell dramatically during the depression. Because many young people put LEVEL 2: Organize students into small groups and tell them to imagine that they are entertainment reporters during the depression. Have each group create an entertainment section for a newspaper. Groups' sections should describe entertainment offerings that were popular during the era, such as movies and radio shows. Ask each group to present its entertainment section to the class, explaining how popular culture provided an escape from the depression. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct forms of entertainment and the correct effects.) Display groups' sections around the classroom. Cooperative Learning LEVEL 3: Conduct a brief discussion on the forms and uses t popular culture during the 1930s. (See the Level 1 lesson forth correct forms and effects.) Then organize students into triad and tell them to imagine that they are movie producers durin the early years of the Great Depression. Have each triad develo two written movie proposals. Triads' proposals should appeal fc Americans who want to escape the depression for a while. As each triad to present its proposals to the class, and have student select the most promising movie idea. To extend the lesson, hav each triad create storyboards for its favorite proposals. Cooperative Learning Gangster Films. Gangster movies, such as the 1930 release Little Caesar, were popular with audiences during the early years of the Great Depression. Some historians have argued that people responded positively to these movies because they portrayed acquisitive individuals as selfish, evil, and ultimately self-destructive. students to name a popular modern-day film genre. What might the popularity of this genre indicate about the national mood? Since fans could listen to the game for free on the radio, baseball teams had lower ticket sales. Team owners, however, made money from selling broadcasting privileges to radio stations. Hoping to attract more fans to the ballparks, team owners began to consider new ideas. In 1933 owners organized the first all-star game. In 1935 Larry MacPhail of the Cincinnati Reds revolutionized the sport by introducing nighttime ball games to professional baseball. Owners also rented out their stadiums to African American baseball teams. As white team owners maintained a so-called gentleman's agreement not to sign black players, African Americans played in clubs and leagues of their own. The Negro National League and the Negro American League attracted fans with future hall-of-fame players like Satchel Paige and William "Judy" Johnson. Baseball is now racially integrated. Many of the game's 1930s innovations remain, however. For example, nighttime baseball and all-star games still attract eager fans to the ballpark today. A nighttime baseball game Psychological effects. The economic crisis of the 1930; affected the mental health and attitudes of many Americans. The term depression described the mood of the country as much as it did the economy. More than 20,000 Americans committed suicide in 1932, a 28 percent increase over 1929. For middle-class and wealthy Americans, many of whom had never known poverty, the depression was a cruel blow. Many would never forget the shame they felt at being unemployed, losing their businesses or homes, and being unable to provide for their families. The attitude of an unemployed teacher in New Orleans was typical. "If with all the advantages I've had, 1 can't make a living, I'm just no good, I guess. I've given up ever amounting to anything. It's no use." Many men whose lives had been dominated by-work did not know what to do without a job. They often spent their days dawdling around the house or roaming the streets. The depression proved equally difficult for working women who lost their jobs, particularly those who were single or whose families depended on two incomes to survive. Many parents who could not support their families were consumed by guilt. Even after the depression, the memories of those lean yean remained vivid. Habits of scrimping and saving and of making every penny count would stay with members of this generation for the rest of their lives. A strong desire for financial stability' and material comforts shaped the outlook of many Americans who came of age during the depression. Finding the Main Idea What were the psychological effects of the Great Depression? Depression described both the economic collapse and the mood of the country. Popular Culture in the 1930s As the psychological strain of the Great Depression increased, many Americans looked to popular culture and entertainment for escape. Many people took up inexpensive pastimes, such as reading and playing games at home. Movies and radio were particularly popular. The Sound explosion. With low ticket prices and doubt features, movie theaters offered inexpensive entertainment. Talking pictures, which had begun to replace silent films in the late 1920s, thrilled audiences. Among the most popular movies of the early 1930s were gangster films that portrayed tough guvs fighting their way to the top against all odds. Similarly, strong women such as Bette Davis, Greta Garbo, Mae West, and Marla Dietrich reinforced the theme of survival in a difficult world. | Movie cartoons also brightened the 1930s, thanks to Walt Disney's Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck. Disney cartoons were often as popular with movie audiences as feature films. LEVEL 1: Tell students that the Dust Bowl was the result of a severe drought that struck the Great Plains. Winds carried away the region's dry and loose topsoil. Pair students and ask each pair to create a cartoon depicting the effects of the Dust Bowl. (Cartoons should show that many farmers lost their land, that Dust Bowl farmers migrated west to find work harvesting crops, and that migrants to the West Coast faced stiff competition for jobs.) Ask volunteers to present their cartoons to the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning student to write a poem about the causes of the Dust Bowl and its effects on farmers' lives. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct causes and effects.) Ask volunteers to recite their poems to the class. LEVEL 2: Tell students to imagine that they left their homes during the Dust Bowl to migrate west to California. Ask each LEVEL 3: Tell students to imagine that they have left their homes during the Dust Bowl and migrated west to California. Have each student write a series of short diary entries about the causes of the Dust Bowl and its effect on his or her life and the lives of other farmers. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct causes and effects.) In their entries, students should reflect on the hardships that they have encountered. Ask volunteers to read their entries to the class. Woody Guthrie and American Folk Music l. American folk music experienced a revival during the 1930s. Perhaps the most popular folksinger of the era was Woody Guthrie. Born in Oklahoma, Guthrie became one of many Americans displaced by the storms of the Dust Bowl. Although he had no formal training in music, he wrote dozens of songs that touched millions of listeners. "I don't know nothing about music. Never could read or write it," Guthrie admitted. Guthrie described the experiences of common people in his music, mostly through ballads. Among his numerous songs was the popular "Talking Dust Bowl." Woody Guthrie (4Back in nineteen twenty-seven I had a little farm and I called that heaven, Well, the price was up and the rain came down And I hauled my crops all in to town__ Rain quit and the wind got high, And a black old dust storm filled the sky. And I swapped my farm for a Ford machine And I poured it full of this gasoline_ We got out to the West Coast broke, So dad gum hungry I thought I'd croak. And I bummed up a spud or two. And my wife fixed up a 'tater stew." TR0- - 1960,1963 by Ludlow Music, Inc The federal government hired Guthrie to write songs that promoted projects designed to help rural Americans. While touring a federal dam project, he wrote 26 songs in just 26 days. Guthrie's lyrics praised the federal projects, but his songs reflected the sadness of the era. "It's always we ramble, that river and I," he wrote. "Along your green valley I'll work till I die." Understanding the Arts 1. According to Guthrie's song, how did the Dust Bowl storms affect life in the United States? 2. Why might Guthrie's style of music have been popular? TOPIC: The Dust Bowl GO TO: go.hrw.com Have students access the Internet through the HRVGo site to conduct resear on the causes of the Dus' Bowl. Ask each student to create a newspaper summarizing the environmen and economic conditions that forced thousands of people to leave their homes and migrate westward. The state of California enacted a law making it illegal to anyone who was unempl into the state. One Califo resident, Fred F. Edwards convicted under this law for bringing his unemplo brother-in-law from Texa: the state. The U.S. Supre Court eventually heard Edwards's case and ruler that California's law was unconstitutional. Competition for migrant work. Even before the Dust Bowl refugees started arriving, Mexican Americans had a hard time finding work in the West. Like African Americans, Mexican Americans often found themselves the victims of discrimination in many New Deal programs. Mexican Americans also faced increased job competition from Filipino laborers. During the 1920s California's Filipino population had grown to more than 30,000. Like Mexican American migrants, most Filipinos worked in agriculture. When the depression hit, both groups faced tough economic times. Filipino workers fought declining wages by organizing. Throughout the early 1930s the Filipino Labor Union launched a series of strikes to protest wage reductions. Ask students why photographs might be a powerful way to convey ideas. (Students might suggest that photographs provide an objective record of an event or that images of people carry an emotional weight that verbal descriptions might lack.) Pair students and ask each pair to compile a list of ways that New Deal agencies used photography to promote their goals. (Lists should mention that New Deal agencies hoped that opponents of relief programs would change their minds if they saw photographs of suffering Americans, that agencies used photographs in government pamphlets, and that photos were published in magazines to publicize the work of federal agen- cies.) Ask volunteers to present their lists to the class. English Language Learners, Tell students to imagine that they are advisers to President Roosevelt. Ask each student to write a memo persuading FDR to approve the use of photography to promote the New Deal. In their memos, students should suggest how New Deal agencies might use photography. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct uses.) Ask volunteers to read their memos to the class. NOTE: To help students make meaningful connections between events in U.S. history and those in their own hometown, use the Chapter 25 Hands-On History Activity, A Project for Your Town. James Agee in Let Us Now Praise Famous Men Sharecropping in Alabama. In 1936 journalist James Agee and photographer Walker Evans spent eight weeks with three families who were sharecroppers in rural Alabama. Agee and Evans produced a book-length record of their experiences, Let Us Now Praise Famous Men. Most of these impoverished farmers received little help from New Deal programs. Agee wrote, "WPA work is available to very few tenants: they are, technically, employed, and thus have no right to it: and if by chance they manage to get it, landlords are more likely than not to intervene. They feel it spoils a tenant to be paid wages, even for a little while. A tenant who so much as tries to get such work is under disapproval." might owners feel that tenants would be spoiled by wages? Students might suggest that landlords feared that tenants might abandon sharecropping in favor of wage labor, which would provide a guaranteed income. These migrant workers are waiting to start their day picking carrots in Santa Maria, Texas. ""."SRCIVl Free Find: Dorothea Lange After reading about Dorothea Lange on the Holt Researcher CD-ROM, imagine that you are a photographer. Choose a topic for a photographic project and decide what photographs you would take. Write captions that explain the photographs. The unions were able to slow the fall of wages. Yet, with the arrival of additional migrants from the Dust Bowl, competition for jobs increased. Thus, life for all migrants remained difficult. ✓ READING CHECK: Analyzing Information How did environmental changes in the Great Plains lead to changes in migration? A severe drought turned the area into a wasteland, which forced more people to migrate west. Picturing Life in the Depression The grim experiences of migrants and others in rural areas provided powerful subject matter for documentary filmmakers and photographers. These artists created a memorable record of the New Deal Era. Their images of the slumped shoulders of unemployed men, the staring faces of hungry children, and the worried expressions of exhausted women convey the human suffering of the era. Most of these photographers were hired by the federal government. President Roosevelt believed that opponents of federal relief programs might change their minds if they could see the frightful living conditions of city-dwellers and migrant farmworkers. With Roosevelt's encouragement, numerous federal agencies and departments—including the Department of the Interior, the Works Progress Administration (WPA), the Department of Agriculture, and the Farm Security Administration (FSA)—hired photographers to travel across the country and document the lives of ordinary Americans. No agency used photography more effectively than the FSA, whose staff gathered more than 250,000 images of American life during the depression. Roy E Stryker, head of the FSA historical section, assembled a team of renowned photographers that included Walker Evans, who depicted life among sharecroppers in rural Alabama. Other photographers included African American Gordon Parks, who later became a filmmaker; international photojournalist Margaret Bourke-White; and Dorothea Lange, probably the best known of the FSA photographers. Dorothea Lange was one of the most talented photographers of the depression era. Born in 1895 in Hoboken, New Jersey, she decided in her late teens to s become a photographer. After studying the craft for | several years, she set out to tour the world and record | her impressions. Lange was out of money by the time | she reached San Francisco. She stayed there and | opened a portrait studio. 2 When the depression struck, Lange began taking pictures of the homeless men wandering the streets of San Francisco. Soon the federal government hired her to photograph migrant farmworkers in California. Lange often traveled for weeks at a time, workingup to 14 hours a day. Her photographs reveal the migrants' poverty and suffering as well as their great dignity. Lange's most famous photograph, Migrant Mother, is considered a masterpiece. It shows an exhausted single mother whose children ALL LEVELS: Tell students that the idea that the U.S. government can and should help improve the lives of ordinary Americans originated, in large part, with the New Deal. To help students understand how the New Deal improved the lives of ordinary Americans, copy the graphic organizer at right on the chalkboard, omitting the italicized answers. Have each student complete the organizer. Ask volunteers to share their answers with the class. English Language Learners HOMEWORK Tell students to imagine that it is 1934 and that they live in a rural area. Their homes do not have electricity or indoor plumbing. Ask each student to write a diary entry describing a typical day in his or her life. Students might include information on when they wake up, and how they get ready for school, prepare dinner, and study. boosted family incomes so thachildren could stay in school survived by eating vegetables they scavenged from California fields. When it appeared in 1936, Migrant Mother inspired Californians to defy the state's powerful growers' associations and insist on decent, government-sponsored housing for seasonal harvesters. During World War II, Lange continued her documentary work by taking photographs of the many Japanese Americans in California relocation camps. She later produced photo essays for Life magazine and traveled the world taking pictures. By the time of her death in 1965, Lange ranked as one of the world's foremost photographers. Other FSA photographs helped achieve Roosevelt's goal of gaining support for government programs. From 1936 to 1941, FSA photographs were widely published in government pamphlets and in Time, Life, and other magazines. The photographs strengthened congressional and public support for federal relief. READING CHECK: Summarizing How did FSA photographers document the New Deal Era? FSA photographs conveyed the human suffering of the era and were I published in pamphlets and magazines. Evaluating the New Deal By the late 1930s few American families were untouched by New Deal reforms. By supplying jobs, the New Deal programs improved many Americans' sense of self-worth. Government administrator Louise Armstrong recalled that most people preferred jobs to handouts. "I don't want charity," one person told her. "I want work—any kind of work." Migrant Mother. Photographs like this one by Dorothea Lange capture the suffering of rural Americans. What emotions do you think this picture captures? During the Great Depress! thousands of people wrote Eleanor Roosevelt, telling 1 of their hardships and sug gesting ways that she or tl president could help. One pregnant housewife in Tro* New York, begged Mrs. Roosevelt for a small loan: "Please Mrs. Roosevelt, I d not want charity, only a cha from someone who will tru me until we can get enouc to repay the amount spent the things I need. As a pro that I am really sincere, I a sending you two of my dea possessions to keep as sei rity, a ring my husband ga1 me before we were marrie and a ring my mother uset to wear." Programs sponsored by the National Youth Administration (NYA) helped boost family incomes so that children could stay in school. Helen Farmer recalled working in an NYA program as a teenager. **l lugged... drafts and reams of paper home, night after night_Sometimes I typed all night... This was a good program. It got necessary work done. It gave teenagers a chance to work for pay.... It gave my mother relief from my necessary demands for money." —Helen Farmer, quoted in The Great Depression, by T. H. Watkins Critics charged that the New Deal created a welfare state—a system of government institutions that provides for the basic needs of citizens. These needs might include health care and unemployment bene- 6b. Critics also argued that the New Deal promoted deficit spending—having the government spend more money than it receives in revenue. The New Deal Era represented the first time during a period of peace that the federal government had spent more than it brought in as revenue. Other critics argued •bat the federal government—the president, in particular—had become too involved in the economy, which threatened the free enterprise system. Unemployment in the United States, 1925-1939 Interpreting Graphs In the mid-1930s unemployment rose to its highest rate in U.S. history. H Skills Assessment By how much did the unemployment rate change between 1925 and 1939? Visual Record Answei Answers will vary. Students might suggest despair and apprehension. by about 24 percent Visual Record Answei (for p. 758) Students might point out th the poster advertised dome employment B LEVEL 1: Have each student create a graphic organizer displaying the ways in which the government attempted to protect the rights of minorities during World War II. (The government created the Fair Employment Practices Committee and made attempts to end discrimination in businesses with federal contracts.) Ask volunteers to copy their graphic organizers on the chalkboard. Then have students consult those organizers to write summary paragraphs explaining how the government attempted to protect minority rights during the war. Students may wish to include their paragraphs in their portfolios. English Language Learners LEVELS 2 AND 3: Pair students and tell one member of each pair to act as a newspaper reporter and the other member to act as a government official. Have members prepare for an interview on governmental actions to protect the rights of minority groups during World War II. Newspaper reporters should develop at least five questions on the subject, while government officials should think of at least five possible questions they may be asked and answers to those questions. Have students conduct their interviews. Then hold a discussion on the material presented in the interviews. Conclude the lesson by having each student write a brief newspaper article that reflects the interview on governmental actions on behalf of minority groups during World War II. Cooperative Learning Millions of African Americans in tire workforce struggled to gain acceptance. Many war plants would not hire African Americans. Some would employ black workers only as janitors. Despite labor leaders' no-strike pledge, some white workers staged strikes—called hate strikes—designed to keep black workers out of high-paying factory jobs. In 1941, before the United States entered the war, African American labor leader A. Philip Randolph planned a march on Washington, D.C., to protest discrimination against black workers. Fearing the unrest it might cause, President Roosevelt wanted to prevent the march. Randolph agreed to call off the march after Roosevelt issued an executive order forbidding racial discrimination in defense plants and government offices. To enforce the order, on June 25,1941, Roosevelt created the Fair Employment Practices Committee (FF.PC). The FEPC investigated companies engaged in defense work to make sure that all qualified applicants, regardless of race, were considered for job openings. It was strengthened by a May 27, 1943, executive order requiring nondiscrimination clauses in all war contracts. The FEPC, however, lacked strong enforcement powers and was unable to prevent widespread abuses. As during World War I, many African Americans moved northward to take advantage of the high wages being offered in war plants. In crowded cities where no new homes were being built, African Americans faced discrimination in housing. Competition for limited housing created tensions that sometimes led to outbursts of violence against African Americans. In Detroit in 1943 a fight between African American and white residents at Belle Isle, a popular Detroit park, spread mother parts of the city. Some 34 people died in several days of rioting before federal troops sent by President Roosevelt restored calm. The ZOOt—Suit riots. World War II brought both opportunities and problems to Mexican Americans as well. More than 300,000 Mexican Americans served in the military, and 17 earned the Congressional Medal of Honor. The 88 th Division, a top combat unit known as the Blue Devils, consisted mostly of Mexican terican soldiers. Mexican Americans also helped meet home- font labor needs. University of Texas history fessor Carlos E. Castaneda served as assistant the chair of the FEPC and worked to improve working conditions for Mexican Americans in fcas. In 1945 the FEPC ordered a major Texas icompanv to discontinue hiring and motion practices that discriminated against Hispanics. Many Mexican Americans moved from the Southwest to industrial centers in the Midwest and on the West Coast. Under a 1942 agreement between the I States and Mexico, thousands of "can farm and railroad workers— uti as braceros—came north to work in ; Southwest during World War II. During a rally at Madison Square Carden, A Philip Randolph fights to save the Fair Employment Practices Committee. These Mexican Americans were arrested during the zoot-suit riots. Many others served heroically during World War II, and 17 won the Congressional Medal of Honor (left). The Ttiskegee Airmen. While most African Americar soldiers served in noncombat positions during the war, others took part in the fightinc The Tuskegee Airmen were an all-black unit of fighter pilots that served with distinction in the air war over Europe. Trained at Tuskegee Army Air Field in Tuskegee, Alabama, the Airmen engagei in their first combat mission in June 1943, when they launched an assault on a small Italian island. During the next two years they playec a key role in the Allied air campaign, escorting bornbinr missions and attacking Axis air fields, supply centers, and communication lines. By the end of the war the Tuskegee Airmen were the only U.S. escort group that had not los a single bornber to enemy planes. might the service of the Tuskegee Airmen have affectec the racial attitudes of some white Americans? ANSWER: Students may suggest that the Airmen's outstanding performance might have prompted some white Americans to support civil rights. (for p. 812) Immigrants from Japan landed first in San Francisco rather than New York. B LEVEL 1: Pair students and tell them to imagine that they are Japanese Americans who lived in an internment camp during the war. Have each pair develop a dialogue discussing how the war affected Japanese Americans. (Pairs should note that the government interned Japanese Americans in some states. Interned Japanese Americans often lost their property. Some Japanese Americans received limited military service opportimities.) Ask volunteers to perform their dialogues for the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning LEVELS 2 AND 3: Tell students to imagine that they a Japanese Americans who lived in an internment camp durii the war. Have each student write a one-page memoir describii how Japanese Americans were affected by the war. (See the Lo 1 lesson for the correct effects.) Ask volunteers to read their mer oirs to the class. Students may wish to include their memoirs their portfolios. HOMEWORK Have each student create an outline the subsection titled Japanese American Relocatio Have students use their outlines to develop three pos: ble essay questions on Japanese American life durii the war The Injustice of Internment. Many interned Japanese Americans were justifiably angry about the treatment they received. One man registered the following protest: "I was born in Hawaii. | I worked most of my life on the west coast. I have never been to Japan. We would have done anything to show our loyalty.... That's not democracy. That's not the American way, taking everything away from people.... Where are the Germans? Where are the Italians? Do they ask them questions about loyalty?" might the government have focused suspicion on Japanese Americans? Some students might point to the existence of anti-Japanese prejudice. The American Nation Japanese Americans in Relocation Camps; Teacher's Guide, pp. 159-60 Search 43252, Play to 43455 Videodisc 2, Side A Play Pause See Teacher's Guide for Spanish barcode. The prejudice and discrimination endured by Hispanics in jobs, housing, an recreational facilities caused bitter resentment. Relations grew particularly hosti in Los Angeles. Mexican American youths had adopted the fad of wearing zcv suits—long, wide-shouldered jackets, trousers pegged at the ankle, and widr brimmed hats. In June 1943, U.S. sailors roamed the city attacking zoot-suit-da Mexican American youths in what became known as the zoot-suit riots. The got ernment eventually clamped down on the sailors, but not before they had viriousl beaten many Mexican Americans. A citizens' committee later determined that the attacks were motivated b racial prejudice. The committee assigned partial responsibility to the Los Angek police, who had responded to the riots by arresting Mexican Americans. The atm mittee also blamed biased newspaper reports. ✓ READING CHECK: Analyzing Information How did World War II affect patterns of migration? African Americans moved north in search of jobs; many Mexican Americans moved to industrial centers; braceros came to work in the Southwest. Japanese American Relocation In general. World War II did not produce the same level of home-front intolerance! did World War I. A tragic exception was the internment, or forced relocation anc imprisonment, of Japanese American: Japanese American Relocation, 1942-1945 Interpreting Maps By September 1942 more than 110,000 Japanese Americans were interned in 10 camps located in relatively isolated, underdeveloped areas. Why was the Japanese American population located primarily on the West Coast? Japanese American Population, 1940. More than 10,000 1,000 to 10,000. Less than 1,000 Relocation center Internment camp U.S. Citizenship About two thirds of the 127,000 people of Japanese ancestry living in the continental United States were American born and thus U.S, citizens. living on the Pacific Coast. U.S. Stati Department adviser Eugene Rostov called relocation "a tragic and dangerou mistake." In 1941 about 119,000 peoplt of Japanese ancestry lived in California Oregon, and Washington. About ont third of these people—the issei (ee-Mf) —had been born in Japan and wen regarded by the U.S. government as aliens ineligible for U.S. citizenship. The rest—the nisei (nee-SAY)—had been born in the United States and thus were U.S. citizens. No evidence of disloyalty' on the pail of any issei or nisei existed. Nevertheless, because of strong anti-)apanese feelings among some politicians and residents of western states, the federal government decided to remove people of Japanese descent from the West Coast In February 1942, Japanese Americans were ordered to detention camps in Wyoming, Utah, and other stattj Because Hawaii's Japanese populate was too large to relocate, the islajj were placed under martial law for the duration of the war. Have students complete the Section 2 Review on p. 813. Have students complete Daily Quiz 27.2. As Alternative Assessment, you may want to use the minority rights interview or the Japanese American dialogue in this section's lessons. Have students complete Main Idea Activity for English Language Learners and Special-Needs Students 27.2. Then organize students into triads and assign each triad a subsection of Section 2. Ask each triad to develop a poster that summarizes the information in its assigned subsection. Have each triad present its poster to the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning Have students conduct research on the United Service Organization (USO) during World War II. Ask each student to prepare some kind of oral presentation on a specific topic related to the USO. Students might focus on a particular performer, for example, or a particular show or tour. Have students present their work to the class. Block Scheduling One imprisoned Japanese American was Norman Mineta, a nisei from San Jose, California. On the day of the Pearl Harbor bornbing, the young Mineta fearfully watched his neighbors being taken away for questioning by the FBI. He recalled bitterly that "they had done nothing; the only thing that they had done was to be born of Japanese ancestry." Just 10 years old when his family was uprooted, Mineta wore his Cub Scout uniform on the train. He hoped that it would show his loyalty to the United States. Mineta's family was interned with some 10,000 others at a camp at Heart Mountain, Wyoming. "These camps were all barbed wire, guard towers, searchlights," recalled Mineta. After the war Mineta attended college and became an insurance agent. He later went into local politics in San Jose. In 1974 he was elected to the House of Representatives. Mineta introduced legislation seeking reparations for Japanese American internees. He retired from the House in 1995. He later served as Secretary of Commerce under President Bill Clinton and as Secretary of Transportation under President George W. Bush. Patriotism and the desire to disprove accusations of disloyalty inspired many roung men in the camps to volunteer for military duty, even though they served in segregated units. One nisei combat team, the 442nd, fought in Europe and became one of the most decorated units in the armed services. Several thousand Japanese Americans also served in the Military Intelligence Service as interpreters and translators in the Pacific. The U.S. Supreme Court upheld internment in 1944, and many lapanese Americans remained imprisoned until 1945. African Americans and Mexican Americans found employment and military service opportunities, altho all groups experienced job wage discrimination. Afric Americans and Mexican Americans faced harassrm and violence. Japanese Americans were interned during the war, although sc did receive military service opportunities. 4a. encouraged the medi; to endorse the war effort and created the Office of War Information I I. Define and explain; braceros zoot-suit riots internment I 1. Identify and explain: Office of War Information Rosie the Riveter A Philip Randolph Fair Employment Practices Committee Carlos E. Castaneda Norman Mineta 3. Analyzing Information Copy the web below. Use it to describe how various groups experienced greater opportunities and/or discrimination as a result of the war. African Americans Mexican Americans Japanese Americans Homework Practice Online keyword: SD3 HP27 a. How did the U.S. government seek to keep morale high and to control the flow of information during World War II? b. What long-term effects do you think women's experiences in World War li had on their lives after the war? c What were the economic effects of World War II on the home front? Writing and Critical Thinking Summarizing Imagine that you are living on the home front during World War II. Write a journal entry describing your daily routine. Consider: • changes in popular culture • changes in daily life, such as rationing • the war's effects on job opportunities and racial issues b. Students might sugges that their experiences wol encourage women to broa their roles outside of the home. c. Increased production ir factories and on farms led the economy out of the depression; longer workint hours led to more spendin money. 5. Entries will vary but mic describe rationing or work long hours to aid the war ef or having more spending money. i BALL LEVELS: To help students understand the events that led to the founding of Israel and Arab countries' response to Israel's founding, copy the following graphic organizer on the chalkboard, omitting the italicized answers. Have each student complete the graphic organizer. Ask volunteers to share their answers with the class. Lead the class in a discussion about the issues involved in the Arab-Israeli dispute. English Language Learners Arab countries' response reject UN plan refuse to recognize Israel; attack Israel TOPIC: The Founding of Israel GO TO: go.hrw.com Have students access the Internet through the HRW Go site to conduct research on the founding of Israel. Then have each student create an illustrated time line that traces the major events leading to the formation of the state of Israel. Students should include information on the reasons Israel was founded, international support for its founding, the national origins of immigrants to Israel, and the reactions of Palestinian Arabs. 1. Define • zaibatsu, p. 833 2. Identify • Potsdam Conference, p. 832 • Nuremberg Trials, p. 832 • Adolf Eichmann, p. 834 • Hideki Tojo, p. 834 • United Nations, p. 835 • Trygve Lie, p. 835 • Eleanor Roosevelt, p. 835 • Zionism, p. 835 • David Ben-Gurion, p. 836 • Ralph Bunche, p. 837 The menorah is used to celebrate the Jewish holiday of Hanukkah. Thousands of Jewish refugees and Holocaust survivors from Europe resettled in what would become the nation of Israel. Many others headed for the United States. Between 1935 and 1941 some 150,000 European Jews immigrated to the United States. These new immigrants contributed to the already diverse Jewish American community in the United States. During the 1950s American Judaism was dominated by three denominations—Ortho- dox, Conservative, and Reform. Some Jewish immigrants embraced Orthodox Judaism's emphasis on a unity of past and present faith and on the strict observance of religious laws. Conservative and Reform Judaism, however, proved much more popular. Some immigrants liked the relaxed interpretation of religious observance offered by Reform Judaism. This denomination had been popular in the United States since the late 1800s. It presented a somewhat Americanized, modern Judaism-holding sen/ices primarily in English and experimenting with a Sunday Sabbath. Reform Judaism also presented the Jewish faith simply as an organized religion. Emphasizing both Jewish religious heritage and Jewish ethnic identity, Conservative Judaism attracted the majority of the Jewish immigrants. All three denominations attempted to spread awareness of anti-Semitism. Most Jews in the United States—Conservative Jews in particular—encour- aged Jewish nationalism, primarily in terms of support for the nation of Israel. her early twenties, Roosevelt had gained recognition in New York City's growing community of social reformers. Roosevelt continued her social activism and political work throughout her marriage to Franklin D. Roosevelt, her distant cousin. Her political career continued well after his death. In 1945 she was selected as a U.S. delegate to the UN. In this role, Roosevelt helped create a declaration of human rights that would provide a universal set of inalienable rights. Roosevelt and other UN delegates realized that building world peace after World War II required cooperation among nations. "Security requires both control of the use of force and the elimination of want. No people are secure unless they have the things needed not only to preserve existence, but to make life worth living__All peoples throughout the world must know that there is an organization where their interests can be considered and where justice and security will be sought for all." — Eleanor Roosevelt, My Day, edited by David hmblidge. Copyright £ 1990 by Pharos Boob. Reprinted by permission of United Feature Syndicate, Inc Roosevelt remained politically active and worked for human rights until her death in 1962. Early critics of the UN insisted that it was doomed to fail because it did not have the power to enforce its own decisions. Nevertheless, most Americans were as optimistic as President Truman, who noted in 1945, "This [UNl charter points down the only road to enduring peace. There is no other." READINC CHECK: Identifying Points of View How did Eleanor Roosevelt's views reflect those of the UN founders? She believed that world peace depended on cooperation among nations and security. The Founding of Israel One of the first major conflicts the United Nations faced concerned Palestine, a small eastern Mediterranean region claimed by both Jews and Arabs. After World War II, many European lews moved to Palesti ne—despite Arab protest—rather than return to Europe. Britain, which had ruled Palestine since World War I, could not resolve conflicting claims over the territory. In 1947 Britain turned the issue over to the United Nations. The UN came up with a plan to divide Palestine into two states—one for Jews, the other for Arabs—but Ar abs rejected the proposal. Zionism. The UN plan was a victory for Zionism, the movement seeking a Jewish homeland in Palestine. Zionist leader David Ben-Gurion (ben-goohr-yawn) had supported the idea since the early 1900s. Born in what is now Poland, Ben-Gurion moved to Palestine in 1906. He was expelled in 1915 for Zionist activities. Exiled, he went to the United States to raise money and recruit volunteers among the American Jewish community. MINORITY GROUPS IN THE 1950s BALL LEVELS: Write the following statement on the chalkboard: During the 1950s many white Americans regarded Hispanics, Asian Americans, and American Indians as "the other," which led them to discriminate against these minority groups. Have students respond to the statement in writing. Ask volunteers to share their responses. (Answers will vary. Students might discuss the emphasis on conformity during the 1950s or mention the long-term history of discrimination in the United States.) Hispanic children in all Texas public schools. bun immigration. Some of the prejudice against Hispanics was the result of continued nativism. Nevertheless, fear of immigration begin to ease somewhat after World War 11. Asian immigrants in particular experienced the effects of this change. In 1952 Congress repealed the Chinese Exclusion Act to allow more Chinese immi- gants into the United States. Many Asian Americans achieved great success in the United States. However, they still faced constant reminders that they did ittK fit the profile of an "ideal" American. In 1952, for example, iSngSheng, a Chinese immigrant and Allied war hero, attempted tobnyahouse in a San Francisco suburb called Southwood. When feidghborhood's white residents discovered that an Asian family jt move in, they began a drive to prevent the Sheng family from ' g the house. Noting that his family had fled communism Pima, Sheng appealed to the residents of Southwood to practice the of democracy and equality. "Do not make us the victims of a false After Felix Longoria was finally buried at Arlington National Cemetery, Hispanic veterans organized the American Cl Forum to fight for other rights. Asian immigration to the United States increased after Congress repealed the Chinese Exclusion Act Discrimination in the Southwest. During the 1960s, segregation affected Hispanics in many southwestern states. In southern and western Texas towns, for example, there were "Anglo schools" and "Mexican schools" in "white towns" and "little Mexicos." Churches and even cemeteries were also strictly segregated. In Texas legal segregation largely ended in 1969, when the legislature passed five laws banning various forms of segregation and discrimination. Despite the laws, however, segregation continued in a few towns. For example, in Ozona, the bowling alley, the cemeteries, and the swimming pools remained segregated through the early 1970s. might cemeteries have been segregated in the South and Southwest? What might this segregation reveal about race relations there? Students might suggest that cemeteries were segregated because churches were segregated. Students might argue that the segregation of cemeteries revealed the deep-seated nature of racial discrimination. i S LEVEL 1: Pair students and ask each pair to list some of the criticisms that writers and scholars expressed about 1950s society. (Students should include conformity, poverty, racism, and a lack of creativity.) Ask volunteers to share the contents of their lists and then note the most common criticisms on the chalkboard. Then ask pairs to write paragraphs evaluating the validity of the criticisms. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning LEVEL 2: Conduct a brief discussion on the criticisms that writers and scholars expressed about 1950s society. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct criticisms.) Then organize students into small groups and tell them to imagine that they are magazine editors preparing a special insert entitled The 1950s: An Age of Criticism. Have each group plan its insert, identifying potential articles, editorials, interviews, and so on. Then divide the elements among students and have each student create an item for the insert. Tell students to collect their items and compile them into inserts. Students may wish to include their indi vidual items in their portfolios. Cooperative Learning GO TO: go.hrw.com Have students access the Internet through the HRW Go site to conduct research on the history and political work of the League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC) and the Mexican American Legal Defense Fund (MALDEF). Then have each student create an annotated and illustrated time line that outlines the activities of both organizations from 1929 to the present. Visual Record Answer Students might suggest that people would be more sympathetic toward a young child. Protesting. This young American Indian is protesting the government's takeover of reservation land to build a power plant. Why might this protester be more effective than others? democracy," he pleaded. Despite this request, the neighborhood association voted overwhelmingly to fight the Shengs. When white residents of other communities heard about the Southwood incident, many sent the Shengs personal letters inviting them to move into their neighborhoods. The Shengs accepted one such offer, settling peacefully in the town of Sonoma, California. Relocation of American Indians. American Indians moved underpressure from the federal government. The government adopted a policy of termination in 1953. Termination involved ending the reservation system on a tribe-by-tribe basis. It also cut most federal funding for American Indians. Various tribal groups launched protests and lawsuits against the termination policy. They considered it an attempt to wipe out American Indian communities. To promote the assimilation of American Indians into mainstream society, the Eisenhower administration supported the Relocation Act of 1956. The act set op procedures to encourage Indians to move to urban areas. It also established relocation offices in major cities to assist newcomers. Critics of the legislation feared that it would empty the reservations of future leaders and destroy tribal cultures. Oglala Lakota activist Gerald One Feather recalled the impact of the program. **The relocation program had an impact on our... government at Pine Ridge [South Dakota]. Many people who could have provided leadership were lost because they had motivation to go off the reservation to find employment or obtain an education. Relocation drained off a lot of our potential leadership." —Gerald One Feather, quoted in Indian Self-Rule, edited by Kenneth R. Philp By 1958 the Eisenhower administration backed away from the termination policy. It stated that it would no longer support legislation "to terminate tribes ' without their consent." READING CHECK: Summarizing What kinds of discrimination did Hispanics, Asian Americans, and American Indians face in the 1950s? discrimination in funeral homes, schools, and in buying homes; American Indians were pressured into moving off their reservations Questioning Conformity For some scholars, discrimination against nonwhites was a symptom of broader societal trouble. 'They argued that beneath its surface of conformity, economic prosperity, and peace, the United States faced serious problems. These social critics sought to expose what they called the "crack in the picture window." This meant that the problems grew within a seemingly happy and peaceful society. Some novelists depicted the experiences of those facing poverty and discrimination. Afr ican American writer Ralph Ellison published Invisible Man in 1952. In the novel an African American man searches for his place in a society that is at once both hostile and indifferent to him. Referring to his exclusion from mainstream society, the man states, "I am an invisible man_lam invisible, understand, simply because people refuse to see me." Several important scholars wrote nonfiction works that reinforced Ellison's message. Harvard economist John Kenneth Galbraith issued a warning to privileged Americans in The Affluent Society (1958). He wrote that they were ignoring on the Transition Period Ask students to identify ways in which President Johnson made the transition into the Oval Office. (Students should indicate that Johnson comforted the nation in its sorrow and worked to continue President Kennedy's programs.) Ask students to assess the effectiveness of this transition. (Most students will indicate that Johnson handled the transition quite well.) Then ask students to speculate about how Johnson's presidency might have proceeded had he not made an effort to maintain and implement President Kennedy's policies. Tell students to write several scenarios describing the effects and long-term consequences of this course. Block Scheduling B LEVEL 1: Pair students and tel! them to imagine that they are people living in a community that has greatly benefited from President Johnson's War on Poverty. Have each pair develop a dialogue discussing certain programs and describing the effects of the programs. (Students should mention the Office of Economic Opportunity, the Head Start program, and the Volunteers in Service to America program. These initiatives provided antipoverty programs such as job training and preschool education.) Ask volunteers to perform their dialogues for the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning Johnson later claimed, "During my first thirty days in office 1 believe 1 averaged no more than three or four hours' sleep a night." He focused his attention on securing passage of Kennedy's tax cut bill and civil rights legislation, both of which had stalled in the Congress. In order to gain support for the tax cut, Johnson had his aides craft a federal budget that held spending to $100 billion. Convinced that the budget offered proof that Johnson intended to curb government spending. Congress approved the tax cut bill in February 1964. During his first year in office, Johnson kept his pledge to follow in Kennedy's footsteps. However, the ambitious Texan also had plans of his own. "If you look at my record, you would know that I am a Roosevelt New Dealer," he told a former Kennedy aide. "As a matter of fact, John F. Kennedy was a little too conservative to suit my taste." At his first cabinet meeting in January' 1964 he announced, "The day is over when top jobs are reserved for men." £mm Lyndon B. Johnson 1908-1973 In Office 1963-1969 Many observers saw Lyndon B. Johnson as a stereotypical Texas politician-loud and slightly crude. Johnson loved to shock people with his language, stories, and behavior. He was also a very physical politician. He would shake people's hands until his own bled and slap others on their backs in a friendly gesture. When Johnson visited Thailand in 1961, aides warned him that the Thai people regarded touching someone on the head as offensive. Johnson, however, could not restrain himself. He insisted upon patting the heads of the small children he met. During his years in the Senate, fellow senators joked that Johnson had two techniques for getting another senator's attention. There was the Half-Johnson—"when he just put a hand on your shoulder"-and the Full-Johnson-"when he put his arm clear around you and thrust his face close to yours." Johnson's techniques got results, however. Johnson was known as a workaholic who drove himself and his staff to exhaustion to complete multiple tasks. "What's the hurry?" one senator asked another about Johnson's busy schedule. "Rome wasn't built in a day." The other senator replied, "No, but Lyndon Johnson wasn't foreman on that job." IaihIihi B. Jotmson I tM Stall-. Johnson eventually appointed 27 women to upper-level government positions, induding consumer activist Betty Furness, economists Alice Rivlin and Penelope Thunberg, and Texas legislator Barbara Jordan. He also appointed Mexican Americans to high positions, assigning Vicente T. Ximenes to chair a presidential committee on Mexican American affairs. Other top appointments went to Hector P. Garcia, a Texas spokesperson for Mexican American veterans, and to Raul H. Castro. Castro later became the first Mexican American governor of Arizona. These children are part of a Head Start program. The War on Poverty. Johnson learned of President Kennedy's antipoverty initiative on November 23,1963, his first full day in office. Walter Heller, chair of the Council of Economic Advisers, gave Johnson an outline of the plan. Johnson responded, "I'm sympathetic. Go ahead. Give it the highest priority. Push ahead full tilt." Advisers urged Johnson to implement the antipoverty program slowly, testing its effectiveness in a few cities before expanding its scope, lohnson, however, insisted that the program "be big and bold and hit the nation with real impact." In his first State of the Union Address, delivered on January 8,1964, the president declared "unconditional war on poverty in America." To launch his War on Poverty, Johnson sent to Congress a bill calling for the creation of an Office of Economic Opportunity (OF.O). With a budget of $1 billion, OEO coordinated a series of new antipoverty programs. These programs included the Job. Claudia "Lady Bird" Johnson. President Johnson's wife, Claudia "Lady Bird" Johnson, was very different from Jacqueline Kennedy, just as her husband was very different from John F. Kennedy. The daughter of a general store owner, Claudia Alta Taylor grew up in a remote Texas town. She graduated with a degree in journalism from the University of Texas at Austin. In 1934 she met and married Lyndon B. Johnson, a former schoolteacher. She later used money from her family inheritance to fund his successful campaign for the U.S. House of Representatives. While her husband served in the U.S. Navy during World War II, Lady Bird Johnson managed his congressional office. In the early 1940s she purchased a debt-ridden radio station in Austin, Texas, and turned it into a broadcasting empire worth millions of dollars. After the war Lady Bird Johnson played an active role in her husband's campaigns. In 1960 she traveled some 35,000 miles and gave many speeches supporting his candidacy for vice president. How might Lady Bird Johnson's life belie the myth of the "backseat" political wife? ANSWER: Students might suggest that Lady Bird Johnson was an educated, successful businessperson. HALL LEVELS: Pair students and have each pair summarize decisions the Supreme Court made in the 1970s that limited the impact of busing and affirmative action. (Pairs should note that in Milliken v. Bradley in 1974, the Court struck down a lower court's order that would have merged inner- city and suburban school districts in Detroit. In University of California v. Bakke in 1978, the Court ruled that affirmative action plans using quota systems are unconstitutional.) Then have each student write dissenting opinions in the cases. Have volunteers read their opinions to the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning iiL Teacker to Tester Andy Turay of Bronx, New York, suggested the following activity: Pair students and have each pair create a chart comparing federal civil rights policy during the Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon administrations. Then have each pair write two paragraphs that assess the impact of federal policy. Have students present their charts and paragraphs to the class. By the fall of 1974, violent protests against busing had erupted in Boston. Yet despite the risks, many African American parents believed that busing was necessary to achieve equal education opportunities. One African American woman told her two children that busing would make school difficult. But it's not the first time this has happened and it won't be the last. It's something we have to go through-something you have to go through-if this city is ever going to be integrated." —Rachel Twymon, quoted in Common Ground, by I. Anthony Lukas The busing controversy quieted down after the Supreme Court limited the use of busing as a means to achieve racial integration. In 1974 the Court ruled in Milliken v. Bradley to end a plan that promoted desegregation in Detroit by merging inner-city school districts with the city's suburban districts. The ruling was a severe blow to activists hoping to continue the process of desegregation in neighborhood schools. Justice Thurgood Marshall dissented from the Court ruling. He declared, "Unless our children begin to learn together, there is little hope that our people will ever learn to live together." Visual Record Answe Students might suggest th the flag waving, signs calli for impeachment, and the woman's expression show busing was an emotional ii (for p. 942) Practicing the Skill 1. Answers will vary. Stud should include the title and appropriate products information. 2. Answers will vary. Stuc should provide the main i of the documentary as wt as supporting evidence. 3. Answers will vary. Stuc should note the point of of the documentary and identify any biases. Affirmative action. Civil rights gains during the 1970s resulted from both public and private efforts. In order to uphold federal antidiscrimination laws and to end unfair labor practices, the Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department brought suits against corporations and labor unions. Many schools and businesses instituted affirmative action programs to compensate for previous discrimination. These programs gave preference to ethnic minorities and women in admission and hiring. Many elected politicians did not support affirmative action. The Supreme Court nevertheless upheld the constitutionality of such programs in the 1971 case Griggs v. Duke Power Co. The Court ruled that tests given by the power company to decide on promotions had the effect of limiting the advancement of its African American workers. In the future, companies would have to explain why such tests were necessary. The case encouraged companies to create affirmative action programs. Many white critics of affirmative action argued that it led to "reverse discrimi- nation." In 1978 the Supreme Court handed down an important ruling affecting affirmative action. In University of California v. Bakke, it ruled that a white man, Allan Bakke, had been unfairly denied admission to medical school on the basis of quotas. This system reserved a fixed number of openings for certain groups of people. Although not ruling out all forms of affirmative action, the Court did strike down the quota system in regard to university admissions. Again, lustice Thurgood Marshall dissented from the Court's majority ruling. Marshall explained, "The j dream of America as the great melting pot has not been realized for the Negro; I because of his skin color he never even made it into the pot." Reaction to busing. In Boston, the court order to bus students outraged many white residents. What dues can you gather from this image of an anti- busing rally in Boston in 1974 that support the argument that the busing issue was an emotional one for many Americans? 4. Answers will vary. Categorizing What decisions did the Supreme Court make on busing and affirmative action? The Court approved a busing plan in Charlotte, North Carolina; Griggs v. Duke Power Co. upheld affirmative action, but University of California v. Bakke struck down a school quota system. ii. Teackr to Teacher Jenifer Rowray of Runnells, Iowa, suggested the following activity: Organize students into small groups and have them pick one year between 1963 and 1975. Ask each group to conduct research on events that took place during its chosen year. Tell students to determine the short- and long-term effects of these events. Then have each group prepare a short oral report on the year. To create a living time line, ask students to deliver their reports in chronological order. BALL LEVELS: Conduct a brief discussion on what The Feminine Mystique revealed about women and how readers responded to it. (Students might answer that many women, particularly homemakers, felt dissatisfied with their lives. Inspired by the book, many women began to demand increased opportunities and fair treatment in the workplace.) Then pair students and ask each pair to write a paragraph summarizing why many American women were dissatisfied. Have volunteers share their paragraphs with the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning Helping Women at Work Most of the women polled by Betty Friedan were homemakers. However, the number of women in the workplace had grown dramatically in the years before her book was published. The number of working women rose from 25 percent in 1940 to 35 percent in 1960. By 1963 almost 25 million working women made up more than one third of the American labor force. Yet female workers received lower wages than men did. In 1960, for example, women who worked full-time earned 40 percent less than working men. Women typically held service jobs that paid poorly, but in many cases they received lower wages even when they did the same work as men. As one business executive confessed, "We pay [women] less because we can get them for less." Kennedy responds. The Kennedy administration hired few women but did not ignore the problems that working women faced. President Kennedy issued an executive order requiring that civil-service hiring occur "solely on the basis of ability to meet the requirements of the position, and without regard to sex." His administration also backed a new bill that would make it illegal for employers to pay female workers less than male workers for the same job. Congress approved this Equal Pay Act, which Kennedy signed in June 1963. The act had a limited impact, however. Its provisions did not cover women in agr icultural, professional, or service industries—about two thirds of working women. Nevertheless, the law served as an important first step toward equality in the workplace. In the decade following its passage, 171,000 workers used the law to win $84 million in back pay. Kennedy also created the President's Commission on the Status of Women (PCSW) and appointed former first lady Eleanor Roosevelt as its chairperson. Kennedy authorized the PCSW to investigate the lives of American women. Completed in October 1963, the commission's report noted that female workers continued to experience discrimination in the workplace despite their increasing numbers. The report set new goals for the treatment of working women and called for "equal opportunity in hiring, training, and promotion." In June 1963 President John F. Kennedy signed the Equal Pay Act, which required that women receive equal pay for equal work. Title VII. Female workers received additional and unexpected assistance from the federal government in 1964. That year Congress debated legislation intended to ' protect the civil rights of African Americans. Representa- I five Howard Smith of Virginia proposed adding a clause to the bill that would protect women from discrimination. Smith opposed the civil rights bill and actually | hoped that his amendment would weaken its chances I ofpassing. Occupations of Women, 1960-1970 Total 30.3 Manual labor, service Farming White collar Unknown 1960 1970 Source: Historical Statistics of the United States Interpreting Graphs The number of working women increased from 1960 to 1970. O Skills Assessment By how much did the number of women working in white-collar professions increase? The President's Commission on the Status of Women. President Kennedy gainet a significant political adv: tage when he created the President's Commission c the Status of Women. The creation of the group pie; female voters-citizens wl might support Kennedy ir future elections. In additii forming the commission allowed Kennedy to appe to support women's right without taking a stand or specific issues. Kennedy'i motivations were not pur political, however. He une stood that women often experienced discriminatic the workplace. A 1957 sti had recommended that tl Department of Labor stud underuse of female work might women have been underused source of labc ANSWER: Students might suggest that the limited conception of women's ri barred women from cert? occupations. by 6.7 million ALL LEVELS: Ask students to identify common sources of opposition to the women's rights movement in the 1970s. (Students should identify internal conflict within the movement, debate over the Equal Rights Amendment and Roe v. Wade, and opposition from conservative female activists.) To help students understand the gains and setbacks that the women's movement made during the decade despite this opposition, copy the graphic organizer at right on the chalkboard, omitting the italicized answers. Then have each student complete the organizer. When Congress approved the Equal Rights Amendment in 1972, it included a provision limiting the ratification period to seven years. In 1979 Congress extended the period by an additional three years without the approval of a two-thirds majority. In the 1981 case Idaho v. Freeman, a federal judge ruled that Congress did not have the power to extend the deadline without the two-thirds majority. The judge also declared that the states that had already approved the amendment could rescind, or withdraw, their approval. The deadline for ratification passed before the U.S. Supreme Court could hear the case. Why might Congress have extended the ERA'S ratification deadline? ANSWER: Students might suggest that many congress- members wanted the ERA to be ratified. The American Nation The Women's Rights Movement; Teacher's Guide, pp. 209-10 Search 48258, Play to 49209 Videodisc 1, Side B Play Pause See Teacher's Guide for Spanish barcode. Then and Now Women and Sports The Women's Movement Gains Momentum Basketball player Chamique Holdsclaw The women's movement supported increased opportunities for women in all areas of life, including sports. Before 1972 just 1 percent of the money spent on athletic programs at institutions of higher education was spent on women's sports. As a result, only some 16,000 women attending colleges and universities participated in sports programs. Title IX of the 1972 Education Amendments Act declared that "no person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance." The law did not mean that all college sports had to become coeducational. Rather, it required universities to fund women's sports programs fairly. By 1984 spending on women's athletics had improved. That year, women's sports received 16 percent of all athletic funds, and some 150,000 women participated in college sports activities. By the 1990s more than 160,000 women were involved in college athletics. The increase in girls' participation in high school sports programs was even more impressive. The number of female high school athletes rose from 294,105 in 1972 to some 2.6 million in 1999. The women's movement made progress in the 1970s. Leader worked to elect more women to public office. Many all-male col leges allowed female students to enroll for the first time. Othe universities instituted courses in women's studies. In 1972 Con gress passed the Education Amendments Act, which outlawec sexual discrimination in higher education. Mixed success. In 1973 the Supreme Court handed down: landmark decision affecting women. In the case Roe v. Wade, thi Court overturned a state law 1 imiting women's access to abortior during the first three months of pregnancy. The Court ruled tha a woman and her doctor, not the state, should make such deri sions. While most feminists hailed Roe v. Wade as a victory opponents protested that the ruling violated the right to life o the unborn. During the 1970s controversy also followed the Equal Right Amendment (ERA). A proposed constitutional amendment, thi ERA sought to bar discrimination on the basis of sex. Activist had first proposed such an amendment during the 1920s, but i did not pass. The ERA received strong support from NOW ant other women's groups. Gloria Steinem testified before Congress on behalf of the amendment. ''Women suffer second-class treatment from the moment they are born. They are expected to be rather than to achieve, to function biologically rather than learn. A brother, whatever his intellect is more likely to get the family's encouragement and education money, while girls are pressured to conceal ambition and intelligence." —Gloria Steinem, testimony before Congress. 1971 Congress passed the ERA in 1972, but the amendmem required the approval of at least 38 states. Ratification initially seemed certain. However, conservative groups that regarded the ERA as a threat to traditional women's roles launched a campaign to prevent ratification. By the 1982 deadline set by Congress, the ERA was stil three states short of ratification. As a result, the amendment failed to become law. Opposition. The fight over the ERA revealed that many women believed that the women's movement primarily served wealthy white women. Many nonwhite women and working-class white women felt left out. These women felt that the leaders of NOW and other feminist groups simply did not understand the problems they faced every day. Referring to Gloria Steinem, Cathy Tuley stated, "1 feel she's fighting for women like herself, professional women, and that she's not thinking of women in the whole sense, just part of them." After completing Section 2, students should be able to: Discuss why La Huelga was important to Mexican Americans throughout the country. Explain how conflicts over land rights and education motivated Mexican Americans to protest. Describe how aggressive activists shaped the Chicano movement. Analyze how the Chicano movement changed the lives of Mexican Americans. Guided Reading Strategy 32.2 One-Stop Planner, Lesson 32.2 The American Nation Video Program Segment: Cesar Chavez; Teacher's Guide, pp. 167-68 cm Presents America: Yesterday and Today Segment: Women and Sports Holt Researcher: American History Homework Practice Online HRW Go site Section 2 Review, p. 960 Daily Quiz 32.2 Main Idea Activity 32.2 English Audio Summary 32.2 Spanish Audio Summary 32.2 LU.lltinU'MI 1. Why was La Huelga important to Mexican Americans throughout the country? 2. How did conflicts over land rights and education motivate Mexican Americans to protest? 3. How did aggressive activists shape the Chicano movement? 4. How did the Chicano movement change the lives of Mexican Americans? ttsar Chavez Dolores Huerta La Huelga United Farm Workers Reies Lopez Tijerina Alianza Federal de Mercedes Brown Berets Rodolfo Gonzales Crusade for Justice Mexican American Youth Organization Jose Angel Gutierrez La Raza Unida Party Hispanics make up a larger portion of the U.S. population than ever before. Use oMiyiTM or other current events sources to learn about ways Hispanics take part in U.S. politics today. Record your findings in your journal. Write the following terms on the chalkboard: boycott, strike,and urban activism. Ask students to define the terms and to write a brief statement describing how these actions might have been used in a civil rights movement. Have volunteers share their responses. Then tell students that in Section 2 they will learn how the Mexican American civil rights movement and the Chicano movement utilized boycotts, strikes, and urban activism. The Chicano Movement Eyewitnesses 0 ^/istory 4 4 One night I went to a dance. I didn't know that it was a place with mostly Anglo girls. An Anglo policeman told me to leave the premises. At that point I questioned him, and he arrested me. I asked him why he was arresting me, and he uttered some very racist sentiments. At the station, they let me go. Nevertheless, I spent a very embarrassing and uncomfortable few hours injailV —Cesar Caballero, quoted in New Americans, by Al Santoli Cesar Caballero recalled his years as a high school student in El Paso, Texas, during the early 1960s. Caballero and many other Mexican Americans reacted to the discrimination they experienced by demanding their civil rights and greater opportunities in American life. Stirrings of Protest Like the African American civil rights movement and the women's movement, the Mexican American struggle to secure equal rights became a powerful political force during the 1960s. Almost 4 million Mexican Americans lived in the United States in 1960, with more than 3.4 million living in southwestern states. They were among the poorest and least-educated people in the country. Although 80 percent of Mexican Americans lived in cities, it was the actions of California farmworkers that initially inspired many Mexican Americans to activism. A model for the movement. Migrant agricultural workers, many of them Mexican Americans, received low wages for backbreaking labor. In September 1965 a group of Filipino workers went on strike in Delano, California, in the San Joaquin Valley. They refused to harvest grapes until they received a pay increase. Other migrant workers, including Mexican Americans, soon joined the strike. When the Filipino workers struck, leaders of a union called the National Farm Workers Association (NFWA) were faced with a dilemma. A few months earlier they had won a labor dispute with rose growers, but this strike promised to be much more difficult to win. Led by Cesar Chavez, NFWA leaders decided to join the strike. Born in Yuma, Arizona, in 1927, Cesar Chavez was the son of Mexican American farmers. After losing their land during the Great Depression, Chavez's family became migrant workers. During his childhood Chavez attended nearly 30 different schools. The Chavez family repeatedly experienced discrimination in their travels searching for work. Looking back on his childhood, Chavez recalled, "There were lots of racist remarks that still hurt my ears when 1 think of them." Conduct a brief discussion on the importance of La Huelga to Mexican Americans throughout the country. (Students might mention that it resulted in important advances for workers, elevated Cesar Chavez as a movement leader, and encouraged Mexican Americans to fight discrimination.) Then tell students to imagine that they are Mexican American farmworkers who participated in the strike. Have each student write a paragraph explaining why the strike was important to him or her. English Language Learners LEVEL 2: Tell students to imagine that they are farmworkers who participated in La Huelga. Have each student write a brief speech explaining why the strike was important to Mexican Americans. (See the Level l lesson for the correct reasons.) Ask volunteers to deliver their speeches to the class. Students may wish to include the scripts for their speeches in their portfolios. NOTE: For an additional teaching idea, see the Chapter 32 choosing and acting lesson in the Creative Teaching Strategies handbook. Chavez was strongly influenced by his parents, particularly his mother, who often assisted fellow migrant workers. He remembered, "We were migrants but we were a service center. We did all kinds of work for people." After serving in the navy during World War II, Chavez moved to San lose, California. He became involved in the Community Service Organization (CSO), where he learned community-organizing techniques. Father Donald McDonnell, a Catholic priest, taught Chavez that labor unions could be a powerful force for social change. Chavez wanted to organize migrant agricultural workers. When this project did not receive support from the CSO, he left the organization. With help from former CSO workers Dolores Huerta and Gil Padilla, Chavez founded the NFWA. His wife, Helen, ran the credit union they had created to assist the workers. By 1965 the NFWA claimed some 1,700 members. Strike and boycott. On September 16,1965, Mexican Independence Day, Chavez asked a gathering of NFWA members to join the Filipino strikers. Eliseo Medina was then a 19-year-old worker. He later recalled the union meeting. " People started talking about how unfair... the growers were ... and why we needed to fight back.... And then, so Cesar gets up and he's this little guy... very soft spoken. I say, That's Cesar?" You know, I wasn't very impressed ... but the more he talked, the more I thought that not only could we fight, but we could win." —Eliseo Medina, quoted in Chicano!, by F. Arturo Rosales Religious =Spirits Most religions consider life to be sacred and After NFWA members voted to strike, Chavez and other leaders collected donations of money and food to support the striking workers. The union also constructed a medical clinic and operated a gas station for its members. As Chavez explained, "We are a union of have-nots. So we must satisfy basic needs before other things." Chavez realized that a strike alone would not win the union any concessions. He therefore adopted other strategies used in the civil rights movement to gain support. In 1966, to encourage public sympathy for the strike, Chavez conducted a 300-mile march to Sacramento, the capital of California. When Chavez called for a nationwide boycott of grapes, consumers responded enthusiastically. An estimated 17 million Americans refused to buy grapes. The resulting economic pressure forced grape growers to negotiate a settlement. Known as La Huelga, the Delano grape strike lasted until 1970, when the last of the grape growers signed new contracts with the union. During that time the NFWA merged with another union, eventually forming the United Farm Workers lUFW). The UFW was not exclusively a Mexican American organization and included many non-Hispanic members. However, its accomplishments and have strict standards against the use of violence. During the early 1900s Mohandas K. Gandhi used the idea of nonviolence taken from Hinduism to oppose British rule in India. Martin Luther King Jr. and other African American civil rights activists followed Gandhi's example. They were also influenced by Christian teachings to use nonviolent tactics in their struggle for equal rights. Cesar Chdvez also believed that nonviolence was the best way to bring about social change. Chavez was a deeply religious man. He once declared, "For me, Christianity happens to be a natural source of faith." He maintained that Jesus Christ "was extremely radical, and he was for social change." Chavez drew strength from his Catholic faith. He also studied Gandhi, whom he called "the most perfect man, not including Christ." Chavez noted, "Gandhi's philosophy of nonviolence, it really forces us to think, really forces us to work hard. But it has power. It attracts the support of the people." Many religions use the dove as a symbol of peace. Chavez's leadership inspired many Mexican Americans to fight discrimination TOPIC: The UFW and fcg the Hispanic Rights T Movement GO TO: go.hrw.com Have students access the Internet through the HRV Go site to conduct reseat on Cesar Chavez and the United Farm Workers. Thi have each student create brochure outlining the his of the UFW and the Hisp Rights Movement. tion The American Nation Cesar Chavez; Teacher's Gt pp. 167-68 Search 38963, Play to 39584 Videodisc 2, Side B Play Pause See Teacher's Guide for Spanish bai LEVEL 3: Have each student write a brief essay on Cesar Chavez and La Huelga, explaining why both were important to Mexican Americans. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct rea- sons.) Have volunteers read their essays to the class. Then ask students to identify other past and present civil rights leaders. (Students might mention Martin Luther King Jr. or Nelson Mandela.) Conduct a classroom discussion on the role and importance of leaders in civil rights movements. NOTE: To help students make meaningful connections between events in U.S. history and those in their own hometown, use the Chapter 32 Hands-On History Activity, Write a Biography. on Boycotts Have students conduct research on La Huelga and t grape boycott. Then have each student create a graphic ore nizer comparing and contrasting La Huelga and the grape be cott with another strike or boycott in American histo Students might focus on the colonial boycott against Gri Britain, for example, or a strike in the late 1800s. Ask studei to write short essays to accompany their graphic organizers tl compare and contrast La Huelga and the grape boycott w: another strike or boycott in American history. Block Scheduling i ► i Land Use. One of the first Alianza protests concerned grazing fees on public land in the Kit Carson National Forest. This land had been appropriated from Spanish grants dating back to the 1560s. Many poor Mexican Americans had lived on the lands since before New Mexico became a state. The Forest Service charged local ranchers a fee to pasture their sheep and cattle on forest land. In 1966 the service raised the fees, and many Mexican American ranchers were unable to pay the increase. In response, the aliancistas erected a tent city in the forest. The protest ended after a violent encounter with rangers, but in the months that followed, protesters showed their anger by cutting fences and starting fires in the forest. might the aliancistas have become involved in an agricultural issue? Students might suggest that the aliancistas were interested in land use and that grazing rights relate to land ownership rights. Visual Record Answer Students might suggest that the workers are picking crops and that the work is labor- intensive. The UFW. The UFW fought poor working conditions with boycotts like the one against lettuce growers that the flag above announces. What are the workers in this picture doing? Do you think it is hard work? Why? Cesar Chavez became nationally kno' during the late 1960s. He was respected his tireless efforts and his commitment nonviolent protest. Senator Robert Kennt of New York hailed Chavez as "one of the heroic figures of our time." Reies L6pez Tijerina, quoted in The Mexican-Americttns, by Manuel P. St Although New Mexico governor David Cargo showed sympathy the Alianza cause, many other state officials were determined to stop I aliancistas, as Tijerina's followers were known. Several aliancistas wi arrested for unlawful assembly in June 1967 when they tried toatteir meeting in Coyote, New Mexico. Outraged, other aliancistas stonr the courthouse in Tierra Amarilla, New Mexico, in an attempt to f their friends. A gun battle broke out, and two police officers wi wounded. Governor Cargo was in Michigan at the time of the cou house incident. He later recalled being told, "You've got a civil v going on in New Mexico." The Tierra Amarilla incident marked a turning point in the confl between the aliancistas and their opponents. The group became ent: gled in lawsuits, and Tijerina eventually spent two years in prison for assault conviction. Although Tijerina did not achieve his goals, he did insp a generation of young Mexican American activists. BALL LEVELS: To help students understand how conflicts over land rights and education motivated Mexican Americans to protest, copy the chart at right on the chalkboard, omitting the italicized answers. Have each student complete it. Then pair students and have each pair write either newspaper headlines or newspaper articles describing the attack on the courthouse in Tierra Amarilla, New Mexico; or the school walkouts in East Los Angeles, California. Have volunteers share their work with the class. English Language Learners, Issue Conflict Protests land rights loss of land; theft of land; attempt to regain land Alianza protests education the poor quality of local schools school walkouts; Brown Beret activism Student action. While Tijerina fought his battles in New Mexico, students in California also took to active protest. Many Mexican Americans in East Los Angeles resented the poor quality of the local schools. Some students began planning a mass demonstration. On March 1, 1968, about 300 students at Wilson High School walked out of their classes to protest the cancellation of a school play. The walkout, called a blowout by the students, quickly spread. Within one week some 15,000 students had joined the protest. Police responded by arresting students and, in some cases, beating them. The Educational Issues Coordinating Committee (EICC) tried to use the walkouts to bring about change in the school system. The school reform movement met with opposition in June 1968. That month, 13 people—including many EICC members—were indicted for conspiracy to create riots and disturbing the peace. Known as the L.A. Thirteen, the individuals indicted included several members of the Brown Berets. Inspired by the Black Panthers, the Brown Berets was an activist group formed in 1967 in response to police brutality against Mexican Americans in Los Angeles. Recalling his arrest after being indicted, Carlos Munoz, a Brown Beret leader and L.A. Thirteen member, declared, "They put the cuffs on me. I'll never forget this as long as I live." Charges against Munoz and the other L.A. Thirteen were later dropped. The East Los Angeles school walkouts brought national attention to Mexican American concerns and drew many students into militant activism. John Ortiz was a college student who took part in the protests. He later recalled, "As the strike intensified and people were getting arrested, the students became politically aware. The events politicized the students. And that's why they walked out of their classes!" The Chicano movement This Los Angeles mural celebrates the Chicano movement's fight for equal rights. What do you think the various elements of the mural represent? Finding the Main Idea What issues did Mexican American activists address? They worked to regain land taken from them and protested the poor quality of schools. Nationalism and Politics During the late 1960s some Mexican Americans began embracing a form of cultural nationalism similar to that supported by black nationalists. They called themselves Chicanos, a shortened form of mexicanos. These leaders worked to create a national movement by uniting regional efforts in many southwestern states. Land Rights in New Mexico. The conflict ovi land ownership in New M continued into the 1990s 150th anniversary of the : ing of the Treaty of Guadt Hidalgo was in February The treaty had forced Me to cede some of its land the Southwest to the Uni States. Many holders of Spanish land grants frorr 1700s lost their land. In 1 (Mexican American desce dants of the original grar demanded the return of 1.5 million acres of land controlled by the U.S. Fo Service. might the government re conflicts over land claim: ANSWER: Answers will va Some students might arc that the government sho honor all previous treatie In 1972 the Brown Beret: occupied Santa Catalina, island off the California c for about 24 hours. The B hoped that their protest v draw attention to the issi land rights. Visual Record Answ Students might suggest ti the fist represents Chican power and that the eagle bolizes triumph. S LEVEL 1: Ask students to identify aggressive Chicano activists. (Students should identify Rodolfo Gonzales and Jose Angel Gutierrez.) Have each student write a paragraph explaining how these activists helped shape the Chicano movement. (Students should note that Gonzales concentrated on urban residents and promoted Mexican American nationalism. Gutierrez organized student protests and formed a political party.) Ask volunteers to read their paragraphs to the class. Students may wish to include their paragraphs in their portfolios. English Language Learners LEVELS 2 AND 3: Tell students to imagine that they are aggressive Chicano activists who participated in the Chicano movement. Have each student write a short memoir explaining his or her efforts to shape the movement. (See the Level I lesson for the correct effects.) Ask volunteers to read their memoirs to the class. Students may wish to include their memoirs in their portfolios. School Walkouts. The Crusade for Justice conducted a number of school walkouts to achieve its goals. One of the most violent walkouts took place in a Denver high school in 1969 after a teacher made racist remarks. The strike lasted for three days. During that period, a riot took place, with heavily armed police officers battling protesters. Many demonstrators, including Rodolfo Gonzales, were arrested and jailed. think that school walkouts were an effective protest technique? ANSWER: Some students might suggest that some observers might have viewed school walkouts as a way for students to skip classes. Other students might suggest that the walkouts drew attention to the protesters' grievances. in the Southwest; because most Chicanos in America settled in Texas, New Mexico, and California, all of which are near Mexico f Rodolfo Gonzales testifies before the U.S. Department of Education on discrimination in American schools. Urban activism. Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales became one of the leading figures in the Chicano movement. Gonzales was interested in issues other than farmworkers' rights, land grants, and educational reform. He expressed a vision that appealed to a large number of Mexican Americans, particularly those living in cities. A former boxer, Gonzales became involved with Democratic Party politics and antipoverty programs in Denver during the late 1950s and early 1960s. Over time Gonzales grew dissatisfied with politics, which he believed did little to help Mexican Americans. He later recalled, "I became disenchanted with the electoral system and disenchanted with the two political parties." In 1966 Gonzales founded the Crusade for Justice, a group that promoted Mexican American nationalism. Operating out of an old church, the group offered legal aid, a theater for promoting cultural awareness, a newspaper, and other community services. It also ran a school. Gonzales praised the Crusade as "the embodiment [representation] of nationalism that now exists here in the Southwest It has been a dream of the past, but we're now creating a reality out of it." Gonzales popularized the use of the nationalist term Chicano to refer to Mexican Americans. He also composed an epic poem, I Am Joaquin, which served as an anthem for the movimiento, or "Chicano movement." In March 1969 Gonzales and the Crusade for Justice sponsored the National Chicano Liberation Youth Conference. The case of Hernandez v. Texas leads the U.S. Supreme Court to recognize that Hispanics in the United States are subjected to racial discrimination. H LEVEL 1: Organize the students into small groups. Tell each group to write several sentences explaining how the Chicano movement changed the lives of Mexican Americans. (Groups should indicate that the movement encouraged universities to establish Chicano Studies programs, helped spark a Chicano Renaissance, and encouraged activists to enter politics.) As each group reads its sentences, compile a comprehensive list on the chalkboard. When the list is complete, discuss the items with the class. Ask students to analyze each item's short-term and long-term impact on Mexican Americans' lives. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning LEVELS 2 AND 3: Tell students to imagine that they are Mexican Americans who witnessed key events in the Chicano movement. Have each student write a letter to a friend in Mexico detailing those events and explaining how the Chicano movement changed the lives of Mexican Americans. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct changes.) Letters should describe the activities of both conservative and aggressive groups. Ask volunteers to read their letters to the class. Have students study the mural in this section. Then ask each student to design a mural celebrating the achievements of the Chicano movement and its effects on Mexican Americans. "it was in reality a fiesta: days of celebrating what sings in the blood of a people taught to believe that they are ugly, discovering the true beauty in their souls during the years of occupation and intimidation.... This affirmation grew into a grito, a roar, among the people gathered in the auditorium of the Crusade's Center." —Maria Varda, quoted in Oiicarto!. by F. Arturo Rosales Conference delegates produced El Plan Espiritual de Aztldn, or "The Spiritual Plan of Aztlan," a document calling for Chicano separatism. El Plan declared, "We are a bronze people with a bronze culture. Before all the world, before all of North America, before all our brothers in the Bronze Continent, we are a Nation." The Texas movement. Mexican Americans in Texas also turned to protest (luring the 1960s. In 1967 a group of students at St. Mary's University in San Antonio formed the Mexican American Youth Organization (MAYO). One of MAYO's founders, Jose Angel Gutierrez, had been inspired by a 1966 farmworkers' protest march. Under Gutierrez's leadership, MAYO took radical positions on issues affecting Mexican Americans. Gutierrez declared, "We have to be revolutionary in our demands and make every sacrifice necessary, even if it means death, to achieve our goals." Moderate opponents of MAYO's radical stance included Henry B. Gonzalez, the first Mexican American from Texas to be elected to the U.S. Congress. Gutierrez and MAYO had some success in the fight for civil rights in Texas. In 1969 Gutierrez helped organize a protest in his hometown. Crystal City. Mexican American students at Crystal City' High School were angry about discrimination in extracurricular activities, including cheerleading. The school board initially agreed to allow three Mexican Americans on the cheerleading squad but backed out of the deal in June. In November about 100 Mexican American students and their parents took a list of complaints to the school board. After the school board denied any charges of discrimination, the students walked out. The walkout extended to middle and elementary schools. The federal Justice Department helped resolve the crisis. The setdement required the school board to meet most of the students' demands, including bilingual and bicultural education. Political power. Mexican American leaders had begun discussing the possibility of creating a Chicano political party in 1967. After his success in Crystal City, Gutierrez formed I,a Raza Unida Party (RUP). In elections held in 1970, the RUP earned control of the Crystal City city council and positions in some other Texas cities. That same year Rodolfo Gonzales organized a Colorado branch of the RUP. The Colorado party did not have many electoral victories, but it did draw attention to Chicano causes. The RUP also expanded into California, where it registered tome 10,000 new voters and ran several candidates for state offices. The RUP soon appeared in other states, including Arizona, Nebraska, and New Mexico. RUP leaders hoped to transform the party from a collection of regional parties ratoa strong national organization. In 1972 the RUP held its first national conven- iion in El Paso, Texas. About half of the some 1,500 participants were women. La Raza. Jose Gutierrez (left) and Rodolfo Gonzales (center) appear before the national convention of La Raza Unida Party in 1972. What do you think Gonzales' raised fist symbolizes? a Unida Pa Aztlan. The ancient Aztei identified Aztlan as their hoi land. Modern-day scholars not know whether Aztlan a real or mythological plac Regardless, the idea of Az united Mexican American activists in their struggle fi economic power and civil rights during the 1960s an 1970s. Many of them belie that Aztlan had been local in the American Southwest activists worked for the da when the Mexican Americ living there would have pc cal and economic power. Why might people be inspired I mythology? answer: Students might suggest that myths can se to unite people. Visual Record Answei Students might suggest th< the raised fist symbolizes strength and struggle. Visual Record Answei (for p. 960) Students might suggest the many of the workers addres by the poster are Hispanic* asnna 1. Identify • C6sar Chavez, p. 954 • Dolores Huerta, p. 955 Have students complete the Section 2 Review on p. 960. Have students complete Daily Quiz 32.2. As Alternative Assessment, you may want to use the La Huelga script or the activist paragraph in this section's lessons. Have students complete Main Idea Activity for English Language Learners and Special-Needs Students 32.2. Organize students into small groups. Have each group summarize the information in a subsection by designing a poster. Have volunteers present their posters to the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning Ask students to conduct research on a Chicano Renaissance artist. Have each student write a brief biography of the artist, discussing his or her background and work. Ask volunteers to read their biographies to the class. Block Scheduling • La Huelga, p. 955 • United Farm Workers, p. 955 • Reies Lopez Tijerina, p. 956 • Alianza Federal de Mercedes, p. 956 • Brown Berets, p. 957 • Rodolfo Gonzales, p. 958 • Crusade for Justice, p. 958 • Mexican American Youth Organization, p. 959 • Jose Angel Gutierrez, p. 959 • La Raza Unida Party, p. 959 2. Chavez-rights for farm- workers; Tijerina—regain lost land; Gonzales-nationalism; Gutierrez-protect and promote civil rights 3a. Chavez led a successful strike and helped launch the Chicano movement. La Huelga encouraged Mexican Americans to fight discrimination. b. economic—low wages and poor working conditions for migrant farmers, land rights; social-equality in school programs and extracurricular activities, increased political power C electoral victories in some Texas cities and Muniz's 6 percent of the vote for governor in 1972; organizations in Colorado, California, New Mexico, Arizona, and Nebraska drew attention to Chicano causes 4. Brochures will vary but might suggest that internal conflict needs to be avoided and that the convention will emphasize movement goals. f k Gutierrez was elected the party's first national president. In the 1970s the RUP supported candidates in numerous states. Its greatest success came in Texas, where it won several seats in local and statewide elections. In 1972 the RUP candidate Ramsey Muniz received 6 percent of the total vote for governor in Texas. READING CHECK: Categorizing What responses to discrimination did the Chicano movement offer? It fought discrimination against Hispanic students and created a new political party. The Movement Weakens 1974 rally. This poster calls for immigrants from Latin America and South Africa to rally for better working conditions. Why might Hispanics support this cause? The Chicano movement lost some of its political power during the 1970s. The Brown Berets dissolved in 1972, and the RUP did not offer any candidates after the late 1970s. Some activists later claimed that the ethnic nationalism embraced by many of the movement's members was politically impractical and had caused many moderate Mexican Americans to lose interest. Despite its shortcomings, the Chicano movement had a positive impact on the lives of many Mexican Americans. During the 1960s and 1970s several universities established Chicano Studies programs. The Chicano movement also inspired Mexican American artists, novelists, and playwrights to create new works. This led one critic to declare a Chicano Renaissance. Some activists entered mainstream politics, inspiring others to maintain their efforts to change American society. One participant, Rosalio Munoz, later stated that the Chicano movement "helped crystallize for people making a commitment, just like in my own life, a commitment from there to go on." Evaluating How effective was the Chicano movement? It lost some power during the 1970s but inspired the Chicano Renaissance and the creation of a political party and Chicano Studies programs. 1. Identify and explain: Cesar Chavez Dolores Huerta La Huelga United Farm Workers Reies Lopez Tijerina Alianza Federal de Mercedes Brown Berets Rodolfo Gonzales Crusade for Justice Mexican American Youth Organization Jose Angel Gutierrez La Raza Unida Party 2. Categorizing Copy the chart below. Use it to list the goals of the Mexican American leaders. Leader Goals Cesar Chavez Reies Lopez Tijerina Rodolfo Gonzales Jos£ Angel Gutierrez Finding the Main Idea a. Why did Cesar Chavez and La Huelga become leading symbols of Mexican American activism? b. What economic and social conditions motivated Mexican American activists to protest? c. What impact did La Raza Unida Party have as a third political party? Writing and Critical Thinking Summarizing Write a brochure for a Chicano movement convention. Consider: • the different goals within the movement • the conflicts between movement leaders • the movements effects on Mexican Americans B LEVEL 1: Ask students to identify the ways in which Americans with disabilities gained public support for their causes. (Students should indicate that Americans with disabilities appealed for equal access, used the media to attract public attention, and lobbied Congress for various laws.) Have volunteers list these methods on the chalkboard. Then ask students to write a sentence explaining the rationale and effectiveness of each method. English Language Learners LEVELS 2 AND 3: Conduct a brief discussion on the ways that Americans with disabilities gained public support for their goals. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct methods.) Then have each student write a short essay comparing and contrasting the methods of the disability rights movement with those of the African American or Mexican American civil rights movement. Ask volunteers to read their essays to the class. HOMEWORK Have each student create a detailed outline of the subsection entitled Others Struggle for Their Rights. American Indians continued to face many problems. Unemployment rates remained high in the 1970s, averaging 40 percent and reaching as high as 90 percent on some reservations. The high school dropout rate among Indians was the highest in the nation. Nonetheless, the Red Power movement succeeded in drawing public attention to the concerns of American Indians. It also instilled a sense of pride in American Indians nationwide. ✓ READING CHECK: Analyzing Information What actions did American Indians take to expand their political and economic rights? They formed the Red Power Movement, occupied Alcatraz and Wounded Knee, and brought lawsuits for the return of land. Others Struggle for Their Rights Several other groups of Americans sought recognition and protection of their civil rights during the 1960s and 1970s. Activists fought on behalf of people with disabilities, elderly Americans, and children. Disability rights. Many Americans with disabilities wondered why their tax dollars helped pay for the construction of public facilities that they could not easily use. Ed Roberts, a young Californian who had become a quadriplegic after having polio, was among them. Roberts, who wanted to attend the University of California at Berkeley, insisted that people with disabilities deserved equal access to public facilities. Officials at the university argued that the campus did not have facilities that could accommodate Roberts. Supporters of Roberts used the media to raise public awareness of his cause. The university eventually admitted Roberts and he enrolled in 1962. When other students with disabilities joined Roberts at Berkeley, they formed a support group called the Rolling Quads. In 1969 the group convinced the Berkeley city council to change the design of street curbs so that people in wheelchairs could move easily through the city. Other state and local governments also passed laws requiring wheelchair ramps and special parking spaces at public facilities. Many buildings began to include signs in braille to help the visually impaired. In 1973 Congress added to these efforts to expand opportunity when it passed the Rehabilitation Act. This act forbade discrimination in jobs, education, or housing because of physical disabilities. Two years later Congress passed the Education for All Handicapped Children Act, which required public schools to provide education for children with physical or mental disabilities. ✓ READING CHECK: Drawing Conclusions How did Americans with disabilities organize their campaign for equal access to public facilities? They used the media and appealed to local and state governments. Then and Now fl Education and Deaf Americans Thomas HopkinsGallaudetfounded the nation's first school for the deaf in Hartford, Connecticut, in 1817. By 1835 most institutions relied upon a sign language developed by deaf people, which eventually became known as American Sign Language. During the 1880s supporters of "oralism" opposed signing. They claimed that the hard of hearing should be taught to speak English and to read lips. Although most deaf Americans preferred signing, many schools compromised by teaching both signing and oral language. During the 1970s some schools adopted a method of teaching called Total Communication, which combined signed and spoken language. During the 1980s deaf Americans demanded that society accept them as citizens capable of living their lives without unwanted assistance. A 1988 protest at Gallaudet University, a school for deaf and hard-of-hearing students in Washington, D.C., symbolized this new activism. Gallaudet students responded with anger to the news that the university's new president was not deaf and could not even sign. They demanded a "Deaf President Now." After a week of protests, university officials backed down and announced that I. King Jordan, a university employee, would become Gallaudet's first deaf president American Indian Povert Poverty has remained a persistent problem on many American Indian reservation throughout the 1900s. In 191 President Clinton visited the Pine Ridge reservation in South Dakota. At the time c his visit, the unemployment rate on the reservation was between 75 and 85 percent much higher than that durii the Great Depression. The reservation, which covers some 3,100 square miles, h; just 62 miles of paved road. might geographical locatior affect poverty on certain American Indian reservation ANSWER: Students might nc that many reservations are remote rural areas that hav not experienced much economic development. Students at Gallaudet University protested the appointment of Elisabeth Zinser (left) as president because she was not deaf. In 1995 some 4.4 million Americans between the ag< of 6 and 14 had some sort i disability. Some 659,000 hai a severe disability. Conduct a brief discussion on the constitutional issue raised by the Tonkin Gulf Resolution. (The Tonkin Gulf Resolution allowed the president to respond to military aggression without further congressional approval.) Then pair students and ask each pair to write a few sentences or a paragraph summarizing the discussion. Have volunteers read their sentences or paragraphs to the class. English Language Learners, Pair students and tell them to imagine that they are members of Congress debating the wisdom of passing the Tonkin Gulf Resolution. Have each pair develop a short dialogue explaining the constitutional issue raised by the Tonkin Gulf Resolution. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct issue.) Ask volunteers to conduct their dialogues for the class. Cooperative Learning U.S. Forces in Vietnam President Johnson soon called for an escalation, or buildup, of U.S. military forces in Vietnam. He ordered the Selective Service, the agency charged with carrying out the military draft, to begin calling up young men to serve in the armed forces. In April 1965 the Selective Service notified 13,700 draftees. The troops. During the war more than 2 million Americans served in Vietnam. In the beginning most were professional soldiers who were already enlisted in the armed forces. As the demand for troops grew, however, more and more draftees were shipped to Vietnam. The average U.S. soldier in Vietnam was younger, poorer, and less educated than those who had served in World War II or in the Korean War. One out of four young men who registered for the draft was excused from service for health reasons. Another 30 percent received non-health-related exemptions or deferments—postponements of service. Most of these were for college enrollment. Mainly because of college deferments, young men from higher- income families were the least likely to be drafted. As a result, poor Americans served in numbers far greater than their proportion in the general population. African Americans and Hispanics served in combat in very high numbers, particularly during the early years of the war. Many served in the most dangerous ground units. As a result, they experienced very high casualty rates. In 1965, for example, African Americans accounted for almost 24 percent of all battle deaths, even though they made up just 11 percent of the U.S. population. The most vivid images of the war show soldiers facing the hardships and terrors of battle. Some confronted the enemy in well-defined battles in the highlands. Others cut their way through the jungle, where they heard but seldom saw the enemy. Still others waded through rice paddies and searched rural villages for guerrillas. Most Americans who went to Vietnam, however, served in support positions such as administration, communications, engineering, medical care, and supply and transportation. They were rarely safe. Enemy rockets and mortars could—and did—strike anywhere. Some 10,000 servicewomen filled noncombat positions in Vietnam, mostly as nurses. Although they did not carry guns into battle, nurses faced the horrors of combat on a daily basis. Edie Meeks described the experience of working as a nurse at a field hospital. t4We really saw the worst of it because the nurses never saw any of the victories. If the Army took a hill, we saw what was left over. I remember one boy who was brought in missing two legs and an arm, and his eyes were bandaged. A general came in later and pinned a Purple Heart on the boy's hospital gown, and the horror of it all was so amazing that it just took my breath away. You thought was this supposed to be an even trade?" —Edie Meeks, quoted in Newsweek, March 8,1999 During the Vietnam War millions of American men received draft registration certificates like this one. interpreting the visual record Nurses. First Lieutenant Elaine Niggemann served at the 24th EVAC Hospital. What is the lieutenant doing? Another 20,000 to 45,000 women worked in civilian capacities, many as volunteers for humanitarian organizations such as the Red Cross. Lyndon B. Johnson in The Triumph and Tragedy of Lyndon Johnson President Johnson on the Draft. The Selective Service System was adminis tered by local draft boards, many of which had only whi people as members. In 1966 President Johnson dedicate himself to improving the equ: ity of the draft and diversifyii draft boards, saying, "We mi continue to ask one form of service—military duty-of ou young men.... The Nation': requirement that men must serve, however, imposes thi: obligation: that in this land equals, men are selected as equals to serve.... A just nation must have the fairesi system that can be devised for making that selection." During the Vietnam War Visual Record Answer Students might answer that she is bandaging an injured soldier's foot. B LEVEL 1: Pair students and tell them to imagine that they are Vietnamese citizens who lived through the war. Have each pair create a list of words describing the war's long-term effects. (Pairs might list words such as death, violence, destruction, and so on.) Ask volunteers to write their words on the chalkboard. Then have pairs use the words on the chalkboard to write topic sentences describing the effects of the war. (Pairs' sentences should note that the war resulted in enormous casualties and destroyed the Vietnamese economy.) Ask volunteers to read their sentences to the class. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning LEVEL 2: Tell students to imagine that they are Vietnamese citizens who lived through the war. Have each student write a poem or a song about the war's long-term effects on Vietnam and the Vietnamese people. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct effects.) Have volunteers read their poems or songs to the class. Students may wish to include their poems or songs in their portfolios. LEVEL 3: Tell students to imagine that they are reporters leaving Vietnam after the cease-fire. Have each student write a short article on the war's long-term effects on Vietnam and the Vietnamese people. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct effects.) Have volunteers read their articles to the class. i Cambodia. In April 1975, Cambodian Communists gained control of Phnom Penh, the country's capital. Pol Pot and other Communist leaders soon declared their intention to purify Cambodian society of outside influences. They proclaimed their victory to be the beginning of a new era and designated the year as "Year Zero." Over the next few years, they tortured and murdered their own people. It is estimated that some 2 million Cambodians died under Pol Pot's rule, which ended in 1978 when Vietnam invaded Cambodia. might the events in Cambodia reveal about the legacy of war in Southeast Asia? ANSWER: Students might suggest that the events reveal that the war disrupted society and made violence a commonplace occurrence. interesting! The war devastated the Vietnamese economy, leaving the nation one of the poorest in the world. At the war's end, per capita income averaged only $100. By the 1990s, per capita income had reached only $200. 1968 For Americans the Vietnam War was over. The long, costly effort to prevent the creation of a united, independent Vietnam under Communist rule had failed. The war had spread to Cambodia and Laos, which had been heavily damaged. However, the predicted collapse of all Southeast Asia—the so-called domino theory—never occurred. Quarrels soon broke out between the Communist leaders of Vietnam and those of China and Cambodia. International communism was not as unified a world force as U.S. policy makers had feared. Sequencing What events led to the end of U.S. involvement in Vietnam? 1969—Paris peace talks: 1972—renewed bornbing; 1973—peace agreement reached and The war devastated the Vietnamese people. According to Saigon government figures, some 185,000 South Vietnamese soldiers died in combat. Estimates pul the number of South Vietnamese civilian dead at nearly 500,000. The exact number of Vietcong and North Vietnamese Army war dead is unknown but may have been near 1 million. In addition, about 800,000 Vietnamese were orphaned, and 181,000 were disabled. Among the disabled were those exposed to chemicals such as Agent Orange. These people have been plagued by high rates of liver cancer and other illnesses. U.S. troops withdraw Effects of the War U.S. Battle Deaths in Vietnam, 1961-1972 Source: The Harper Encyclopedia of Military History Interpreting Graphs The number of Americans who died in Vietnam varied greatly during the years of U.S. military involvement there. H Skills Assessment During which year did the United States suffer the greatest number of battle deaths in Vietnam? Vietnamese refugees. Le Ly Hayslip was one survivor of the Vietnam War. Hayslip was born in a village near Da Nang in 1949 and experienced constant warfare as a child. By the time she was 14, she had been imprisoned by the South Vietnamese government. Suspected of being a revolutionary, Hayslip was tortured and sentenced to death. She escaped, however, and returned home. Surviving as best she could, Hayslip worked in a hospital, as a waitress, and as a black-market vendor. Hayslip's brothers fought on both sides of the war. In 1970 she married a U.S. civilian worker. Soon they fled to the United States. Although she escaped the fighting, she was unable to escape its effects. Hayslip described watching television coverage of Vietnam with her family. Analyzing Primary Sources Identifying Bias How does Hayslip's view of the Vietnamese differ from that of U.S. troops? She is Vietnamese and saw them as her people, not as the enemy. "where the Munros [Hayslip's in-laws] saw faceless Orientals fleeing burning villages, tied up as prisoners, or as rag dolls in a roadside trench (even innocent villagers were "VC" or "Charlie"), I saw my brother Bon Nghe, who fought twenty-five years for the North; my mother's nephew, who was lieutenant for the South; my sister Lan, who hustled drinks to the Americans in Danang; and my on MIAs Remind students that some 2,500 Americans were missing in action at the war's end. Have students conduct research on efforts to honor and commemorate these MIAs. Ask each student to write a short report summarizing his or her research. Have volunteers read their reports to the class. Then conduct a brief discussion on the efforts to honor and commemorate these MIAs. To conclude the lesson, have students create a memorial to the MIAs. Block Scheduling Teackr to Teacher jp Andy Turay of The Bronx, New York, suggested the following activity: Ask students to conduct research comparing and contrasting U.S. involvement in Vietnam with Soviet involvement in Afghanistan. Have each student write a short report presenting his or her research. sister Hai, who shared sleepless nights with my mother in our family bunker at Ky La. I saw floating on the smoke of battle the soul of my dead brother, Sau Ban, victim of an American land mine, and the spirit of my father, who drank acid to avoid involving me again with the Viet Cong terrorists. I saw in those tiny electronic lines, as I saw in my dreams, the ghosts of a hundred relatives, family friends, and playmates who died fighting for this side or that, or merely to survive. " —Le Ly Hayslip, Child of War, Woman of Peace Destruction. The effects of a B-52 bornbing raid are clearly visible in this part of the Vietnamese countryside. What long-term effects do you think the bornb- ing might have had? Shortly after arriving in the United States, Hayslip began writing her memoirs. Published in 1989, her highly acclaimed book, When Heaven and Earth Changed Places, describes growing up in a constant state of war. In 1987 Hayslip created a charitable organization, the East Meets West Foundation, to provide comfort to all victims of the war. The foundation provides assistance to Vietnamese people trying to rebuild their lives. It also helps U.S. veterans cope with the effects of the war. More than 1.5 million Vietnamese like Hayslip fled Vietnam after the tall of Saigon. Desperate to escape economic and social hardships, many braved the rough South China Sea and Gulf of Thailand in tiny, crowded boats. They were joined by thousands of other refugees from Southeast Asia—such as the Hmong (muhng) of Laos—also fleeing grave postwar conditions. More than 730,000 of these refugees have settled in the United States since the war. ✓ READING CHECK: Finding the Main Idea How did the war affect Vietnam and its people? 500,000 South Vietnamese civilians died, 800,000 orphaned; 1.5 million refugees fled Vietnam; more than 730,000 settled in the United States. Vietnam veterans. More than 2 million Americans were involved in the Vietnam War. More than 58,000 of them died, and more than 300,000 were wounded. About 2,500 were missing in action. Improved emergency medical services saved the lives of many U.S. soldiers who had severe wounds that would have been fatal in previous wars. As a result, there were a large number of paralyzed and otherwise severely disabled Vietnam veterans. More than 600 Americans were held as prisoners of war (POWs). Some POWs spent more than six years in North Vietnamese jails, where they endured long periods of solitary confinement and torture. One of the most visible tragedies of the war was the fate of its veterans. No ticker-tape parades celebrated the return of soldiers from the Vietnam conflict. On the contrary, veterans often became targets for the anger, guilt, or shame of fellow citizens frustrated by the war. Many other Americans met the veterans with stony silence. The public's negative reaction enraged and demoralized many veterans. They had faced a life- and-death struggle, obeying orders that they trusted were in their country's best interests. Vietnam veteran Ron Kovic recalled the pain of this lack of support in his 1976 book, Born on the Fourth of July: Ron Kovic (holding flag) led this 1972 protest against the Vietnam War. In the late 1970s the Unite Nations held a conference devise ways of assisting tl boat people. Several natic including the United State agreed to increase the nur of refugees they would act Despite these actions, sot 39,000 Vietnamese lived ii refugee camps as late as 1 isssm TOPIC: Vietnam Veterans Memorial GO TO: go.hrw.com Have students access the Internet through the HRW Go site to conduct researt on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. Then ask each student to create a persor response to the memorial Students' responses should be in a creative form, sud as artwork, fiction, poetry, songwriting. Visual Record Answe Students might note the destruction of the landscat i 10( After completing Section 4, students should be able to: Describe how the American population and family structure changed during the 1970s. Explain why Americans were said to be self-absorbed. List forms of entertainment that were popular in the 1970s. As students enter the classroom, tell them to compile a list of clothing styles, movies, music, slang words, and other elements of popular culture that they believe originated during the 1970s. Ask students which, if any, of these items are still popular today. Tell students that in Section 4 they will learn about popular culture, family life, population changes, and technological developments during the 1970s. Did the way in which Americans commemorated the nation's 200th birthday contribute to the American dream embodied in the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, and the Bill of Rights? Having witnessed, along with all other Americans, the renewed spirit of dedication, patriotism and friendship that flowed across the land on the Bicentennial weekend, it seems to me that the answer is an unqualified [with- out reservation] yes. Americans used the Bicentennial to renew their faith in themselves, to gain knowledge and understanding of their neighbors, and to begin again the quest for liberty, justice, and equality for allV This serving dish was decorated to celebrate the bicentennial. —Edward W. Brooke, quoted in The Bicentennial of the United States of America Senator Edward W. Brooke of Massachusetts praised the celebrations that took place throughout the nation on July 4,1976. For many Americans, the bicentennial celebration provided a welcome break from the anxiety and stress of the decade. A Changing Population American society evolved during the 1970s, both on the national level and within people's homes. Immigration from abroad and migration within the nation's borders changed the makeup and distribution of the population. Americans also experimented with new ways to raise families. Immigration. During the 1970s the U.S. population was greatly affected by continued immigration, mostly from Asia and Latin America. Most Latin American immigrants came from Mexico, but many others came from the Caribbean. In 1980, for example, nearly 120,000 Cubans tied their communist nation for the United States, settling mainly in the Miami area. Having opened the way for emigration after President Nixon's visit, China supplied some of the new Asian population in the United States. Many of these Chinese immigrants were highly skilled and well-educated professionals fleeing political persecution. Despite their backgrounds, many found that discrimination and their difficulty speaking English prevented them from getting jobs that paid well. The experiences of Wei-Chi Poon, a biology professor front China, and her husband, a skilled architect, were typical. Neither knew any English when they immigrated to the United States. As a result, she had to work in a laundry factory for $1.85 per hour, while he took on two low-paying jobs. "We were so busy working and so tired," she recalled. "We had no time and energy to study English." Congress passed two new laws designed to aid such immigrants. The Voting Rights Act of 1975 required states and communities with a large number of H LEVEL 1: Organize students into triads. Have each triad create a collage of images that shows how the American population and family structure changed during the 1970s. (Collages should depict immigration from Asia and Latin America, people moving to the Sunbelt, the rise in single-person households, the rise in divorce, fewer children per family, and the rise in single-parent households.) Display students' collages in the classroom. English Language Learners, Cooperative Learning LEVELS 2 AND 3: Have each student write a short essay that discusses the changes in the American population and family structure during the 1970s. Essays should compare those trends to current trends in population and family structure. (See the Level 1 lesson for the correct changes.) Tell students to evaluate or speculate on whether the trends of the 1970s continue today or whether they have changed. Ask volunteers to read their essays to the class. NOTE: For an additional teaching idea, see the Chapter 34 inner-outer circle lesson in the Creative Teaching Strategies handbook. The Sunbelt. The Sunbelt states continued their phenor enal growth into the 1980s. California's population-the largest in the nation-grew I some 26 percent during the 1980s. During that same tim Florida's population grew nearly 33 percent, moving it from the seventh-most- populous state to the fourth by 1990. The population of Texas grew by about 19 per cent making it the second- most-populous state. might students determine which state experienced the greatest population increase in actual numbers, rather than percentages? ANSWER: Students might point out they would need the states' population data. Because of funding for bilingual education, students can receive instruction in their primary language while they learn English. The Sunbelt Many Americans moved to the Sunbelt states in the 1970s. What do most of the people in this photograph have in common? Visual Record Answer 1033 non-English-speaking residents to print voting materials in various foreign languages. The Bilingual Education Act of 1974 increased funding for public schools to provide instruction to students in their primary languages while they learned English. Some critics opposed bilingual education, which they claimed slowed the adjustment of immigrants to American life. Yet there was little question that the United States was becoming an increasingly multicultural society. Coping with new immigrants remained an important challenge for the country. Rise of the Sunbelt. Americans moved more often in the 1970s than in previous decades. A growing number of Americans migrated from the North and the East, which some people mocked as the Frostbelt. They moved to the Sunbelt states of the South and the West. The Sunbelt states became increasingly important in national politics. This was particularly true of California, Florida, and Texas, where migration caused population growth to outpace that of the rest of the nation. Americans moved to the Sunbelt for a number of reasons. The successes of the civil rights movement of the 1960s made the South a more attractive region in which to live. Some 7 million people moved there between 1970 and 1978. Economic growth spurred by increased defense spending after World War II had created more job opportunities in the region. Some migrants merely sought a warmer climate and a suburban lifestyle. Suburbs were more common and more spacious in the Sunbelt than in the Northeast because of the greater availability of land. Improved technology also encouraged population growth in the Sunbelt. Air conditioning had become widely available, allowing people to tolerate the region's heat. However, not everyone welcomed this development. One Florida woman complained, "I hate air conditioning; it's a[n] ... invention of the Yankees. If they don't like it hot, they can move back up North where they belong." Family life. During the 1970s an increasing number of Americans chose to live alone. By the end of the decade some 22.5 percent of American households included just one person. Men and women waited longer to marry, driving up the average age at marriage. They were also more willing to leave unhappy marriages. This was in part because most states instituted laws that made divorces easier to obtain. The divorce rate continued to rise during the 1970s. There were 5.2 divorces per 1,000 Americans in 1980, up from 2.2 in 1960 and 3.5 in 1970. However, the increase in the divorce rate did not mean that Americans rejected the institution of marriage. In fact, remarriage rates also increased during this period. Attitudes regarding family size also changed. In 1967 some 34 percent of women polled hoped to have four or more children. Four years later, just 15 percent of women polled expressed that desire. Not surprisingly, birthrates dropped sharply, averaging two births per woman. At the peak of the baby boom, the average family had three children. By 1980 that number had dropped to about 1.6 children per family. By tire end of the 1970s the idea of the "average family" had to be revised. Just 15 percent of American families matched the traditional image of a working father and a mother who stayed home to raise the children. During the 1970s the number Students might suggest that most appear to be older and wearing hats. Technology Resources Everyday Life in America Transparency 31: Star Wars: Sign of the Seventie BALL LEVELS: Tell students that many social changes have affected families in the United States during the past two decades. To help students understand the issues that affected family life in the 1990s, copy the graphic- organizer at right on the chalkboard, omitting the italicized answers. Have each student complete the organizer. Ask volunteers to share their answers with the class. To conclude, lead a discussion about what the passage of the Family and Medical Leave Act might reveal about the changing priorities of American society. English Language Learners HOMEWORK Tell students to imagine that it is January 1993 and that they are working parents. Have each student write a letter to his or her congressional representative that describes the issues affecting family life in the 1990s and urges the representative to vote for the Family and Medical Leave Act ^Because of what they see on television, everyone in Jamaica thinks ... that everything in America. It makes people think that money and material wealth are the only ways to be rich in this world." —Jamaican journalist, quoted in Sleepwalking Through History, by Haynes Johnson The shared global culture also had advantages, however. Through orbiting communications satellites, television linked the entire world. Events in one nation were instantly transmitted around the globe. Thus, events like natural disasters often quickly produced a global outpouring of sympathy and help. ✓ READING CHECK: Drawing Conclusions How has American popular culture affected the rest of the world? Some foreigners feared their native culture would be suffocated; others received aid. A New Wave of Immigration Many people in other countries continued to see the United States as a land of opportunity. The 1990 census revealed that more immigrants had come to the United States in the 1980s than in any decade since 1910. More than 80 percent of these immigrants came from Asia, the Caribbean, and Latin America. By the 1990s many native-born Americans had grown alarmed by the wave of immigrants. Many blamed immigrants for talcing jobs from native-born residents. Supporters of immigration argued that immigrants created new businesses that revitalized urban areas and helped the economy. They also noted that many recent immigrants, in particular those from China, India, Korea, and the Philippines, had on average more schooling than native-born Americans or European immigrants. Asian immigrants, they pointed out, made up about one third of the engineers in Silicon Valley, California's center of computer technology, located near San Jose. President George Bush had recognized these benefits when he signed the Immigration Act of 1990. The new law set a permanent limit of 675,000 immigrants per year after 1994. It also doubled the number of skilled workers allowed into the United States each year. The act authorized special visas for overseas investors interested in establishing businesses in economically depressed areas of the country. In the mid-1990s, however, Congress acted to curb new immigration. In 1996 Congress passed an immigration law that strengthened control of U.S. borders in an effort to halt illegal immigration. The law attempted to keep new immigrants off welfare. For example, sponsors of immigrants were required to have incomes at least 125 percent above the poverty level. It also prevented legal immigrants who were not U.S. citizens from receiving most forms of welfare benefits. Religious =Spirit^ The Masjid Omar Al-Khattab mosque in Los Angeles The increase in the number of Asian immigrants led to a growing religious diversity in the United States. By the end of the 1990s Christianity was still by far the most common religion, representing about 84 percent of the U.S. population. However, membership in traditionally Eastern religions such as Buddhism, Hinduism, and Islam was growing. In 1998 Islam had some 5 to 6 million followers in the United States. By 2010 it is expected to overtake Judaism as the nation's second-most-practiced religion. As these religions grew in prominence, so did the number of non-Asian converts. By 1998 more than 80,000 American Muslims were of Western European descent. Buddhism also attracted many non-Asian converts. In many places, American Buddhism evolved into a distinct faith. It moved away from Asian Buddhism's traditional focus on the intense spiritual training of monks and nuns. American Buddhism tends to emphasize the personal spiritual growth of lay members. Some followers argue that such an approach is in keeping with the American democratic traditions. "What American Buddhists are doing," noted one observer in 1997, "is taking a path of enlightenment in a lay culture without priests and temples and structures, and moving it right into daily practice in everyday life." What consequences might filmmakers' choices have for American movie audiences? ANSWER: Students might suggest that American audiences might have fewer opportunities to see films that have meaningful or complex dialogue. In 1996 the United States received more immigrants from Mexico than from any other nation. Some 163,600 Mexicans arrived in the United States that year. Visual Record Answer (for p. 1086) Students might note the sign in the background, which points to a child care center, as well as her business attire. 