Where Foreign-Born Lived, 1900 Applying the Skill Ask students to choose an audio source and prepare an oral history about immigrant experiences. Suggest that students go to the library and check out records or tapes. They might also record interviews with family or friends who have stories to tell about immigrating. Have students present their oral histories to the class. Immigrants and Urbanization 461 Tracing Themes THE WEST INDIES AND MEXICO Between 1880 and 1920, about 260,000 Immigration Around the World Immigration increased around the world during the late 1800s and early 1900s. Between 1850 and 1930, about 6.5 million people Immigrated to Canada from Great Britain and the United States. In the late 1800s, some Chinese immigrants moved to Canada to work on railroad construction. Between 1850 and 1930, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese immigrants settled in Latin America. Instruct: Objective © Life in the New Land • What difficulties did immigrants face on their journey to the United States? From 1892 to 1924, Ellis Island was the chief immigration station in the United States. An estimated 17 million immigrants passed through its noisy, bustling facilities. angel island While European immigrants arriving on the East Coast passed through Ellis Island, Asians—primarily Chinese—arriving on the West Coast gained admission at Angel Island in San Francisco Bay. Between 1910 and 1940, about 50,000 Chinese immigrants entered the United States through Angel Island. Processing at Angel Island stood in contrast to the procedure at Ellis Island, Immigrants endured harsh questioning and a long detention in filthy, ramshackle buildings while they waited to find out whether they would be admitted or rejected. COOPERATION FOR SURVIVAL Once admitted to the country, immigrants faced the challenges of finding a place to live, getting a job, and getting along in daily life while trying to understand an unfamiliar language and culture. Many immigrants sought out people who shared their cultural values, practiced their religion, Ellis Island The buildings on Ellis Island were restored during the 1980s, and the Ellis Island Immigration Museum opened in 1990. One exhibit is a display of belongings that immigrants brought over from their home countries. Steerage passengers were allowed to bring only a hundred pounds of goods. Immigrants had to leave many of their possessions behind. The museum display includes musical instruments, fine lace, tools, books, religious objects, family pictures, and handmade quilts. Many Immigrants, like these arriving at Ellis Island, were subjected to tests such as the one below. Poems About Immigrant Experiences minutes letters or poems based on an imagined immigrant experience students to the difficulties faced by newcomers to a foreign Directions Ask each student to imagine what it would have been like to be an immigrant. Have students create a letter or a poem about their imagined experience. Ask students to describe their feelings and observations and the challenges of being a newcomer. Ask students to share their creative writing with the class. V\ Integrated Assessment • Rubric 5 More About . . . The Generation Gap Immigrant parents were often concerned about passing down a cultural heritage to their children. Often, however, children were eager to fit in and be American and were embarrassed by their parents' traditions. Children sometimes tried to separate from their own cultures by refusing to recite traditional prayers or speak their native languages. Parents were confused and saddened by this behavior. Some wondered if the price of coming to the United States was too high. ^ and spoke their native language. The ethnic communities were life immigrants. People pooled their money to build churches or synagogue formed social clubs and aid societies. They founded orphanages and old homes, and established cemeteries. They even published newspapers in their languages. Committed to their own cultures but also trying hard to grow into their identities, many immigrants came to think of themselves as Americans. As hard as they tried to fit in, these new Polish- and Italian- Chinese-Americans felt increasing friction as they rubbed shoulders born and raised in the United States. Native-born people often disliked the grants' unfamiliar customs and languages, and viewed them as a threat to the American way of life. & © Immigration Restrictions Many native-born Americans thought of their country as a melting pot, a mixture of people of different cultures and races who blended together by abandoning their native languages and customs. Many new immigrants, however, did not wish to give up their cultural identities. As immigration increased, strong anti- immigrant feelings emerged. Immigration Restrictions - What did nativists believe? How did the Chinese Exclusion Act and the Gentleman's Agreement limit Asian immigration? From Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 by U.S. Government More About . . . Nativism and the Anti-Defamation League The Anti-Defamation League [ADL] was established in 1913 by Jewish lawyer Sigmund Livingston in response to nativist beliefs-in particular the emphasis on Anglo-Saxon superiority. The League mandate was "to stop, by appeals of reason and conscience, and if necessary, by appeals to law, the defamation of the Jewish people ... to secure justice and fair treatment to all citizens alike." Since its inception, the ADL has fought discrimination in employment and housing, college admission quotas, and restrictive immigration policies. THE RISE OF NATIVISM One response to the growth in immigration was nativism, or overt favoritism toward native-born Americans. Nativism gave rise to anti-immigrant groups and led to a demand for immigration restrictions. 1 Many nativists believed that Anglo-Saxons—the Germanic ancestors of the English—were superior to other ethnic groups. These nativists did not object to immigrants from the "right" countries. Prescott F. Hall, a founder in 1894 of the Immigration Restriction League, identified desirable immigrants as "British, German, and Scandinavian stock, historically free, energetic, progressive." Nativists thought that problems were caused by immigrants from the "wrong" countries— "Slav, Latin, and Asiatic races, historically down-trodden . . . and stagnant." Nativists sometimes objected more to immigrants' religious beliefs than to their ethnic backgrounds. Many native-born Americans were Protestants and thought that Roman Catholic and Jewish immigrants would undermine the democratic institutions established by the country's Protestant founders. The American Protective Association, a nativist group founded in 1887, launched vicious anti-Catholic attacks, and many colleges, businesses, and social dubs refused to admit Jews. In 1897, Congress—influenced by the Immigration Restriction League—passed a bill requiring a literacy test for immigrants. Those who could not read 40 words in English or their native language would be refused entry. Although President Cleveland vetoed the bill, it was a powerful statement of public sentiment. In 1917, a similar bill would be passed into law' in spite of President Woodrow Wilson's veto. ANTI-ASIAN SENTIMENT Nativism also found a foothold in the labor movement, particularly in the West, where native-born workers feared that jobs would go to Chinese Chinese Immigrants wait outside the hospital on Angel Island In San Francisco Bay, 1910. ▼ Using the Narrative Point out to students that some of the information in this section is presented in first-person quotations, in which new immigrants describe their experiences. Have students find these quotes and identify each speaker and his or her country of origin. Locate the countries on a world map. Work was scarce, and labor "exerted political pressure on the govern- ®r°UPS, restrict Asian immigration. The founder of ^Workingmen's Party, Denis Kearney, headed the the Chinese movement in California. He made hundreds of speeches throughout the state, each Hiding with the message, "The Chinese must go!" In 1882, Congress slammed the door on immigration for ten years by passing the Chinese Exclusion Act. This act banned entry to all Chinese except students, teachers, merchants, tourists, and government officials. In 1892, Congress extended the law for another ten years. In 1902 Chinese immigration was restricted indefinitely the law was not repealed until 1943. THE GENTLEMEN'S AGREEMENT The fears that had led to anti-Chinese agitation were extended to Japanese and other Asian people in the early 1900s. In 1908, the local board of education in San Francisco segregated Japanese children by putting them in separate schools. When Japan raised an angry protest at this treatment of its emigrants, President Theodore Roosevelt worked out a deal. Under the Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907-1908, Japan's government agreed to limit emigration of unskilled workers to the United States in exchange for the repeal of the San Francisco segregation order. Although doorways for immigrants had been all but closed to Asians on the West Coast, cities in the East and the Midwest teemed with European immigrants—and with urban opportunities and challenges. ▲ Fear and resentment of Chinese immigrants sometimes resulted In mob attacks, like the one shown here. Discrimination Against Japanese In the years following the Gentlemen's Agreement, discrimination against Japanese immigrants continued. In 1913, for example, the California legislature passed a bill to deny land ownership to Japanese immigrants. One supporter of the bill warned that "all about us the Asiatics are gaining a foothold." California's Attorney General, Ulysses S. Webb, candidly acknowledged that the measure stemmed from a concern for "race undesirability." Melting pot • nativism •Chinese Exclusion Act •Gentlemen's Agreement •**e 8 diagram such as the one *** List two or more causes of w effect. Effects Immigrants leave their home countries. Immigrants face hardships in the United States. Some nativists want to restrict immigration. Which group of immigrants do you think faced the greatest challenges In the United States? Why? What were the effects of the massive influx of immigrants to the U.S. in the late 1800s? What arguments can you make against nativism and anti-immigrant feeling? Think About: • the personal qualities of immigrants • the reasons for anti-immigrant feeling • the contributions of immigrants to the United States Have students compare the immigration controversy that occurred between 1870 and 1920 and present day immigration controversy. Show the video "From China to Chinatown" again and discuss the immigration issues raised in the film. 1fi\ In-Depth Resources: Unit 4 • Reteaching Activity, p. 45 Immigrants and Urbanization 465 Answers Leaving home countries: poverty, religious persecution, shortage of land, lack of jobs. Hardships: foreign culture, interrogation, detention, discrimination, urban life. Nativist opposition: intolerance, preju dice, economic depression. The Chinese were subjected to interrogation and detention on Angel Island. Nativists pushed for immigration restriction. The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 made it extremely difficult for the Chinese to enter the United States. Rapid urban growth: formation of ethnic communities, rise of nativism and anti- immigrant sentiments, competition for jobs. Immigrants were brave and willing to work hard; there is value in being exposed to many ways of life; nativists themselves were descendants of immigrants. Immigrants and Urbanization 465 Ask students to discuss the meaning of the motto on the presidential seal, "E pluribus unum," or "out of many, one." More About . . . The Statue of Liberty The Statue of Liberty rises 151 feet above the entrance to New York's harbor. Broken shackles lie at her feet. She holds a tablet in her hand that bears the inscription, "July 4, 1776," the date of the Declaration of Independence. The French gave the statue to the United States to commemorate 100 years of American independence from Great Britain. The Statue of Liberty was built in Paris, disassembled, shipped to New York, and put back together. President Grover Cleveland officially dedicated it on October 28, 1886. Diversity and the National Identity Before the first Europeans arrived, a variety of cultural groups_coastal fi h societies, desert farmers, plains and woodland hunters—inhabited. With the arrival of Europeans and Africans, the cultural mix grew more comn^ Although this diversity has often produced tension, it has also been beneficialyu' different groups learned from one another about agriculture, technology, and social customs, American culture became a rich blend of cultures from around the world. 1610s-1870s Spanish missionaries in the Southwest tried t culture upon Native Americans. However, Americans retained aspects of their original t they took on Spanish ways. For example, today ii Indians of New Mexico perform ancient ceremo the Corn Dance, in addition to celebrating the f Catholic saints. Later, the first cowboys Spanish—would introduce to white Americans c techniques developed in Mexico. 1776 The signers of the Declaration of Independence were descendants of immigrants. The founders' ancestors had come to North America in search of economic opportunity and freedom of religious expression. When the Second Continental Congress declared a "United States" in 1776, they acknowledged that the country would contain diverse regions and interests. Thus the founders placed on the presidential seal the motto "E Pluribus Unum"—"out of many, one." twin mi . i 1862-1863 1 At the midpoint of the Civil War, President Abraham L the Emancipation Proclamation, freeing all slaves m" Union that were in rebellion. Although the Prociamation be enforced immediately, it was a strong statement _ to slavery, and it paved the way for African Americans. Recognize the contributions that immigrants have made to the United States. Focus & Motivate Guarneri, Carl and John Higham, eds. Hanging Together: Unity and Diversity in American Culture. Collection of contemporary writings on the issue of diversity in America. America Becoming. Dir. Charles Burnett. USA, 1991. Documents the experience of American newcomers in six cities across the United St** America's Multicultural Ha Educational Video Network. In 1998, three countries (Mexico, China, and India) contributed a third of the total number of immigrants to the United States. The rest of 1998's immigrants came from countries as diverse as Vietnam, Sudan, and Bosnia. American athletes at the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney, Australia, reflected the increasing diversity of the U.S., pointing toward a future in which there may no longer be a majority racial or ethnic group. Predicting Effects Research current U.S. policy on immigration. How might this policy affect cultural diversity? j Write a short editorial from one of the following viewpoints: • U.S. immigration policy needs to change. • U.S. immigration policy should be maintained. Instruct 1. In what ways have Native Americans kept their cultural traditions alive? 2. What is the significance of the Emancipation Proclamation? 3. What immigrant contributions to United States culture are discussed in this section? Ask students to discuss the cultural diversity they observe and experience on a daily basis at school and in the community. More About 21st Century Diversity According to the 2000 census, the United States population is 71 percent Caucasian, 12 percent African American, 12 percent Hispanic, 4 percent Asian, and around 1 percent Native American. In 2050, observers predict that Caucasians will comprise approximately 53 percent of the population, African Americans about 13 percent, Asians close to 9 percent, and Native Americans 1 percent. The greatest increase is expected for Hispanics, who will account for almost 25 percent of the U.S. population by the middle of the century. Immigrants, religious prejudice, mic competition, fear of political or social takeover fear of difference. traditions: Formed close communities, valued heritage, "°Wn beliefs to next generation. Rubrics An editorial should ... For what reasons did a number of Americans move from the country to the cities? ^ Critical Thinking Transparencies CT15 • Urban Growth The Challenges of Urbanization The rapid growth of cities forced people to contend with problems of housing, transportation, water, and sanitation. Consequently, residents of U.S. cities today enjoy vastly improved living conditions. •urbanization •Americanization movement •tenement . •mass transit One American's Story In 1870, at age 21, Jacob Riis left his native Denmark for the United States. Riis found work as a police reporter, a job that took him into some of New York City's worst slums, where he was shocked at the conditions in the overcrowded, airless, filthy tenements. Riis used his talents to expose the hardships of New York City's poor. A Personal Voice jacob riis Be a little careful, please! The hall is dark and you might stumble over the children pitching pennies back there. Not that It would hurt them; kicks and cuffs are their daily diet. They have little else. . . . Close [stuffy]? Yes! What would you have? All the fresh air that ever enters these stairs comes from the hall-door that is forever slamming. . . . Here is a door. Listen! That short hacking cough, that tiny, helpless wail—what do they mean? . . . The child is dying with measles. With half a chance it might have lived; but it had none. That dark bedroom killed it. " —How the Other Malt Lives Making a living in the late 19th and early 20th centuries was not easy. Natural and economic disasters had hit farmers hard in Europe and in the United States, and the promise of industrial jobs drew millions of people to American cities. The urban population exploded from 10 million to 54 million between 1870 and 1920. This growth revitalized the cities but also created serious problems that, as Riis observed, had a powerful impact on the new urban poor. O Urban Opportunities The technological boom in the 19th century contributed to the growing industrial strength of the United States. The result was rapid urbanization, or growth of cities, mostly in the regions of the Northeast and Midwest. Immigrants who the United States in 19th century became city because cities were the t and most convenient places Cities also offered unskilled uborvrs steady jobs in mills and fac- • Bv 1890, there were twice as I Irish residents in New York City Ijto Dublin, Ireland. By 1910, immi- I Kant families made up more than the total population of 18 major ylmerican cities. The Americanization movement was designed to assimilate people of wide-ranging cultures into the dominant culture. This social campaign was sponsored by the government and by concerned citizens. Schools and voluntary associations provided programs to teach immigrants skills needed for citizenship, such as English literacy and American history and government. Subjects such as cooking and social etiquette were included in the curriculum to help the newcomers learn the ways of native-born Americans, it Despite these efforts, many immigrants did not wish to abandon their traditions. Ethnic communities provided the social support of other immigrants from the same country. This enabled them to speak their own language and practice their customs and religion. However, these neighborhoods soon became overcrowded, a problem that was intensified by the arrival of new transplants from America's rural areas. HISTORY from VISUALS Tracing Themes Educational Opportunities To many new immigrants, free education seemed a miracle. One immigrant recalled her father had "brought his children to school as if it were an act of consecration." In school, children learned about American history and government and gained proficiency in English. Many immigrant parents worked during the day and went to school at night. They also had the opportunity to learn English, American history, and the fundamentals of democratic government. Ethnic enclaves of at least 20% of population: Austro-Hungarian, German, Irish, Italian Scandinavian n Nonresidential .... Boundary between Brooklyn and Queens Interpreting the Map Point out that each ethnic group is represented by a different color on the map. Ask students to look at the map and answer the following question: Which of the four areas of New York City appears to have the most diverse population and why might that diversity have occurred there? (Brooklyn: possibly the location of jobs and inexpensive housing. Manhattan: some students may suggest that many immigrants settled in this urban area of New York City) 1. Place What general pattern of settlement do you notice? 2. Movement Which ethnic group settled in the largest area of New York City? MIGRATION FROM COUNTRY TO CITY Rapid improvements in farming technology during the second half of the 19th century were good news for some farmers but bad news for others. Inventions such as the McCormick reaper and the steel plow made farming more efficient but meant that fewer laborers were needed to work the land. As more and more farms merged, many rural people moved to cities to find whatever work they could. Many of the Southern farmers who lost their livelihoods were African Americans. Between 1890 and 1910, about 200,000 African Americans moved north and west, to cities such as Chicago and Detroit, in an effort to escape racial violence, economic hardship, and political oppression. Many found conditions only somewhat better than those they had left behind. Segregation and discrimination were often the reality in Northern cities. Job competition between blacks and white immigrants caused further racial tension. Skillbuilder Answers 1. Immigrants often settled near others of similar backgrounds. 2. Germans Ite In-Depth Resources: Unit 4 • Geography Application, pp. 48-49 • Outline Map, pp. 50-51 ^ Critical Thinking Transparencies CT49 • From County to City, 1870-1920 Immigrants and Urbanization 469 Eng Maps I foe Skill Maps are visual representations of information about areas. When creating a map, students might find it helpful to use aP as a guide. Applying the Skill Ask students to make a map of the United States showing major areas of immigrant settlement. (New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, German settlements in North Dakota, Norwegian settlements in Minnesota, Japanese in California, or Latin Americans in Texas or Florida.) You may want to use your community or state for this activity. In-Depth Resources: Political Machines Despite the tendency of political machines for corruption and graft, some scholars insist they also served a worthwhile purpose. Political observer Frank Sorauf remarked, "In its fabled heyday the urban machine in America offered the new arrivals to the cities a range of services that made it, in contemporary terms, a combination of employment agency, legal aid society, social worker, domestic relations counselor, and community social center. And in the new style, urban 'club' parties in the American cities and suburbs, the parties cater to the social and intellectual needs of a mobile, educated, ideological, often isolated upper middle class." More About . . . The Pendergast Family After his wife's death in 1905, "Big Jim" Pendergast lost interest in politics. In 1910, he gave his younger brother, Tom, control of the Democratic Party. Under Tom's leadership, the Kansas City political machine reached its height of power and corruption. Alcohol flowed despite Prohibition, gambling flourished, and elections were rigged. Tom was strong as a leader but weak when it came to gambling. In 1939, he was charged with failing to pay taxes on bribe money he had used to pay off gambling debts. Tom Pendergast served 15 months in prison, after which he lived out the rest of his life quietly at his home. A corrupt 19th- century boss robs treasury by easily cutting government red tape, or bureaucracy. THE POLITICAL MACHINE An organized group that controlled the activities a political party in a city, the political machine also offered services to vmd and businesses in exchange for political or financial support. In the decani after the Civil War, political machines gained control of local government® Baltimore, New York, San Francisco, and other major cities. The machine was organized like a pyramid. At the pyramid's base were ioca. precinct workers and captains, who tried to gain voters' support on a city block in a neighborhood and who reported to a ward boss. At election time, the ward boa worked to secure the vote in all the precincts in the ward, or electoral district. Ward bosses helped the poor and gained their votes by doing favors or providing services As Martin Lomasney, elected ward boss of Boston's West End in 1885, explained "There's got to be in every ward somebody that any bloke can come to . . . and get help. Help, you understand; none of your law and your justice, but help." At the top of the pyramid was the city boss, who controlled the activities of the political party throughout the city. Precinct captains, ward bosses, and the city boss worked together to elect their candidates and guarantee the success of the machine. Ai THE ROLE OF THE POLITICAL BOSS Whether or not the boss officially served as mayor, he controlled access to municipal jobs and business licenses, and influenced the courts and other municipal agencies. Bosses like Roscoe Conkling in New York used their power to build parks, sewer systems, and waterworks, and gave money to schools, hospitals, and orphanages. Bosses could also provide government support for new businesses, a service for which they were often paid extremely well. It was not only money that motivated city bosses. By solving urban problems, bosses could reinforce voters' loyalty', win additional political support, and extend their influence. IMMIGRANTS AND THE MACHINE Many precint captains and political bosses were first- generation or second-generation immigrants. Few were educated beyond grammar school. They entered politics early and worked their way up from the bottom. They could speak to immigrants in their own language and understood the challenges that newcomers faced. More important, the bosses were able to provide solutions. The machines helped immigrants with naturalization (attaining full citizenship), housing, and jobs—the newcomers' most pressing needs. In return, the immigrants provided what the political bosses needed—votes. S' "Big Jim" Pendergast, an Irish-American saloonkeeper, worked his way up from precinct captain to Democratic city boss in Kansas City by aiding Italian, African-American, and Irish voters in his ward. By 1900, he controlled Missouri state politics as well. A Personal Voice james pendergast "I've been called a boss. All there Is to it is having friends, doing things for people, and then later on they'll do things for you. . . . You can't coerce people into doing things for you—you can't make them vote for you. I never coerced anybody In my life. Wherever you see a man bulldozing anybody he don't last long. —quoted In The Pendergast Machine 474 Chapter 15 Writing a Biography Have interested students research and write a biographical sketch about one of the people mentioned on pages 474 and 475. Students should use the Internet and other resource materials. Encourage students to include quotes in their sketches. !s\ Integrated Assessment • Rubrics 1, 5 474 Chapter 15 Immigrant Education Education was a vital resource for millions of immigrants who came to America from 1880 to 1920. Immigrant children attended school by day. Parents had the opportunity to take adult education courses at night or to participate in Americanization programs at work. Immigrants were also indirectly assimilated into American culture through their experiences in labor unions and political organizations. Encourage students to offer their own definitions of Americanization and to discuss its historical importance. Technology and Schools Evaluating Have students discuss the role of computers in the classroom. Do they think computers are overrated? How might computers be educational tools? Are computers an essential part of the classroom? Instruct: Objective Q Expanding Higher Education - What changes did many universities make in their curriculum and why? ' How did African Americans work to gain a higher education? RACIAL DISCRIMINATION African Americans were mostly excluded from u lie secondary education. In 1890, fewer than I percent of black teenagers attend ed high school. More than two-thirds of these students went to private schools' which received no government financial support. By 1910, about 3 percent of African Americans between the ages of 15 and 19 attended high school, but majority of these students still attended private schools. EDUCATION FOR IMMIGRANTS Unlike African Americans, immigrants were encouraged to go to school. Of the nearly 10 million European immigrants set tied in the United States between 1860 and 1890, many were Jewish people flee ing poverty and systematic oppression in eastern Europe. Most immigrants sent their children to America's free public schools, where they quickly became "Americanized." Years after she became a citizen, the Russian Jewish immigrant Mary Antin recalled the large numbers of non-English-speaking immigrant children. By the end of the school year, they could recite "patriotic verses in honor of George Washington and Abraham Lincoln . . . with plenty of enthusiasm." Some people resented the suppression of their native languages in favor of English. Catholics were especially concerned because many public school systems had mandatory readings from the (Protestant) King James Version of the Bible. Catholic communities often set up parochial schools to give their children a Catholic education. Thousands of adult immigrants attended night school to learn English and to qualify for American citizenship. Employers often offered daytime programs to Americanize their svorkers. At his Model T plant in ffighland Park, Michigan, Henry Lord established a "Sociology Department," because "men of many nations must be taught American ways, the English language, and the right way to live." ford's ideas were not universally accepted. Labor activists often protested that Ford's educational goals were aimed at weakening the trade union movement by teaching workers not to confront management. In 1922, Thomas Alva Edison wrote, "I believe that the motion picture is destined to revolutionize our educational system and that in a few years it will supplant. . . the use of textbooks." Today's high schools show that the brilliant inventor was mistaken. Recently, some people have predicted that computers will replace traditional classrooms and texts. Computers allow video course- sharing, in which students in many schools view the same Instructors. Students also use computers to access up-to-the- minute scientific data, such as weather information. Expanding Higher Education Q Although the number of students attending high school had increased by the turn of the century, only a minority of Americans had high school diplomas. At the same time, an even smaller minority—only 2.3 percent—of America's young people attended colleges and universities. CHANGES IN UNIVERSITIES Between 1880 and 1920, college enrollments more than quadrupled. And colleges instituted major changes in curricula and admission policies. Industrial development changed the nation's educational needs. The research university emerged—offering courses m modern languages, the physical sciences, and the new disciplines of psycholog)' and sociology. Professional schools in law and medicine were established. Private colleges and universities required entrance exams, but some state universities began to admit students by using the high school diploma as the entrance requirement. HIGHER EDUCATION FOR AFRICAN AMERICANS After the Civil War, thousands of freed African Americans pursued higher education, despite their exclusion from white institutions. With the help of the Freedmen's Bureau and other groups, blacks founded Howard, Atlanta, and Fisk Universities, all of which opene 490 Chapter 16 Reforming Public Education Class Time 45 minutes Task Creating a plan to reform turn of the 20th century public schools Purpose To understand the methods and goals of educational reformers at the turn of the 20th century Directions Have students work in groups of five or six. Each 6roU^ a school board at the turn of the 20th century. They are to their school district. Student plans should account for factors influx of immigrant children, increasing school age populations, jobs available in their area. Du Bois Have students discuss each scholar's approach to the struggle for racial equality. What were the differences and the similarities between their views on the politics of race in America? (Both were leaders in the struggle to end racial discrimination. Both favored higher education for African Americans. But Washington advocated a gradual approach to change while Du Bois called for a more immediate end to racial injustice.) What were the difficulties that Mexicans encountered in the United States? How were Chinese immigrants treated? lt\ In-Depth Resources: Unit 4 • Guided Reading, p. 63 More About . . . Segregated Neighborhoods Harlem, in New York City, would become a famous African-American neighborhood in the early 20th century. Even before the city's first subway line opened in 1904, real-estate speculators began building apartments there, hoping to appeal to middle class whites. When the middle class did not arrive, Philip A. Payton, an African-American developer, stepped in and promised high rents to landlords who would allow African-American tenants. Soon, despite the higher rents, African Americans began moving to Harlem. For many, Harlem was to be a cultural mecca and a home. DISCRIMINATION IN THE NORTH Most African Americans lived in the segregated South, but by 1900, a number of blacks had moved to Northern cities. Many blacks migrated to Northern cities in search of better-paying jobs and social equality. But after their arrival, African Americans found that there was racial discrimination in the North as well. African Americans found themselves forced into segregated neighborhoods. They also faced discrimination in the workplace. Labor unions often discouraged black membership, and employers hired African-American labor only as a last resort and fired blacks before white employees. Sometimes the competition between African Americans and working-class whites became violent, as in the New York City race riot of 1900. Violence erupted after a young black man, believing that his wife was being mistreated by a white policeman, killed the policeman. Word of the killing spread, and whites retaliated by attacking blacks. Northern blacks, however, were not alone in facing discrimination. Non-whites in the West also faced oppression. £/ Booker T. Washington argued for a gradual approach to racial equality—suggesting that "it Is at the bottom of life we must begin, and not at the top." Ten years later. W. E. B. Du Bois denounced this view of gradual equality. Du Bois demanded full social and economic equality for African Americans, declaring that "persistent manly agitation is the way to liberty." In 1909 the Niagara Movement, founded by Du Bois in 1905, became the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), with Du Bois as the editor of its journal, The Crisis. He wrote, "We refuse to surrender. . . leadership ... to cowards and trucklers. We are men: we will be treated as men." The NAACP continues the fight for racial equality today. 0 Discrimination in the West Western communities were home to people of many backgrounds working and living side by side. Native Americans still lived in the Western territories claimed by the United States. Asian immigrants went to America's Pacific Coast in search of wealth and work. Mexicans continued to inhabit the American Southwest. African Americans were also present, especially in former slave-holding areas, such as Texas. Still, racial tensions often made life difficult. MEXICAN WORKERS In the late 1800s, the railroads hired more Mexicans than members of any other ethnic group to construct rail lines in the Southwest. 494 Chapter 16 Debating Discrimination Class Time 45 minutes Task Investigating racism in the early 20th century Purpose To understand the role of racism in American society in the early 20th century Directions Groups of four or five students should conduct research at,oU topics as racial discrimination against African Americans, African-Amen ers. or segregation in the early 20th century. (Examples-P/essy v Fergd Crow laws, debt peonage, W. E. B. Du Bois, Ida B. Wells, Booker T. Wash representative from each group should present the group's findings aS a class discussion on the role of racism in American society in the early2 494 Chapter 16 | Mexicans were accustomed to the region's hot, dry climate. Hut the work was grueling and the railroads made them work for less money than other ethnic groups. Mexicans were also vital to the development of mining and agriculture in the Southwest. When the 1902 National Reclamation Act gave government assistance for irrigation projects, many southwest desert areas bloomed. Mexican workers became the major labor force in the agricultural industries of the region. Some Mexicans, however, as well as African Americans in the Southwest, were forced into debt peonage, a system that bound laborers into slavery in order to Work off a debt to the employer. Not until 1911 did the Supreme Court declare involuntary peonage a violation of the Thirteenth Amendment. Mexican track workers tor the Southern Pacific railroad posed for this group photo taken sometime between 1910 and 1915. Chinese Exclusion In 1882, Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act, which prohibited virtually any more Chinese immigrants from entering the United States and suspended naturalization for those already in the country. In 1892, legislators extended the law for another ten years. In 1902, it was extended indefinitely. Congress finally repealed the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1943. Assess & Reteach EXCLUDING THE CHINESE By 1880, more than 100,000 Chinese immigrants lived in the United States. White people's fear of job competition with the Chinese immigrants often pushed the Chinese Into segregated schools and neighborhoods. Strong opposition to Chinese immigration developed, and not only in the West, (See Chinese Exclusion Act, page 465.) Racial discrimination posed terrible legal and economic problems for nonwhites throughout the United States at the turn of the century. More people, however, whites in particular, had leisure time for new recreational activities, as well as money to spend on a growing arrray of consumer products. For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. Wells -grandfather clause -Jim Crow laws dtu -debt peonage segregation • Plessy v. Ferguson section, and find five key is 1900 Event BrrJ?!.theSe events d0 think "fst important? Why? How did segregation and discrimination affect the lives of African Americans at the turn of the 20th century? What did some African-American leaders do to fight discrimination? How did the challenges and opportunities for Mexicans in the United States differ from those for African Americans? Think About: • the types of work available to each group • the effects of government policies on each group • the effect of the legal system on each group Life at the Turn of the 20th Century 495 Have students volunteer to lead a class discussion on questions 4 and 5. !^\ Formal Assessment • Section Quiz, p. 275 Have students make a two-column chart on the topic of segregation and racial discrimination at the turn of the 20th century. In the left column, have students list what they already knew; in the right column, what they learned in the section. Review regional variations of race relations, discrimination, and segregation. Refer to each section for specific examples. Ida B. Wells' anti-lynching campaign; Booker T. Washington and W. E. B. Du Bois emerge as leaders. 1896: Plessy v. Ferguson 1900: New York City race riot, early 1900s: Mexicans settle in Southwest. African Americans were victimized by voting restrictions, Jim Crow laws, and the "separate but equal" doctrine established by Plessy v. Ferguson. Ida B. Wells fought lynching; Homer Plessy took his case to the Supreme Court; Booker T. Washington advocated a gradual approach to racial equality; W. E. B. Du Bois founded the NAACP. Answers will vary but should indicate that Mexicans in the United States faced discrimination but it was not legalized, and that there were job opportunities but they were low-paying. Life at the Turn of the 20th Century 495 Telephone Operators Making Inferences Ask students to research the issue of gender pay inequity. Are women still paid less than men? What reasons might there be for pay differences? Instruct: Objective Q Women Lead Reform • How did the opening of women's colleges help create new opportunities for women? • Why were there women leaders in the movements to reform social welfare, public morals, and race relations? ■ How did Susan B. Anthony help the cause of women? "The Status of Woman" by Susan B. Anthony, p. 18 Today, when Americans use the telephone, an automated voice often greets them with instructions about which buttons to press. In the 19th century, every telephone call had to be handled by a telephone operator, a person who connected wires through a switchboard. Young men, the first telephone operators, proved unsatisfactory. Patrons complained that the male operators used profane language and talked back to callers. Women soon largely replaced men as telephone operators, and were willing to accept the ten-dol- lar weekly wage. Department stores advertised shopping by telephone as a convenience. One ad in the Chicago telephone book of 1904 declared. "Every [telephone] order, inquiry, or request will be quickly and intelligently cared for." The ad pictured a line of female telephone operators. one out of five American women held jobs; 25 percent of them worked in manufacturing. The garment trade claimed about half of all women industrial workers. They typically held the least skilled posl- tions, however, and received only about half as much money as their male counterparts or less. Many of these women were single and were assumed to be supporting only themselves, while men were assumed to be supporting families. Women also began to fill new jobs in offices, stores, and classrooms. These jobs required a high school education, and by 1890, women high school graduates outnumbered men. Moreover, new' business schools were preparing bookkeepers and stenographers, as well as training female typists to operate the new machines, DOMESTIC WORKERS Many women without formal education or industrial skills contributed to the economic survival of their families by doing domestic work, such as cleaning for other families. After almost 2 million African- American women were freed from slavery, poverty quickly drove nearly half of them into the work force. They worked on farms and as domestic workers, and migrated by the thousands to big cities for jobs as cooks, laundresses, scrub- women, and maids. Altogether, roughly 70 percent of women employed in 1870 u'ere servants. pos" StKOf types tlK*" Unmarried immigrant women also did domestic labor, especially when they first arrived in the United States. Many married immigrant women contributed to the family income by taking in piecework or caring for boarders at home. Women Lead Reform Dangerous conditions, low wages, and long hours led many female industrial workers to push for reforms. Their ranks grew after 146 workers, mostly young women, died in a 1911 fire in the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory in New York City- Middle- and upper-class women also entered the public sphere. By 1910, womens clubs, at which these women discussed art or literature, were nearly half a milli°n strong. These clubs sometimes grew' into reform groups that addressed issues such as temperance or child labor. WOMEN IN HIGHER EDUCATION Many of the women who became active in public life in the late 19th century had attended the new women's colleges. Vassar Chaffer 17 Charting Events Help students follow the development of the woman suffrage movement. Have them create a chart with two columns. They should label the narrow left-hand column, Date, and the wider right-hand column, Event. For the first date and event, have students write in 1848 and First women's rights convention in Seneca Falls, NY. Help students fill In the chart with the most important events as they read. con r ij a m en 1 7 inn ti/fiiifiii 3 Creel's propaganda campaign was highly effective. However, while the Ei igd promoted patriotism, it also inflamed hatred and violations of the civil c^P3 f eertain ethnic groups and opponents of the war. liberties vi Q Attacks on Civil Liberties Increase ^ in 1917, President Wilson expressed his fears about the consequences of war hysteria 'A Personal Voice woodrow wilson Once lead this people into war and they'll forget there ever was such a thing 3$ tolerance. To fight you must be brutal and ruthless, and the spirit of ruthless brutality will enter into the very fiber of our national life, Infecting Congress, the courts, the policeman on the beat, the man in the street. How did the Espionage and Sedition Acts affect civil liberties in the United States? ANTI-IMMIGRANT HYSTERIA The main targets of these attacks were PJy Americans who had emigrated from other nations, especially those from Germany and Austria-Hungary. The most bitter attacks were directed against the nearly 2 million Americans who had been born in Germany, but other foreign- born persons and Americans of German descent suffered as well. & Many Americans with German names lost their jobs. Orchestras refused to play the music of Mozart, Bach, Beethoven, and Brahms. Some towns with German names changed them. Schools stopped teaching the German language, anti librarians removed books by German authors from the shelves. In June 1917 Congress passed Espionage Act, and in May 1918 it passed the Sedition Act. Under the F.mi"_T* and Sedition Acts a person could be fined up to $10,000 and sentenced to2n years in jail for interfering with the war effort or for saying anything disloyal n fane, or abusive about the government or the war effort. Like the Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798, these laws clearly violated the spir it of the First Amendment. Their passage led to over 2,000 prosecutions for loosely defined antiwar activities; of these, over half resulted in convictions Newspapers and magazines that opposed the war or criticized any of the Allies lost their mailing privileges. T he House of Representatives refused to seat Victor Berger, a socialist congressman from Wisconsin, because of his antiwar views Columbia University fired a distinguished psychologist because he opposed the war. A colleague who supported the war thereupon resigned in protest, saying "If we have to suppress everything we don't like to hear, this country is resting on a pretty wobbly basis." The Espionage and Sedition Acts targeted socialists and labor leaders. Eugene V. Debs was handed a ten-year prison sentence for speaking out against the war and the draft. The anarchist Emma Goldman received a two-year prison sentence and a $10,000 fine for organizing the No Conscription League. When she left jail, the authorities deported her to Russia. "Big Bill" Haywood and other leaders of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) were accused of sabotaging the war effort because they urged workers to strike for better conditions and higher pay. Haywood was sentenced to a long prison term. (He later skipped bail and fled to Russia.) Under such federal pressure, the IWW faded away. B) The War Encourages Social Change luhaq Hint, Wars often unleash powerful social forces. The period of World War I was no exception; important changes transformed the lives of African Americans and women. AFRICAN AMERICANS AND THE WAR Black public opinion about the war was divided. On one side were people like W. E. B. Du Bois, who believed that blacks should support the war effort. A Personal Voice w. e. b. du bois That which the German power represents today spells death to the aspirations of Negroes and all darker races for equality, freedom and democracy. ... Let us, while this war lasts, forget our special grievances and close our ranks shoulder to shoulder with our own white fellow citizens and the allied nations that are fighting for democracy. —'Close Ranks' W. E. B. Du Bois ► 598 Chapter 19 Conducting a Trial Have a group of interested students get together and conduct a mock trial of an American citizen accused of antiwar activities such as an immigrant to the United States. Students should prepare arguments for why this individual is guilty or innocent of antiwar activities. Arguments should be logical and clearly expressed, using standard grammar and sentence structure as though students were in a real courtroom. Each student in the group can assume one of the following roles and present the trial to the rest of the class. 598 Chapter 19 Bois believed that African-American support for the war would strength- L n for racial justice. In contrast, William Monroe Trotter, founder of the e" C Guardian, believed that victims of racism should not support a racist gov| g05t°" lrotter condemned Du Bois's accommodationist approach and favored *nUpSt instead. Nevertheless, despite grievances over continued racial inequality United States, most African Americans backed the war. GREAT MIGRATION In concrete terms, the greatest effect of the First World w on African Americans' lives was that it accelerated the Great Migration, at| crale movement of hundreds of thousands of Southern blacks to cities the the North. This great population shift had already begun before the war in the late 19**' century, when African Americans trickled northward to escape the Jim Crow South—but after the turn of the century, the trickle became a tidal wave. Several factors contributed to the tremendous increase in black migration, first many African Americans sought to escape racial discrimination in the South, which made it hard to make a living and often threatened their lives. Also, a boll weevil infestation, aided by floods and droughts, had ruined much of the South's cotton fields. In the North, there were more job opportunities. For example, Henry Ford opened his automobile assembly line to black workers in 1914. The outbreak of World War I and the drop in European immigration increased job opportunities for African Americans in steel mills, munitions plants, and stockyards. Northern manufacturers sent recruiting agents to distribute free railroad passes through the South. In addition, the publisher of the black-owned newspaper Chicago Defender bornbarded Southern blacks with articles contrasting Dixieland lynchings with the prosperity of African Americans in the North. History Through (1940-41) This painting by Jacob Lawrence shows three of the most common destinations for African Americans leaving the South. Why do you think the artist has not shown any individual facial features? The First World War 599 jENTlATING INSTRUCTION • Main Ideas focus students' attention and set a purpose for reading, write the °m this section on the board and identify them as Main Ideas (Ml). As e section together, have students identify the important details (D) that ac,) main idea. Write them in an outline format, such as the example *s. 'ar encourages social change, especially for African Americans and D. The war accelerated the movement of African Americans to the North, called the Great Migration. D. Women moved into jobs that had been held exclusively by men. D. The service of women helped bolster public support for woman suffrage, leading to the ratification of the 19th Amendment, D. An international flu epidemic affected about one-fourth of the U.S. population, killing about 500,000 Americans during 1918-1919. Africa n Americans backed the war. Tracing Themes The Great Migration Although migrants faced many challenges, employment in the North did offer an escape from sharecropping, boll weevil infestations, floods, lynchings, and political disenfranchisement in the South. One man wrote to a friend back in Mississippi: 'I just begin to feel like a man.... I don't have to humble to no one. I have registered. Will vote in the next election." History Through Art Jacob Lawrence's parents were part of the Great Migration. His father moved north from South Carolina, and his mother migrated from Virginia. They met during their journey north, and in 1917, Lawrence was born in Atlantic City, New Jersey. As he grew up, he began to see how the story of his life fit into the history of African Americans. In 1940, he began a series of paintings on the Great Migration. The series is intended to show the "triumph over adversity" of African Americans who "left the South on a quest for freedom, justice, and dignity." (The artist wanted to represent not individuals but an entire people on the move.) The First World War 599 Race Riots Discuss current race relations and racial prejudice in the United States. Ask students to think about the race riots of 1917 and 1919. How do these events relate to race relations in the United States today? (Some students may say that race relations have gotten much better since 1919 and may point to civil rights laws as evidence. Others may say that racism continues to exist.) More About . . . Women in the War Men went off to war, and women went to work in their place. The army did not allow women to enlist as soldiers, but did allow them to serve in noncombat roles such as nurses and ambulance drivers. At home, the industrial war effort created an enormous demand for labor. Women volunteered and were recruited to work in industry, agriculture, wherever they were needed. As the role of women in the workplace began to shift, a parallel shift in their social status occurred. Racial prejudice against African Americans in the North sometimes took violent forms. In July 1917, a race rtot exploded in East St. Louis, Illinois. White workers, furtous over the hiring of African Amertcans as strtkebreakers at a munitions plant, rampaged through the streets. Forty blacks and nine whites died. Another riot erupted in July 1919 in Chicago when a 17-year- old African Amertcan swam from the water off a "black beach" to the water off a "white beach." There, white bathers threw rocks at him until he drowned. African Americans retaliated, and several riots broke out in the city. Order was restored after several days of violence that involved about 10,000 people. However, racial prejudice against African Anterii --- existed in the North. Chicago, New York, and Philadelphia. Author Wright described the great exodus. Hicham A Personal Voice richard wright We are bitter no more; we are leaving! We are leaving homes, pulling up stakes to move on. We look up at the01*' high southern sky and remember all the sunshine and all the rain and we feel a sense of loss, but we are leaving. We look out at the wide green fields which our eyes saw when we first came into the world and we feel full of regret, but we are leaving. We scan the kind black faces we have looked upon since we first saw the light of day and, though pain Is In our hearts, we are leaving. We take one last furtive look over our shoulders to the Big House- high upon a hill beyond the railroad tracks—where the Lord of the Land lives, and we feel glad, for we are leaving. 'quoted in 12 Million Black V"ees WOMEN IN THE WAR While African Americans began new lives, women moved into jobs that had been held exclusively by men. They became railroad workers, cooks, dockworkers, and bricklayers. They mined coal and took part in shipbuilding. At the same time, women continued to fill more traditional jobs as nurses, clerks, and teachers. Many women worked as volunteers, serving at Red Cross facilities and encouraging the sale of bonds and the planting of victory gardens. Other women, such as Jane Addams, were active in the peace movement. Addams helped found the Women's Peace Party in 1915 and remained a pacifist even after the United States entered the war. President Wilson acknowledged, "The services of women during the supreme crisis have been of the most signal usefulness and distinction; it is high time that part of our debt should be acknowledged." While acknowledgment of that debt did not include equal pay for equal work, it did help bolster public support for woman suffrage. In 1919, Congress finally passed the Nineteenth Amendment, granting women the right to vote. In 1920 the amendment was ratified by the states. Women worked ► in a variety of jobs during the war. Here, women assemble an aircraft wing. Writing a Journal Class Time 30 minutes Task Creating a journal entry from a historical perspective Purpose To describe the experiences of African Americans who migrated north during the war for* Directions Pose the following scenario: In an old trunk at a fl®a ^ have found the journal of an African American who participated I*1 Migration. Ask them to consider the thoughts and feelings such have had at the time-why they left the South, what they were North, and what they found when they got there. Then have the entries that the migrant's journal might have contained, describinf> the journal entries to frame a discussion about the Great Migra,lon' m Integrated Assessment • Rubric 5 600 Chapter 19 (Summarize the reaction in the United States to the perceived threat of communism. | Analyze the causes and effects of the quota system in the United States. I Describe some of the postwar conflicts between labor and management. Seventy-thousand radicals joined, including some from the Industrial Workers of the World (1WW). When several dozen bornbs were mailed to government and business leaders, the public grew fearful that the Communists were taking over. U.S. Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer took action to combat this "Red Scare." A Personal Voice a. mitchell palmer The blaze of revolution was sweeping over every American institution of law and order.... eating its way into the homes of the American workman, its sharp tongues of revolutionary heat. . . licking the altars of the churches, leaping into the belfry of the school bell, crawling into the sacred corners of American homes, . . . burning up the foundations of society. —"The Case Against the Reds' ^C.ONOM/c The first Communist government in Russia was based on the teachings of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. In 1848, these two had published The Communist Manifesto, which outlined a theory of class struggle. It said that a class that had economic power also had social and political power. It also said that two classes, the "haves" and the "have-nots," have struggled tor control throughout history. During the Industrial Revolution, Communists believed, the struggle was between the capitalists, who owned capital—land, money, and machinery— and workers, who owned only their labor. Marx and Engels urged workers to seize political power and the means of production. Ultimately, they believed, laborers would overthrow capitalism In all industrialized nations. THE PALMER RAIDS In August 1919, Palmer appointed J. Edgar Hoover as his special assistant. Palmer, Hoover, and their agents hunted down suspected Communists, socialists, and anarchists—people who opposed any form of government. They trampled people's civil rights, invading private homes and offices and jailing suspects without allowing them legal counsel. Hundreds of foreign- born radicals were deported without trials. But Palmer's raids failed to turn up evidence of a revolutionary conspiracy— or even explosives. Many thought Palmer was just looking for a campaign issue to gain support for his presidential aspirations. Soon, the public decided that Palmer didn't know what he was talking about. Although short-lived, the Red Scare fed people's suspicions of foreigners and immigrants. This nativist attitude led to ruined reputations and wrecked lives. The two most famous victims of this attitude were Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, a shoemaker and a fish peddler. Both were Italian immigrants and anarchists; both had evaded the draft during World War I. In May 1920, Sacco and Vanzetti were arrested and charged with the robbery and murder of a factory paymaster and his guard in South Braintree, Massachusetts. Witnesses had said the criminals appeared to be Italians. The accused asserted their innocence and provided alibis; the evidence against them was circumstantial; and the presiding judge made prejudicial remarks. Nevertheless, the jury still found them guilty and sentenced them to death. Roots of Communism The American Communist Party firmly believed in the possibility of revolution in the United States. Ambitious politicians used the perceived threat of communist revolt as justification for their attacks on radicals and labor activists. Such attacks, which created a climate of fear and repression, served to maintain the status quo. More About . . . The Palmer Raids The Palmer Raids occurred between 1919 and 1920. After Palmer's house was bornbed on June 2,1919, the raids intensified. Union offices and headquarters of communist and socialist organizations were the targets. Attorney General Palmer also focused on aliens, since they had fewer rights. The most famous raid took place in December 1919, when 249 resident aliens were rounded up and placed on board the ship Buford, headed for the Soviet Union. <S> Electronic Library of Primary Resources • Instructions Regarding Conduct on Raids, 1920 by U.S. Dept, of Justice. How did the Ku Klux Klan regard foreign-born Americans? • What was the quota system? In-Depth Resources: Unit 6 • Guided Reading, p. 1 <$> Electronic Library of Primary Sources • from A Letter Regarding Immigration, 1924 by L. Marshall —quoted In The National Experience In 1961, new ballistics tests showed that the pistol found on Sacco was in fact the one used to murder the guard. However, there was no proof that Sacco had actually pulled the trigger. O Limiting Immigration During the wave of nativist sentiment, "Keep America for Americans" became the prevailing attitude. Anti-immigrant attitudes had been growing in the United States ever since the 1880s, when new immigrants began arriving from southern and eastern Europe. Many of these immigrants were willing to work for low wages in industries such as coal mining, steel production, and textiles. But after World War I, the need for unskilled labor in the United States decreased. Nativists believed that because the United States now had fewer unskilled jobs available, fewer immigrants should be let into the country. Nativist feelings were fueled by 620 Chapter 20 Staging a Retrial for Sacco and Vanzetti Class Time Two class periods Task Researching the Sacco and Vanzetti case and staging a trial for the accused Purpose To study the historical record of the Sacco and Vanzetti case and develop a feeling for the issues involved Directions During the first day, and as homework, have students research the case and take notes on the evidence presented at the trial. 620 Chapter 20 During the second class period, assign groups to the prosecution and defenS* teams, and appoint a judge and jury. Stage a retrial of the accused. Allow both teams to present their evidence^ Encourage the judge to make sure all arguments are heard. Once the juO heard all the evidence, have them render their verdict. H Conduct a post-trial discussion in which all participants explain what* ence was like for them. %\ Integrated Assessment • Rubric 3 History from Visuals Reading the Graph The bar graph drastically illustrates the sharp reduction in European immigration between 1921 and 1929. Ask students how the reduction in immigration affected political life in the countries shown on the map. (It might have increased political and economic tension in those countries, since people who wanted to immigrate to the United States were not able to.) More About . . . Quota System It is interesting to compare the economic and political climates of the 1920s and 1950s. Immigration restrictions were enacted during both decades. The Emergency Quota Act of 1921 created the quota system. In the 1950s, the McCarran-Walter Act of 1952 reinforced restrictions on immigration and established a system for screening out communists and deporting suspected subversives. Labor conflicts and anti-communist sentiments influenced the political climate in both the Twenties and the Fifties. ^ Critical Thinking Transparency CT20. Which geographical areas show the sharpest decline in immigration to the U.S. between 1921 and 1929? What are the only areas to register an increase in immigration to the U.S.? 2. How did the quota system affect where immigrants came from? 622 Chapter 20 Family Mobility Class Time 45 minutes Task Creating a chart showing American states and foreign countries in which students' families originally lived Purpose To describe the mobility of Americans and the diversity of the American population In class, have students list the states and/or countries in which their lived, and create a visual presentation of the results. They could use the family tree, a web, or another diagram of their own design. Display the have students who wish to do so discuss their diagrams. Directions As homework, ask students to find out where their ancestors originally came from. Encourage students to explore American and overseas connections. 622 Chapter 20 The national origins quota system did not apply to I ts from the Western Hemisphere, however. iiiuu'K 1920s, about a million Canadians and almost During tne Mexicans crossed the nation's borders. Oj Una •to* * 500,0001 A Time of Labor Unrest Q 7 ntheTsevere postwar conflict formed between labor d management. During the war, the government wouldn't allow workers to strike because nothing could 'nterfere with the war effort. The American Federation of Ubor (AFL) pledged to avoid strikes. However, 1919 saw more than 3,000 strikes during which some 4 million workers walked off the job. Employers didn't want to give raises, nor did they want employees to join unions. Some employers, either out of a sincere belief or because they saw a way to keep wages down, attempted to show that union members were planning a revolution. Employers labeled striking workers as Communists. Newspapers screamed, "Plots to Establish Communism." Three strikes in particular grabbed public attention. THE BOSTON POLICE STRIKE The Boston police had not been given a raise since the beginning of World War 1. Among their many grievances was that they had been denied the right to unionize. When representatives asked for a raise and were fired, the remaining policemen decided to strike. Massachusetts governor Calvin Coolidge called out the National Guard. He said, "There is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody, anywhere, any time." The strike ended but members weren't allowed to return to work; new policemen were hired instead. People praised Coolidge for saving Boston, if not the nation, from communism and anarchy. In the 1920 election he became Warren G. Harding's vice- presidential running mate. THE STEEL MILL STRIKE Workers in the steel mills wanted the right to negotiate for shorter working hours and a living wage. They also wanted union recognition and collective bargaining rights. In September 1919, the U.S. Steel Corporation refused to meet with union representatives. In response, over 300,000 workers walked off their jobs. Steel companies hired strikebreakers— employees who agreed to work during the strike—and used force. Striking workers were beaten by police, federal troops, and state militias. Then the companies instituted a propaganda campaign, linking the strikers to Communists. In October 1919, negotiations between labor and management produced a deadlock. President Woodrow Wilson made a written plea to the combative "negotiators." A Personal Voice woodrow wilson At a time when the nations of the world are endeavoring to find a way of avoiding International war, are we to confess that there is no method to be found for carrying on Industry except. . . the very method of war? . .. Are our industrial leaders and our industrial workers to live together without faith in each other? —quoted in Labor in Crisis The steel strike ended in January 1920. In 1923, a report on the harsh working conditions in steel mills shocked the public. The steel companies agreed to an eight-hour day, but the steelworkers remained without a union. 5/ Strikers included working women tailors who fought for improved working conditions. - Politics of the Roaring Twenties 623 ^NTIATING instruction ! an<l Effect identify the causes and effects of labor unrest after World War I. j^toto-column chart Causes and Effects. . Uses of labor unrest from pages 417 and 418. Examples: low wages, U)e rs' unsafe working conditions. Examples: strikes, decline in union membership. Instruct: Objective Q A Time of Labor Unrest •Why did conflict between labor and management increase after the war? • Why did the public turn against strikers? •Why did labor union membership decline in the 1920s? |^\ In-Depth Resources: Unit 6 • Primary Sources: from Report on Steel Strike of 1919, p. 13 More About . The Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution, banning the manufacture, sale, and transportation of alcohol, took effect in January of 1920. Billy Sunday, an evangelist who preached against the evils of drinking, predicted a new age of virtue and religion. A Personal Voice billy Sunday " The reign of tears Is overt The slums will soon be only a memory. We will tum our prisons into factories and our Jails into storehouses and corncrlbs. Men will walk upright now, women will smile and the children will laugh. Hell will be forever for rentl —quoted in How Dry We Were: Prohibition Revisited Sunday's dream was not to be realized in the 1920s, as the law proved unenforceable. The failure of Prohibition was a sign of cultural conflicts most evident in the nation's cities. I.ured by jobs and by the challenge and freedom that the city represented, millions of people rode excitedly out of America's rural past and into its urban future. O Rural and Urban Differences America changed dramatically in the years before 1920, as was revealed in the 1920 census. According to figures that year, 51.2 percent of Americans lived in communities with populations of 2,500 to more than 1 million. Between 1922 and 1929, migration to the cities accelerated, with nearly 2 million people leaving farms and towns each year. "Cities were the place to be, not to get away from," said one historian. The agricultural world that millions of Americans left behind was largely unchanged from the 19th century—that world was one of small towns and farms bound together by conservative moral values and close social relationships. Yet small-town attitudes began to lose their hold on the American mind as the city rose to prominence. For all its color and challenge, though, the city could be impersonal and frightening. Streets were filled with strangers, not friends and neighbors. Life was fast-paced, not leisurely. The city demanded endurance, as a foreign visitor to Chicago observed. A Personal Voice Walter l. george It is not for nothing that the predominating color of Chicago is orange. It is as If the city, In its taxicabs, in its shop fronts, in the wrappings of its parcels, chose the color of flame that goes with the smoky black of its factories. It is not for nothing that It has repelled the geometric street arrangement of New York and substituted .. . great ways with names that a stranger must learn if he can. . .. He Is in a [crowded] city, and If he has business there, he tells himself, 'If I weaken I shan't last long.'" —Hail Columbia! How ya gonna keep 'em down on the farm, after they've seen Paree?" POPULAR SONG OF THE 1920s Skillbuilder Answers 1. Possible Answer: The person in the center with the saxophone is the focal point. 2. Possible Answer: The figure on the right is running toward the big city buildings. 3. Possible Answer: The figure in the center appears to be joyous as he raises his arms upwards. by Aaron Douglas is part of a series Inside the 135th Street Branch of tbrk Public Library to symbolize differ- •k*ds of African-American life during the In this panel, Song of the Towers, he figures before a city backdrop. As seen ""eh of Douglas's style was influenced music and geometric shapes. "'BUILDER Analyzing Visual Sources JJ*15 local point of this panel? of this painting might be symbolic Americans' move north? Douglas represent new freedoms mural? Support your answer with a*nples. ^NTIATING instruction ^stlng More About . . . Billy Sunday William Ashley "Billy'' Sunday was born in Ames, Iowa, In 1862. As a young man, Sunday played major-league baseball in Chicago, Pittsburgh, and Philadelphia. In 1891, after giving up his baseball career, he went to work at the YMCA. Sunday became a Presbyterian minister in 1903. Sunday's flamboyant style and promotional methods made him one of the most popular evangelists of the time. He reportedly preached to more than 100 million people during his lifetime. William Sunday died in 1935. History Through Art Aaron Douglas was born in Kansas in 1898. He received a degree in art from the University of Nebraska. After graduation, he taught drawing at a high school in Kansas City for a year, before making his way to Harlem in 1924. There, he began studying art with German artist, Winold Reiss. Encouraged by Reiss, Douglas began to incorporate aspects of African art-namely geometric shapes and designs-into his works. Many of Douglas' paintings depict African Americans in their daily lives. "I refuse to compromise and see blacks as anything less than a proud and majestic people,'' Douglas said. ^fidents comprehend the differences between urban and rural life in the ' ve them create a comparison chart like the one shown here. Have them " examples of the differences between life in the cities and in smaller '"ities as described in the text. Urban life Rural life The Roarinv Life of the 1920s 641 | Identify the causes and results of the migration of African Americans to Northern cities in the early 1900s. Drawing Conclusions, p. 663 Focus & Motivate Watch the video "Jump at the Sun" to find out about Zora Neale Hurston and the Harlem Renaissance. Using the Teacher's Resource Book as a guide, explore the background of Hurston in Florida. Then, discuss her participation in the Harlem Renaissance and engage in extension activities, using key primary sources. Instruct Instruct: Objective Q African-American Voices in the 1920s. What factors prompted many African Americans to move to Northern cities? What ways did African-American leaders propose to combat discrimination and violence? In-Depth Resources: Unit 6 • Guided Reading, p. 23 • Primary Sources: "When the Negro Was in Vogue," p. 35 The Harlem Renaissance Terms & | African-American ideas, politics, art, literature, and music flourished in Harlem and elsewhere in the United States. The Harlem Renaissance provided a foundation of African-American intellectualism to which African- American writers, artists, and musicians contribute today. One American's Story •Zora Neale Hurston •James Weldon Johnson •Marcus Garvey •Harlem Renaissance When the spirited Zora Neale Hurston was a girl in Eatonville, Florida, in the early 1900s, she loved to read adventure stories and myths. The powerful tales struck a chord with the young, talented Hurston and made her yearn for a wider world. A Personal Voice zora neale hurston My soul was with the gods and my body in the village. People just would not act like gods. . . . Raking back yards and carrying out chamber-pots, were not the tasks of Thor. I wanted to be away from drabness and to stretch my limbs in some mighty struggle. ' —quoted In The African American Encyclopedia After spending time with a traveling theater company and attending Howard University, Hurston ended up in New York where she struggled to the top of African-American literary society by hard work, flamboyance, and, above all, grit. "I have seen that the world is to the strong regardless of a little pigmentation more or less," Hurston wrote later. "I do not weep at [being Negro]—I am too busy sharpening my oyster knife." Hurston was on the move, like millions of others. And, like them, she went after the pearl in the oyster—the good life in America. O African-American Voices in the 1920s. During the 1920s, African Americans set new goals for themselves as they moved north to the nation's cities. Their migration was an expression of their changing attitude toward themselves—an attitude perhaps best captured in a phrase first used around this time, "Black is beautiful."African-American Migration from the South James Weldon Johnson A true "Renaissance man," Johnson worked much of his adult life to lift the status of African Americans. "Johnson was not the man to throw down the gauntlet to America," stated writer Jean Wagner. "He preferred to appeal to its reason and to persuade it that, since blacks and whites are irrevocably destined to live in association, the welfare of one group can only be maintained through assuring the welfare of another." Discuss with students how Johnson's success as a writer made him a successful leader in the fight to protect African-American rights. The Roaring Life of the 1920s 659 Rating instruction 'ing Important Details ents may have difficulty identifying details that support the main ideas ' °n- To help these students organize the information, have them create Jllart° the one at the right. As they read, have them identify important record them in the chart. A completed version of the chart can be Vle'v the section. Changes in Society Group Changes Youth rebelled against values of the past wanted fun and freedom stayed in school longer Women African Americans The Rnarinv life of the. 1920s Instruct Instruct: Objective Q The Harlem Renaissance Flowers in New York. What ideals did the Harlem Renaissance writers promote? • How did African-American performers and musicians popularize black culture? M In-Depth Resources: Unit 4 • Guided Reading, p, 23 promote African-, Garvey also lured followers with practical plans, especially his nr rican-American businesses. Further, Garvey _ m,o followers to return to Africa, help native people there throw off colonial oppressors, and build a mighty nation. His idea struck a i-dB many African Americans, as well as in blacks in the CaribbeanandAfi^l Desnite the anneal of Garvev's movement, suonort for it a"_i, Despite the appeal of Garvey's movement, support for it declined mid-1920s, when he was convicted of mail fraud and jailed, t the movement dwindled, Garvey left behind a powerful leeacvH newly awakened black pride, economic independence, and revet °* for Africa. §/ encouraged his 'nthe ut hough The Harlem Renaissance Q Flowers in New York, Marcus Garvey designed this uniform of purple and gold. Many African Americans who migrated north moved to Harlem, a neighborhood on the Upper West Side of New York's Manhattan Island In the 1920s, Harlem became the world's largest black urban community, with residents from the South, the West Indies, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and Haiti. James Weldon Johnson described Harlem as the capital of black America. complete with More About . . . The Harlem Renaissance The Harlem Renaissance helped to create a distinctive African-American culture in the United States. The writers and artists of the Harlem Renaissance celebrated their culture, though few of them addressed the problems that most African Americans faced in the 1920s. The Harlem Renaissance was brief, but it remains a lasting tribute to the artistic creativity of African Americans. More About . . . Jean Toomer Nathan Eugene [Jean] Pinchback Toomer published Cane in 1923. The work's focus on African-American dignity and strength inspired many artists of the Harlem Renaissance that followed-such as Langston Hughes, Countee Cullen, and Zora Neale Hurston. By the early- 1930s, Cane was out of print but was rediscovered during a renewed interest in African- American literature during the 1960s and 1970s. feathered hat, his role as "Provisional President of Africa." A Personal Voice james weldon johnson Harlem is not merely a Negro colony or community, it is a city within a city, the greatest Negro city in the world. It is not a slum or a fringe, it is located in the heart of Manhattan and occupies one of the most beautiful , . . sections of the city. ... It has its own churches, social and civic centers, shops, theaters, and other places of amusement. And it contains more Negroes to the square mile than any other spot on earth. —"Harlem: The Culture Capital* Like many other urban neighborhoods, Harlem suffered from overcrowding, unemployment, and poverty. But its problems in the 1920s were eclipsed by a flowering of creativity called the Harlem Renaissance, a literary and artistic movement celebrating African-American culture, AFRICAN-AMERICAN WRITERS Above all, the Harlem Renaissance was a literary movement led by well-educated, middle-class African Americans who expressed a new pride in the African-American experience. They celebrated their heritage and wrote with defiance and poignancy about the trials of being black in a white world. W. E. B. Du Bois and James Weldon Johnson helped these young talents along, as did the Harvard-educated former Rhodes scholar Alain Locke. In 1925, Locke published The New Negro, a landmark collection of literary works by many promising young African-American writers. Claude McKay, a novelist, poet, and Jamaican immigrant, was a major figure whose militant verses urged African Americans to resist prejudice and discrimination. His poems also expressed the pain of life in the black ghettos and the strain of being black in a world dominated by whites. Another gifted writer of the rime was Jean Toomer. His experimental book Cane—a mix of poems and sketches about blacks in the North and the South—was among the first full-length literary publications of the Harlem Renaissance. Missouri-born Langston Hughes was the movement's best-known poet. Many of Hughes's 1920s poems described the difficult lives of working-class. Even with price ^ wage controls, average weekly pay (adjusted for j"flation) rose 10 percent during the war. And although orkers still protested long hours, overtime, and night. Were able to save money for the future. Some workers invested up to half their paychecks in war bonds. farmers also prospered during the war. Unlike the depression years, when farmers had battled dust storms d floods, the early 1940s had good weather for growing oops. Fanners benefited from improvements in farm machinery and fertilizers and reaped the profits from rising crop prices. As a result, crop production increased by 50 percent, and farm income tripled. Before the war ended, many farmers could pay off their mortgages. Women also enjoyed employment gains during the war, although many lost their jobs when the war ended. Over 6 million women had entered the work force for the first time, boosting the percentage of women in the total work force to 35 percent. A third of those jobs were in defense plants, which offered women more challenging work and better pay than jobs traditionally associated with women, such as as waitressing, clerking, and domestic service. With men away at war, many women also took advantage of openings in journalism and other professions. "The war really created opportunities for women," said Winona Espinosa, a wife and mother who became a riveter and bus driver during the war. "It was the first time we got a chance to show that we could do a lot of things that only men had done before." ft^WOW The war gave women the chance to prove they could be just as productive as men. But their pay usually did not reflect their productivity. In addition to revamping the economy, the war triggered one of the greatest mass migrations in American history. Americans whose families had lived for decades in one place suddenly uprooted themselves to seek work elsewhere. More than a million newcomers poured into California between 1941 and 1944. Towns with defense industries saw their populations double and even triple, sometimes almost overnight. As shown in the map *o the right, African Americans left the South f°t cities in the North in record numbers. African-American Migration, 1940-1950 England Mountain and Plains States Middle Atlantic 1/ *2"3,600 South -1,244,800 % 1. Movement To which geographic region did the greatest number of African Americans migrate? 2. Movement How did the wartime economy contribute to this mass migration? The United States in World War II 797 link to popular culture Attitudes Toward Women 15 minutes and attitudes toward women's roles In the 1940s lll(lerstand changing social attitudes More About . . . Women in the Postwar Workforce The employment gains made by women during the war proved to be short-lived. After the war was over, a massive propaganda campaign was mounted and the Department of Labor invoked seniority rules to force women to give up their jobs to returning servicemen. Women who continued to work were demoted to less-skilled jobs with smaller paychecks. Meanwhile, federal subsidies for daycare centers were eliminated, raising the cost of childcare for working mothers or eliminating the service altogether. HISTORY from VISUALS Reading the Map Make sure students understand that the positive numbers in the arrows represent gains in Northern regions' African-American populations; the negative number represents the loss from the South. Have them verify that the South's loss equals the North's gain by adding the positive numbers and comparing the negative number with that total. Tracing Themes Wartime Migration In addition to the mass African-American migration from the South, thousands of young men left home for military training in other parts of the country and then for service overseas. The rapid growth of defense industries further changed American demographics as workers pulled up roots to follow the job opportunities. LfJ Directions Have students hold a brief discussion in which they attempt to identify the social values that were operating that dictated what happened to women at the time. Ask students to speculate about what happened and when attitudes toward women changed. TENSION IN LOS ANGELES Mexican Americans also experienced prejudice during the war years. In the violent summer of 1943, Los Angeles exploded in anti-Mexican "zoot-suit" riots. The zoot suit was a style of dress adopted by Mexican-American youths as a symbol of tlreir rebellion against tradition. It consisted of a long jacket and pleated pants. Broad-brimmed hats were often worn with the suits. The riots began when 11 sailors in Los Angeles reported that they had been attacked by zoot-suit-wear- ing Mexican Americans. This charge triggered violence involving thousands of servicemen and civilians. Mobs poured into Mexican neighborhoods and grabbed any zoot-suiters they could find. The attackers ripped off their victims' clothes and beat them senseless. The riots lasted almost a week and resulted in the beating of hundreds of Mexican-American youth and other minorities. Despite such unhappy experiences with racism, many Mexican Americans believed that their sacrifices during wartime would lead to a better future. A Personal Voice manuel de la raza This war... is doing what we In our Mexican-American movement had planned to do in one generation. ... It has shown those 'across the tracks' that we all share the same problems. It has shown them what the Mexican American will do, what responsibility he will take and what leadership qualities he will demonstrate. After this struggle, the status of the Mexican Americans will be different. More About . . . Detroit Race Riot of 1943 U.S. Army troops occupied Detroit for six months after the riot. The governor of Michigan commissioned an investigation of the causes of the riot. The commission quickly blamed African Americans. The mayor of Detroit praised the police force for its restraint despite the fact that 17 of the 25 African-American fatalities had been killed by the police. NAACP official and future Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall excoriated both the mayor and the police for their handling of the riot. More About . . . Mexican Americans in Los Angeles By 1940, Los Angeles had the largest urban population of people of Mexican descent outside Mexico City. It also had a poor record of discrimination in jobs, housing, education, and recreation. Here is one example of that discrimination: A public swimming pool was open to Mexican Americans and African Americans only one day a week. Japanese-American Testimony from National Defense Migration Hearings $L\ In-Depth Resources: Unit 7 • Primary Sources: from Farewell to Manzanar, p. 39 • Literature: from Snow Falling on Cedars, pp. 40-42 Japanese Relocation Camps, 1942 Minidoka Tule Lake Topaz Granada (Amache) Gila River Rohwer^ Jerome 1. l ocution How many Japanese internment camps existed in 1942? 2. Place Why do you think the majority of these camps were located in the West? On March 3, 1942, a J a i > Li nese American mother carries her sleeping daughter during their relocation to an internment camp. Internment of Japanese Americans While Mexican Americans and African Americans struggled with racial tension, the war produced tragic results for Japanese Americans. When the war began, 120,000 Japanese Americans lived in the United States. Most of them were citizens living on the West Coast. The surprise Japanese attack on Pearl ilarbor in Hawaii had stunned the nation. After the bornbing, panic-stricken citizens feared that the Japanese would soon attack the United States. Frightened people believed false rumors that Japanese Americans were committing sabotage by mining coastal harbors and poisoning vegetables. This sense of fear and uncertainty caused a wave of prejudice against Japanese Americans. I.arly in 1942, the War Department called for the mass evacuation of all Japanese Americans from Hawaii. General Delos Emmons, the military governor of Hawaii, resisted the order because 37 percent of the people in Hawaii were Japanese Americans. To remove them would have destroyed the islands' economy and hindered U.S. military operations there. However, he was eventually forced to order the internment, or confinement, of 1,444 Japanese Americans, 1 percent of Hawaii's Japanese-American population. On the West Coast, however, panic and prejudice ruled the day. In California, only 1 percent of the people were Japanese, but they constituted a minority large enough to stimulate the prejudice of many whites, without being large enough to effectively resist internment. Newspapers whipped up anti-Japanese sentiment by running ugly stories attacking Japanese Americans. On February 19, 1942, President Roosevelt signed an order requiring the removal of people of Japanese ancestry from California and parts of Washington, Oregon, and Arizona. Based on strong recommendations from the military, he justified this step as necessary for national security. In the following weeks, the army rounded up some 110,000 Japanese Americans and shipped them to ten hastily constructed remote "relocation centers," euphemisms for prison camps. 800 Chapter 25 Japanese Internment Ask students to use Internet and other research tools to read original articles involving the Japanese population in California in 1941 and 1942. Use the Los Angeles Times, San Francisco Chronicle, San Francisco Examiner, and Oakland Tribune between December 8,1941, and February, 1942, when Roosevelt signed the executive order for internment. Have them report their findings to the rest of the class. Then discuss what the research suggests about the mainstream press and its reporting of the situation. No specific charges were ever filed against Japanese Americans, and no evidence of subversion was ever found. Faced with expulsion, terrified families were forced to sell their homes, businesses, and all their belongings for less than their true value. Japanese Americans fought for justice, both in the courts and in Congress. The initial results were discouraging. In 1944, the Supreme Court decided, in Korennitsu v. United States, that the government's policy of evacuating Japanese Americans to camps was justified on the basis of "military necessity." (See pages 802-803.) After the war, however, the Japanese American Citizens League (JACL) pushed the government to compensate those sent to the camps for their lost property. In 1965, Congress authorized the spending of $38 million for that purpose—less than a tenth of Japanese Americans' actual losses. The JACL did not give up its quest for justice. In 1978, it called for the payment of reparations, or restitution, to each individual that suffered internment. A decade later, Congress passed, and President Ronald Reagan signed, a bill that promised $20,000 to every Japanese American sent to a relocation camp. When the checks were sent in 1990, a letter from President George Bush accompanied them, in which he stated, "We can never fully right the wrongs of the past. But we can take a clear stand for justice and recognize that serious injustices were done to Japanese Americans during World War II. What effect did World War II have on American families? Think About: • the role of women in families and the economy. Yes The United States government had no way of telling with certainty that Japanese citizens were loyal. No There was no proof that Japanese Americans were disloyal to their country. The war changed traditional gender roles as women enlisted in the armed forces and took jobs outside the home. The war also reinforced the country's long-standing policy of discrimination against minorities. Where did migrant farm workers travel? 2. Why did workers in the Midwest and on the Atlantic Coast have to travel farther than workers in other regions? 3. Why was California's climate helpful to migrant farm workers? • Ask students to consider the hardships of migrant workers, including poor living conditions, long hours, and low pay. Have students suggest ways to improve the situation of migrant farm workers. HISTORY from VISUALS Interpreting the Infographic Have students study the map and the photographs carefully. Three states offer year-round work-Florida, Texas, and California. What conclusions can students draw about the climates of these states? (They have warm climates that allow year-round growing seasons.) Which group of migratory paths shown on the map overlaps the other two groups? (the Midwest paths) Extension On the basis of the photos, write four or five words that characterize migrant farm work, (backbreaking, monotonous, tiring, dirty) 'fcTTO | HISTORY During the winter months, migrant workers in est and Atlantic Coast paths seek employment in California and Texas. They head north as the weather gets warmer and a lumber of Northern states during the summer and early fall. rner begins to fade into autumn, however, the workers once south. Migrant workers keep moving because they need Und employment. Rubric A database should present... • a variety of information on agricultural regions, crops, planting and harvesting seasons types of laborers needed - clearly identified sources The New Frontier and the Great Society EMIGRATION The Great Society also brought profound " rates to the nation's immigration laws. The Immigration 'L 0f 1924 and the National Origins Act of 1924 had estab- • hed immigration quotas that discriminated strongly against J^ople from outside Western Europe. The Act set a quota of ^OW $ THc^v about 150,000 people annually. It discriminated against southern and eastern Europeans and barred Asians completely The Immigration Act of 1965 opened the door for non-European immigrants to settle in the United States by ending quotas based on nationality. S' THE ENVIRONMENT In 1962, Silent Spring, a book by Rachel Carson, had exposed a hidden danger: the effects of pesticides on the environment. Carson's book and the public's outcry resulted in the Water Quality Act of 1965, which C required states to clean up rivers. Johnson also ordered the government to search out the worst chemical polluters. "There is no excuse ... for chemical companies and oil refineries using our major rivers as pipelines for toxic wastes." Such words and actions helped trigger the environmental movement in the United States. (See Chapter 32.) CONSUMER PROTECTION Consumer advocates also made headway. They convinced Congress to pass major safety laws, including a truth-in-packaging law that set standards for labeling consumer goods. Ralph Nader, a young lawyer, wrote a book, Unsafe at Any Speed, that sharply criticized the U.S. automobile industry for ignoring safety concerns. His testimony helped persuade Congress to establish safety standards for automobiles and tires. Precautions extended to food, too. Congress passed the Wholesome Meat Act of 1967. "Americans can feel a little safer now in their homes, on the road, at the supermarket, and in the department store," said Johnson. Reforms of the Warren Court O The wave of liberal reform that characterized the Great Society also swept through the Supreme Court of the 1960s. Beginning with the 1954 landmark decision Brown v. Board of Education, which ruled school segregation unconstitutional, the Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren took an activist stance on the leading issues of the day. Several major court decisions in the 1960s affected American society. The Warren Court banned state-sanctioned prayer in public schools and declared state-required loyalty oaths unconstitutional. It limited the power of communities to censor books and films and said that free speech included the wearing of black armbands to school by antiwar students. Furthermore, the Court brought about change in federal and state reapportionment and the criminal justice system, CONGRESSIONAL REAPPORTIONMENT In a key series of decisions, the Warren Court addressed the issue of reapportionment, or the way in which states redraw election districts based on the changing number of people in them. By 1960, about 80 percent of Americans lived in cities and suburbs. However, many states had failed to change their congressional districts to reflect this development; instead, rural districts might have fewer than 200,000 people, while some urban districts had more than 600,(XX). Thus the voters in rural areas had more representation—and also more power—than those in urban areas. When President Johnson signed the Medicare bill in 1965, only half of the nation's elderly had health insurance. Today, thanks largely to Medicare, nearly all persons 65 years or older are eligible. In 2000, federal spending on Medicare was about $224 billion. In recent years, experts have debated over whether Medicare can be sustained in the face of changing trends: (1) people are living longer, (2) health care continues to become more expensive, and (3) the large baby boomer generation is moving toward retirement age. Though most Americans are not in favor of cutbacks to Medicare, the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 reduced federal spending on Medicare from 1998 through 2002 by $112 billion. The New Frontier and the Great Society 897 ^Ching " ^ 45 mi ^ati. link to civics Consumer Protection minutes S 3 display on federal and state consumer protection laws and agen- Tracing Themes Immigration Legislation The major impact of the Immigration Act of 1965 was to greatly boost the number of non-European immigrants. The result of that increase today is that Hispanic Americans and Asian Americans significantly increased their numbers. The Immigration Act of 1990 raised the caps on immigration from individual countries, thus accelerating immigration from Asia, Latin and Central America, and Africa. Medicare on the Line Evaluating Ask students whether they think cutbacks should be made in Medicare. Ask them if Medicare is an entitlement. Have students consider whether other federal programs should be cut to help fund Medicare, or whether Medicare in its present state is too expensive to maintain. , ". classzone.com To s% identify government efforts to protect consumers ^ave students work in small groups to research state and federal con- L i ction agencies and laws in the library or on the Internet. Ask students v'sual display that illustrates their findings. LATINOS OF VARIED ORIGINS Mexican Americans, the largest Latino group, have lived mostly in the Southwest and California. This group includes descendants of the nearly 100,000 Mexicans who had lived in territories ceded by Mexico to the United States in 1848. Another million or so Mexicans came to the United States in the 1910s, following Mexico's revolution. Still others came as bmceros, or temporary laborers, during the 1940s and 1950s. In the 1960s close to half a million Mexicans immigrated, most in search of better paying jobs. Puerto Ricans began immigrating to the United States after the U.S. occupation of Puerto Rico in 1898. As of 1960, almost 900,000 Puerto Ricans were living in the continental United States, including almost half a million on New York City's West Side. Large Cuban communities also formed in New York City and in Miami and New Jersey. This is because hundreds of thousands of Cubans, many of whom were academics and professionals, fled to the United States in 1959 to escape Fidel Castro's Communist rule. In addition, tens of thousands of Salvadorans, Guatemalans, Nicaraguans, and Colombians immigrated to the United States after the 1960s to escape civil war and chronic poverty. Wherever they had settled, during the 1960s many Latinos encountered ethnic prejudice and discrimination in jobs and housing. Most lived in segregated barrios, or Spanish-speaking neighborhoods. The Latino jobless rate was nearly 50 percent higher than that of whites, as was the percentage of Latino families living in poverty. 4/ Latinos Fight for Change Q As the presence of Latinos in the United States grew, so too did their demand for greater representation and better treatment. During the 1960s, Latinos demanded not only equal opportunity, but also a respect for their culture and heritage. In the 1960s and 1970s, thousands of poor Mexicans illegally crossed the 2,000-mile border between the United States and Mexico each year. The journey these illegal aliens undertook was often made more difficult by "coy- otes," guides who charged large amounts of money to help them cross the border, but who often didn't deliver on their promises. Illegal Immigrants' problems didn't end when they entered the United States, where they were denied many social services, including unemployment insurance and food stamps. In addition, the Immigration and Naturalization Service urged businesses to refrain from hiring them. As a result, some owners stopped employing people with Latino names, including legal immigrants. An Era of Social Change 975 Seating instruction Desperate Journeys Illegal immigration from Mexico has remained a controversial domestic and foreign relations issue. American authorities have recognized that economic conditions in Mexico drive poor Mexicans to emigrate. The North American Free Trade Agreement has spurred Mexican-American cooperation. In 2001, the presidents of both countries, Vicente Fox and George W. Bush, pledged to work together on the problem. Ask students what steps the United States should take to reduce illegal immigration. Jot down reasons why Latinos in each region decided to leave their homelands. Add the city or cities where each group settled. An Era of Social Change 975 More About . . . Jessie Lopez de la Cruz, Union Organizer When Jessie Lopez de la Cruz first became involved in the farm worker movement, all the union organizers were men. She later recalled, 'I guess when the union found out how I was able to talk to people, I was called into Delano, [field office of the United Farm Workers Union] to one of the meetings, and they gave me my card as an organizer. I am very proud to say I was the first woman organizer out in the fields organizing the people." Cesar Chavez As a boy growing up during the Depression, Chavez attended at least 37 elementary schools-some for only a few days or weeks. Like other migrant workers, Chavez's parents had to keep moving to find work. As a young man, Chavez began working to help the Latino community. Although he was a quiet, self-effacing young man, Chavez nonetheless captured the imagination and heart of people from all walks of life with his message of social justice. At least 17 million Americans joined his five-year boycott of California grapes. Ask students what Chavez's actions in the theater reveal about him. (He was proud, independent, and courageous.) How does his behavior as a teenager foreshadow his actions as a labor organizer as an adult? (Like his protest in the theater, the protests he organized as an adult were dignified and nonviolent.) Electronic Library of Primary Sources •The Birth of La Causa. 1962, by Cesar Chavez 1927-1993 COsar ChSvez spoke from experience when he said, "Many things in farm labor are terrible." As a teenager, Chavez moved with his family from farm to farm, picking crops. "The worst crop was the olives," ChSvez recalled. "The olives are so small you can never fill the bucket." The seeds of protest grew early In Chavez. As a teenager, he once went to a theater that was segregated—whites on one side of the aisle and Mexicans on the other side. "I really hadn't thought much about what I was going to do. but I had to do something," Chavez recalled. The future union leader sat down in the whites-only section and stayed there until the police arrived and arrested him. THE FARM WORKER MOVEMENT As Jessie Iopez de la Cruz explained th sands working on California's fruit and vegetable farms did backbreaking work*" little pay and few benefits. Cesar Chavez believed that farm workers had to * i ^ ize, that their strength would come from bargaining as a group. In 1962, Chavez ^ Dolores Huerta established the National Larin Workers Association. Four years this group merged with a Filipino agricultural union (also founded by Huerta) ' form the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee (UFWOC). Chavez and his fellow organizers insisted that California's large fruit and v etable companies accept their union as the bargaining agent for the farm workers Chavez, like Martin Luther King, Jr., believed in nonviolence. In 1965 when California's grape growers refused to recognize the union, Chavez sent farm workers across the country to convince supermarkets and shoppers to boycott California grapes. Chavez then went on a three-week fast in which he lost 35 pounds The efforts of Chavez and the farm workers eventually paid off. In 1970, Huerta negotiated a contract between the grape growers and the UFWOC. Union workers would finally be guaranteed higher wages and other benefits long denied them. 5* CULTURAL PRIDE The activities of the California farm workers helped to inspire other Latino "brown power" movements across the country. In New York, members of the Puerto Rican population began to demand that schools offer Spanish-speak- ing children classes taught in their own language as well as programs about their culture. In 1968, Congress enacted the Bilingual Education Act, which provided funds for schools to develop bilingual and cultural heritage programs for non-F.nglish-speaking children. Young Mexican Americans started to call themselves Chicanos or Chicanas—a shortened version of "Mexicanos" that expressed pride in their ethnic heritage. A Chicano community action group called the Brown Berets formed under the leadership of David Sanchez. In 1968, the Brown Berets organized walkouts in East Los Angeles high schools. About 15,000 Chicano students walked out of class demanding smaller classes, more Chicano teachers and administrators, and programs designed to reduce the high Latino dropout rate. Militant Mexican-American students also won the establishment of Chicano studies programs at colleges and universities. POLITICAL POWER Latinos also organized politically during the 1960s. Some worked within the two-party system. For example, the Mexican American Political Association (MAPA) helped elect Los Angeles politician Edward Roybal to the House of Representatives. During the 1960s, eight Hispanic Americans served in the House, and one Hispanic senator was elected— Joseph Montoya of New Mexico. The I-eague of United I-atin American Citizens (LULAC) had formed in 1929 to fight segregation and other forms of discrimination. In the 1940s and into the 1950s, LULAC had filed lawsuits to desegregate schools throughout the Southwest, and in 1954, they helped win Mexican Americans the right to serve on juries. Still other Latinos took on a more confrontational tone. In 1963, one-time evangelical preacher Reies Tijerina founded the Alianza Federal de Mercedes (Federal Alliance of Land Grants) to help reclaim U.S. land taken from Mexican landholders in the 19th century. He and his followers raided the Rio Arriba County Courthouse in Tierra Amarilla, New Mexico, in order to force authorities to recognize the plight of New Mexican small farmers. They were later arrested. Native Americans Struggle for Equality © Instruct: Objective © Native Americans Struggle for Equality t ] t As are Latinos, Native Americans are sometimes viewed as a single homogeneous group, despite the hundreds of distinct Native American tribes and nations in the United States. One thing that these diverse tribes and nations have shared is a mostly bleak existence in the United States and a lack of autonomy, or ability to control and govern their own lives. Through the years, many Native Americans have clung to their heritage, refusing to assimilate, or blend, into mainstream society. Native American nationalist Vine Deloria, Jr., expressed the view that mainstream society was nothing more than "ice cream bars and heart trouble and . . . getting up at six o'clock in the morning to mow your lawn in the suburbs." Despite their cultural diversity, Native Americans as a group have been the poorest of Americans and have suffered from the highest unemployment rate. They have also been more likely than any other group to suffer from tuberculosis and alcoholism. Although the Native American population rose during the 1960s, the death rate among Native American infants was nearly twice the national average, while life expectancy was several years less than for other Americans. In 1954, the Eisenhower administration enacted a "termi- nation" policy to deal with these problems, but it did not respect Native American culture. Native Americans were relocated from isolated reservations into mainstream urban American life. The plan failed miserably. Most who moved to the cities remained desperately poor. In 1961, representatives from 61 Native American groups met in Chicago and drafted the Declaration of Indian Purpose, which stressed the determination of Native Americans to "choose our own way of life." The declaration called for an end to the termination program in favor of new policies designed to create economic opportunities for Native Americans on their reservations. In 1968, President Lyndon Johnson established the National Council on Indian Opportunity to "ensure that programs reflect the needs and desires of the Indian people." Si VOICES OF PROTEST Many young Native Americans were dissatisfied with the slow pace of reform. Their discontent fueled the growth of the American Indian Movement (ATM), an often militant Native American rights organization. While AIM began in 1968 largely as a self-defense group against police brutality, it soon branched out to include protecting the rights of large Native American populations in northern and western states. Whereas many Native Americans rejected assimilation, Ben Nighthorse Campbell has chosen to work within the system to improve the lives of Native Americans. Campbell's father was a North Cheyenne, and his great- grandfather, Black Horse, fought in the 1876 Battle of the Little Bighorn—in which the Cheyenne and the Sioux defeated Lieutenant Colonel George Custer. In 1992. Campbell was elected to the U.S. Senate from Colorado, marking the first time since 1929 that a Native American had been elected to the Senate. Campbell stated that while his new job covered the entire nation, the needs of Native Americans would always remain a high priority. What was the American Indian Movement, and what did it advocate? How did the American Indian Movement engage the government? What successes did Native Americans attain? |S\ In-Depth Resources: Unit 8 • Guided Reading, p. 64 Tracing Themes Equality for Native Americans Native Americans had been denied basic rights for generations. Their goals in the 1960s were to win more control over their own lives, new economic opportunities, rights to lands taken by the government, improved living conditions on reservations, and more say in the education of their children. Ben Nighthorse Campbell Making Inferences Ask students whether they think Native Americans can achieve their goals by working within the system as Campbell did. (Yes, as a U.S. senator he is in a position to help his people. Campbell also serves as a role model for Native Americans. No, he is only one senator and has to represent all the people of Colorado to get reelected.) Have students research Campbell's Senate career and assess how effective he has been in helping Native Americans. An Era of Social Change 977 Rating instruction gifted and talented students mini classzone.com 'tog AIM research the current and past activities of the American Indian ^M). Ask students to consider the group's principles and its conflicts eral government. Have students make a poster that illustrates what lund and share it with the class. As an extension activity, you could ask them to compare the activities of AIM with those of Senator Ben Nighthorse Campbell on behalf of Native Americans, Have students attempt to evaluate whose activities have been more effective, AIM's or Senator Campbell's. An Era of Social Change 977 r- 0f pi life <5-0'. ^labv Social Security, which pays benefits to retired Americans, was designed to rely on continued funding from a vast number of younger workers who would contribute taxes to support a small number of retired workers. That system worked well when younger workers far outnumbered retirees and when most workers didn't live long after retirement. In 1996, it took Social Security contributions from three workers to support every retiree. By 2030, however, with an increase in the number of elderly persons and an expected decline in the birthrate, there will be only two workers' contributions available to support each senior citizen. Few issues loomed as large in the 2000 presidential election as what to do about Social Security. If President Bush and Congress do not restructure the system, Social Security will eventually pay out more money than it will take in. Some people suggest that the system be reformed by raising deductions for workers, taxing the benefits paid to wealthier Americans, and raising the age at which retirees can collect benefits. §, The Shifting Population 0 In addition to becoming increasingly suburban and elderly, the population of the United States has also been transformed by immigration. Between 1970 and 2000, the country's population swelled from 204 million to more than 284 million. Immigration accounted for much of that growth. As the nation's newest residents yearned for U.S. citizenship, however, other Americans debated the effects of immigration on American life. A CHANGING IMMIGRANT POPULATION The most recent immigrants to the United States differ from immigrants of earlier years. The large numbers of immigrants who entered the country before and just after 1900 came from Europe. Instruct: Objective 0 The Shifting Population Skillbuilder Answers: 1. Iowa and Mississippi. 2. The map shows immigrants are moving to the Midwest and Northwest, but does not show the absolute numbers. How are ethnic and racial demographics changing in the United States? Why is illegal immigration a controversial issue? American Lives: Wilma Mankiller, p. 64 Change in U.S. Immigration, 2000 1. Movement Which states show the greatest rise in numbers of immigrants? 2. Movement In the past, immigrants settled in the U.S. along borders and coastlines. Has this changed in 2000? Explain. HISTORY from VISUALS Interpreting the Map Ask students to study the map. Have them identify the states with the fewest number of immigrants. (The states in green.) Ask students to suggest reasons why particular states might have attracted an increased number of immigrants. (Job opportunities, communities, climate, schools.) The United States in Today's World 1091 'Pping the Immigrant Population 45 minutes ^aPPing the immigrant population Se To identify and locate immigrant populations in a selected state fU Directions Ask students to study the map above and make a list of all states that had a more than 100 percent increase in immigration. Have each student select one state and research the immigrant populations in that state. Ask students to determine from where the immigrants have come and where they now reside within the state. Then have students create a map of the state they selected and indicate where the immigrants are living. I&\ Integrated Assessment • Rubric 2 The United States in Today's World 1091 More About . . . Proposition 187 The California Supreme Court struck down Proposition 187. In the court's opinion, the federal government has sole jurisdiction over Immigration law. Passing Proposition 187 would be usurping federal authority. Several provisions of the law were declared to be in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment, specifically those that called for expulsion of illegal immigrants without a hearing. This would be considered denial of due process. In addition, denying public education to the children of illegal immigrants would also be in violation of due process. ▲ Lowe Shee Miu, of Oakland, California, stands in front of a monument commemorating Chinese Immigrants at Angel Island—the Ellis Island of the West. In contrast, about 45 percent of immi grants since the 1960s have come from the Western Hemisphere, primarily Mexico, and TO percent from Asia. In Mexico, for example, during three months in 1994-1995, the Mexican peso was devalued by 73 percent. The devaluation made the Mexican economy decline. As a result, almost a million Mexicans lost their jobs. Many of the unemployed headed north in search of jobs in the United States. This search for a better opportunity continues today as thousands of immigrants and refugees—more than 2,000 legal and 4,000-10,000 illegal—arrive each day. About 4,000 of those who enter illegally are deported to Mexico shortly after crossing the U.S.-Mexico border. To help those seeking more opportunity in America, in July 2001, President Bush's administration proposed a temporary guest worker program for the 3 million Mexicans residing illegally in the United States. Based on the 2000 census, it was reported that patterns of immigration are changing the country's ethnic and racial makeup. By 2001, for example, California had become a majority minority state, with Asian Americans, Latinos, African Americans, and Native Americans making up more than half its population. The 2000 census indicated that if current trends continue, by the year 2050 Latinos will become the nation's largest minority community overall. DEBATES OVER IMMIGRATION POLICY The presence of such a large number of immigrants has also added to the continuing debate over U.S. immigration policies. Many Americans believe that their country can't absorb more immigrants. By the early 1990s, an estimated 3.2 million illegal immigrants from Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Haiti had made their way to the United States. Many illegal immigrants also arrived from Canada, Poland, China, and Ireland. They took jobs many Americans turned down, as farm workers and domestic servants—often receiving the minimum wage or less and no benefits. By 2001, between 5 and 6 million illegal immigrants resided in the United States. Hostility toward illegal immigration peaked in California and Florida, two states with high percentages of immigrants. In 1994, Florida Governor Lawton Chiles filed suit against the U.S. government for "its continuing failure to enforce or rationally administer its own immigration laws." That same year, California passed Proposition 187, which cut all education and nonemergency health benefits to illegal immigrants. By March 1998, Proposition 187 was ruled unconstitutional. Although never implemented, the law inspired political participation among Hispanic voters, who saw themselves as targets. As more immigrants make their way to the U.S. and the nation's ethnic composition changes, debates about immigration will continue. Those who favor tighter restrictions argue that immigrants take desired jobs. Others, however, point to America's historical diversity and the new' ideas and energy immigrants bring. & Throughout the nation's history, U.S. immigration policies have been influenced by the political and economic climate of the time. National immigration policy in the United States has a history of fluctuation with periods of time during which the country followed a restrictive immigration policy, usually followed by years characterized by less restrictive policy. Integrated Assessment NATIVE AMERICANS CONTINUE LEGAL BATTLES As the nation debated its immigrant policies, the ancestors of America's original inhabitants continued to struggle. The end of the 20th century found most members of this minority enduring extremely difficult lives. In 2001, about 32 percent of Native Americans lived below the poverty line, more than three times the poverty rate for white Americans. Furthermore, Native Americans endured a suicide rate that was 72 percent higher than that of the general population and an alcoholism rate seven times greater. In the face of such hardships, Native Americans strived to improve their lives. Throughout the 1990s, dozens of tribes attained greater economic independence by establishing thriving gaming resorts. Although controversial for promoting gambling, reservation gaming—a nearly $10 billion a year industry by 2000—pro- vided Native Americans with much-needed money for jobs, education, social services, and infrastructure. Over the past decades, Native Americans have used the courts to attain greater recognition of their tribal ancestry and land rights. In 1999, for example, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the Chippewa Indians of Minnesota retained fishing and hunting rights on some 13 million acres of land that were guaranteed to them in an 1837 treaty. Across the nation, a number of other tribes have had similar land rights affirmed. America in a New Millennium Q As the 21st century begins, Americans face both new problems and old ones. Environmental concerns have become a global issue and have moved to center stage. Furthermore, poverty remains a problem for many Americans in the late 20th century, as does the increasing threat that terrorist acts pose to Americans at home and abroad. It is clear that the new century America faces will bring changes, but those changes need not deepen divisions among Americans. With effort and cooperation, the change could foster growth and tolerance. The 20th century brought new ways of both destroying and enriching lives. What will the 21st bring? Much will depend on you—the dreamers, the decision makers, and the voters of the future. What economic challenges will Americans face in the years ahead? In-Depth Resources: Unit 9 • Guided Reading, p. 48 Assess & Reteach Have students answer the Section Assessment questions individually. Then have them compare answers with another student. Ask students to locate text passages that support their answers. jj^ Formal Assessment • Section Quiz, p. 598 Ask students to identify events from the chapter that they found hard to understand. Then have them formulate one question about the reading that they would like to have answered. Organize a group roundtable. Have students discuss their responses to question 4, "What will be the biggest challenge facing the United States in the new millennium?" Ask students to suggest ways to handle the challenge. 1&\ In-Depth Resources: Unit 9 • Reteaching Activity, p. 54 Answers mi Similar: desire for economic opportunity, democratic freedom. Different: 1990-2000 immigrants from a wider variety of countries. The disagreements show that in a diverse culture there are differing ideas on immigration policy and that society allows freedom of speech on the issue. The United States in Today's World 1093 Objectives • To explain how war and other factors affected immigration to and migration within the United States. To analyze the impact of the various waves of immigration and migration Focus & Motivate Immigration and Migration Immigrants to the United States have been part of a worldwide movement pushing people awav from traditional means of support and pulling them toward better opportunities. Most immigrants have left their homelands because of economic problems, though some have fled oppressive governments or political turmoil. War has often been the deciding factor for people to immigrate to the United States or to migrate within the country. Others have migrated to escape poverty, religious persecution, and racial violence. But the chief lure in coming to the United States or migrating within its borders continues to be the opportunity to earn a vlng. More About . . . With hope and apprehension, millions of foreign immigrants poured into America's pulsing cities during the earty 20th century. Bringing with them values, habits, and attire from the Old World, they faced a multitude of new experiences, expectations, and products in the New World. Many native-born Americans feared that the new immigrants posed a threat to American culture. Instead of the immigrants being allowed to negotiate their existence by combining the old with the new, they were pressured to forget their old cultures, languages, and customs for more "American" ways. Anti-Immigrant Feelings Among the challenges facing immigrants, prejudice is perhaps one of the most insidious. In the early 1900s, Senator Henry Cabot Lodge said that immigrants were inferior peoples. Such discrimination has been a constant in the American consciousness. Immigrants have long been involved in the struggle for equality. As the American population grows increasingly diverse, the need for fair and equal treatment for all citizens becomes even greater. Evaluating Ask students to consider the effects of immigration on American society. - What changes have taken place in American society in the last four or five years as a result of recent immigration? What role do you think ethnic heritage should play in today's America? 1840s MIGRATING TO THE WEST. Throughout the 19th century, Americans continued their movement westward to the Pacific Ocean. Victory in the War with Mexico in 1848 greatly increased the amount of land under American control, and thousands of Americans moved out West to take advantage of it. Two important consequences emerged from this movement. First, following the discovery of gold in California, hundreds of thousands of people from around the world rushed in to strike it rich. Within a year, there were enough residents in California to qualify it for statehood. Second, Americans disagreed over whether the new lands should be open to slavery. That disagreement fueled the fires that led to the Civil War. Chermayeff, Ivan et al. Ellis Island; An Illustrated History of the Immigrant Experience. New York: Maxwell Macmillan, 1991. Text by Mary J. Shapiro. Orth, Samuel Peter. Our Foreigners. St. Clair Shores, Ml: Scholarly Press, 1970. A period account of immigration. Pan, Lynn. Sons of the Yellow Emperor. NY: Kodansha International, 1994. A history of the Chinese Diaspora. Portes, Alejandro. Immigrant America: A Portrait. Berkeley: U of California P, 1990. A study of immigrants and the process of their Americanization. Ellis Island: Gateway to America. Sterling Educational Media, 1991. History of Ellis Island. The Immigrant Experience: The Long, Long Journey. Dir. Joan M. Silver. Coronet/MTI Film and Video, 1972. Experiences of one turn-of-the-century immigrant family. Tills Island. Diskette. Educational Activities, 1994. Students role-play3'1 Italian teenager who immigrates to America in 1892. 1094 Chapter 34 Analyze the legal, economic, and moral aspects of immigration. Describe the arguments for and against restricting immigration. The Debate over Immigration Should new laws restrict or expand immigration? Focus & Motivate Ask students if they think U.S. borders should be closed to immigrants. Ask for explanations to either a yes or no answer. A follow-up question might be whether only certain people should be allowed to immigrate to the United States. Tracing Themes The immigration debate is waged in both economic and cultural terms. For example, unskilled immigrants are likely to work for lower wages than American workers. They are viewed both as competition by working class Americans and as workers who depress the wage scale because they increase the labor supply. American tolerance also has been strained by the challenge of diverse cultures. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, America's Protestant majority was concerned first by European Catholic immigrants and, later, by Jewish immigrants. Today, some Americans fear rapidly growing numbers of Hispanic Americans and the arrival of people of varied non-Christian religions from all over the world. Briam Saiti left wai-torn Bosnia and arrived in New York City, where he worked to save money to send for his brother and parents. But his family may never be able to join him. For hundreds of years, immigrants working for their dreams have shaped the United States. Latino ranchers developed many of the tools and skills of the American cowboy. Chinese laborers laid the tracks of the transcontinental railroad. African Americans, though not voluntary immigrants, labored to develop the agriculture of the South and the industry of the North. Farmers and workers of every origin and ethnicity built the nation we know today. But immigration has been argued throughout American history. In the 1700s, Benjamin Franklin worried about the number of Germans immigrating to Pennsylvania. Anti-immi- gration sentiment spurred the nativist movement that developed in the 1830s and the "America First" campaign of the 1920s. Americans today are divided on the issue. Some agree with New York City mayor Rudolph Giuliani that immigrants "challenge us with new ideas and new perspectives." Others side with Dan Stein of the Federation for American Immigration Reform, who has said "The U.S. has this terrible problem. . . . The smartest people in the world want to come here." that "large-scale immigration is not serving the needs and interests of the country." From 1900 into the 1940s, economic troubles and rapid population growth spurred more than 16 million Europeans to move to the United States. The same pressures have recently hit Asia and Latin America, with the same effect on the United States. Between 1970 and 1998, the immigrant population of the United States nearly tripled, soaring to over 26 million. Complicating the debate has been the issue of illegal immigrants. By —ary lllega" undocumented immigran,' jobs but usually receive low no benefits. Although these do not W t"es, they also*? receive government-funded serZ Pete Wilson, the former gove- nor of California, echoed his con stituents when he said, "There's right way to come to America and wrong way." In 1994, Califomu voters approved Proposition 18? denying illegal immigrants access n public education and state-fundes health care. A federal court late ruled that law unconstitutional It 1996, Congress passed a law tha toughened measures to bar illega entry into the United States. Those who favor limits claim tha: immigrants take jobs from Americans. However, data suggest that immigration has not hurt the economy and may have helped fuel its growth. At the same time that millions of immigrant workerv- including undocumented workers- were joining the work force, unemployment fell from 7.1 percent in 1980 to 4.3 percent in March 2001 the lowest rate in 30 years. Another economic argument focuses on wages, Economists agree that immigrants tend to work ft* lower wages than native-born workers History of Immigration in the United States | 1751 1853 1882 1896 1921 Benjamin Franklin denounces German immigrants. Nativists form Know- Nothing Party to protest Increase in Immigration (page 319). Chinese Exclusion Act severely restricts Immigration from China (page 460). Ordered the Immigration and Naturalization Service to develop an identity card for immigrants that would feature an identifying device such as a retinal scan or fingerprint. 