Maddy sprouted from the marshy lowlands around Charleston as rice became the colony's cash crop hv the opening decades of the eighteenth century. Commanding good prices and being in constant demand in Europe, rice yielded less spectacular rewards than Caribbean sugar, hut larger and more reliable returns than Chesapeake tobacco. It made South Carolina the richest colony and South Carolina rice planters the richest people on the mainland ot North America. Unfortunately, South Carolina s natural environment, so well suited for rice production, was less well suited for human habitation. For a century after the colony's initial settlement, appalling mortality rates prevented many planters from liv ing long enough to appreciate their prosperity. The swamps of the lowland coast, perfect breeding grounds for mosquitoes and deadly microbes, defied survival and reproduction among men and women. Weakened by chronic malaria, settlers succumbed in epic numbers to yellow fever, smallpox, and respirators infections. The white population grew slowly, through immigration rather than natural increase, and numbered a mere 10.<MM) by 1730. Tlie first generations ol South Carolinians had little in common lint the harsh conditions of Irontier existence. Most colonists lived on isolated plantations, making only occasional trips to Charleston. Early deaths fragmented families and inhibited the development ol native-born communities. Immigration after 1700 only intensified the colony's ethnic and religious diversity, adding Swiss and German Lutherans, Scots-Irish Presbyterians, Welsh Baptists, and Spanish Jews. Local institutions that might have enhanced order and a sense of solidarity remained extremely weak for more than a century after the first settlement. The colony's only courts were in Charleston; churches and clergymen of any denomination were scarce. Oil those rare occasions when earls' Carolinians came together, they gathered at Charleston to escape the pestilent air of their plantations, to sue each other for debt and to haggle over prices, or to fight over religious differences and proprietary politics. White, Red, ;md Black: The Search for Order liv the opening decades ol the eighteenth century. South Carolina, like the earl) Chesapeake, seemed slated for a future of strife. While internal weaknesses ini paired social stability, external dangers threatened English settlement with extinction. The Spanish rattling their sabers in Florida, the French filtering into the Culf region, and the pirates lurking along the North Carolina coast imperiled the security ol settlement. iiw>n:ii.jng mti. tin- Indians and iii 1715 they struck The Vnmjsre laonehed a series of carefully coordinated assaults that nearly pushed white Carolinians into the sea.---- Once the allies and trading partners of white settlers, the Yamasee had subdued and enslaved smaller tribes like the Tiisearora. Then their own debt to Carolina merchants mounted, and the Yamasee realized that they might share the fate of the shattered Tuscarora. Allied with the Creeks, the Yamasee executed the most successful pan-Indian offensive in the eighteenth-century South. As Indians raided plantations within 30 miles of Charleston, refugees streamed into the city. planters, white Carolinians instituted repressive slave codes that converted their polony into an armed camp"and snuffed out the freedoms that blacks had oniovetl earlier. The ever-present threat of revolt on the part of the black majority gave all white South Carolinians, whatever their religion, politics, or ethnic background, an incentive to cooperate among themselves. Despite the persistence of high death rates and cultural differences, despite the continuing isolation of planter families and the lack of strong local civil and religious institutions—against all odds, white South Carolinians prospered and political peace prevailed after IT:JO. Any course except harmony would have extracted too high a price. In South Carolina there emerged a society both more opulent and more embattled than that of the Chesapeake. In its extremes of planter prosperity and black degradation, the surface splendor of Charleston and the actual vulnerability of the entire colony. South Carolina resembled the English Caribbean more closely than it did Virginia or Maryland. On the other hand, white Carolinians, like Chesapeake planters, tied their fortunes to a single staple crop, found themselves in debt to British merchants and financiers, prided themselves on being white and free, and held in contempt the enslaved black and Indian population Even more than the Chesapeake's biggest planters, low country Carolina s leading men depended for their wealth on the very people whom they' deeply feared—tin black slaves who tended their rice fields ant! the Indians who supplied them with pelts and slaves. The Founding of Georgia _Aitcr 17.30 South Carolinians could take comfort not only from their new prosperity and new political harmony, but also from the loimdine of a new colony on their southern border. South Carolinians liked Georgia a great deal more than the Virginians had liked Maryland, for the colony Ibriued a defensive buffer between British North America and Spanish Florida. .Enhancing the military security of South Carolina was only one reason tor.the lonndine of (Georgia. More important to General James Oglethorpe a*"l other .idealistic English eentrx was the aim of aitling the worthy poor''_hy~pn>viding tliem with land, employment, and a new start in a better society. They projected a colony of hardworking small farmers who would produce silk and wine, sparine England the need to import both commodities from other countries. That dream seemed within reach when George II made Oglethorpe and his friends the trustees of the new colony in 1732, granting them a charter for 21 shears, after which time Georgia would revert to royal control. Unlike the Virginia Company's inadequate and haphazard provisions for Jamestown, Georgia's trustees exercised strict oversight in their colony. They selected with meticulous care those poor families who were to be transported "on charity, a group including not only English hut Germans, Swiss, Austrians. Scots, and even a few Italians. The trustees did not, as legend has it. empty England's debtors' prisons to populate Georgia: they freed few debtors but recruited from even* country in Europe paupers who seemed willing to work hard— and who professed Protestantism. They sponsored their resettlement and provided each with 50 acres of land, tools, and a year's worth of supplies. They also encouraged settlers who could pay their own way to immigrate, by allotting them larger tracts of land. Much to the trustees' consternation, that generous offer was Newfoundland to the coast ol Acadia anti New England carried home descriptions oi the long, lonely stretch ol coast, rockbound and nigged, washed by the waves ol tilt* slate gray Atlantic. Long winters of numbing cold and heavy snowfalls alternated with short summers of steamy heat. There were no minerals worthy of mining, no crops worthy of export, no large population of natives suitable for enslaving. To prospective investors and settlers the Chesapeake, with its temperate climate and long growing season, appeared a more likely spot. In truth, of course, Indian tribes had successfully inhabited the territory that came to lie called New England for at least III,000 years. Each spring they set fires while the forests were still wet, to burn away the underbrush and make traveling and hunting easier. Such burnings encouraged the growth ol deer and other game populations and gave early New England forests an almost parklike appearance. Elsewhere, Algonkian women tended fields ol corn, beans, and pumpkins—not one crop per field as Europeans did, but mixed together in single patches, to help keep down weeds. B> the beginning of the seventeenth century, perhaps lOO.tXX) Algonkian-speaking men and women hunted, fished, and farmed in the area reaching from the Kennebec River in Maine to Cape Cod. Until 1020, the English remained unimpressed with the region's potential. Increasingly, however, deteriorating conditions in the Old World began to produce the peculiarly intense blend of desperation and idealism that was required to settle an uninviting, unknown world. Just as the crusading militancy of the Catholic Counterreformation shaped the French colonization of Canada, the uncompromising zeal of John Calvin xJullowers inspired the first English sclllciuciits o" the mirth Atlantic coast. Because of the Protestant Reformation, religious faith became more and more a matter of controversy during the seventeenth century. Compounding the religious crisis were mounting political tensions and continuing problems of unemployment and recession. Times were had—so had that the anticipation of worse times to come swept men and women to the shores of New England. The drama that unfolded there differed in almost every way from the ordeal taking place at the same time in the Chesapeake colonies and the Carolinas. The Puritan Movement -The settlement ol New England started with a king who chose his eiyemies-un- _wisely. |ames I . shortly after succeeding Elizabeth I in 1603, vowed to "harry out of his realm radical Protestant reformers. That angered the Puritans, the radicals whom James had in mind, and it angered some members of Parliament with Puritan sympathies. Next the king attempted to levy taxes without the consent of Parliament. That angered every member of Parliament and many other English besides. The auger of these two groups did not bode well for James' reign. Iii Parliament, he faced |x>litically ambitious landowners and merchants, who were convinced that law was on their side;. And in the Puritans he laced a determined hand ol zealots who were convinced that Cod was on their side. 'The Puritans were less remarkable for what they believed than for the intensity with which they believed it. Like all Christians. Proieshir^ ynd Catholic, tin Puritans hejieved d'-O Cud was all-knowintr and~aIFnowerfnl. And like all Calvin- jsls, I he PiirLtaus-eiup]i as izud-that idea utdivme-stixiueigntv known as predestination. At the center of their thinking was the belief that Cod had determined the outcome of history, including the eternal fate of every human being, before the beginning of time. Logically, believing in predestination should have made men and women despairing or passive, resigned to their preordained fates. But psychologically, the effect on the Puritans was just the opposite: predestination was the engine driving their' social and political activism. Par from sinking into pessimism, the Puritans called predestination "a com-—- fortalalc doctrine." because it provided their lives with meaning, order, and a clear sense of purpose. They had the assurance that a sovereign God was firmly directing the fate of individuals, nations, and all of creation. Far from lapsing into passivity, the Puritans strove to play their parts in the divine drama of history anti to discover in their performances some evidence of personal salvation. The divine plan, as the Puritans understood it, called for them to reform evils in both church and society along the lines laid down by John Calvin. What stood between them and the reformation of England was the state. Instead of promoting purity in the churches and order in society, the English government, it seemed to the Puritans, impeded the progress of reform, it tolerated drunkenness, theater- going, gambling, extravagance, public swearing, and Sabbath-breaking. It condoned popular pastimes rooted in pagan custom and superstition—sports like bear-baiting and maypole-dancing and festivals like the celebration of Christinas and saints' days. What was worse, the state had not gone far enough in purifying (lie English church. The Puritans deplored the "corruptions''_of Uomau_Catholi- cism that still infected the^CJumduiOhiglant}: the hierarchical offices oLhishops and archbishops, ecclesiastical courts, elaborate ceremonies in which priests wore ornate vestments, making communion a kind of literal sacrifice, in which wine was turned into blood before an altar. Tod many Anglican clergy were 'dumb dogges" in Puritan eyes, too poorly educated to instruct the laity in the truths of Scripture nr lo deliver a decent sermon. Finally, the Church of England included everyone in the nation, saint and sinner alike. To the Puritans, belonging to a church was no birthright. They wished to limit church membership and the privileges of baptism and communion to the visibly godly. Tile refusal of English monarchs to, take stronger measures _(o_re£urm church and society turned the Puritans into their outspoken critics,..Elizabeth 1 had toler^^- ated this~opp35ition. but lames 1 would not endure it and intended to rid England bhbeS'e m^cfttttents WitTTTinmejvi'th^ j-WilMns Lnnwv) as fhg SpfSraHcfs hf> Seemed to Succeed. The Pilgrim Settlement at Plymouth Colony Hie Separatists were Puritans who concluded that the Church ofFaigland was too uimipt lo be reformed from within. Theyabandoned Anglican worship and met secretly in small congregations of like-minded men and vvonii-n. From their first appearance in England during the 1570s, the Separatists suffered persecution from the government—fines, imprisonment, and in a few eases, execution. Always a tiny minority within the Puritan movement, the Separatists were pious [people from humble hafkgrr"]infh 'Taftworkcrsauid jariners without the resources ormeTumibers or the inclination to challenge the state. By 1608 one Separatist ttmgregriliOii, a group TTTScrooby, had become so dismayed by the depravity of Stuart England that they migrated to Holland. The move to Holland proved to be just the first of their trials. Although the Dutch government permitted complete freedom of religion, the Separatists were disappointed by low-paying jobs, alarmed when their children adopted Dutch customs, and distressed by desertions from their own ranks to other religions. Sfi THE CREATION OF A NFAV AMERICA Brunswick Dunstable 1 Tlh century Commonly held land Privately hekf lots v< Mile H Kilometer SWflU s * a t European migrations Interregional migrations □ Early population earner. Despite some variety among emigrants to New England, the region remained relatively homogenous and stable, with everyday life centered in small towns like Sudbury (heated to the west of Boston). Most families lived close to one another in houses clustered around tin meetinghouse, in contrast to the decentralized plantations ol' the South. The privately held larm lots were mixed together as well, so that neighbors worked and lived in close contact with each other. They wanted a place where their pure churches and communities could flourish, free of hardship, corruption, distraction, and competition. Some decided to move to Virginia. What fate would have greeted the gentle, unworldly Separatists of Holland if they had actually settled in the Chesapeake during the decade of the tobacco boom can only he imagined Rut a series of mistakes—including an error in charting tlu1 course ol their ship, the Mayflower—landed the little band in New England instead. In November 1620, some 88 Separatist "Pilgrims," sick with scurvy, weakened by malnutrition, and shaken by a shipboard mutiny, disembarked at a place that they called Plymouth on the coast of present-day southeastern Massachusetts. Neither the site nor the season seemed auspicious, as one of their leaders, William Bradford, later remembered: For summer being done, all things stand upon them with a weatherbeaten face, and the whole country, full of woods and thickets represented a savage hue. If ihey looked behind them, there was the mighty ocean which they had passed and was now as a main bar and gulf to separate them from all the civil parts of the world. For some, the shock was too great. Dorothy Bradford, William s wife, is said to have fallen overboard from the Mayflower as it lay anchored off Plymouth. It is more likely that she jumped to her death. Few Pilgrims could have foreseen founding the first permanent white settlement in New England, and many did not live long enough to enjoy the distinction. The season was far too late to plant crops, and the colonists had failed to bring an adequate supply of food with them. By the spring of 1621. half of the immigrants had died. Plans for attaining self-sufficiency through hunting and fishing proved impractical too, for the Separatists knew little of firearms and even less about fish. Their efforts to establish a summer fishery on Cape Ann ended in an inglorious retreat after a company of English fishermen laid claim to the same spot with muskets leveled. English merchants who had financed the Mayflower voyage failed to send supplies to tlie struggling colony. Plymouth might have become another doomed colony if tile Pilgrims hat 1 n<it receiveJTictter treatment from nativejnhabitants Him they did from their English Tjjgkgrs. Samoset and Squanto, two Indians who had learned to speak English from visiting fishermen, introduced the settlers to native strains of corn and arranged a treaty between the Pilgrims and the region's main tribe, the Wam- panoags, who sought the English as allies against their enemies, the Narragan- setts. Peace with them prevailed for 50 years, enabling the white settlers of Plymoutnto survive. The Pilgrjnw aho <et up =a ffoven'm^F-fhr tlnm- colony, the basis of which was Cpinpui-i That agreement provided for a governor and severaT assistants to advise hinu^tll tohe elected annually bv Plymouth's adult males. The Plymouth settlers had no clear legal sanction for their claim to land or their government, for they had neither a royal charter nor approval from the Crown. But English authorities, distracted by more pressing problems, left the tiny colony of farmers alone. The Puritan Settlement at Massachusetts Bay Among the Crown's distractions were other Puritans—the Presbyterians and the Congregationalists—who were still striving to reform church and society in England, But the 1620s brought them only fresh discouragements. In 1625 Charles I inherited his father's throne and all of his enemies in Parliament and among the Puritans. Charles dealt with political dissent by dissolving Parliament in 1629. lie dealt with religious dissent by supporting a group of archconservative Anglicans 0. led by Archbishop William Laud, proponents of stringent measures for suppressing Puritanism. Laud purged England's parishes of ministers with Puritan leanings anti reintroduced Roman Catholic rituals and practices into the Church of England. Increased persecution appeared to the Puritans a fearful portent that England was slipping toward the edge of apocalypse. Many believed that great catastrophes were at hand which would usher in the second coming of Jesus Christ. As their disillusionment deepened into desperation, some concluded that it might 1m- more prudent to cross the Atlantic—then press for reform and await Christ's return. The Puritans who became interested in American colonization came from tin- ranks of the Congregationalists. They shared with the Separatists in Old and New England a commitment to Calvinism and a common view ol church government. Both groups believed that each congregation should 1m- self-governing and independent of any higher authority. But the Congregationalists differed from the Separatists in their desire to remain within the Church ol England, as well as in their social background ami temperament. It was a group of energetic, experienced, and established Congregationalist merchants, landed gentlemen, and lawyers who organized the Massachusetts Buy Company in 1629. Alienated from their own society, these able Puritan leaders aimed TiTbuild a better society in-America, an sample to the rest of the world. Unlike the Separatists, they were imbued with a .strong sense of mission and destiny; they claimed that they were not abandoning the English ehnrch hnt regrouping ipr another assault on corruption from across .the Atlantic. They began by organizing a mass exodus to Massachusetts Bay that had the precision and efficiency of a military maneuver and the aggressive, martial spirit of a crusade. One of the immigrants. Edward Johnson, described his fellows as "Soldiers of Jesus Christ," who "for England's sake . . . are going from England to pray without ceasing for England." The Massachusetts Bay Company first dispatchud-advancc parties _ul several hundred settlers, who established ...the town of Salem as a Puritan lootliold on the coast well north of Plymouth. Then the company procured a royal charter eonfirm~- ing its title to most of present-day Massachusetts and New Hampshire anti securing its rights to govern the region. That accomplished, the stockholders promptly voted to transfer the company to Massachusetts Bay and elected us their first governor John Winthrop, a pious, tough-minded Puritan lawy er and fancied tie man. Winthrop sailed from England in 1630, taking with him a dozen other company stockholders and a fleet of men and women committed to the Puritan cause. "We shall he as a city on a hill, Winthrop declared during the crossing to fiis fellow passengers on the ship ArlteUa. The Winthrop fleet steered a straight course for Salem, landing on die spot as spring planting season began. To guarantee that the settlers would govern themselves without interference from London, Winthrop carried across the Atlantic the royal charter of the Massachusetts Bay Company. Leaders of the migration believed that the charter sup plied them with an unimpeachable title to settle and to rule, and they made the most of their opportunity. Once established in the Bay Colony, Winthrop and the other stockholders transformed the charter for a mere trading company into the framework of government tor a colony. The company's governor became the John Winthrop, the lirst governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony. colony's chief executive and the company's other officers, the governor's assistants. The charter provided for annual elections of the governor and his assistants by company stockholders, the freemen. But to create a broad base of support for the new government. Wintlirop and his assistants expanded tile freernanship in 1631 to include, every adult male church member. Being committed to Puritanism rather than owning eompany stock became the requirement for political participation. "The way of Caul hath alwayes beene to gather his churches out of the world, Winthrop remarked; "Now the world, orcivill state, must lie raised out oi the churches.'' The governor, his assistants, and the freemen together comprised the Gcn- eral Court of the colony, which passed all laws, levied taxes, established courts, and made war and peace. In 1634 the whole body of the freemen stopped meeting and instead each town elected representatives or deputies to the General Court. Ten years later, the deputies constituted themselves as the lower house of the bay Colony legislature, and the assistants formed the upper house. By refashioning a company charter into a civil constitution, Massachusetts Bay Puritans gained lull control of the government under which they would jive. In the New World they fulfilled their dream of shaping society, church, and state to their liking. Contrary to all expectations, New England proved more hospitable to the English than did the Chesapeake, J'lie character of the initial migration itself gave New England settlers an advantage, for most arrived not as young, single, indentured servants, but in family groups. The heads of New England's first households were typically free men—farmers, artisans, anti merchants, most ol whom were skilled and literate. Since husbands usually migrated with their wives anti children, the ratio of three men to two women within the population was fairly evenly balanced at the outset. There was never in New' England a large number of young, single men like those who contributed to the volatility of Virginia society. Most immigrants, some 21,000, came in a cluster between 1630 and 16-12. Thereafter the How of new arrivals tapered off because of the outbreak of the English Civ il War. The concentrated settlement of New England w ithin the short span of 12 years meant that these colonies, unlike the Chesapeake, escaped the strain of absorbing a steady stream of newcomers throughout the seventeenth iculury llapid settlement .dsn made lot soeial solidarity because immigrants shared a common set of experiences and ideals. The "Great Migration" of 1630 to I 1642 was a movement of Puritans unified by persecution and a strong sense of I religious mission—the desire to create a purer church and to establish an ordered | society modeled on Scripture. New England Families Like-minded Puritan emigrants and their progeny lived long and prospered in- N< \ England, and their very longevity fostered a sense of continuity;. New Eng- landers lived nearly twice as long ils Virginians and about 10 years longer than I English men and women. The first generation of colonists lived to an average age Along die edges ol New England settlement, several communities departed dramatically frtJJii typical patterns ol Puritan life—ami their inhabitants had no desire to conform. One such outpost was Marblehead, a lishing |x"rt north of Boston tin the Massachusetts coast. Marbleheaders were a volatile mixture of immigrant lisherfolk from England's West Country. Wales, Ireland, and the French-speaking Isle of Jersey in the English Channel. Most eked out a spare subsistence as suppliers and employees of Boston merchants, who managed Marblehead's fishery and pocketed most of its profits. Fishermen and mariners competed fiercely for credit and customers in Boston—and for the company of the few women in Marblehead. They sought solace for the shortage of both at the town s mans taverns, which inspired frequent street brawls anti drunken cavorting. Since most Marbleheaders had come to New England mainly to catch fish, they had little commitment to creating a community life of any kind, let alone the Puritan variety. 1 x >eal government remained weak for most of the seventeenth century, and inhabitants managed to avoid founding a local church lor 50 years. Similar problems blighted Springfield in western Massachusetts, a frontier settlement in the fertile Connecticut River valley. A single powerful family, the Pynehons, founded Springfield as a center of the fur trade and later developed a thriving commercial agriculture. The Pynchon family recruited most of Springfield's inhabitants—a motley assortment of Scottish convicts and English indentured servants—for their labor rather than their lives of piety and restraint. Baiicous, chaotic "company towns'' like Marblehead and Springfield—had morem common with the settlements of the early Chesapeake than with the rest of New England. Financed by profit-minded merchants, these places suffered Bum severe social disarray because of the great gulf between rich and poor and the exploitation of labor. Puritan Massachusetts tolerated these towns because their inhabitants produced what few commodities New England could trade to the rest of the world. Outside of the Connecticut River valley. New England's stony soil yielded just enough to feed farming families. But Marblehead's abundant supplies offish found a ready market in Catholic Spain and Portugal and among the slaves of English sugar planters in the West Indies. Similarly, the surplus of Springfield s grain and livestock commanded a goixl price among Caribbean planters, and English consumers coveted furs. In exchange. New Englanders acquired wine, sugar, molasses, textiles, and iron goods—commodities that they needed hut could not produce. Still, less-than-Puritan places like Marblehead and Springfield were few and far between. A more common cause of conflict in early New England than ethnic diversity and economic inequality was the tension that resulted when immigrants, of different English backgrounds tried to live together. Variations in English local enstoms produced disagreement among townsmen about the proper way of distributing land or farming it, regulating livestock, or allocating rights to marshes and woodlands. As the first generation passed from the scene, disagreements ol this sort died and other quarrels arose to take their place. The typical town conflict of the late seventeenth century was triggered by the movement drhousehdlds. As local population < vpandpH anH the warm ot towns became overcrowded, many young fctmilies relocated in outlying districts, village "suburbs. Since moving made churches and schools at the center of towns too distant, the "outlivers petitioned the town meeting to create convenient institutions of their own or to split off as a separate town. Reluctant to lose taxpayers, the town meeting often resisted, and a running battle between the two factions resnlteiL, vania anil Delaware enjoyed more secure 1 ivesjthanjnosLaiwrthemers, jhey lacked ffarbaSisTor consensus ~that It-nTlsIew Falkland its jemarl-aible stability. Instead, in each of the Middle Colonies an assortment of ethnic and religious groups vied for wealth from farming and the fur trade and chaf ed under the rule of political institutions less responsive and representative than those to the north and south. The Founding of New Netherlands JRv tlw-heginning ol the seventeenth.century the Calvinist Dutch had finally freed their homeland from Spanish domination. Having won independence, they were . equally determined to compete with Spanish merchants and to contain the spread of Spanish Catholicism. Along the Amazon River and the African coast, torts and trading posts of the Dutch West fedia Cmiipanv protected and promoted Dutch coimngrce while harrying Spanish competitors. Least important to the company was its sole outpost in North America, New Netherlands, founded in l(i24. The company had some interest in tapping the fairs of the interior, scattering a few trading posts along the Hudson. Connecticut, and Delaware rivers. But the Dutch did not, intend to plant permanent communities in America; enjoying both prosperity and religious freedom at home, they were far levs inclined than the English -immigrate. Tjujs New Netherlands' population was as small and scattered as. New England's was large and concentrated. Most of the few settlers were clustered in the village of New Amsterdam on the tip of Manhattan Island at the mouth of the* Hudson. One-hundred and fifty miles upriver lay Fort Orange (Albany). Bv the New Amsterdam (later New York City) in about 1626. Despite having this outpost in New Netherlands, the Dutch had far more interest in vying with the Portuguese for control ol commerce with the Far East than in competing with the English for the iur trade in North America. 102 THE CREATION Of A NEW .AMERICA 1660s a few other farming villages dotted the west end of Long Island, upper Manhattan Island, Staten Island, and the lower Hudson valley. fnall, there were fewer than 9000 New Nether landers—a diverse array ol Dutch, Belgians, french. English, Portuguese, Swedes, Finns, anti Africans. The first blacks had arrived in 1626. imported as slaves; some later became free, intermarried with whites, and even owned white indentured servants. Tills ethnic diversity ensured a variety of religions. Although the Dutch Reformed Church predominated, other early New Netherlander professed Lutheranism, Congregationalism. Quakerism, and Catholicism. There were Jews as well, refugees Irom Portuguese Brazil, who were required by law Jo live in a ghetto in New Amsterdam. To New Englanders, accustomed as they were to more homogeneous communities. New Netherlands must have seemed a veritable Babel, a bustling confusion of languages, customs, and beliefs Nevertheless, as early as the 1640s, a substantial number of New Englanders, drawn by promises ol cheap land and local self-government, planted farming conn..... on eastern Long Island. New Netherlander recognized that their differences complicated the creation of a stable civic order, and the Dutch West India Company did little to ease the strain. Most of the colony's governors were inclficicnt, corrupt, and dictatorial, and no elective assembly was established. New Netherlander felt little loyalty' to either the company or its representatives. To make matters worse, the company provided scant protection for its outlying settler; when it did attack neigh I wring Indian nations it did so savagely, leading to an increased level til violence. By the time the company went bankrupt, in 1654, it had virtually abandoned its American colony. New Englanders on Long Island, who had insisted on a free hand in regulating their own villages, began to demand a voice in running the colony as well Their example prompted Dutch towns to advance claims to self-government. By the 1660s, the New Englander had gone further still, openly challenging Dutch rule and calling for English conquest of the colony. English Rule in New York The English were, of course, already in the midst of an ongoing rivalry with Holland for maritime and commercial supremacy. In 1652 antagonism flared into a conflict that lasted Ibr two years, the first Anglo-Dutch War. Four y ears later the English, were- spoiling -Ibr .a, renewal ol hostilities. More than 1(M) English ship captains complained to Oliver Cromwell in 1658 that "the Dutch eat us out of our trade at home and abroad . . . and call us English Dogs, which doth much grieve our English spirits. They will not sail with us, but shoot at us and by indirect courses bring their goods into our ports, which wrongs not only us but you in your customs." Charles II Look up the challenge, tempted by the disarray ol New Netherlands. Brushing aside Dutch claims. The Long Islanders, however. had^settled-tn-New4erscy not at the invitation ol Berkeley jmd CartereL-hut under a conflicting grant from Governor Richard Nicolls of New1-York, whose colony claimed title to New Jersey. Unaware that James had already given New Jersey to his friends, Nicolls granted the Long Islanders land there, as well as the right to government by their own assembly. Tlie Long Islanders announced that they had not come ULNew-Jej;sey_to.-pay quit rents or to submit to autoci ati c ru fe- To complicate matters even more, Berkeley and Carteret decided to divide New Jersey into east and west and sell both halves to (Quaker investors. New Jersey s Puritan inhabitants, unhappy with any proprietorship, became apoplectic .it the prospect of heretical Quakers running their colony. But New Jersey was not destined to develop as the center of Quaker settlement in the New World. Although some English Friends migrated to West Jersey, the Quakers quickly decided that neither of the Jerseys compared favorably with Pennsylvania and sold both to speculators- In the end. the Jerseys were dominated neither hy Puritans nor hy Quakers, hut became patehworkx-oIonics of English. Scots. Irish. Dutch. French Huguenots. Germans, and Indians These settlers established small family farms and clustered in neighborhoods where inhabitants shared a common religion or national origin. When the Crown reunited east and west and converted New Jersey into a royal colony in 1702. it was still overshadowed by more notable settlements to the north and, now, to the south. - Quaker Odysseys A spirit of religious and political idealism similar to that ol New England infused llic settlement of Pennsylvania, making it an oddity among northern proprietary' colonies. The oddity began with an improbable bounder, William Penn. Young Penn devoted his early years to disappointing his distinguished lather. Sir William Penn, an admiral in the royal navy. After being expelled from college, he traveled in Europe, dabbled in law, and seemed generally at loose ends, until at last he settled upon a career that may have made his eminent father yearn for mere disappointment. For the son had been captivated by the doctrines of the Quakers; this youthful interest in the Society of Friends quickly deepened into a lifelong commitment to put into practice its teachings. By the 1670s William Penn had emerged as one of the movement's acknowledged leaders. English Quakerism had by the 1060s shed some of its more extreme practices, taken up during the previous heady decade of revolt and religious enthusiasm. But the Friends still adhered to ideas that most people regarded as odd. They affected a deliberately plain and severe manner of dress. They withheld from their social superiors the customary marks oi respect, such as bowing, kneeling, and removing their hats. They refused to swear oaths or to make war. They allowed women to speak in their meetings and to travel about preaching as "Public Friends. " That pattern of behavior bespoke their disdain of pride and worldliness and their embrace of egalitarian ideals. It was the logical conclusion ot tin- Quaker belief that all men and women shared equally in the "Light Within. Some 40,000 English merchants, artisans, and farmers embraced Quakerism by 1660, and many suffered lor their convictions, paying fines and enduring imprisonment and corporal punishment. Since the English upper class lias always welcomed eccentricity among its members, it is perhaps less surprising that young William Penn s Quakerism did nothing to diminish liis standing at the Stuart court or his friendship with Charles II. More surprising is that royal favor took the extravagant form of presenting Penn with all the land between New Jersey and Maryland. A roval charter of 1681 made the 37-year-old Penn the absolute proprietor of the only ungranted land "left along the North American coast, a territory nearly as large as England. Perhaps the king was repaying Penn for the large sum that his father had lent the Stuarts. Or perhaps the king was hoping to export England s troublesome Quakers to a preserve presided over by his trusted personal friend. Whatever the reason for Charles' generosity, the energetic Penn lost no time in making the most of his New World windfall. He envisioned planting a prosperous settlement that would provide a refuge for persecuted Quakers and produce revenue for its proprietor in the form of quitrents. Recruiting settlers required planning, because the pace of English migration to America had slowed by the 1680s, and Quaker meetings, the most likely source of colonists, were scattered throughout the British Isles and the continent of Europe. To publicize his colony, Penn printed pamphlets in several languages extolling its attractions. The response was overwhelming. In 1682, just a year after being chartered, Pennsylvania received 4000 settlers. Within five years its population had tripled, and by 1700 it stood at 21.000. The only early migration of equal magnitude was the Puritan colonization of New England. Perhaps half of Pennsylvania's settlers arrived as indentured servants: the families of free farmers and artisans made up the rest of the immigrants. The majority were English. Irish, and Welsh Quakers, but newcomers also included William Penn, the founder ol Pennsylvania. Catholics. Lutherans, Baptists. Anglicans. and Calvinists. Not all new Pennsylvanians came from the British Isles, Quakers from Germany and Holland joined the exodus. And in 1682 when Penn purchased and annexed the Three Lower Counties (later the colony of Delaware), his settlement included the Dutch, Swedes, and Finns living there, about 1000 people. Finally, Quakers from other American colonies- West Jersey, Maryland, and New England—Hocked to the new homeland. These experienced American farmers and established merchants brought with them agricultural skills and trading connections that contributed to Pennsylvania's spectacular economic growth. Industrious Quaker landowners speedily sowed their rich lands into a sea of wheat, which was exported along with pork, heel, and lumber to the Caribbean by enterprising Quaker merchants. The center of the colony's trade was the seaport of Philadelphia, a superb natural harbor situated at the confluence of the Delaware and Schuylkill risers. Boasting a population of 5000 by 1700, Philadelphia equaled New York City in size and soon outstripped its northern competitor. Rural settlement radiated rapidly from Philadelphia, first stretching along the Delaware River. After 1700 settlers moved west along the Schuylkill and later across the Susquehanna River. In contrast to New England's landscape of villages, the Pennsylvania country side was dotted with dispersed farmsteads. Commercial agriculture rccpiired larger farms, which kept settlers at some distance from one another. As a result, the county rather than the town became the basic unit of local government in Pennsylvania. Another reason that tarmers did not need to cluster their homes within a central village was that the local Indian tribe, the Lenni Lenapes (also called Delawares by the English), posed no threat. Thanks to two of the odder Quaker beliefs—their commitment to pacifism and their conviction that the Indians right- folly owneeftheir land—peace prevailed between native Pennsylvanians and new- coiners. Before lie sold any land to w hit e settlers. Penn purchased iTTrom the Indians. He also prohibited the sale of alcohol to the tribe, strictly regulated the fur trade, and learned the language of the la-uni Lenapes. Not a language spoken in Eum|M', he remarked, "hath words of more sweetness in Accent and Emphasis than theirs.' "Our Wildernesse flourishes as a Garden. Penn declared late in 1683. and in fact, his colony lived up to all of its advance promises. New arrivals readily acquired good land on liberal terms; Penn's Frame ol Government instituted a representative assembly and guaranteed all inhabitants the basic English liberties of habeas corpus (the right to bail) and trial by jury. In addition, all faiths enjoyed complete freedom of worship. Like the Puritans, Penn yearned to reform the political and religious errors of f.inope bv creating a model society across the seas. Ami like the Puritans, he believed that government should be based on contract and consent. Penn even shared with the Puritans the view that the state should by lavs promote morality, virtue, and Christian values. But he parted company with most New England Puritans on the point of religious toleration. While the Puritans believed that the government should support "true religion and persecute dissenters, Penn vehemently opposed religious establishments. Undeviating in his devotion to liberty of conscience, bgj^udorsed a nearly complete separation of church and state. Despite Pennsylvania s prosperity and rejigirius peace, political harmony did, not follow. Because Penn believed that the colony would survive and prosper only. with the backing of the wealthy, he sold rich investors large tracts of land to persuade them to settle. As an added inducement, he conferred ou them trade monopolies and political power. Penn's Frame of Government gave the sole right to initiate legislation to the council, a body comprised of those large landowners. The colony s representative assembly could only accept or reject bills sent down by the council. The citizens of Pennsylvania, having been given much, wanted more. Members of the assembly battled relentlessly for the right to init iate legislation. Fanners opposed Penn's efforts to make orderly allotments of land and to collect quitrents, The Dutch, Swedish, and Finnish inhabitants of the Three Lower Counties, non-Quakers who felt no loyalty to Penn, chafed at being annexed to the colony and agitated for separation. Adding insult to injury, even the Quaker merchants and landowners who owed their privileges to Penn tried to increase their influence by challenging proprietary rule. Their attacks found a receptive audience among settlers, fully half of whom could vote. Penn's carefully laid plans ran afoul of his prickly fellow Quakers who, accustomed to defying civil and religious authority in the Old World, bristled against proprietors in America. Peim filially bought peace in the place that he now called "this licentious wilderness -—but at the price of approving a complete revision oThis originaL Frame of Government. In 1701 the Charter of Privileges. Pennsylvania's new constitution, stripped the council ofits legislative power. braving it only the role of advising the governor. The charter also limited Penn's privileges to the ownership of ungranted laml and the power to veto legislation. A unicameral assembly, the only single-house legislature in the colonies, dominated Pennsylvania's government. Pennsylvania continued to prosper, and Philadelphia became the commercial and cultural center ol England's North American empire. The colony's Quaker inhabitants continued to squabble over politics, both among themselves and with their Anglican and Presbyterian neighbors. And as the interior of the colony became peopled with groups with no Odd ideas aland Indian rights—mainly Germans and Scots-Irish—the Lenni Lenapes and other trilies were intimidated into moving farther west. As for William Penn, he returned to England and spent some time in a debtors prison after being defrauded by his unscrupulous colonial agents. lie died in 1718, an ocean away from his American utopia. In the vear 1685 from the city of London, a new English king surveyed his American domains. The former duke of York, now James 11. had Imped that America might contribute to the making of England and. incidentally, to the making of kings anti queens, lake earlier Stuart monarch*. James hoped to ride to power on a wave of imperial wealth, just as Spain's monarchs had during the sixteenth century. The Stuarts had chartered the private trading companies of Virginia. Plymouth, and Massachusetts Bay, and they had handed out to their aristocratic favorites huge tracts of land—Maryland, the Garolinas, New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania—all in the name ol encouraging colonial settlement. But Stuart expectations had exceeded Stuart commitments. Their governments had resisted For the time being, the commissioners could do little to satisfy Iroquois doubts, except lavish as much hospitality as their straitened burl gets would allow. In the end, Hendrik and the other delegates made evasive promises of loyalty, and then hauled away 30 wagons full of presents. but would the colonies themselves unileFThat was Krnnklinls worry. On the way to the Albany Congress he had sketched out a tentative political framework for colonial cooperation. Working with several others at the meeting, he proposed establishing a federal council comu.oscd.xil represeiitatixos-femn each colony, pre1 'literdverby a president-general apjxmited by the Crown. The council would assume all rcsponsiliility for colonial defense and Indian policy, defraying the cost of building forts and patrolling harbors by taxes levied on all Americans. The commissioners were bold enough to accept the plan, having experienced face to lace the reluctance of the Iroquois and the reality of the French threat. Franklin sailed back down the Hudson with his plan endorsed and a call from the commissioners lo establish "one general guveminent" for British North America. But the union born at Albany was smothered by the jealous colonies, who were unwilling to sing i/o-heif'h-cif'li either in unison or separably. Not a single assembly approved the Albiuiy Plan of Union. New Englanders and Pennsylvanians did not want to help secure the claims ofVirgmians to the upper Ohio valley. Virginians, along with New Jerseyans, had refused even to attend the congress. And no American legislature was ready to surrender its cherished and exclusive right to tax inhabitants of its own colony—not to a federal council or any other Ixtdy. "Everyone cries, a union is necessary," Franklin wrote Governor Shirley oi Massachusetts in disgust; "but when they come to llu* manner and form ot the union, their weak noodles are perfectly distracted. If the Albany Congress prov cd one thing, it was that American colonials .were emphatically and hopelessly -djvTdedT Franklin, of course, should have known better. He was a practical man, not given to idle dreams, and he certainly recognized the many forces of disunion at work in America. He knew that the colonies were divided by ethnic, racial, and religious differences and prejudices. Year after year small wooden ships sailed into American seaports to disgorge a bewildering variety of immigrants-—especially in Philadelphia, where Franklin had lived since 1723. From his efforts to reorganize the post office Franklin knew, too. that Americans were separated by vast distances, poor transportation, and slow communications. And lie knew how much frontier districts distrusted seaboard communities and how the eastern sealxxird disdained the backcountry. Taken all in all. the British settlements in America were, in the eighteenth century, a diverse and divided lot. Immigration and Natural Increase One of the largest immigrant groups—250,000 black men, women, and children— had come to the colonies from Africa not by choice but in chains. White arrivals included a substantial number ol English immigrants, hut also a quarter of a million Scots-Irish, the descendants ol seventeenth-century Scots who had regret- Jj Scots-lrtsh piU Duicn I Gorman Great Wagon Road. All of the voyagers, English and non-English, risked the hazardous Atlantic crossing. And many mortgaged their freedom to redeem the price of passage by signing indentures to work as servants in the New World. The immigrants and slaves who arrived in the colonies hetween 1700 and 1775 swelled an American population that was already growing dramatically from natural increase. The birth rate in eighteenth-century America was triple what it is today. Most women bore between five and eight children, anti most children survived to maturity. Even larger families of 10 or more children were not un- common—Franklin was the youngest son in a family of 17 children. After about 1700, low rates of infant mortality and long life expectancy, the rule in the northern colonies since the seventeenth century, also became more typical in the South. Franklin knew, better than most colonials, the dimensions of American growth, both from immigration and through reproduction. In a 1751 essay on the siihjeet, he recognized the social and political consequences of the population explosion. People of different races speaking different languages, believing in different religions, and cherishing different customs created distinctive environments that ranged over a wide expanse of territory. This diversity, coupled with the hectic pace and sheer scale ol expansion alter 1700, made it hard for Americans to share any common identity. Far from fostering political union, almost every aspect of social development set Americans at odds with one another. / Older Rural Communities Once they disembarked at American ports, the free immigrants needed places to live and ways of earning a livelihood. So, too, did the burgeoning ranks of native- born Americans coming of age even' year: about half of the colonial population iu 1775 was under 16. The places that probably appealed to many immigrants and younger Americans were the scores of older rural communities lining the coast or lying a few miles inland. Even after a century7 of colonization, most northern settlements remained isolated villages of several hundred inhabitants living in simple family farmsteads built of logs, stone, or brick. In the older parts of New England, family farms of about 100 acres radiated along dirt roads from country towns, the centers of social life. Here farmers bartered small stocks of produce at village stores for w hat their families could not make at home—sugar, molasses, rum. spices, salt, chocolate, tea, iron ploughs and scythes, and English textiles. Here men and women gathered at village taverns to tipple, smoke, and gossip. Here families flocked on the Sabbath to worship at white steepled meetinghouses and to listen to long sermons delivered by the best educated man in the community, the village minister. Here, several times during the year, men convened at the same meetinghouse to discuss village business. The stony soil of New England's coast, now worn with a century of use, afforded most families just enough to feed themselves. Outside of the rich Connecticut River valley, it was almost impossible to turn a profit by fanning. But most formers owned the land they worked, and there were no marked extremes of wealth or poverty. In tlit- Middle Colonics, farms of slightly larger size lay at a greater distance from smaller central places, often only a crossroads where all of the county occasionally gathered at a tavern, a country store, a courthouse, or a church. The fertile soil south of Connecticut afforded farm families there not only subsistence but often a surplus of livestock and grain, which they sent to Philadelphia or New York City for export. Because of such commercial opportunities, wider disparities in wealth existed in some settled communities of the Middle Colonies. But since most farmers owned land, inequality was not pronounced. In established northern rural communities, there had emerged a local "squirearchy comprised of the wealthier farmers These families, at the pinnacle of the v illage pecking order, owned more land than their neighbors anil supplemented their farm income by keeping stores, milling wheat or logs, or practicing law. Year after year, they provided leadership for their localities, directing civic life and church allairs. In the oldest counties of the'Virginia and Maryland Tidewater and in the Carolina low country, stability anil prosperity also prevailed. Like the rural areas of the Middle Colonies, coastal southern counties specialized in commercial agriculture. Chesapeake planters cultivated tobacco for export; low-country formers grew rice and indigo. But southern forms were even larger than those in the Middle Colonies, and even greater distances isolated planters from each other. Not only longer physical distances, but also greater social distances separated inhabitants of settled plantation districts. Through a combination of forming, shop- keeping, land speculation, and professional practice, the gentry amassed estates that for exceeded those of ordinary planters. And after 1700. gentry property included a growing number of black slaves. Wealth won the deference ol lesser planters; social authority and political office passed from one generation of southern gentlemen to the next. Like their northern Counterparts, these local leaders administered justice, supervised civic life, anil oversaw public order and morality. To white immigrants from Europe, weary of war or worn by want. America's settled towns and counties must have seemed safe havens. But by the beginning of the eighteenth century, many coastal communities could no longer accommodate even the children of long-time settlers, let alone newcomers from Europe. In older New England towns, three and four generations were putting pressure on a limited supply of land, while wasteful forming practices had depleted the soil of its fertility. Farther south, earlier settlers had already snatched up the choice form- land ol Philadelphia's outlying counties, the prime tidewater tobacco property, and the best low-country rice swamps. With older rural communities offering few opportunities to either native-born or newly arrived white families, both groups were forced to create new communities in new places. Blacks alone among eighteenth-century immigrants were settled in established rural districts, the plantations of the tidewater and the low country . The uprooting and resettlement of Europeans. But for the most part, the peopling of New England's interior was left to the descendants of old Yankee families. Throughout the eighteenth century, young men, often brothers or cousins who had grown up in the same coastal village, brought their brides to Maine. New Hampshire, or Vermont, There they felled trees planted farmsteads, and named tiny hamlets after their hometowns back in southern New England. Better opportunities to acquire plentiful land at cheaper prices lay south of New York, especially in the backcountrv of Pennsylvania. Virginia, and the Caro- linas. There, Germans, Seots-lrish. and other settlers formed farming communities that were distinct from both the plantation districts ol the southern coast and the runil villages of the North. Backcountrv families dispersed across the landscape. enduring greater isolation than any other Americans. In one new Virginia Piedmont county, about 3000 settlers were, scattered over 5000 square miles. Farm families spread over this distance seldom had contact with anyone outside of the members of their own households. The nearest courthouse could lie as tar as a day's ride from many farmsteads; taverns and churches were often just as distant. II the isolation of the frontier inhibited the development of strong social bonds, so did the rapid rate at which people came to and left western communities. Many Americans migrated west only to roam restlessly within the backeoun- tr\: some families pulled up stakes three and four times before settling down permanently. It was not uncommon for as many as one-third of the members of a frontier county to move on after a few years—to be replaced fry an even larger number of newcomers. Houses reflected the transiency of frontier settlements. Framed structures were the exception; most families crowded into filthy, fragile, one-room shacks, earth-fast structures built ou posts sunk in the ground and walled with mud, turf, or erut le logs. Backcountrv economies afforded most families a bare existence. What the frontier gained in equality it may have lost in stability. In the back- country there were no southern gentlemen or northern squires to supply continuous, experienced local leadership. There was only a handlul ol farmers in each county set above their neighbors by a few extra acres or a single slave. To these relatively inexperienced and uneducated men fell the thankless tasks of overseeing public order as justices of the peace or officers in the local militia or representatives to colonial assemblies. It was bard lor men who bail so little authority over This log cabin, built in tin- North Carolina baekeountry in 1782. would have been dark inside, Riven the lack ol windows. The spaces between the logs in such cabins were usually chinked with thin stones or wedges of wood, then daubed with mortar. llteir fellows to police sprawling huckcouulry communities; not surprisingly, coarse anti aggressive behavior dominated frontier life. Backcoimtry men and women mated out of wedlock, swore in public, drank to excess, and brawled at any provocation. Nor were the churches much help in promoting law anti ortler. Most westerners could not at first allord to build churches, and their widely dispersed homesteads deterred them from attending public worship. The few clergy willing to endure the rigors ol preaching from one baekeountry neighborhood to another were either exceptional zealots or, as frontier folk described them, "notorious evil-livers'—drunkards, womanizers, and other scoundrels. While churches loomed large in the lives til Americans on the coast, most western families, although often deeply pious, had only haphazard or occasional contact with organized religion. Among the least enviable lives in eighteenth-century America were those of frontier women. Besides doing the usual chores of farm women, western wives and daughters joined male family members in the fields. One traveler from the East expressed his astonishment at seeing German women in western Pennsylvania "at work abroad on the Farm mowing. Hoeing, Loading Dung into a ('art Perhaps even more difficult to endure than the greater demands on their labor was the loneliness of their lives. Most women had little enthusiasm for moving iar away from family and old friends, and they often had trouble adjusting to the primitive conditions ol the baekeountry. Equally distressing was the distance sejv arating their homesteads from those oi female neighbors. The reactions of women tol >eing uprooted and resettled in a wilderness cabin can be guessed at from the assurance that one Scottish husband offered his wife: "We would get all these trees cut down . . . [so] that we would see from house to house." Social Conflict on the Frontier Benjamin Franklin knew about the lure of the frontier. He had observed the hordes of Scots-Irish and German immigrants disembarking at Philadelphia and lingering there just long enough to scrape together the purchase price of western land. He had seen workers in his own printshop grow restless with city life and light out for the frontier. From his point of view, the backcountry performed a valuable service by siphoning off surplus people from congested eastern settlements and endowing them with enough land to make a living. But he knew, too, lliat the frontier was an American Pandora s box: once opened, the West unleashed discord and conflict. Backcountry communities were themselves volatile and violent places. And the settlement of the frontier fostered deep political divisions between the eastern seaboard and the backcountry. These fissures fueled struggles in almost every colony, and in some, they widened into violent conflict. In Pennsylvania, Franklin himself mediated one contest between East and West. In 1763 a band of Scots-Irish farmers known as the Paxton Boys' protested the government's inadequate protection of frontier Settlers by killing a number ol Indians. Then they took their protests and their guns to Philadelphia, marching as far as Lancaster before Franklin intervened and promised redress of their grievances. Nordi and South Carolina did not get oil as easily. In both colonies, legislatures dominated by coastal planters refused to grant equitable political representation and extend basic legal institutions to inland settlers. In response to eastern intransigence, two protest movements emerged in the Carolina interior, each known as the Regulation. Beginning in the 1760s, backcountry South Carolinians sought to "regulate" into extinction gangs of horse thieves and cattle rustlers who preyed on farm families. The outlaws stormed into lonely plantations, burned farm buildings, stole livestock, kidnaped and raped women, tortured and murdered men. Disgusted by the inaction ol South Carolina's assembly, which refused to set up courts in the backcountry, westerners formed vigilante groups and administered grisly frontier justice to the marauders, as well as to any hapless drifters and trappers caught in their dragnets. Threats to march on Charleston itself finally panicked eastern political leaders into extending the court system, but bitter memories of eastern indifference lingered among the Regulators. If local government in western South Carolina was nonexistent, in North Carolina it was corrupt. Here frontier disaffection ran even deeper. Wealthy lawyers and merchants, hacked by big eastern planters, moved into the western parts ol the colony, shouldered aside local farmers, and seized control of politics. The new leaders used the machinery of government to exploit frontier settlers, charging exorbitant fees for legal services, imposing high taxes, and manipulating debt laws. Led by the largest local planters, frontier settlers petitioned the governor and the assembly for redress in 1766 and tried to vote the corrupt out of office. When that failed, a virtual civil war erupted in the backcountry. Dubbing themselves the "Regulation, western farmers seized county courts, liberated their jailed leaders, and at Iasi squared off 2000 strong against an eastern militia led !i> the governor. The militia won at the Battle of Alamance hi 1771, hut the brutal repression of frontier discontent left westerners in North Carolina with an enduring hostility to the seaboard. Ethnic differences exacerbated the political tensions between East and West. While people of English extraction predominated along the Atlantic coast, Germans, Scots-lrish, and other white minorities were concentrated in the interior. Many English colonials eyed the new immigrants with disdain and mistrust, regarding them as culturally inferior and even politic-ally subversive. In 1729 Bosto- nians greeted the arrival of a Ixiatload of Irish immigrants with a riot: a lew years later, a mob in Worcester. Massachusetts, set lire to a Sc-ots-Irish Presbyterian church. Farther south, the Scots-lrish also stirred strong animosities Charles Woodmason, an Anglican missionary' in the South Carolina hackcnuntry, deplored the influx of "5 or WXX) Ignorant, mean, worthless, beggarly Irish Presbyterians, the Scum of the Earth, the Refuse of Mankind, who "delighted in a low. lazy, sluttish, heathenish, hellish life. German immigrants were generally credited with greater industry as well as higher standards of sexual morality and personal hygiene. But like the clannish Scots-Irish, the Germans preferred to live, trade, and worship among themselves. They exhibited little admiration for English political institutions, even less interest in citizenship, and a decided aversion to military service. By 1751 Franklin was warning that the Germans would always retain their separate language and customs: instead of Anglicizing the Germans, the Pennsylvania English would be overrun by "the Palatine Boors. Even in South Carolina, a colony desperate lor white settlers because of its black majority, the assembly considered restricting German immigration. Boundary Disputes and Tenant Wars The settlement of the frontier also triggered disputes between colonies over their boundaries. At the root of the confusion were the old colonial charters, whose vague definitions ol western borders allowed groups of settlers and land speculators from different colonies to lay claim to the same tract of land. Thus was New York drawn into fray s w ith Connecticut and Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania with Connecticut and Virginia. The most serious of these border wars pitted New York against some farmers from New England who had settled in present-day Vermont: Ethan Allen and the Green Mountain Boys. In the 1760s New York, backed by the Crown, claimed laud that Allen and his friends had already purchased from New Hampshire. When New York tried to invalidate New England land titles and to extend its political jurisdiction over Vermont, it reaped a whirlwind of opposition. For more than a decade Allen spearheaded a successlnl guerrilla resistance, harassing Yorker settlers and officials, occupying Yorker courthouses, anti setting up a competing judicial system in the Green Mountains. The spread of settlement also set the stage for mass revolts by farm tenants in areas where proprietors controlled vast amounts of land. While outright owner ship of land was the exception among rural lolk in Europe, it was the rule in America. Throughout the eighteenth century, colonial governments regularly granted or sold land to any interested buyers; for those willing to settle in remote western districts, allotments were liberal and prices affordable. Even those who started out renting farms managed to end up as independent landowners. Still, in a few areas of the Middle Colonies, tenancy struck a deeper root. In eastern New Jersey, prominent proprietors pressed squatters lor quitrents on land that had become increasingly populated and therefore more valuable. When the squatters, many of them strong-willed migrants from New England, refused to pay rents, buy the land, or move, the proprietors began evictions, touching off riots in the 1740s. In New York's Hudson River valley several prominent merchant families had received large manorial estates in the 1680s from the royal governor. They established themselves on these tracts as resident landlords and recruited poor Dutch and German immigrants as tenants. By the middle of the eighteenth century, there were about 30 manors around New York City and Albany, totaling some 2 million acres and worked by several thousand tenants. Their labor produced a large surplus of wheat and livestock and a handsome profit for the great Yorker landlords. The terms of tenancy in the Hudson valley were fairly generous, because Yorker landlords had to compete with other colonies to attract laborers. But tenancy under any terms was unacceptable to the New Englanders who had moved there. They squatted on Yorker manors, fended oil all attempts at eviction, and preached their ideas about owning land to Dutch and German tenants. Armed insurrection exploded in 1757 and again, more violently, in 1766. Tenants refused to pay rents, formed mobs, stormed the homes of landlords, and prepared to march on New York City. The rebels dispersed only when a regiment of British soldiers arrived armed with a cannon. Eighteenth-Century Seaports Most Americans tin the move found homes, if not havens, in frontier communities. Others, drawn by opportunity or desperation, made places tor themselves in a different environment—colonial seaports. Cities like Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Charleston, founded as coastal v illages in the seventeenth century, became magnets lor migrants and mushroomed into major commercial centers by the opening decades of the eighteenth century. Benjamin Franklin's Philadelphia offered a waterfront hanged with wharves and dotted with warehouses, streets crowded with a jumble of shops, taverns, and homes, and a skyline punctuated by the spires of churches and the towers of public buildings li was the second largest city of all the British empire, hut by modern standards Philadelphia was small, with just 35,000 inhabitants in 1770. New York, Boston, Charleston, and Newport were its closest competitors in the colonies, 'Hie scale of city life was small in another way too. All of New York City was clustered at the southern tip of Manhattan Island; all of Boston could be traversed in a walk of less than an hour. Onl\ Philadelphia's population had sprawled into suburbs. And it was a rare building that rose more than two stories high. Because of their tiny total area, colonial seaports were teeming, congested places. Human occupants competed for places on crude sidewalks and narrow streets of gravel or rough cobblestone with cattle and sheep being driven to the butcher and with carts, carriages, and horses conveying produce and passengers, often at breakneck pace. Pedestrians, vehicles, and livestock alike vied for right of way with roaming herds of swine and packs of dogs. Despite the density of settle- Young single women from poorer families commonly spent a few years before marriage working in more affluent households as maids, cooks, laundresses, seamstresses, or nurses for infants and the infirm. Prostitution was another possible line of work, but less secure because of public opposition. More respected and lucrative occupations for women, all requiring long apprenticeships and expert skill, included midwifery, millinery, and "mantua making —the "Genteel way of Making up fashionable dresses and cloaks. Although wives of artisans and retailers sometimes assisted in their husbands businesses, and. as widows, often continued to manage groceries, taverns, and printshops, most women worked in jobs that more closely resembled traditional female roles. And even in cities, less than one out of every ten women worked outside their own homes. The people who lived in cities, perhaps one out oi every twenty Americans, enjoyed a more stimulating and diverse environment than most colonials. The wealthiest could attend an occasional ball or concert; those liv ing in liberal New York or Charleston might even see a play performed by touring English actors. The middling classes could choose among weekly newspapers and a varied stock at local bookshops and could converse with other tradespeople at private social clubs and fraternal societies. The lower classes, along with their betters, found diversion in drink, horse racing, cockfigliting, and bull and bear baiting. Occasionally members of all social classes converged at taverns to see traveling exhibitions of trained dogs and horses, exotic displays of "Great White Bears' and "Arabian camels," or the spectacular waxworks of one John Dyer, featuring "a lively Representation of Margaret, Countess of Ilerrinburg, who had Children at one Birth.' But city dwellers, then as now, paid a price for the variety of their lives. Commerce was fraught with risk: ships sank, small markets abroad glutted, and wars disrupted trading patterns. Natural and human disasters could send shock waves through the delicate economies of colonial seaports, bankrupting merchants and leaving craftworkers and laborers out of work. When trade slowed down, the lowest classes were the lirst to feel the pinch. The ups and downs of seaport economies, combined with the steady influx of immigrants, swelled the ranks of the poor in all cities by the mid-eighteenth century. While the major seaports established workhouses to employ the able-bodied poor, these institutions were a place of last resort for their intended occupants. Cities continued to aid most of the dependent by doling out small subsidies of money, food, and firewood. Not only economic life but often life itself was more precarious for city dwellers, who endured epidemic disease more frequently than country folk. The deadly microbes of smallpox and yellow fever, introduced to American ports by sailors and immigrants, spread rapidly among closely packed populations. And because ol urban congestion, fire was an ever-present danger as well. Although buildings of brick were slowly supplanting the wooden frame structures of an earlier era. a spark from a single clogged chimney flue could quickly set afire surrounding dwellings, engulfing overcrowded neighborhoods in a catastrophic blaze. Social Conflict in Seaports Cities were social tinderboxes ton. Just as rapid westward movement churned up trouble on the frontier, the swelling of urban populations sparked discord in seaports. The jumbled assortment of English, Scots-Trish, Germans, Swiss, Dutch. French, and Spanish jostled uneasily against one another in the compact quarters ol Philadelphia and New York. To make matters worse, religious differences con- strategy for survival. While the inilux of white immigrants to the back country contributed to upheaval on the frontier, the concentration of slaves on the southern coast generated conflict in plantation districts. Because they spoke fluent English and possessed valuable skills, they could survive once they slipped away from their masters. And because they ran away individually, the .slave artisans were more difficult to track down. Most disappeared into colonial seaports, where they practiced their craft or became sailors. liebellion against bondage also involved violence. Whites in communities rsufis tin i tTaTn mi iLc is olTilackslivccTTn giunCnTgclfcad of arson, poisoning, and pn. Four slave conspiracTeiTwere repOrtCtHir Virginia during' theTfirst half of the eighteenth century. In South Carolina, more than two decades of abortive uprisings and insurrection scares culminated in the Stono Kebellion ol 1739, -the largest slave revolt ot the colonial period. Nearly 100 blacks, led by a slave named Jemmy, seized arms from a store in the low-country district of Stono and killed several whites before they were caught and killed by the white militia. The Stono Rebellion triggered other unsuccessful slave uprisings and reports of slave conspiracies throughout the colonies in 1740 and 1741. But throughout the eighteenth century, slave rebellions occurred far less frequently on the mainland of North America than in the Caribbean or Brazil. Whites outnumbered blacks in all of tile colonies except South Carolina, and only there did rebels have a haven fora quick escape—Spanish Florida. Faced with these odds, most slaves reasoned that the risks of rebellion outweighed the prospects tor success—and most sought opportunities for greater personal freedom within the slave system instead. Despite the growing rebelliousness of blacks, southern planters continued to import African slaves in large numbers during the eighteenth century. The practice mystified Franklin, revealing at least one gap in his knowledge—the crucial importance of slavery in the southern economy. But unlike some ol his Quaker neighbors in Pennsylvania, who were beginning to object to slavery on moral and humanitarian grounds, Franklin's reservations—like his opposition to German Daily Thomas Jefferson, whose presidential administration invented the Washington cocktail party, complained that for every glass til wine drunk by his guests, his resourceful slaves stole three. Early Americans did not drink because they regarded alcohol as hcalthlul. blit their faith that it provided an added comfort. Until the middle of the eighteenth century, most colonials (and Europeans) considered spirits a source of physical strength and an essential supplement to their diet, as well as a remedy for colds, fevers, snakebite, and. ironically, depression. They did not condone public drunkenness, but they saw nothing amiss in the regular use ol alcohol or even in occasional intoxication. The easy acceptance of drinking prevailed for most of the colonial period tor two reasons. First, until about 1700s, frequent access to the strongest spirits, rum, lay beyond llie means of most Americans. Second, the leaders ol local communities were able to oversee most public drinking anti to keep disorder to a minimum. But by the middle of the eighteenth century some Americans developed misgivings alxuit the drinking culture. Increased production and importation led the price of ruin to drop anywhere from 30 to nearly 50 percent. With a gallon of rum selling so cheaply, an ordinary laborer could earn enough in a day to stay ' drunk as a lord" for the rest of the week. And as distilled liquor became cheaper, taverns proliferated, making it impossible for community leaders to monitor the popular consumption of alcohol. The new concern that the drinking of rum fostered crime and soeial disruption prompted the first steps toward temperance reform. By the 1770s, Quakers like Anthony Benezet were urging that alcohol, like slavery, was an "unrepublican Lives vice," for both forms of bondage deprived their victims ol liberty and the capacity for rationality and self-control. Some members of the medical profession also joined early temperance ranks, most notably Benjamin Rush, who publicized new theories about the detrimental effects of drink upon health which he had learned in Edinburgh, While the advocates of more uuxlcr- ate consumption won support among some educated elites, most Americans altered their drinking habits by consuming more bard liquor. Rum, the liquor of choice, received a setback during the Revolution when the British blockade cut drastically the import of both rum and the molasses from which it was made. It became so scarce that Patrick Henry, while governor of Virginia, was embarrassed into serv ing his guests home-brewed beer. Alter the war distillers tried to recover their trade, but consumption dropped from 8 million gallons in 1770 to only 7 million in 1789, even though the American population had nearly doubled during that time. Rum lost much of its ground to a new riv al, whiskey- Before the 1780s few Americans drank whiskey or were even familiar with it. But significant numbers of immigrants, arriv ing from Scotland and Ireland in the last quarter of the eighteenth century, brought with them the techniques ol efli- cient, small-still grain distilling. Whiskey was democratic and cheap, for it could he made in the lowliest back- country farmhouse. It was patriotic, since it did not depend on imports from the Caribbean. Gradually these "spirits of independence" supplanted rum. not only in the frontier West hut also in the urban East. Consumption of alcohol was on a steady rise that would finally result, hall a century after the Revolution, in calls for temperance reform. When the Constitution went into effect, the United States stretched from the Atlantic Ocean to the Mississippi River. The first federal census, compiled in 1790. put the population at approximately 4 million people, divided about evenly between the northern and southern states. Virginia, the largest and most populous state, contained over half again as many residents as Pennsylvania, its nearest rival. New York, whose settlers lived primarily in the Hudson River valley, ranked only fifth, behind not only Virginia and Pennsylvania. Imt also Massachusetts ami North Carolina. Formal boundaries could Ire deceptive, however, since the Republics population was overwhelmingly concentrated along the eastern scalxtard within 50 miles of the Tidewater. Only about 100.000 settlers lived beyond the Appalachians in the Tennessee and Kentucky territories, which were soon to become states. The area north of the Ohio River was virtually unsettled hy whites. "Hie great westward surge of population, which would he a major phenomenon of the nineteenth century, was just beginning. Within the Republic's boundaries were two major social groups that lacked effective political influence: African-Americans and Indians. In 1790 blacks numbered 750,000, almost one-fifth of die total population. Over 90 percent lived in the southern states from Mary land to (Georgia, most of them slav es who worked on tobacco and rice plantations. But there were free blacks as well, their numbers increased hy the ideals of liberty that the Revolution had fostered. In 1790 the free black population was larger, relative to the total African-American population, than at any time before the Civil War. The census did not count the mmiltcrs of Indians living east of the Mississippi. North ol the Ohio, the powerful Miami Confederacy discouraged settlement, although during the 1780s a smallpox epidemic had decimated their numbers. To the south, five strong, well-organi/ed tribes with a total population somewhere between .50,000 and 100,(KM)—the Creeks. Chemkres. Chickasaws. Choctaws, and Scininoles—dominated the region below the Ohio from the Appalachians to the Mississippi River. In 1790 in other words, Indian nations wielded effective control of more territory within the United States than the United States itself did. That situation would soon change, however, as the white population continued to double approximately once every 22 years. Immigration contributed only a small part tn this astonishing increase, for on average, fewer than IH.IKHI incoming Europeans arrived annually between 1790 and 1820. Thu primary cause was natural increase, making the United States preeminently a nation of youth. In 1790 almost hall of all white Americans were under 16 years old and the average American woman gave birth to nearly eight children. Because of the extremely high birth rate (no nation in the world today can match it), women did not liv e* as long, and thus males made up slightly more than hall the population, at least among whites.* The age at first marriage was about 2-5 lor men. 24 for women; because of the preponderance of males on the frontier, it was significantly lower in newly settled areas (on average perhaps 21 for males and less for females), whic h contributed to the high birth rate*. * Bemuse the 1790 reusus th(i not include signitimnt data on 1 ill' 111.irk population, nianv of the statistical figures quoted lot this era apply only to whites-. The 1796 Election As long as Washington remained head of the Federalists, they enjoyed an insurmountable advantage over their opponents. But in I7HH the weary president. stnngTiV-llie vituperation heaped on him by the opposition press, announced that he would not accept a third term in office. lust as he had refused during the Revolution to assume dictatorial powers, so in I THE he voluntarily relinquished IKJwei— setting a two-term precedent that other presidents would follow uiiliL Franklin Roosevelt. In his Farewell Address to his fellow citizens, he warned against the dangers ok parties and urtred a return to the earlier nonpartisan system. Since the "nonpartisan system envisioned the Federalists guiding thegovern~ meal, the manifesto amounted to an electioneering tract; still, it voiced Washington's genuine fear of party strife. But that vision had become obsolete: parties were an effective way of expressing the interests oi different social and economic groups within the nation. When the Republicans chose Thomas Jellerson to oo- pose JoljLLAdarns, the lMsssihilitv.olln nonpartv constitutional system disappeared. The framers of the Constitution did not anticipate that political parties would run competing candidates for both the presidency and the vice presidency. They assumed that, of those running for president, the candidate with the most electoral votes would win and the second highest would become vice president. Hamilton, ever the intriguer, disliked both Adams and Jefferson and tried to manipulate the electoral vote so that the Federalist vice presidential candidate, Thomas Pinckney of South Carolina, would be elected president. Hamilton attempted to persuade several Federalist electors to vote for Pinckney but not Adams; the scheme backfired when some of Adams supporters learned of the plan and refused to vote for Pinckney, in the ensuing confusion. Adams won with 71 electoral votes, and, his rival. Jefferson, gained the vice presidency with 68 votes. In their constituencies, the two parties reflected basic divisions in American life, geographically, the Federalists were strongest in New England, with its extensive commercial ties to Great Britain and its powerlnl tradition of hierarchy ~;Incl order. Moving farther south, the party became progressively weaker. Of the southernmost states, tbe Federalists enjoyed significant strength only in aristocratic South Carolina. The Republicans won solid support in subsistence areas like. the West, where Crevecoeur s farmers were only weakly linked to the market The middle states, with more complicated economic and social divisions, were doselv contested, although the most cosinopolitan_and commercially oriented elements remained the core of Federalist strength. The Republicans wuiy over most of the old Anti-Federalist opponents of the Constitution, and their coalition contained some who had firmly backed the new Uniuri. Those- supporters included soiritrcoinmcrclal farmers in the NqrjEZand planters in the South ;nid_. increasingly. urban workers and small shopkeepers who were repelled bv the aristocratic torwTbf the Federalists. In many communities, especially towns that were rising economically, the Republicans were led by ambitious men of new wealth who felt excluded by the entrenched Federalist elite. For similar reasons, Jefferson attracted the support of immigrants from France and Ireland, who felt culturally excluded, as well as members of religious sects such as the Baptists and Methodists, who resented the power and privileges of New England's established Congregational Church. A Irememlons public _miH:i:y aiyiinsf Fmnee ensued. Confronted with such deeply felt anger. Adams, who bristled with pride and independence, termed this act the most disinterested, the most determined and the most successful of my whole life. " With the Federalist party split. Republican prospects lor 1800 brightened Again the party chose Jefferson to run against Adams, along with Aaron Burr lot- vice president. Their efficient party organization coordinated the campaign, subsidizing Republican newspapers, circulating the Virginia and Kentucky resolutions as propaganda, and mobilizing supporters. In contrast, the Federalists' highhanded policies, disdain for the masses, and insensitivity to public opinion doomed them in a republic where the suffrage was so broad. The political journalist Noah Webster put his linger on his fellow Federalists' problem when he said: "They have attempted to resist the force of public opinion, instead of falling into the current with a view to direct it. Sweeping to victory, the Rcpnhlicans won control of both houses of Congress tor the first time aaiuiue 40 scats from the Federalists in the House alone Jefferson outdistanced Adams. 73 electoral votes to 65. although Adams ran ahead of his party and proved more popular with the rank-and-file Federalists and the southern wing of the party. But once again, the election demonstrated the fragility of the fledgling political system. Jefferson and Burr received an equal number of votes, lint the Constitution, with no provision for political parties, did not distinguish between the votes for president and vice president. With the election tied, the decision lay with the House of Representatives, where each state was allotted one vote. Since Burr refused to step aside for Jefferson, the election remained deadlocked for almost a week, until the Federalists, who eventually decided that Jefferson represented the lesser of two evils, allowed his election on the thirty- sixth ballot. The arrival of the Irish, who were desperately poor and did not view their situation as temporary, signaled the creation of a permanent working class. It also eventually let! to a lowering of wages and a narrowing of the gap between the highest and lowest paying jobs in the factory. Industrial Work The transition to an industrial labor force with values and behavior patterns that were attuned to factory w'ork was not a smooth one. Before the rise ot the factory, artisans had worked within the home. Apprentices were considered part of the family and subject to the discipline and control of the master. Masters were responsible not only for teaching their apprentices a trade, but also for providing them some education and for supervising their moral behavior. Journeymen took pride in their work, knowing that if they developed their skills and were frugal, they could eventually set themselves up in a shop and become respected master artisans. Nor did skilled craftsmen work by the clock, at a steady pace, but rather in bursts of intense labor alternating with slow seasons, their work frequently interrupted lor a pint of ale, a bit of gossip, or even a prank or two. The factory, however, changed that. Bride in craftsmanship gave wav to rates of productivity. Goods produced by factories were not as finished or elegant as thos£_domT by hand. Instead, the emphasis was on mass producing articles of lower Quality that could be sold cheaply. At the same time that workers .lost pride in their work, they were required to discard old habits. Industrialism demanded a worker who was sober, dependable, anti sell-disciplined. The machines, whirring and clacking away, set a strict schedule that had to be followed. Absenteeism, lateness, and drunkenness hurt productivity and, since work was specialized, disrupted the regular factory routine. This industrialization not only produced a fundamental change in the way work was organized, but also transformed the very nature of work. The first generation to experience these changes did not adopt the new attitudes easily, and many workers persisted in the old ways. The factory clock became the symbol of the new work rules. One mill worker who finally quit complained revealingly about "obedience to the ding-dong of the bell—just as though we are so many living machines. With the loss of personal freedom also came the loss of pride in one's work and a sense of place in the community. Unlike the master—apprentice relationship, factories sharply separated workers from management, and few workers rose through the ranks to supervisory positions. In areas ot the economy where factory production became dominant, even fewer could achieve the artisan's dream of setting up one's own business, since handcrafted goods were too expensive to be sold to any but the wealthy. Even well-paid workers sensed their decline in status. The Shoe Industry Shoemaking illustrates one way the artisan tradition came. In contrast, the sawyer (right) working in New York City evidences the dignity free blacks maintained in the face of hostility and discrimination. The Minstrel Show During the first hall oi the nineteenth century, a popular culture directed toward the masses developed in response to rising urbanization. Originating in the 1830s and 1840s and playing to packed houses in cities and towns throughout the nation and even in the gold fields of California, the minstrel show became the most popular form of entertainment in Jacksonian America. Featuring white aetors per- fimiiiigdrrhtacklact-, these sllows revealed the deep racism embedded in American societv, They dealt in the broadest ol racial stereotypes; their advertisements naiculed blac ks, with bulging eyeballs, Hat noses, large lips, and gaping mouths, as physically different. The skits themselves portrayed blac ks as hullootis, speaking in heavy dialect, performing outlandish dances, and singing almost compulsively. Although popular throughout the country, minstrelsy's primary audience was in northern cities, and its basic message was that African-Americans could not cope with freedom and therefore did not belong in the North. Blacks in slavery were portrayed as happy and contented, whereas free blac ks were invariably caricatured either as strutting dandies who aped white ways or as helpless ignoramuses. Longing to return to the South, one character declared. "Dis being free is worser den being a slave. Drawing its patrons from workers, Irish immigrants, and the poorer elements in society, minstrelsy assured these white champions of democracy that no matter what their situation, they were superior to blacks. • The unsettling economic, social, and political changes ol the Jacksonian era heightened white anxiety. Under intense pressure to succeed, whites were lotteries that were so popular among the lower classes. He outspokenly condemned those who drank to excess, and he sought to close the booths that sold grog on the Boston Common. And he denounced Roman Catholic priests and nuns as superstitious, devious agents of "Antichrist —that seven-headed, ten-horned beast described so vividly in the book of Revelation. By the late IS2IK a new wave of immigrants had begun to arrive in (lie United States, many of them Catholics from Ireland and Germany. Such newcomers, as well as other working people who enjoyed rum, whiskey, or lotteries, did not appreciate Beecher's efforts at "moral reform. When a blaze broke out in the basement of his church in 1830. local firelighters rushed to Hanover Street—tor the pleasure of watching while that splendid structure burned to the ground. The fires of spiritual reform bad been checked, temporarily, by a blaze of a literal sort. Any fire, real or spiritual, is a bit unpredictable as it spreads from one scrap of tinder to the next. So it proved with reform movements of the 1820s and 1830s: they moved in diverging, sometimes contradictory ways. What did it mean, after all. to bring in Christ's kingdom? The goals of the early reform societies were moral rather than social. Leaders like Beecher sought to convert individuals and to church the unchurched, with the help of religious revivals and benevolent associations. Their conservative aim. as he expressed it. was to restore America to "the moral government of God. Other Christians, however, began to focus on social abuses and to demand more radical solutions. The degradation of slavery, the inequality of women in society', the abuses of prisons and asylums—these social evils needed to he attacked directly they argued, ironically, while Lvman Beecher remained in the conservative mainstream, many ofliis children went well beyond bis own strategies for hastening the millennium. They spoke out for abolition, women's rights, and education in ways that left their father distinctly uncomfortable. In their activities, Beecher family members reflected the diversity of the reform impulse itself. Society during the Jacksonian era was undergoing deep and rapid changes. It was expanding economically through the revolution in markets, as its citizens competed for status and wealth through the gospel ol democratic individualism. In a nation where fortunes could be won and lost almost overnight, some reformers sought stability and moral order in religious community. The bonds of unity created by a revival brought a sense of peace in the midst ol a society in change. Revivals could provide a sense of strength and discipline, too, in an emerging industrial culture that demanded sobriety and regular working habits. Other reformers, however, sought to cheek the excesses ol Jacksonian America by radically remaking institutions or devising utopian, experimental ways of living and working together. The drive for renewal, in other words, led reformers sometimes to preserve social institutions, other times to overturn them. It led them sometimes to liberate, other times to control. And tin* conflicting ways in which these dynamics operated could be seen as the revivals of the Second Great Awakening were transformed by the electric career of Charles Grandisori Finney. The crusading idealism of revivalists and reformers inevitably collided with the hard reality that society could not be perfected by converting individuals. Despite the arguments ol the temperance movement, some Americans continued to drink. For all the zeal of the abolitionists, slavery showed no signs of disappearing, liven the revivalist tide had lost its force by the end of the 1830s. Several campaigns, including those to establish public schools and erect asylums, had operated within the political system from the beginning. But a growing number of other frustrated reformers abandoned the principle of.voluntary persuasion and looked to governmental coercion to achieve their goals. In America's democratic society politics promised a more effective means to impose a new moral vision on the nation. Declared a writer in the American Temperance Magazine, "The speculative has yielded to the practical. ... In this sense, moral suasion is moral balderdash. Old-1 ine politicians did not particularly welcome the new interest. Moral questions such as temperance and antislavery, which cut across party lines, threatened to detach regular parly members and disrupt each party's unity and voting base. Because the Whig and Democratic parties had formed around economic questions rather than moral ones, both drew on evangelical and nonevangelical voters. Yet it was precisely for this reason that moral reform, by mobilizing evangelical voters, threatened the Jacksonian party system. Both religion and reform helped shape that system, through ethnic and religious loyalties. Whigs attracted immigrant groups that most easily merged into the dominant culture, such as the English, Welsh, and Scots. Democrats, on the other hand, recruited more Germans and Irish, whose drinking habits, more lenient observance of the Sabbath, and (among Catholics) use of parochial schools made native-born citizens suspicious. As the self-proclaimed party of respectability, Whigs especially attracted the support of high-status native-born church groups, including the Congregationalists and Unitarians in New England and Presbyterians elsewhere. Democrats appealed to the lower-status Baptists and Methodists. For all their evangelical ways, these groups usually lacked the prestige and social acceptance of the Presbyterians and Congregationalists, with whom they often clashed. Both parties also attracted freethinkers and the unchurched, but the Democrats had tin- advantage because they resisted demands for temperance and Sabbatarian laws, such as the prohibition of Sunday travel. Women and the Right to Vote As the locus of change and reform shifted toward the political arena, women in particular lost influence. As major participants in the benevolent organizations of the 1820s and 1830s, they had circulated petitions, sought new members, and used their efforts on behalf of "moral suasion. " But since women could not vote, they felt excluded when reformers turned to electoral action to accomplish their goals. By the 1840s, female reformers increasingly demanded the right to vote us the means to reform society. Nor were men blind to what was at stake: one reason they so strongly resisted female suffrage was because it would give women real power. The temperance and abolitionist movements, both of which turned to [xilili- cal action in the 1840s, helped convince women of the importance of gaining the ballot. Previously, many female reformers had accepted the right of petition as their most appropriate political activity. But The Lily, a women's rights paper, soon changed its tack. "Why shall [women) he left only the poor resource of petition?' it asked. "For even petitions, when they are from women without the elective franchise to give them backbone, are of but little consequence." The right to vote would remain the key demand of the women's rights movement until 1920, when the Nineteenth Amendment was ratified. The Maine Law The political parties could resist the women's suffrage movement, since most of its advocates lacked the right to vote. !a*ss easily put off w ere temperance advocates. As early as 1825 Lyman Beecher had called for banning the sale of distilled spirits, and the antiliquor crusade turned to political action in the 1840s. Although drinking had significantly declined in American society, it had not been eradicated, and the arrival after 1845 of large numbers of German and Irish immigrants, who were accustomed to drinking, made voluntary prohibition even more remote. In response, temperance advocates decided to attack the supply of liquor by enacting state laws outlawing the manufacture and sale of alcoholic leverages; they demanded stiff penalties, including jail sentences, for individuals guilty of selling liquor. Antiliquor reformers reasoned that if liquor was unavailable, the attitude of drinkers was unimportant-—they would be forced to reform whether they wanted to or not. In taking up the cause of prohibition, the antidrinking movement gained the support of the evangelical churches, which condemned drinking even in moderation. Consequently, the issue of prohibition cut across party lint's, with large numbers of Whigs and Democrats on both sides of the question. When party leaders tried to dodge the issue, the temperance movement adopted the strategy of endorsing for the legislature only candidates who pledged to support a prohibitory law. As a result, a growing number of legislators committed themselves to the antiliquor cause. To win additional recruits, temperance leaders emulated techniques used in political campaigns, including house-to-house canvasses, parades and processions, bands and singing, banners, picnics, and mass rallies. The major triumph came in 1851 in Maine's legislature. The Maine Law, as it was know'll, provided stiff penalties for selling liquor in the state; it also provided for search and seizure of private property, thereby strengthening the powers of enforcement. In the next tew years a number oi states enacted similar law-s. although most were struck down by the courts or subsequently repealed. Nevertheless, prohibition remained a divisive political issue throughout the century. While prohibition W'as temporarily deleated, the issue badly disrupted the unity of the two parties. The birth rate of African-Americans, on the other hand, showed no significant falling off, and would not until after emancipation. Blacks had a strong sense of family, hut the economic incentives that motivated whites to reduce family size affected them less, since slaves were denied control over their own lives. Because free blacks were allowed to work only in the lowest paying jobs, they depended, as did poor immigrant families, on the income of \ children to make ends meet. The ideal of the democratic family I that developed after 1800 was based on I greater personal affection, not only be[ tween husband and wife, bn! also between I parents ami children. The new family was I child-centered: relations with children I were emotionally less distant and—as I Marrvat observed—discipline was less I severe. Children were seen as individuals with special needs, and companies began producing books, toys, and furniture designed specifically for children. By mid- eentury the concept of the family vacation had developed, along with new family- oriented celebrations such as Christmas, Thanksgiving, and birthday parties. With fewer children, mothers could lavish more attention on each child. Anxious about raising their sons and daughters properly, women read a host of books on child nurture directed specifically at them. Whereas the Puritan tradition had stressed the "breaking and beating down" of a child's "natural pride," nineteenth- century parents emphasized the importance ol affection rather than strict control. The new generation of children also tended to remain at home longer. Eight- eenth-century parents had put out older children as apprentices and servants in order to reduce their financial burden, but families now delayed their children's departure in order to evtend their education and increase their chances of success. A growing number ol children, especially among the urban middle class, lived at home until their late teens and even early twenties. Adolescence (a term that now came into common use) was recognized as a separate stage of lif e, distinct from childhood. witli its own needs and problems. In the new world of the market, aspiring parents hoped to raise children who were independent, responsible, orderly. THE republic: transformed and tested for manufactured goods, and buffalo, whose meal offered a reliable food supply. Having obtained guns in exchange for hire, the Sioux could drive tin* Omalias. Otos, Cheyennes, and Missouris (who had not yet acquired guns) south and west. Much like the Iroquois in New York a century earlier, the Sioux used their strategic position to dominate the western fur trade, but by the 1770s their previous advantage in guns bail disappeared, and any further advance up the Missouri was blocked by powerful tribes such as the Mandans and Arikaras. These peoples were primarily horticultural, raising corn, beans, and squash and living in well-fortified towns. They also owned more horses than the Sioux, which made it easier for them to resist attacks. But the third frontier, disease, threw the balance of power toward tin- Sioux after 1779. European traders inadvertently brought smallpox with them onto the prairie. The horticultural tribes were bit especially hard because they lived in densely populated villages, where the epidemic spread more easily. Observing this decimation, the Sioux abandoned their tentative experiments with agriculture and instead developed a nomadic culture centered on the buffalo hunt. They began a second wave of westward expansion in the late eighteenth century, so that by the time Lewis and Clark came through in 1804, they firmly controlled the upper Missouri as far as the Yellowstone River. The Sioux's nomadic life enabled them to avoid the worst ravages of disease, especially the smallpox epidemic of 1837, which reduced the plains population by as much its half . They also benefited from government vaccination programs in the 1830s and 1840s, after several L'.S. forts were established on the Missouri. Indeed, the Sioux became the- largest tribe on the plains and was the only one whose high birth rate approximated that ol whites, their population doubling perhaps every 20 years. From an estimated 5000 in 1804, they grew to 25,000 by the 1850s. Their numbers increased Sioux military power as well as the need lor new hunting grounds. During the first half of the nineteenth century, they pushed farther up the Missouri, conquered the plains west of the Black Hills, and won control of the hunting grounds on the Platte River. By the 1840s, when whites began to traverse the region in large numbers, tin- Sioux had become the most powerful tribe on the plains. So the "Sioux frontier was multidimensional, involving shifting boundaries of trade, animals, guns, and disease. Each of these factors disrupted the political and cultural life of the Great Plains. And as white Americans moved westward, their own frontier lines produced similar disruptions, not only' between white settlers and Indians, but also between Anglo-American and Hispanic cultures. To Americans in the East, hearing tales of covered wagons along the Platte, the frontier saga seemed a stirring tale of "progress" moving west. To ranchers in New Mexico or California, this migration threatened their status as the predominant upper class. For the Chinese who had come to the gold fields of California, it meant creating a civilized enclave among the fan kuxi (foreign devils), who mocked long pigtails and wore incredibly coarse clothes. Ironically, perhaps the greatest instability created by the moving frontiers occurred in established American society As the political system of the United States struggled to incorporate territories, the Nortli and South engaged in a fierce debate over whether the new lands should become slave or free. What, after all. was the destiny ol "these United States? (Americans, remember, still used the plural.) Just as the Sioux's cultural identity was brought into question by the moving frontier, so too was the identity of the American Republic. frontier settlers had grown indifferent if not hostile to religion. As the population grew, however, a more conventional society evolved: towns and a middle class developed, the proportion oi women increased, and the population Irecame more stable. The presence of women, both as teachers and as strong advocates of education, made possible the establishment of schools. As towns expanded to serve the neighboring countryside, they provided stores, newspapers, cultural institutions, and lxAier transportation. While opportunity was greater on the frontier than in the East and early arrivals had a special advantage, the development of the market and a transportation network meant that success and wealth would not he equally distributed throughout the community, More and more, the agricultural frontier of the West resembled the older society of the East. Wealth became concentrated, some families fell to the lower rungs of society, and those who were less successful left. seeking yet another fresh start. The Gold Kush lit January 1848, while constructing a sawmill along the American River, a carpen- trr and engineer named James Marshall noticed gold flecks in the millraec. More discoveries followed, and by May eager prospectors were stampeding to the Sierra foothills. Wortl took a season to trickle east, then spread like wildlire. and the following spring the Overland Trail was jammed with eager "forty-niners. " Some 80.000 emigrants journeyed to California that year, about 55,000 of whom took the overland route. The popular soug that Jiad once serenaded travelers to the boom country of Louisiana was quickly updated: "Oh, Susannah, don't you cry for me./ I'm gone to California with my wash-bowl on my knee. In only two years, from 1848 to the end of 1S-I9. California's population jumped from 14,000 to 100,000. By 1852 it stood at twice that figure, and in I860 it was 380,000 California's glittering promise would always have a special allure for restless Americans. For those intent on making a fortune and returning home, there was no question of putting down roots. Camps literally appeared and died overnight, as word of a new strike sent miners racing off to yet another canyon, valley, or stream bed. Most settlements were hardly more than a single street, littered with debris and lined with stores, buildings, and miners' shacks—dirty, uncomfortable, and often no more than blankets or cloth tacked to a wooden frame in order to holddown costs. Almost always a saloon and gambling hall, which might double as a hotel and sometimes a brothel, was the most prominent building in town. Over SO percent ol the prospectors who poured into these settlements were Americans; most hailed from the Mississippi valley, hut Yankees and free African-Americans were there as well. Mexicans, Australians, Hawaiians, Chinese, French, English, arid Irish also came. Whatever their nationality, the new arrivals were overwhelmingly unmarried men in their twenties and thirties. The constant movement, the hard labor of mining, the ready cash, and the motlessness all contributed to the instability of camp society. "There is an excitement connected with the pursuit of gold which renders one restless and uneasy ever hoping to do something better, explained one forty-niner. Hcinoved from the traditional forms of social control, miners felt and behaved as if they had left civilization behind. Gambling, swearing, drinking, and lighting were commonplace. As a Denver paper complained during that territory's gold rush a few years later, as soon as "men of decent appearance" reached a mining camp, they sang low songs, walked openly with the painted courtesans with whom the town teems, and generally gave themselves up to what they term 'a time!' Secure in the knowledge that "their women folks were safe and snug in their distant homes . . . these [former| gentlemen announced that they were going 'the whole hog or *"" none. Only about 5 percent of gold rush emigrants were women or children; given this relative scarcity, men were willing to pay top dollar for women's domestic skills. Women supported themselves by cooking, sewing, and washing, as well as running hotels and hoarding houses. "A smart woman can do very well in this country / one woman informed a friend in the East. "It is the only country 1 ever was in where a woman received anything like a just compensation for work. Yet women's earnings depended on those of the miners, and as the mines played out. their wages declined accordingly. Regardless, they suffered no shortage of suitors. "Even I had men come forty- miles over the mountains, just to look at me, Eli/a Wilson recalled, "and 1 never was called a handsome woman, in my best days, even by my most ardent admirers. Women went to the mining frontier to be with their husbands, to make money, or to find adventure. By far the class most frequently seen in the diggings were prostitutes, who numbered perhaps 20 percent of female Californians in 1850. Many had practiced their trade elsewhere before coming to the mining districts. Those handsome enough to set themselves up in "high-class houses made tidy fortunes. Rut for those who had aged or were less attractive, ''cribs" were rented: tiny, foul, windowiess rooms with a cot, a chair, and a blur of faces at 50 cents apiece. In such circumstances, life was grim, violent, and uncertain. Predictably, mining the miners offered one of the more reliable roads to prosperity, Perhaps half the inhabitants of a mining town were shopkeepers, businessmen, and professionals who serviced prospectors; also conspicuous were gamblers, card sharks, and other shady characters, all bent on separating the miner from Ins riches. In suc h an atmosphere, violence was prevalent, so when a new camp opened, miners adopted a set of rules and regulations to govern it, including a mining code and local government. Justice was dispensed promptly, either by a vote of all die miners or by an elected jury. After witnessing one such trial, a European visitor commented, "1 never saw a court of justice with so little humbug about it. While effective when administered lairly. the system at times degenerated into lynch law. Observers spoke of the democratic spirit in the diggings. The only capital required is muscle and an honest purpose, boasted one. Yet such assertions overlooked strongly held riativist prejudices: w hen frustrated by a lack of success. American miners directed their hostility toward foreigners, whom they scorned with suc h derogatory names as "greasers (Mexicans) and "chinks' (Chinese), The miners ruthlessly exterminated the Indians in the area, mob violence drove Mexicans out of nearly every camp, and the Chinese were confined to claims abandoned by Americans as unprofitable. Efforts to exclude all foreigners from mining failed, but the state eventually enacted a foreign miners' tax. which fell largely on the Chinese. Free African - American s fell the sting of discrimination as well, both in the camps and in state law. White American miners proclaimed that colored men were not privileged to work in a country intended only for American citi- zens." Before long, the most easily worked claims had been played out. Moreover, with 100,000 miners in the1 state* by 1852, competition steadily drove down the average daily earnings from 820 in 18-18 to $fi in IS52. That was still higher than wages, but goods and services cost significantly more too. As gold became increasingly difficult to extract, highly capitalized companies using heavy equipment dominated the industry. Shafts were dug deep into the ground, high-pres- sure water jets tore away ore-hearing gravel, and veins of quartz rock w ere blasted out and crushed in large stamping mills. Virtually all ol this was done by miners working for wages rather than prospecting for themselves. Thus control of the mining industry passed into the hands of capitalists and corporate executives. Men who had come to California filled with visions of wealth usually found only shovels of mud. And as the era of the individual miner passed, so too did most mining camps anti the unique society they spawned. Instant Cityg San Francisco When the United States assumed control of California, San Francisco had a population of perhaps 200. But thousands of emigrants took the water route west, passing through San Francisco s harbor on their way to the diggings. Some stayed, others returned from the mines to settle down, and by 1856 the city's population had jumped to an astonishing 50,000. In a mere eight years the city had attained the size New York had taken 190 years to reach. The product of economic self-interest. San Francisco developed in a helter- skelter fashion. Land prices soared, speculation was rampant, and commercial forces became paramount. The business streets presented a bedlam of noise and commotion, one visitor reporting that "the throng of men of all classes, characters, and nations, with carts and animals, equaled Wall Street before three o'clock. Tlu* city plan wras a neat gridiron, but it paid no heed to the hilly terrain, and streets along tire waterfront were projected precariously into the bay on piles driven into the water, until dirt from the hills being leveled could be carter! down to fill in I lie cove. To complicate matters, south of Market Street the streets were laid out at u 45° angle to the original survey, which clogged the flow of traffic. Commercial sentiment was so strong that almost no land was reserved for public use, and the city government took virtually no role in directing development. The town appeared insubstantial, with people living in tents or poorly constructed, half-finished buildings. Junk and rubbish littered the streets and goods were piled everywhere because of the lack of warehouse space. Property owners defeated a proposal to widen the streets, prompting the city's leading newspaper to complain. "To sell a few more feet of lots, the streets were compressed like a cheese, into half their width." The city's population was strikingly heterogeneous, and visitors reported that an amazing assortment of languages could he heard. Ethnic neighborhoods included Little Chile for South Americans, a French quarter, Sydneytown. where Australians dominated. Chinatown, and a Jewish section In I860, the city was .51) percent foreign-lxim. The most distinctive of the ethnic groups was the Chinese. They had come to Gum San, the land of the golden mountain, because China in the 1840s had experienced considerable economic distress. Between 18-19 and 1854, some 45,000 Chinese went to California. Like the other gold seekers, they were overwhelmingly young and male, and they wanted only to accumulate savings and return home to their families. (Indeed, only 16 Chinese women were recorded as arriving before 1854.) When the Chinese were harassed in the mines, many found work in San Francisco as launderers. The going rate at the time for washing, ironing, and starching shirts was an exorbitant $8 per dozen; many earls San Franciscans actually found it cheaper to send their dirty laundry to Canton or Honolulu, to In* returned several months later. The Chinese quickly stepped in, for it took little capital to start a laundry—soap, scrub board, iron, and ironing board. Soon the price for washing shirts dropped to $2 a dozen. Other Chinese around San Francisco set up restaurants or worked in the fishing industry . In these early years, they found Americans less hostile, so long as they stayed away from the gold fields. In 1850 a San Francisco newspaper, the Alta California, predicted optimistically that the China Boys will yet vote at the same polls, study at the same schools and bow at tire same altar as our countrymen." As immigration and the competition for jobs increased, however, anti-Chinese sentiment intensified. Gradually. San Francisco took on the trappings of a more orderly" community. The city government established a public school system, erected street lights, created a municipal water system, and halted further hlling in of the bay. Fashionable neighborhoods sprouted on several hills, as high rents drove many residents from die developing commercial center of the city. Industry was relegated to the area south of the city ; several new working-class neighborhoods grew up near the downtown section. Churches and families became more common. By I85(i, when the city and county were consolidated, the city of the gold rush had been replaced by a new city whose stone and brick buildings gave it a sense of permanence. The Mormon Experience The society spawned by the gold rush—in the makeshift mining towns and the chaotic progress of San Francisco—was a product of largely uncontrolled economic pressures. The society that evolved in the Great Basin of Utah exhibited an entirely different but equally remarkable growth. Salt Lake City became the center of a religious kingdom established by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Church members, known generally as Mormons, streamed west by the thousands during the 1840s. But unlike most families on the Overland Trail, they were united by a common faith and closely bound by persecution. Salt I^ake City reflected the discipline and unity of their movement, whose roots reached hack to the "Burned-Over District of western New York, an area wrhere the religious fires of revivalism Hared up regularly. The church had been founded in Palmyra, New' York, by a young man named Joseph Smith. In 1827, at the age of only 22, Smith announced that he had discovered a set of golden tablets on which was written the Book of Mormon. The tablets, translated by Smith, told the story of some lost tribes of Israel, who came to America and established a Christian civilization, only to be exterminated by the Indians. Proclaiming that he had a commission from God to reestablish the true church. Smith gathered a group of devoted followers. .Although he was a robust, cheerful, and magnetic person. Smith's unorthodox teachings provoked hitter persecution wherever he went: first in Ohio and then Missouri, where mob violence hounded his settlement out of the state. Finally he obtained a charter from the Illinois legislature to establish a Mormon community at Nauvoo. Thousands of followers settled there, but hostility again mounted after rumors circulated around the state that Smith had announced to his inner circle a new revelation sanctioning plural marriage, or polygamy. In 1844, following a dispute with dissident Mormons, the state threw him in jail in Carthage, Illinois, w here an anti-Mormon mob murdered him. increase the community's self-sufficiency. Regulations specified that sidewalks were to he a standard width, and homes were to lie set 20 feet hack from the sidewalks and constructed of adobe. The planners also provided for lour public squares in various parts of the city. As with the kingdom of Deseret itself, Salt Lake City lacked any traditional secular authority. The city was divided into 18 wards, each under the supervision of a bishop. Holding civil as well as religious power, the bishops were responsible for fencing, constructing irrigation ditches, and building and maintaining the bridges across the ditches in their wards. By 1853 the city already covered four square miles. As the city expanded, the original plan had to be modified to accommodate the developing commercial district by dividing lots into sizes more suitable for stores. Experience and growth also eventually dictated smaller blocks and narrower streets, but the city7 still retained its spacious appearance and regular design. Through religious and economic discipline church leaders succeeded in preserving a sense of unity' and common purpose in an urban setting, while milking a "desert bloom.' Shadows on the Moving Frontier Transformations like Salt Lake City and San Francisco were truly remarkable. But it is important to remember that Americans were not coming into a trackless, unsettled wilderness. As frontier lines crossed, 75,000 Mexicans had to adapt to the new American rule. In theory, the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo guaranteed that Mexicans would be "maintained and protected in the free enjoyment of their liberty and property . " So long as Mexicans continued to be a sizable majority in a given area, their influence was strong. But as Anglo emigrants became more numerous, they scorned Mexicans and demanded conformity to American customs. When Mexicans remained faithful to their heritage, language, and religion, these cultural differences worked to reinforce Hispanic powerlessness, social isolation, and economic exploitation. New Mexico had die largest Hispanic population as well as the fewest Anglos in the former Mexican territory. As a result, the upper-class Mexicans who owned the land and employed large numbers of mixed-blood workers on their ranches managed to maintain their position. This class had established American allies during the Santa Fe trade, and their connections grew stronger as American businessmen slowly entered the territory in the 1850s. Neither group had much interest in the lower-class Hispanies, whom both exploited. In contrast, the rush of American emigrants quickly overwhelmed Hispanic settlers in California and Texas. Even in 1848, before the discovery of gold. Americans in California outnumbered Mexicans two to one, aud by 1860 Hispanies amounted to only 2 percent of the population. Ironically, the descendants of the Spanish, who had opened their own American frontier three centuries earlier by exploiting Indians in the silver mines, now found themselves subject to the California "foreign' miners' tax and driven out of the gold fields by- Anglo mobs who had equally firm notions about their own superiority. During the gold rush, the 200 or so ranchero families (who together owned about 14 million acres) prospered because of the demand lor beef to feed the miners. But changes in California land law required verification of the rancher os' original land grants by a federal commission. Since the average claim took 17 years to complete and imposed complex procedures and hefty legal fees, many runche- ms lost large areas of land to Americans. Lower-class Mexicans scratched out a bare existence on ranches and farms, or in the growing cities and towns. Despised by the dominant Anglo majority and without skills and resources, they were often reduced to extreme poverty'. Mexicans in Texas were also greatly outnumbered: they totaled only 10 percent of the population in 1840 and (i percent in 1860. Stigmatized as inferior, they were the poorest group in free society. One response to this dislocation, an option Commonly taken by persecuted minorities, was social banditry. Just as the Shawnee prophet Tenskwatawa a half century earlier sought to drive out American intruders and restore the purity of Indian cultures, a number of Mexican bandits gained fame by attacking and robbing Anglos. The most famous was Joaquin Muri- eta of California, a semifictional character whose legend actually drew on the exploits of several men. Another folk hero, less shrouded in legend, was Juan Cortina. A member of a displaced landed family in southern Texas, Cortina was driven into resistance in the 1850s by American harassment. He began stealing from wealthy Anglos to aid poor Mexicans, proclaiming, "To me is entrusted the breaking of the chains of your slavery." His sizable band of followers staged a daring attack on Brownsville in 1859, then eluded the U.S. Army by retreating into Mexico. Cortina continued to raid Texas border settlements until the Mexican army, under intense American pressure, finally imprisoned him. While failing to produce any lasting change, Murieta and Cortina demonstrated the depth of frustration and resentment among Hispanics over their abuse at the hands of the new Anglo majority. ESCAPE FROM CRISIS. With the return of peace. Congress continued to debate what to do with its newly won territories, especially whether to allow slavery within them. David Wilmot had already thrown down the gauntlet of the northern opposition with his proviso to outlaw slavery' in any new territory. John C. Calhoun, representing the extreme southern position, countered that slavery ought to be legal in all territories. The federal government had acted as the agent of all the states in acquiring the land, he argued, and southerners had a right to move there and take their property with them, including slaves. Only when the residents of a territory drafted a state constitution could they decide the question of slavery. Between these extremes were two moderate positions. One proposed extending the Missouri Compromise line of36°30' lo the Pacific. That approach would have continued the policy, dating hack to the 1780s, of dividing the national domain between the North and the South. The other proposal, championed by Senators Lewis Cass of Michigan and Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois, was to allow the people of the territory rather than Congress to decide the status of slavery. This solution, which became known as popular sovereignty, was left deliberately ambiguous. Could settlers of a new territory prohibit slavery any time they wished or only at the time it was admitted as a state, as Calhoun argued? Hoping to avoid further polarization, Cass, Douglas, and other supporters of popular sovereignty left northerners and southerners to draw their own conclusions. In 1848 the two moderate approaches would probably have appealed to most mechanical reaper. Problems in harvesting had long limited the amount of grain farmers could grow, for they had only a short time to cut it before it spoiled. The reaper allowed as much as 14 tunes more wheat to be harvested with the same amount of labor. John Deere established a factory in Moline, Illinois, in 1847, the same year that McCormick set up headquarters in Chicago. McCormick was soon selling 1000 reapers a year and could not keep up with demand, while Deere turned out 10.000 plows annually, By 1860 midwestern states produced for market more wheat, corn, beef, and pork than any other region. Again the shift in commercial agriculture had an effect on the political balance. "The power of cotton over the financial affairs of the Union has in the last few years rapidly diminished, the Democratic Review remarked in 1849, "and bread stuff's will now become the governing power." Rising Industrialization On the eve of the Civil War, 60 percent of the American labor force was still employed in agriculture. But in 1860 for (be first time, less than half the workers in tire North were engaged in agriculture. The expansion of commercial agriculture spurred the growth of industrial labor, for out of the 10 leading American industries, 8 processed raw materials produced by agriculture; these included flour milling and the manufacture of textiles, shoes, and woolens. The only exceptions were iron and machinery. Industrial growth also spurted during the 1850s as water power was increasingly replaced by steam. Only a fixed number of rivers and falls were available for water-power sites, and in the Northeast, these had largely been occupied. For industry to spread, another source of power was essential. Most important, the factory system of organizing labor and the technology of interchangeable parts spread to other areas of the economy. The textile industry , we have seen, first brought workers together in factories. Many industries during the 1850s adopted interchangeable parts, which required that a product's components be machined to very fine tolerances. Isaac Singer began using them in 1851 to mass produce sewing machines, an invention patented only five years earlier. In turn, sewing machines made possible the ready-made clothing industry, while shoe manufacturers adapted the machines to concentrate all steps of their production under a single roof. Similarly, the workers who assembled farm implements performed a single step in the process over and over again. By 1860. the United States had nearly a billion dollars invested in manufacturing, almost twice as much as in 1849. Immigration The surge of industry depended on having a large labor force to support the factory system. Natural increase helped swell the population to over 30 million by 1860, but this accounted for only part of the new labor force, for the birth rate in the United States had actually begun to decline. On the eve of the Civil War the average white mother bore five children, compared to seven at the turn of the century. But the beginning of mass immigration to America during the mid-1840s kept population growth soaring. In the 20 years from 1820 to 1840, about 7(X),(>00 newcomers had entered the United States. That figure jumped to 1.7 million in the 1840s, then to 2.6 million in the 1850s. Though even greater numbers arrived after the Civil War. as a percentage of the nation's total population, the wave from 1845 to 1854 was the largest influx of immigrants in American history. From the British Isles alone, a fleet of 1000 ships transported immigrants back and forth; in 1854, one ol the heaviest years, 51 ships left Liverpool in June, carrying nearly 22,000 passengers. Whether traveling as individuals or as families, most of the newcomers were young people in the prime ol life: in 1850 out of224,000 arrivals, only 31,000 were under 10 and 20,000 were over 40. Although lares were low, the journey, which lasted from six weeks to three months depending on the weather, was anything but comfortable. The cheapest passage was the cramped, crowded quarters of steerage, where the food was bad, the air noxious, and sanitation inadequate. Sickness weakened the passengers, and sometimes epidemics decimated them. "Dvin like rotten sheep thrown into a pit, one Irish immigrant recalled, "and the ininit the breath is out of our bodies, flung into the sea to be eaten up by them horrid sharks." Once disembarked in the United States, newcomers were set upon by runners for various boardinghouses and railroad companies, as well as swindlers who tried to take advantage of them. Tickets, printed with enticing pictures of a train, steamboat, or canal packet, were hawked at exorbitant rates, after which hopeful immigrants might tind themselves herded, for example, onto a "night boat" from New York to Albany, with no shelter from the rain or cold, and only a hard deck to sleep on. Deaths from exposure on the lines to Albany alone were estimated in the thousands. Certainly the booming economy and the lure of freedom drew immigrants to America, but they were also pushed by deteriorating conditions in Europe. In Ireland, a potato blight which struck in 1846 produced widespread famine. Already desperately poor and oppressed by English landlords, the Irish faced hunger, starvation, and the ravages of epidemics that swept across the Emerald Isle. Out of an Irish population ol 9 million, as many as a million perished, while a million and a half more emigrated, two-thirds to the United States. The tide continued, though at a lesser rate, even after the potato crop recovered in 1849. Tlie Irish tended to be poorer than other immigrant groups of the day, generally younger sons and daughters of farm families, who had become a burden to their families because Irish landholdings and farms were so small. Mostly unmarried, they often arrived as individuals rather than as part of a family, and they sent money home to support their relatives. Although the Protestant Scotch-lrish New York was the major port of entry tor immigrants in the 1840s and 1850s. Here a group of Irish immigrants debark at New York in 1847. .532 tinned to emigrate, as they had in large numbers during the eighteenth century, the decided majority of the Irish who came alter 1845 were Catholic. Because they were poor and unskilled, the Irish congregated in the cities, where the women performed domestic service and took factory jobs and men did manual labor. Germans and Scandinavians also had economic reasons for leaving Europe. They might be small fanners whose lands had become marginal or who had been displaced by landlords, or skilled workers thrown out of work by industrialization. Others fled religious persecution. Some, particularly among the Germans, left after the liberal revolutions of 1848 failed. Many celebrated the free institutions ol the United States and advertised them in letters home. "1 am living in God -> noble and free soil, neither am 1 a slave under others, wrote a Swede who settled in Iowa in 1850. Since coming to America, he added, T have not been compelled to pay a penny for the privilege of living. Neither is my cap worn out from lifting it in the presence of gentlemen. An approving Dutch woman reported that schools were free, taxes low, and while "the finery is great, one cannot discern any difference between the cobbler's wife and the wife ol a prominent gentleman. Immigration reached its highest levels during periods ol prosperity, then declined significantly alter 1857, when the Country entered another depression. Newcomers testified that the pace of work was faster and more regular in the United States, but wages were high and the food abundant and cheap. "Nearly all people eat meat three times a day, marveled a woman from Holland. Although many Germans and Scandinavians arrived in modest straits, few were truly impoverished, and many could afford to buy a farm or start a business. Scandinavians and the Dutch were most often farmers; Germans included workers and shopkeepers, who settled throughout the countryside and in cities and towns. Unlike the Irish, Germans tended to emigrate as families, and wherever they settled they formed social, religious, and cultural organizations to maintain their language and customs. Whereas the Scandinavians, Dutch, and English immigrants were Protestant, half or more ol the Germans were Catholics. As a result of the immigrant tide, many American cities by 1860 contained a sizable foreign-born population. The Irish were especially numerous in eastern cities, particularly Boston, New York, and Philadelphia. Germans had established enclaves there too, but they were more dominant in western cities like Cincinnati, Chicago, Milwaukee, and St. Louis. By 1860 a majority of the population in Chicago, St. Louis, and San Francisco was foreign-born. Factories came more and more to depend on immigrant labor, since newcomers would work for lower wages and were less willing to protest harsh working conditions. The meager pay seldom supported a family, so both parents and all but the youngest children often had to work. The shift to an immigrant work force could be seen most clearly in the textile industry, where over half the workers in New England mills were foreign-born by 1860. Mostly Irish, they found that American employers gave them only the lower paying jobs and excluded them from company housing. Rising ethnic tensions between native- and foreign-born workers, as well as among immigrants of various nationalities, made it difficult for workers to unite. The massive influx of immigrants also strained city resources. Immigrants who could barely make ends meet were forced to live in overcrowded, unhealed tenement houses, damp cellars, and even shacks. A building might appear as "a high, respectable-looking brick house on the outside," one New York journalist reported, but "within, the hall was dark and reeking with the worst filth. . . . The upper part of the house was filled with little narrow rooms, each one hav ing liv e or six occupants; all very filthy. The people seemed very poor, honest Irish, not long here, and without work, usually." Such urban slums became notorious for crime and drinking, which took a heavy toll on families and the poor. In the eyes of many native-born Americans, immigrants were to blame for driving down factory wages and pushing American workers out of jobs. Overarching these complaints was a fear that America might not be able to assimilate the new groups, with their unfamiliar social customs, strange languages, national pride, and foreign traditions. Such fears precipitated an outburst of political nativism in the mid-1850s. Southern Complaints Industrialization affected the South, too, though in different ways. With British and northern factories buying cotton in unprecedented quantities, southern planters prospered in the 1850s. Like those of northern commercial farmers, their operations became more highly capitalized to keep up with the demand. But northern capital went into machinery like McCormick's harvester; white south- From 1815 to 1850, cotton and slave prices generally moved together, as southerners plowed their profits from growing cotton into huying more land and slaves. During the 1850s, however, the booming southern economy and bumper cotton crops drove the price of slaves steeply upward compared to cotton prices, squeezing slaveowners' profit margins and heightening southern anxieties about the future. The Know-Nothings New York City was the primary gateway for immigrants, and it was here in 1850 that a secret society, the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, was formed. The society, which entered the political arena as the American party, proclaimed its unbridled hostility' to the growing political power of Catholics and immigrants. Its members were sworn to secrecy and instructed to answer inquiries by replying "I know nothing. In 1853, the Know-Nothings (as they were quickly dubbed) began organizing in several other states; after only a year they had become the fastest growing party in the nation. Not coincidentally, 1854 also marked the peak of the new wave of immigration. Taking as its slogan "Americans should rule America, the American party advocated that immigrants Ik- forced to wait not 5 but 21 years before becoming naturalized citizens, and it called on voters to oust from office corrupt politicians who openly bid lor foreign and Catholic votes. Know-Nothings denounced illegal voting by immigrants, the rising crime and disorder in urban areas, and immigrants more easygoing observance of the Sabbath. (Germans, for example, enjoyed congregating on Sunday in beer gardens rather than engaging in solemn contemplation at home. ) Indeed, because the Irish as well as the Germans often drank more heavily than native-born Americans, the prohibition movement had strong nativist overtones and gained the support of many Know-Nothings. Behind a great many of their specific complaints lay a virulent anti-Catholicism. Know- Nothings were convinced that the "undemocratic" hierarchy of priests, bishops, and archbishops, controlled by the pope in Home, was conspiring to undermine American democracy. The party especially attracted the support of young native-born American workers, who bore the brunt of the economic dislocations caused by industrialization and had to compete with immigrants for jobs. To workers, their jobs threatened and their status declining, immigrants and Catholics seemed obvious symbols of the unwanted transformation. And in the election of 1854. joined by sympathetic farmers and some members of the middle class, they voted in remarkable numbers for nativist candidates in key northern states like New York. Pennsylvania. Ohio, and Massachusetts. The Know-Nothing triumph spelled doom for the Whigs, as the rank and file deserted in droves to the Know-Nothings. Fueled by its success, the American party turned its attention south, and in a few months it had organized in every state of the Union. By 1855, perhaps a million voters had enrolled in its lodges, as Know-Nothing candidates triumphed for the first time in Maryland, Kentucky, and Texas. Know-Nothing leaders confidently predicted that they would elect the next president. Yet only a year later—by the end of 1856—the party had collapsed as quickly as it had risen. Lack ol experience was one reason. Many Know-Nothing officeholders proved woefully incompetent, while in some stales ambitious politicians quickly took over die movement and used it for their own purposes. Worse, party members often fell to bickering among themselves and tailed to enact their program: voting reforms, a longer period of naturalization, and laws meant to check the power of the Catholic church. When firm deeds failed to follow strong words, supporters became disillusioned. Idle party's secrecy, too, seemed out of tune with a free republican spirit and in some cities, Know-Nothing gangs stole ballot boxes or attacked immigrants to prevent them from voting. Such actions made a mockery of the American party's claim to be a patriotic reform organization. 