or many centuries the first Americans lived as hunter-gatherers, subsisting on the abundant vegetation and wildlife. Over time, many of the larger species of animals—mammoths, giant beaver, and horses— died out, victims of overhunting and climatic change; their demise forced hunters to become adept at killing more elusive and faster rabbits, deer, and elk. About Using a global projection, the cartographer has placed North America in the center of the map. but parts of four other continents appear. m Evidence indicates that peoples came ^ from Asia to the Americas during the Ice Age, when the sea level was much lower than today and a large land bridge—labeled Beringia on the map - connected the continents. Current scholarship holds that the migrating peoples initially traveled on a narrow strip onf ice-free land along the Pacific coast. As the area between the Cordillcran ice sheets lost its cover of icc, probably between 14,000 and 12,000 B.<migrants may also have used the inland routes from present-day Alaska to ihe American interior.In the 1560s a Protestant rebellion in the Spanish Netherlands led to Holland's emergence as a separate nation and a major commercial power in both Asia and the Americas. England likewise experienced a religious revolution and a major economic transformation that gave it the physical resources and spiritual energy to establish Protestant settlements in North America. The Protestant Movement Over the centuries the Catholic Church had become a large and wealthy institution, controlling vast resources throughout Europe. Renaissance popes and cardinals were among the leading patrons of the arts, but some also misused the Church's wealth. Pope Leo X (r. 1513-1521) was the most notorious, receiving half a million ducats a year from the sale of religious offices. Ordinary priests and monks regularly used their authority to obtain economic or sexual favors. One English reformer denounced the clergy as a "gang of scoundrels" who should be "rid of their vices or stripped of their authority," but he was ignored. Other reformers, such as Jan Hus of Bohemia, were tried and executed as heretics. Martin Luther's Attack on Church Doctrine. In 1517 Martin Luther, a German monk and professor at the university in Wittenberg, nailed his famous Ninety- five Theses to the door of the castle church. That widely reprinted document condemned the sale of indulgences—church certificates that purportedly pardoned a sinner from punishments in the afterlife. Luther argued that heavenly salvation could come only from God through grace, not from the Church for a fee. He was excommunicated by the pope and threatened with punishment by King Charles I of Spain (r. 1516-1556), the head of the Holy Roman Empire, which included most of Germany (Table 1.2). Northern German princes, who were resisting the emperor's authority for political reasons, embraced Luther's teachings and protected him from arrest, thus allowing the Protestant movement to flourish. Luther broadened his attack, articulating positions that differed from Roman Catholic doctrine in three major respects. First, Luther rejected the doctrine that Christians could win salvation through good deeds, arguing that people could be saved only by grace, which came as a free gift from God. Second, he downplayed the role of clergy and the pope as mediators between God and the people, proclaiming, "Our baptism consecrates us all without exception and makes us all priests." Third, Luther said that believers must look to the Bible (not Church doctrine) as the ultimate authority in matters of faith. So that every German-speaking believer could read the Bible, he translated it from Latin into German. Peasants as well as princes heeded Luther's attack on authority and, to his dismay, mounted social protests of their own. In 1524 some German peasants rebelled against their manorial lords and were ruthlessly suppressed. Fearing social revolution, Luther urged obedience to established political institutions and condemned the teachings of new' groups of religious dissidents, such as the Anabaptists (so called because they rejected infant baptism). Embracing Luther's views, most princes in northern Germany broke from Rome, in part because they wanted the power to appoint bishops and control the Church's property within their own domains. In response, Emperor Charles dispatched armies to Germany to restore Catholic doctrine and his political authority, unleashing a generation of warfare. Eventually the Peace of Augsburg (1555) restored order by allowing princes to decide the religion of their subjects. Most southern German rulers installed Catholicism as the official religion, while those in the north made Lutheranism the state creed (Map 1.7). The Teachings of John Calvin. The most rigorous Protestant doctrine was established in Geneva, Switzerland, under the leadership of the French theologian John Calvin. Even more than Luther, Calvin stressed the omnipotence of God and the corruption of human nature. His Institutes of the Christian Religion (1536) depicted God as an awesome and absolute sovereign who PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 peasantry of England is decayed and become servants to gentlemen." These changes, and a series of crop failures caused by cold weather between 1590 and 1640, set the stage for a substantial migration to America. In Mesoamerica the Spanish colonial regime forced the Indians to convert to Catholicism and to work digging gold and farming large estates. But in the sparsely populated Indian lands north of the Rio Grande, other Europeans founded different types of colonies (Table 2.1). In the fur-trading empires created by die French and the Dutch, the native peoples retained their lands and political autonomy, while in the English colonies the rapidly multiplying settlers expelled the resident Indians, who were pushed ever farther to the west. Despite the differing goals of these colonial regimes—the exploitation of native labor by the Spanish, the trading of furs by the French and the Dutch, the creation of farming communities by the English—nearly everywhere the Indian peoples eventually rose in revolt. New Spain: Colonization and Conversion In their ceaseless quest for gold, Spanish adventurers became the first Europeans to explore the southern and western United States. In the 1540s Francisco Vasquez de Coronado searched in vain for Cibola, the fabled seven golden cities said to lie north of present-day Albuquerque. Continuing his search, Coronado dispatched expeditions that discovered die Grand Canyon in Arizona, the Pueblo peoples of New Mexico, and the grasslands of central Kansas. Simultaneously, Hernan de Soto and a force of 600 adventurers cut a bloody swath across the densely populated Southeast, doing battle with the Apalachees of northern Florida and the Coosas of northern Alabama but finding no gold and few riches (Map 2.1). By the 1560s few Spanish officials still dreamed of finding rich Indian empires north of Mexico. Now their main goal was to prevent other European nations from establishing settlements. Roving English "sea dogs" were already plundering Spanish possessions in the Caribbean, and French corsairs were attacking Spanish treasure ships, halving the Spanish crown's revenue. Equally ominously, French Protestants began to settle in Florida, long claimed by Spain. In response King Philip II ordered that the Frenchmen in Florida be "cast . . . out by the best TABLE 2.1 European Colonies In North America before 1660 Date First Settlement Type Religion Chief Export or Economic Activity New France 1608 Quebec Royal Catholic Furs New Netherland 1613 New Amsterdam Corporate Dutch Reformed Furs New Sweden 1628 Fort Christina Corporate Lutheran Furs; farming English Colonies Virginia 1607 Jamestown Corporate (Merchant) Anglican Tobacco Plymouth 1620 Plymouth Corporate (Religious) Separatist- Puritan Mixed farming; livestock Massachusetts Bay 1630 Boston Corporate (Religious) Puritan Mixed farming Maryland 1634 St. Mary's Proprietary Catholic Tobacco; grain Connecticut 1635 Hartford Corporate (Religious) Puritan Mixed farming; livestock Rhode Island 1636 Providence Corporate (Religious) Separatist- Puritan Mixed fanning; livestock Dominican friars teach him the Spanish language and the principles of the Catholic faith. Three years later the young man was in Mexico, where he acquired a new patron, Don Luis de Velasco, the viceroy of New Spain, who became his godfather and gave the Indian his own name. Eager to return to his people, in 1566 the Indian Don Luis accompanied an expedition to the Bahia de Santa Maria that was blown off course, and he found himself once again in Spain. Under Jesuit instruction, a contemporary chronicler noted, "he was made ready and they gave him the holy sacraments of the altar and Confirmation." Eor his part, the Indian Don Luis convinced the Jesuit father Juan Baptista de Segura of his "plan and determination ... of converting his parents, relatives, and countrymen to the faith of Jesus Christ, and baptizing them and making them Christians as he was." Thus it was that the young Christianized Indian and eight Jesuit missionaries landed in 1571 in Ajacan, five miles from the later site of Jamestown. Once restored to the land of his childhood, Don Luis readopted its customs, taking a number of wives. Publicly chastised for adultery by Father Segura, he took refuge in his native village. When three missionaries came to fetch him, Don Luis had them killed with a "shower of arrows"; then, according to one account, he murdered Father Segura and the rest of the Jesuits by his own hand. The massacre brought quick retribution. In 1572 Menendez personally led a punitive expedition that killed dozens of Indians, but his former protege escaped his wrath. At this point the historical record becomes cloudy, but there is strong circumstantial evidence that the young cacique, Don Luis, now took the name Opechancanough and became chief of the Pamunkeys. Both chiefs are described in the records as imposing in size, much taller than most Indians and most Europeans. And there is a chronological fit between their fives. When Don Luis returned to America in 1571, he was about twenty-five years old; in 1621, when Opechancanough succeeded Powhatan as chief, he was an elderly man. Finally, there is the translation of Opechancanough's name: "He whose soul is white"— perhaps a reference to his fife as a Christian Indian or his remorse about Father Segura's fate. As Spanish dreams of an eastern North American empire faded in the face of fierce Native American resistance, England dispatched its own adventurers to search for gold and promote "the Christian religion to such People as yet live in Darkness." Opechancanough first confronted the new invaders in December 1607, when he captured Captain John Smith but spared his life. Two years later, after Smith grabbed Opechancanough "by the long lock of his head; and with my pistol at his breast... made him fill our bark with twenty tuns of corn," the chief did not seek revenge. Instead, for the next decade, the Pamunkeys' leader pursued a complicated diplomatic strategy: he "stood aloof" from the English and "would not be drawn to any Treaty." In particular, he strongly resisted proposals to take Indian children from their parents so that they might be "brought upp fir Christianytie." At the same time, Opechancanough promoted interracial peace by accepting the marriage of his niece Pocahontas to John Rolfe and by arranging a treaty between the English and a Chesapeake tribe. The chief's allegiance may have been divided between two worlds: Algonquian and European. An Indian in culture and outlook, he was also a person whose soul was "white." Then, in 1621, this man assumed a new identity, taking the name Massatamohtnock. And he took up a new cause. The number of English migrants had greatly increased, leading many Algonquians to believe that the English would soon take up "all their lands and would drive them out the country." To prevent this, the aging Massatamohtnock played a double game. While assuring Governor Wyatt of Virginia that "the Skye should sooner falle than Peace be broken, on his parte," he secretly mobilized the Pamunkeys and more than two dozen other Indian peoples. In 1622 these tribes launched a surprise attack that took the lives of 347 English men, women, and children. Urging the chief of the Potomacks to continue the onslaught, Massatamohtnock declared his goal: "before the end of two Moons there should not be an Englishman in all their Countries." Finally defeated in the late 1620s when the English systematically burned Indian cornfields, the old chief reappeared in 1644, orchestrating another surprise assault that took the lives of "near five hundred Christians." Now a hundred years old, "so decrepit that he was not able to walk alone but was carried about by his men," Massatamohtnock was captured by the English and taken to Jamestown. There, an English official reported, an angry soldier "basely shot him through the back... of which wound he died." The absence of Algonquian sources makes it unlikely that we will ever know the complete history or the real motives of this remarkable man. But the violent treatment Don Luis meted out to Father Segura and the uprisings Massatamohtnock instigated in 1622 and 1644 suggest that ultimately he defined himself as an Indian patriot, a resolute enemy of the European invaders and their Christian religion. PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 New Amsterdam, c. 1640 /Is the wooden palisade surrounding the town indicates. New Amsterdam was a frontier settlement, a fortlike trading post at the edge of vast lands populated by alien Indian peoples. The first settlers, remembering the architecture and waterways of Amsterdam and other Dutch cities, built houses in the Dutch style, with their gable ends facing the street (note the middle two houses), and excavated a canal across lower Manhattan Island, connecting the Hudson and East Rivers. Library of Congress for furs. However, the West India Company now largely ignored its crippled North American settlement, concentrating instead on the profitable importation of African slaves to its sugar plantations in Brazil. Moreover, Dutch officials in New Amsterdam ruled shortsightedly. Governor Peter Stuyvesant rejected the demands of English Puritan settlers on Long Island for a representative system of government and alienated the colony's increasingly diverse population of Dutch, English, and Swedish migrants. Consequently, in 1664, during an Anglo-Dutch war, the population of New Amsterdam offered little resistance to an English invasion and subsequently accepted English rule. For the rest of the century the renamed towns of New York and Albany remained small fiir-trading centers, Dutch-English outposts in a region still dominated by Native Americans. In Albany, Mohawk remained the language of business until the 1720s. The First English Model: Tobacco and Settlers The first English ventures in North America, undertaken by minor nobility in the 1580s, were abject failures. However, the European presence extended into the interior, as colonial authorities established diplomatic and commercial relations with neighboring Indian peoples and as French and Dutch fur traders carried European goods and diseases to distant tribes. included only traders and adventurers—no settlers, ministers, or women. The company retained ownership of all the land and appointed a governor and a small council to direct the adventurers, who were its employees or "servants." They were expected to procure their own food and ship anything of value to England— gold, exotic crops, and Indian merchandise. Some of the employees were young gentlemen with personal ties to the shareholders of the company but no experience in living off the land: a bunch of "unruly Sparks, packed off by their Friends to escape worse Destinies at home." The rest were cynical adventurers bent on seizing gold from the Indians or turning a quick profit from trade in English doth and metalware. All they wanted, as one of them said, was to "dig gold, refine gold, load gold." Unfortunately, such traders were unprepared for the challenges of the new environment. Arriving in Virginia after a hazardous four-month voyage, the newcomers settled on a swampy peninsula on a river. They named both their new home (Jamestown) and the waterway (James River) after the king. Because the adventurers had chosen an unhealthful location with little fresh water and refused to plant crops, their fate was sealed. Of the 120 Englishmen who embarked on the expedition, only 38 were alive nine months later, and death continued to take a high toll. By 1611 the Virginia Company had sent 1,200 settlers to Jamestown, but fewer than half had survived. "Our men were destroyed with cruell diseases, as Swellings, Fluxes, Burning Fevers, and by warres," reported one of the leaders, "but for the most part they died of meere famine." Native American hostility was a major threat to the survival of the settlement. Upon their arrival, the traders had been immediately confronted by the Pamunkey chief Powhatan, the leader of the Algonquian-speaking tribes of the region, some 14,000 people in all. Powhatan, whom the adventurer John Smith described as a "grave majestical man," allowed his followers to exchange their corn for English cloth and iron hatchets but treated the English as one of the dependent peoples of his chiefdom. As conflicts over food and land increased, Powhatan threatened war, accusing the English of coming "not to trade but to invade my people and possess my country." In 1614 the Indian leader tried another strategy to integrate the newcomers into his chiefdom, allowing the marriage of his daughter Pocahontas to the adventurer John Rolfe. This tactic also failed, in part because Rolfe imported tobacco seeds from the West Indies and began to cultivate the crop, which was already popular in England. Tobacco quickly became the basis of economic life in Virginia, setting in motion the creation of a settler society. New Political Institutions. To attract migrants to its increasingly valuable colony, the Virginia Company instituted a new and far-reaching set of policies. In 1617 it allowed individual settlers to own land, granting one hundred acres to every freeman in Virginia, and established a headlight system giving every incoming head of a household a right to fifty acres of land and fifty additional acres for every servant. The following year the company issued a "greate Charter" that swept away the military-style regime of Governor Sir Thomas Dale, laying the basis for a system of representative government. The House of Burgesses, which first convened in Jamestown in 1619, had the authority to make laws and levy taxes, although the governor or the company council in England could veto its legislative acts. By 1622 these incentives of PART ONE The Creation of American Society. 1450-1775 land ownership for ordinary settlers, self-government by local leaders, and a court system based on "the lawes of the realme of England" had attracted about 4,500 new recruits. Virginia was on the verge of becoming an established colony. However, the influx of settlers sparked all-out war with the Indians. Land-hungry farmers demanded access to land that the Native Americans had cleared and were using, alarming Opechancanough, Powhatan's brother and successor. Mobilizing the peoples of many Chesapeake tribes, in 1622 Opechancanough launched a surprise attack, killing nearly a third of the white population and vowing to drive the rest into the ocean. The English retaliated by harvesting the Indians' cornfields, providing food for themselves while depriving their enemies of sustenance, a strategy that gradually secured the safety of the colony. The cost of the war was high for both sides. The Indians killed many settlers and destroyed much property, but Opechancanough's strategy had failed; rather than ending the English invasion, the uprising accelerated it. As one English militiaman put it, "[We now felt we could] by right of Warre, and law of Nations, invade the Country, and destroy them who sought to destroy us; whereby wee shall enjoy their cultivated places ... possessing the fruits of others' labour." The invaders sold captured warriors into slavery and took control of huge areas of land. By 1630 the colonists in Virginia had created a flourishing tobacco economy and a stable English-style local polity, controlled by landed gentlemen sitting as justices of the peace. The Chesapeake Experience The English colonies in the Chesapeake brought wealth to some people but poverty and moral degradation to many more. Settlers forcefully dispossessed Indians of their lands, and prominent families ruthlessly pursued their dreams of wealth by exploiting the labor of English indentured servants and enslaved African laborers. Settling the Tobacco Colonies Distressed by the Indian uprising of 1622, James 1 dissolved the Virginia Company, accusing its directors of mismanagement, and created a royal colony in 1624. Under the terms of the charter, the king and his ministers appointed the governor and a small advisory council. The king allowed the House of Burgesses to remain, but any legislation it enacted required ratification by his Privy Council. James also legally established the Church of England in Virginia, so that all property owners had to pay taxes to support the clergy. These institutions—a royal governor, an elected assembly, and an established Anglican church—became the model for royal colonies throughout English America. Catholics in Maryland. However, a second tobacco- growing settler colony, which developed in neighboring Maryland, had a different set of institutions. In 1632 King Charles 1 (r. 1625-1649), the successor to James 1, conveyed most of the territory bordering the vast Chesapeake Bay to Cecilius Calvert, an aristocrat who carried the title Lord Baltimore. As the proprietor of Maryland (named in honor of Queen Henrietta Maria, Charles's wife), Baltimore could sell, lease, or give this land away as he wished. He also had the authority to appoint public officials and to found churches and appoint ministers. Baltimore wanted Maryland to become a refuge from persecution for his fellow English Catholics. He therefore devised a policy of religious toleration intended to minimize confrontations between Catholics and Protestants, instructing the governor (his brother, Leonard Calvert) to allow "no scandall nor offence to be given to any of the Protestants" and to "cause All Acts of Romane Catholicque Religion to be done as privately as may be." In 1634, twenty gentlemen (mostly Catholics) and two hundred artisans and laborers (mostly Protestants) established St. Mary's City, which overlooked the mouth of the Potomac River. The population grew quickly, for the Calverts carefully planned and supervised the colony's development, hiring skilled artisans and offering ample grants of land to wealthy migrants. However, political and religious conflict constantly threatened Maryland's stability. When Governor Leonard Calvert tried to govern without the "Advice, Assent, and Approbation" of the freemen of the colony, as the charter specified, a representative assembly elected by die freemen insisted on the right to initiate legislation, which Lord Baltimore grudgingly granted. Uprisings by Protestant settlers also endangered Maryland's religious mission. To protect his Catholic coreligionists, who remained a minority. Lord Baltimore persuaded the assembly to enact a Toleration Act (1649) granting religious freedom to all Christians. Tobacco and Disease. In Maryland, as in Virginia, tobacco was the basis of the economy. Indians had long used tobacco, a substance unknown in Europe before the Columbian Exchange, as a medicine and a stimulant. By the 1620s English men and women were craving tobacco and the nicotine it contained, smoking, chewing, and snorting it with abandon. Initially James I condemned the use of this "vile Weed" and warned that its "black stinking fumes" were "baleful to the nose, harmful to the brain, and dangerous to the lungs." But the king's attitude changed as revenues from an import tax on tobacco filled the royal treasury. European demand for tobacco set off a forty-year economic boom in the Chesapeake, attracting thousands PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 colony and issued a "Manifesto and Declaration of the People," demanding the death or removal of all Indians and an end to the rule of wealthy "parasites." "All the power and sway is got into the hands of the rich," Bacon proclaimed, as his army burned Jamestown to the ground and plundered the plantations of Berkeley's allies. When Bacon died suddenly from dysentery in October 1676, the governor took his revenge, dispersing the rebel army, seizing the estates of well-to-do rebels, and hanging 23 men. Bacon's Rebellion was a pivotal event in the history of Virginia. Although landed planters continued to dominate the economy and polity, they curbed corruption and found public positions for politically ambitious yeomen. The plan ter-merchant elite appeased the lower social orders by cutting their taxes and supporting the expansion of settlement onto Indian lands. The uprising also contributed to the expansion of African slavery. To forestall another rebellion by poor whites, planters in Virginia and Maryland turned away from indentured servitude. To provide labor for their expanding plantations, they explicitly legalized slavery and imported thousands of Africans, committing their descendants to a social system based on racial exploitation. Puritan New England The Puritan exodus from England from 1620 to 1640 was both a worldly quest for land and a spiritual effort to preserve the "pure" Christian faith. By creating a "holy commonwealth" in America, these pious migrants hoped to promote reform within the established Church of England. By distributing land broadly, they tried to build a society of independent property-owning farm families. And by defining their mission in spiritual terms, the Puritans gave a moral dimension to American history. The Puritan Migration From the beginning New England differed from other European settlements. New Spain and Jamestown were populated initially by unruly male adventurers, New France and New Netherland by commercial-minded fur traders. By contrast, women and children as well as men settled Plymouth, the first permanent community in New England, and its leaders were pious Protestants—the Pilgrims. The Pilgrims. The Pilgrims were Puritans who had left the Church of England, thus earning the name "Separatists." When King lames 1 embraced hierarchical religious policies in the 1610s and threatened to harry Puritans "out of the land, or else do worse," the Pilgrims left England and settled among like-minded Dutch Calvinists in Holland. Subsequently, 35 of these exiles resolved to migrate to America to maintain their English identity. Led by William Bradford and joined by 67 other migrants from England, they sailed to America aboard the Mayflower in 1620 (Map 2.5). Before departing, the Pilgrims organized themselves into a joint-stock corporation with backing from sympathetic Puritan merchants. Arriving in America without a royal charter, they created their own covenant of government, the Mayflower Compact, to "combine ourselves together into a civill body politick." This document was the first "constitution" adopted in North America and used the Puritan model of a self-governing religious congregation as the blueprint for political society. The first winter in America tested the Pilgrims. As in Virginia, hunger and disease took a heavy toll; of the 102 migrants who arrived in November, only half survived until the spring. Thereafter the Plymouth colony—unlike Virginia—became a healthy and thriving community. The cold climate inhibited the spread of mosquito-borne diseases, and the Pilgrims' religious discipline established a strong work ethic. Moreover, because a severe smallpox epidemic in 1618 had killed 90 percent of the local Wampanoag people, the migrants faced few external threats. The Pilgrims quickly built solid houses, planted ample crops, and entered the fur trade. Their numbers grew rapidly to 3,000 by 1640, prompting the creation of ten new self-governing towns. A legal code embodied their social ethics, providing for a colonywide system of representative self-government, broad political rights, and a prohibition of government interference in spiritual matters. Meanwhile, England was plunging deeper into religious turmoil. King Charles I supported the Church of England but personally repudiated some Protestant doctrines, such as the role of grace in salvation. English Puritans, who had gained many seats in Parliament, accused the king of "popery"—holding Catholic beliefs. Charles's response was to dissolve Parliament in 1629, claiming that he ruled by "divine right." He began to raise money through royal edicts, customs duties, and the sale of monopolies. The king's arbitrary rule struck at the power of the landed gentry, who expected to exercise authority through the House of Commons, and cut away at the profits of the merchant community, a stronghold of Puritanism. Then in 1633 the king chose William Laud, who loathed Puritans, to head the Church of England. Laud removed hundreds of Puritan ministers and forced Anglican rituals on their congregations, prompting thousands to seek refuge in America. The Massachusetts Bay Colony. Nearly fifty thousand Puritans left England between 1620 and 1640, hut they managed to create Puritan-dominated societies only in the New England colonies of Plymouth, Massachusetts Hay, and Connecticut. Within New England, migrants from the three major areas of English Puritanism—Yorkshire, East Anglia, and the TVes/ Country—commonly settled among those from their own region. They named American communities after their English towns of origin and transplanted regional customs to New Englund, such as the open-field agriculture practiced in Rowley in Yorkshire and Rowley in Massachusetts Hay. children and a place in Christian history for his people. "We must consider that we shall be as a City upon a Hill," Winthrop told his fellow passengers aboard the ship Arbella in 1630. "The eyes of all people are upon us." Like the Pilgrims, this larger wave of Puritans envisioned a reformed Christian society, a genuinely "New" England. They saw themselves as a "saving remnant" chosen by God to preserve the true faith in America and inspire religious change in England. Winthrop and his associates established the Massachusetts Bay colony in the area around Boston and transformed their joint-stock business corporation, the General Court of shareholders, into a colonial legislature. Over the next decade about 10,000 Puritans migrated to the Massachusetts Bay colony, along with 10,000 others fleeing hard times in England. The Puritans created representative political institutions that were locally based, with the governor as well as the assembly and council elected by the colony's freemen. However, to ensure rule by the godly, the Puritans limited the right to vote and hold office to men who were church members. Eschewing the religious toleration of the Pilgrims, they established Puritanism as the state-supported religion and barred members of other faiths from conducting services. PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 Governor John Winthrop 77its portrait, painted in the style of the Flemish artist Anthony Van Dyke, captures the gravity and intensity of Winthrop, whose policies of religious orthodoxy and elite rule shaped the early history of the Massachusetts Bay colony. Courtesy. American Antiquarian Society. Massachusetts Bay became a religious commonwealth with the Bible as its legal as well as spiritual guide. Following a biblical rule, Massachusetts Bay Puritans divided inheritances among all children in a given family, with a double portion going to the oldest son. "Where there is no Law," the colony's government advised local magistrates, they should rule "as near the law of God as they can." Religion and Society, 1630-1670 In establishing their churches, the Puritans in New England tried to re-create the simplicity of the first Christians. They eliminated bishops and devised a democratic church structure controlled by the laity, or the ordinary members of the congregation—hence their name, Congregationalists. Influenced by John Calvin, Puritans embraced predestination, the doctrine that God had decided, or "predestined," the fates of all people before they were born and chosen a few "elect" men and women (the Saints) for salvation and condemned the rest to damnation. Most congregations set extraordinarily high standards for church membership, rigorously examining those who applied. Even so, many Saints lived in great anxiety, for they could never be sure that God had predestined them for salvation. Puritans dealt with the uncertainties of divine election in three ways. Some congregations stressed the conversion experience: when God infused a soul with grace, the person was "born again" and knew that salvation was at hand. Other Puritans stressed "preparation," the confidence in redemption that came from years of spiritual guidance and church discipline. Still others believed that God had entered into a covenant, or contract, with them, promising to treat them as a divinely "chosen people" as long as they lived according to his laws. Roger Williams and Rhode Island. To maintain God's favor, die Puritan magistrates of Massachusetts Bay felt they must purge their society of religious dissidents. One target was Roger Williams, who in 1634 had become the minister of the Puritan church in Salem. Williams preferred the Pilgrims' separation of church and state in Plymouth colony and condemned the legal establishment of Congregationalism in Massachusetts Bay. He taught that political magistrates should have authority over only the "bodies, goods, and outward estates of men," not their spiritual lives. Moreover, he questioned the Puritans' seizure (rather than purchase) of Indian lands. In response, the Puritan magistrates banished him from Massachusetts Bay. In 1636 Williams and his followers resettled in Rhode Island, founding the town of Providence on land acquired from the Narragansett Indians. Other religious dissidents founded Portsmouth and Newport. In 1644 these towns obtained a corporate charter from the English Parliament that granted them full authority "to rule themselves." In Rhode Island as in Plymouth there was no legally established church; every congregation was autonomous, and individual men and women could worship God as they pleased. Anne Hutchinson. Puritan magistrates in Massachusetts Bay also felt threatened by Anne Hutchinson, the wife of a merchant and a mother of seven who worked as a midwife. Hutchinson held weekly prayer meetings in her house—attended by as many as sixty women—in which she accused certain Boston clergymen of placing undue emphasis on church laws and good behavior. In words that recalled Martin Luther's rejection of indulgences, Hutchinson argued that salvation could not be earned through good deeds; there was no "covenant of works." Rather, God bestowed salvation through the "covenant of grace." Hutchinson stressed the importance of revelation: God directly revealing truth to the individual believer. Since the doctrine of revelation diminished the role of ministers and. indeed, of all established authority, Puritan magistrates found it heretical. The magistrates also resented Hutchinson because of her sex. Like other Christians, Puritans believed in the PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 worship there were no sermons; members sat in silence until moved to speak by the inner light Penn's Frame of Government (1681) extended Quaker radicalism into politics. In a world dominated by established churches, Penn's constitution guaranteed religious freedom to Christians of all denominations and allowed all property-owning men to vote and hold office. Thousands of Quakers, primarily from the ranks of middling farmers in northwestern F.ngland, flocked to Pennsylvania, settling along the Delaware River in or near the city of Philadelphia, which Penn himself laid out in a rational grid pattern of main streets and back alleys. The proprietor sold land at low prices and, to attract Protestant settlers from Europe, published pamphlets in Dutch and German advertising the advantages of his colony. In 1683 migrants from the German province of Saxony founded Germantown (just outside Philadelphia) and thousands of other Germans soon joined them, attracted by cheap, fertile land and the prospect of freedom from religious warfare and persecution. Ethnic diversity, pacifism, and freedom of conscience made Pennsylvania the most open and democratic of the Restoration colonies. From Mercantilism to Dominion Since the 1560s, Elizabeth I and her successors had used government subsidies and charters to stimulate English manufacturing and foreign trade. Beginning in the 1650s, the English government extended these policies— known as mercantilism—to its American colonies, where they created a generation of political controversy. The Navigation Acts. The new mercantilist policies regulated colonial commerce and manufacturing. According to mercantilist theory, the American colonies were to produce agricultural goods and raw materials, which English merchants would carry to the home country, where they would be reexported or manufactured into finished products. Consequently, the Navigation Act of 1651 prohibited Dutch merchants from the colonial trade and gave English traders a monopoly by requiring that goods imported into England or its American settlements be carried on English-owned ships. New parliamentary acts in 1660 and 1663 strengthened the ban on foreign merchants and stipulated that colonial sugar, tobacco, and indigo could be shipped only to England. To provide even more business for English merchants, the acts also required that European exports to America pass through England. To enforce these mercantilist laws and raise money, the Revenue Act of 1673 imposed a "plantation duty" on sugar and tobacco exports and created a staff of customs officials to collect the duty (Table 3.2). The English government backed its mercantilist policy with the force of arms. In three commercial wars between 1652 and 1674 the English navy drove the Dutch from New Netherland and ended Dutch supremacy in the West African slave trade. Meanwhile, English merchants expanded their fleets and dominated Atlantic commerce. Many Americans resisted these mercantilist laws as burdensome and intrusive. Edward Randolph, an English customs official in Massachusetts, reported that the colony's Puritan-dominated government took TABLE 3.2 Navigation Acts, 1651-1751 Date Purpose Result Act of 1651 1651 Cut Dutch trade Mostly ignored Act of 1660 1660 Ban foreign shipping; enumerated goods only to England Partially obeyed Act of 1663 1663 Require European imports to pass only through England Partially obeyed Staple Act 1663 Require enumerated goods to pass through England Mostly obeyed Revenue Act 1673 Impose "plantation duty"; create customs system Mostly obeyed Act of 1696 1696 Prevent frauds; create Vice-Admiralty Courts Mostly obeyed Woolen Act 1699 Prevent export or intercolonial sale of textiles Partially obeyed Hat Act 1732 Prevent export or intercolonial sale of hats Partially obeyed Molasses Act 1733 Cut American imports of molasses from French West Indies F.xtensively violated Iron Art 1750 Prevent manufacture of finished iron products Extensively violated Currency Art 1751 End use of paper currency as legal tender in New England Mostly obeyed Growth and Crisis in Colonial Society 1720-1765 Freehold Society in New England Farm Families Women's Place Farm Property: Inheritance The Crisis of Freehold Society The Middle Atlantic: Toward a New Society, 1720-1765 Economic Growth and Social Inequality Cultural Diversity Religious Identity and Political Conflict The Enlightenment and the Great Awakening, 1740-1765 The Enlightenment in America American Pietism and the Great Awakening Religious Upheaval in the North Social and Religious Conflict in the South The Midcentury Challenge: War, Trade, and Social Conflict, 1750-1765 The French and Indian War The Great War for Empire British Economic Growth and the Consumer Revolution Land Conflicts Western Uprisings In 1736 Alexander MacAllister left the Highlands of Scotland to settle in the backcountry of North Carolina, where he was soon joined by his wife and three sisters. Over the years MacAllister prospered as a landowner and mill proprietor and had only praise for his new home. Carolina was "the best poor man's country I have heard in this age," he wrote to his brother Hector, urging him to "advise all poor people ... to take courage and come," In North Carolina there were no landlords to keep "the face of the poor ... to the grinding stone," and so many Highlanders were arriving that "it will soon be a new Scotland." Here, on the margin of the British empire, people could "breathe the air of liberty, and not want the neces- sarys of life." Tens of thousands of European migrants— Highland Scots, English, Scots-Irish, Germans—heeded such advice, helping to swell the size of Britain's North American settlements from 400,000 people in 1720 to almost 2 million by 1765. The rapid and continuous increase in the number of settlers—and slaves—transformed the character of life in every region of British America. Long-settled towns in New England became densely settled and then overcrowded. Young Dutch American Girl, 1730 This painring of four-year-old Susanna Truax of Albany, New York, was the work of the "Gansevoort Limner," an unknown Dutch portrait painter. Following the artistic conventions of the time, the limner rendered Susanna as a mature young woman adding a lump of sugar to her tea. Bom in 1726 (as noted in the upper left comer), Susanna never married; by the time she died in 1805, at age seventy-nine, Albany had lost much of its character as a "Dutch" city. National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC: gift ol Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch, PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 Antagonistic ethnic and religious communities jostled uneasily with one another in the Middle Atlantic region, and the influx of the MacAllisters and thousands of other settlers into the southern backcountry altered the traditional dynamics of politics and social conflict in that region as well. Moreover, in every colony the growing influence of a European spiritual movement called Pietism changed the tone of religious life. Finally, and perhaps most important, as the new immigrants and the landless children of long-settled families moved inland, they sparked warfare with the native peoples and with the other European powers contesting for dominance of North America—France and Spain. A generation of growth produced a decade of crisis. Freehold Society in New England In the 1630s the Puritans had migrated from a country where a handful of nobles and gentry owned 75 percent of the arable land and farmed it by using servants, lease- holding tenants, and wage laborers. In their new home the Puritans consciously created a yeoman society composed primarily of independent farm families who owned their lands as freeholders—without feudal dues or leases. By 1750, however, the rapidly growing population outstripped the supply of easily farmed land, posing a severe challenge to the freehold ideal. Farm Families: Women's Place The Puritans' commitment to individual autonomy did not extend to gender relations, and by law and custom men dominated their families. As the Reverend Benjamin Wadsworth of Boston advised women in The Well-Ordered Family (1712), being richer, more intelligent, or of higher social status than their husbands mattered little: "Since he is thy Husband, God has made him the head and set him above thee." Therefore, Wadsworth concluded, it was a woman's duty "to love and reverence him." Puritan ideology celebrated the husband as head of the household, according him nearly complete control over his dependents. Throughout their lives women saw firsthand that their role was a subordinate one. Small girls watched their mothers defer to their fathers. As young women they saw the courts prosecute few men and many women for the crime of fornication, especially those who bore an illegitimate child. And they learned that their marriage portions would be inferior in kind and size to those of their brothers; usually daughters received not highly prized land but rather livestock or household goods. Thus, Ebenezer Chittendon of Guil- ford, Connecticut, left all his land to his sons, decreeing that "Each Daughter have half so much as Each Son, one half in money and the other half in Cattle." Thanks to the English Statute of Wills of 1540, which eliminated many customary restrictions over the disposition of wealth, fathers had nearly complete freedom to devise their property as they pleased. In rural New England—indeed, throughout the colonies—women were raised to be dutiful helpmeets (helpmates) to their husbands. Farmwives spun thread and yarn from flax or wool and wove it into shirts and gowns. They knitted sweaters and stockings, made candles and soap, churned milk into butter and pressed curds into cheese, fermented malt for beer, preserved meats, and mastered dozens of other household tasks. The most exemplary or "notable" practitioners of these domestic arts won praise from the community, for their physical labor was crucial to the rural household economy. Bearing and rearing children were equally central tasks. Most women married in their early twenties; by their early forties many had given birth to six or seven children, usually delivered with the assistance of midwives. A large family sapped the physical and emotional strength of even the most energetic wife, focusing her attention on domestic activities for about twenty of her most active years. A Massachusetts mother explained that she had less time than she would have liked for religious activities because "the care of my Babes takes up so large a portion of my time and attention." Yet more women than men became full members of the Puritan congregations of New England. As the revivalist Jonathan Edwards explained, they joined so "that their children may be baptized" in the church and because they feared the dangers of childbirth. As the size of farms shrank in long-settled communities, many couples chose to have fewer children. After 1750 women in the typical farm village of Andover, Massachusetts, bore an average of only four children and thus gained the time and energy to pursue other tasks. Farm women made extra yarn, cloth, or cheese to exchange with neighbors or sell to shopkeepers, enhancing their families' standard of living. Or like Susan Huntington of Boston (the wife of a prosperous mer- chant), they spent more time in "the care 8c culture of children, and the perusal of necessary books, including the scriptures." Yet women's lives remained tightly bound by a web of legal and cultural restrictions. While ministers often praised the piety of women, they excluded them from an equal role in the life of the church. When Hannah Heaton grew dissatisfied with her Congregationalist minister, thinking him unconverted and a "blind guide," she sought out Quaker and Baptist churches that welcomed questioning women and allowed them to become spiritual leaders. National Gallery of Art. Washington, DC: gift ot Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch declared the Danbury (Connecticut) Baptist Association, Willingly or not, most New England women lived according to the conventional view that, as the essayist Timothy Dwight put it, they should be "employed only in and about the house and in the proper business of the sex." Farm Property: Inheritance By contrast, men who migrated to the colonies escaped many traditional constraints of European society, including the curse of landlessness. "The hope of having land of their own & becoming independent of Landlords is what chiefly induces people into America," an official noted in the 1730s. For men who had been peasants in Europe, owning property was a key element of their social identity, justifying their position as heads of the community's households. Indeed, property ownership and family authority were closely related, because most migrating Europeans wanted farms that were large enough to provide sustenance for the present generation and land for the next one. Parents with small farms could not provide their children with a start in life and had to adopt a different strategy. Many indentured their sons and daughters as servants and laborers in more prosperous households, where they would have enough to eat. When the indentures ended at age eighteen or twenty-one, their propertyless sons faced the daunting challenge of a ten-to-twenty-year climb up the agricultural ladder, from laborer to tenant and finally to freeholder. Luckier sons and daughters in successful farm families received a marriage portion when they reached the age of twenty-three to twenty-five. The marriage portion—land, livestock, or farm equipment-repaid children for their past labor and allowed parents to choose their children's partners, which they did not hesitate to do. The family's prosperity and the parents' security during old age depended on a wise choice of a wife or husband. Normally, children had the right to refuse an unacceptable match, but they did not have the luxury of "falling in love" with whomever they pleased. Marriage under English common law was hardly a contract between equals. A bride relinquished to her PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 Tavern Culture By the eighteenth century, many taverns were run by women, such as this "Charming Patroness," who needed all her charm to deal with her raucous clientele. It was in taverns, declared puritanical John Adams, that "diseases, vicious habits, bastards, and legislators are frequently begotten." Connecticut Historical Society. husband the legal ownership of her land and personal property. After his death, she received her dower right— the right to use (but not to sell) a third of the family's estate. The widow's death or remarriage canceled this use-right, and her portion was divided among the children. In this way the widow's property rights were subordinated to those of the family "line," which stretched, through the children, across the generations. It was the cultural duty of the father to provide inheritances for his children, and men who failed to do so lost status in the community. Some fathers willed the family farm to a single son, providing their other children with money, apprenticeship contracts, or uncleared land along the frontier or requiring the inheriting son to do so. Alternatively, yeomen moved their families to the New England frontier or to other unsettled regions, where life was hard but land for the children was cheap and abundant. "The Squire's House stands on the Bank of the Susquehannah," the traveler Philip Fithian reported from the Pennsylvania backcountry in the early 1760s. "He tells me that he will be able to settle all his sons and his fair Daughter Betsy on the Fat of the Earth." The historic accomplishment of these farmers was the creation of whole communities composed of independent property owners. A French visitor remarked on the sense of personal worth and dignity in this rural world, which contrasted sharply with European peasant life. Throughout the northern colonies, he wrote, he had found "men and women whose features are not marked by poverty, by lifelong deprivation of the necessities of life, or by a feeling that they are insignificant subjects and subservient members of society." The Crisis of Freehold Society How long would this happy circumstance last? Because of high rates of natural increase, the population of New England doubled with each generation, a rate of growth that raised the specter of landlessness and poverty. The Puritan colonies had about 100,000 people in 1700, nearly 200,000 in 1725, and almost 400,000 in 1750. In long-settled areas farms had been divided and subdivided and now often consisted of fifty acres or less. Many parents found themselves in a quandary because they could not provide an adequate inheritance. In the 1740s the Reverend Samuel Chandler of Andover, Massachusetts, was "much distressed for land for his chil- dren," seven of whom were male. A decade later in the neighboring town of Concord, about 60 percent of farmers owned less land than their fathers had. Because parents had less to give their sons and daughters, they had less control over their children's lives. The system of arranged marriages broke down as young people engaged in premarital sex and used the urgency of pregnancy to win their fathers' permission to marry. Throughout New England the number of firstborn children conceived before marriage rose spectacularly, from about 10 percent in the 1710s to 30 percent or more in the 1740s. Given another chance, young people "would do the same again," an Anglican minister observed, "because otherwise they could not obtain their parents' consent to marry." New England families met the threat to the freeholder ideal through a variety of strategies. Many parents chose to have smaller families by using primitive methods of birth control. Others joined with neighbors to petition the provincial government for land grants, moving inland and hacking new farms out of the forests of central Massachusetts and western Connecticut— and eventually New Hampshire and the future Vermont. Still other farmers learned to use their small plots more productively, replacing the traditional English crops of wheat and barley with high-yielding potatoes and Indian corn. Corn offered a hearty food for humans, CHAPTER 4 Growth and Crisis in Colonial Society, 1720-1765 and its leaves furnished feed for cattle and pigs, which in turn provided milk and meat. New England developed a livestock economy, becoming the major supplier of salted and pickled meat to the slave plantations of the West Indies. Finally, New England farmers made do on their smaller farms by exchanging goods and labor, developing the full potential of what historian Michael Merrill has called the "household mode of production." Men lent each other tools, draft animals, and grazing land. Women and children joined other families in spinning yarn, sewing quilts, and shucking corn. Farmers plowed fields owned by artisans and shopkeepers, who repaid them with shoes, furniture, or store credit. Typically, no money changed hands; instead farmers, artisans, and shopkeepers recorded their debts and credits in personal account books and every few years "balanced" the books by transferring small amounts of cash to one another. The system of community exchange allowed house- holds—and the entire economy—to achieve maximum output, thereby preserving the freehold ideal. The Middle Atlantic: Toward a New Society, 1720-1765 Unlike New England, which was settled mostly by English Puritans, the Middle Atlantic colonies of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania became home to peoples of differing origins, languages, and religions. These settlers—Scots-Irish Presbyterians, English and Welsh Quakers, German Lutherans, Dutch Reformed Protestants, and others—created ethnic and religious communities that coexisted uneasily with one another. New York was particularly unsettled as a result of a fairly sizable African populace—in 1756 slaves constituted more than 15 percent of its population. Economic Growth and Social Inequality Ample fertile land and a long growing season attracted migrants to the Middle Atlantic colonies of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, and profits from wheat financed their rapid settlement. Between 1720 and 1770 a population explosion in Western Europe doubled the price of wheat; American farmers profited from the growing demand by increasing their exports of wheat, corn, flour, and bread This boom in exports helped the population of the Middle Atlantic region to surge from 50,000 in 1700 to 120,000 in 1720 and 450,000 in 1765 (Figure 4.1), Tenancy in New York. As the population rose, so did the demand for land. Nonetheless, many migrants 1.0 Population Imports from Britain (in £.) FIGURE 4.1 Population Growth, Wheat Prices, and Imports from Britain in the Middle Colonies Wheat prices soared in Philadelphia because of demand in the West Indies and Europe. Exports of grain and flour paid for British manufactures, which were imported in large quantities after 1750. refused to settle in New York's fertile Hudson River Valley. There, Dutch families presided over long-established manors created by the Dutch West India Company and wealthy British families, such as the Clarke and Livingston clans, dominated vast tracts granted by English governors between 1700 and 1714 (Map 4.1). Like the slave-owning planters in the Chesapeake, these landlords tried to live like European gentry, but few migrants wanted to labor as poor and dependent peasants. However, as freehold land became scarce in eastern New York, manorial lords were able to attract tenants, but only by granting them long leases and the right to sell their improvements—their houses and barns—to the next tenant. The niunber of tenants on the vast Rensselaer estate, for example, rose from 82 in 1714 to 345 in 1752 to nearly 700 by 1765. Most tenant families hoped that with hard work and luck they could sell enough wheat to buy freehold farmsteads. However, preindustrial technology limited their output, especially during the crucial harvest season. As the wheat ripened, it had to be harvested quickly; any ripe uncut grain promptly sprouted and became useless. Yet a worker with a hand sickle could reap only half an acre a day, limiting the number of acres a family could PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 MAP 4.1 The Hudson River Manors Dutch and English manorial lords dominated the fertile eastern shores of the Hudson River Valley, leasing small farms to German tenant families and refusing to sell land to freehold-seeking migrants from overcrowded New England. This powerful elite produced Patriot leaders, such as Gouverneur Morris (see American Lives, p. 206), and leading American families, such as the Roosevelts. plant. The cradle scythe, an agricultural tool introduced during the 1750s, doubled or tripled the amount of grain a worker could cut. Even so, a family with two adult workers could not reap more than about twelve acres of grain each harvest season, a yield of perhaps 150 to 180 bushels of wheat and rye. After family needs were met, the remaining grain might be worth £15—enough to buy salt and sugar, tools, and cloth but little else. The road to land ownership was not an easy one. Quaker Pennsylvania. Unlike New York, rural Pennsylvania and New Jersey were initially marked by relative economic equality because the original Quaker migrants arrived with approximately equal resources (Figure 4.2). The first settlers lived simply in small houses with one or two rooms, a sleeping loft, a few benches or stools, some wooden trenchers (platters), and a few wooden noggins (cups). Only the wealthiest families ate off pewter or ceramic plates imported from England or Holland. However, the rise of the wheat trade and an influx of poor settlers introduced marked social divisions. By the 1760s some farmers in eastern Pennsylvania had grown wealthy by buying slaves and hiring propertyless laborers to raise large quantities of wheat for market sale. Others had bought up land and subdivided it into small farms, which they let out on lease. Still others had become successful commercial entrepreneurs, providing newly arrived settlers with farming equipment, sugar and rum from the West Indies, and financial services. Gradually a new class of wealthy agricultural capitalists—large-scale farmers, rural landlords, speculators, storekeepers, and gristmill operators—accumulated substantial estates that included mahogany tables, four-poster beds, couches, table linen, and imported Dutch dinnerware. By 1760 there were also many people at the bottom of the Middle Atlantic social order, for half of all white men were propertyless. Some landless men were the sons of property owners and would eventually inherit at least part of the family estate, but just as many were Scots-Irish inmates—single men or families "such as live in small cottages and have no taxable property, except a cow," In the predominantly German settlement of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, a merchant noted an "abun- dance of Poor people" who "maintain their Families with great difficulty by day Labour." Although Scots- Irish and German migrants hoped to become tenants and eventually landowners, sharply rising land prices prevented many from realizing their dreams. Merchants and artisans took advantage of the ample supply of labor by organizing an outwork system. They bought wool or flax from farmers and paid propertyless workers and land-poor farm families to spin it into yarn or weave it into cloth. In the 1760s an English traveler reported that hundreds of Pennsylvanians had turned "to manufacture, and live upon a small farm, as in many parts of England." Indeed, eastern areas of the Middle Atlantic colonies had become as crowded and socially divided as rural England, and many farm families feared a return to the lowly status of the European peasant. Although some wealthy men heaped abuse on "shitten farmers," a letter to the Pennsylvania Gazette celebrated the old Quaker ideal of social equality: it was simply CHAPTER 4 Growth and Crisis in Colonial Society, 1720-1765 too " 90 "0 | 80 tfl | 60 i 40 5c 30 tS g 20 p 10 -59% 1700 Top 10% of taxpayers Middle 60% of taxpayers 38%- 58% - Bottom 30% of taxpayers 1715 1730 1745 1760 1782 4%-^1800 FIGURE 4.2 Increasing Social Inequality in Chester County, Pennsylvania By renting land and selling goods to a growing popidation, the county's landed and commercial elite grew rich. Eventually the top 10 percent of taxpayers commanded nearly 40 percent of the wealth, far above the paltry 4 percent owned by the poorest 30 percent. "impudence to tell another animal like myself that I came into the world his superior; none is born with the right to control another." Cultural Diversity The middle colonies were not a melting pot in which European cultures blended into a homogeneous "Amer- ican" society; rather, they were a patchwork of ethnically and religiously diverse communities (Table 4.1). A traveler in Philadelphia in 1748 found no fewer than twelve religious denominations, including Anglicans, Quakers, Swedish and German Lutherans, Scots-lrish Presbyterians, and even Roman Catholics. Migrants usually tried to preserve their cultural identities, marrying within their own ethnic groups or maintaining the customs of their native lands. The major exception was the Huguenots—Protestant Calvinists who were expelled from Catholic France. They settled in New York and various seacoast cities and gradually lost their French ethnic identity by intermarrying with other Protestants. More typical were the Welsh Quakers. Seventy percent of the children of the original Welsh migrants to Chester County, Pennsylvania, married other Welsh Quakers, as did 60 percent of the third generation. Members of the Society of Friends (Quakers) became the dominant social group in Pennsylvania, at first because of their numbers and later because of their wealth and influence. Quakers controlled Pennsylvania's representative assembly until the 1750s and exercised considerable power in New Jersey as well. Immigration from Germany peaked in the mid-1750s, while that from Ireland, Scotland, England, and Wales continued to increase during the 1760s and early 1770s. Most migrants were Protestants, including those from southern Ireland. Source: Adapted from Aaron S. Fogleman, "Migrations to the Thirteen British North American Colonies, 1700-1775: New Estimates," Journal of Interdisciplinary History 22 (1992). PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 Quaker Meeting for Worship Quakers dressed plainly and met in unadorned buildings, sitting in silence until inspired to speak by the "inner light.'' Women spoke with near-equality to men, a tradition that prepared Quaker women to take a leading part in the nineteenth-century women's rights movement. In this English work, entitled Quaker Meeting, an elder (his hat on a peg above his head) conveys his thoughts to the congregation. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Quakers were pacifists, they dealt peaceably with Native Americans, negotiating treaties and buying land rather than seizing it by force. These conciliatory policies enabled Pennsylvania to avoid a major war with the Indian peoples until the 1750s. Some Quakers extended the egalitarian values emphasized by their faith to their relations with blacks. After 1750 many Quaker meetings condemned the institution of slavery, and some expelled members who continued to keep slaves. The Quaker vision of a "peaceable kingdom" attracted many German settlers who were fleeing their homelands because of war, religious persecution, and poverty. First to arrive, in 1683, was a group of religious dissenters—the Mennonites—attracted by a pamphlet promising religious freedom. In the 1720s religious upheaval and population growth in southwestern Germany and Switzerland stimulated another wave of migrants. "Wages were far better" in Pennsylvania, Heinrich Schneebeli reported to his friends in Zurich after an exploratory trip, and "one also enjoyed there a free unhindered exercise of religion." Beginning in 1749 thousands of Germans and Swiss fled their overcrowded societies; by 1756, nearly 37,000 of these migrants had landed in Philadelphia. Some of these newcomers were redemptioners—a type of indentured servant—but many more were propertied farmers and artisans who Gottlieb Mittelberger The Perils of Migration Gottlieb Mittelberger was a Lutheran minister who migrated to Pennsylvania with thousands of other Germans in the 1740s. Dismayed by the lax religious behavior of the colonial population and the lack of state support for religious authority; he returned to his homeland a fter a few years. In a book published in Germany in 1750, Mittelberger viewed America with a critical eye, warning his readers of the difficulties of migration and of life in a harsh, competitive society. [The journey from Germany to Pennsylvania via Holland and England] lasts from the beginning of May to the end of October, fully half a year, amid such hardships as no one is able to describe adequately with their misery. Both in Rotterdam and in Amsterdam the people are packed densely, like herrings so to say, in the large sea-vessels. One person receives a place of scarcely 2 feet width and 6 feet length in the bedstead, while many a ship carries four to six hundred souls.... During the journey the ship is full of pitiful signs of distress—smells, fumes, horrors, vomiting, various kinds of sea sickness, fever, dysentery, headaches, heat, constipation, boils, scurvy, cancer, mouth-rot, and similar afflictions, all of them caused by the age and the highly-salted state of the food, especially of the meat, as well as by the very bad and filthy water, which brings about the miserable destruction and death of many.... Children between the ages of one and seven seldom survive the sea voyage; and parents must often watch their offspring suffer miserably, die, and be thrown into the ocean, from want, hunger, thirst, and the like. I myself, alas, saw such a pitiful fate overtake thirty-two chi I dren on board our vessel, all of whom were finally thrown into the sea. Their parents grieve all the more, since their children do not find repose in the earth, but are devoured by the predatory fish of the ocean.... When the ships finally arrive in Philadelphia after the long voyage only those are let off who can pay their sea freight or can give good security. The others, who lack the money to pay, have to remain on board until they are purchased and until their purchasers can thus pry them loose from the ship. In this whole process the sick are the worst off, for the healthy are preferred and are more readily paid for.... Every day Englishmen, Dutchmen and High-German people select among the healthy persons; ... adult persons bind themselves in writing to serve 3, 4, 5, or six years for the amount due to them.... Many parents must sell and trade away their children like so many head of cattle; for if their children take the debt upon themselves, the parents can leave the ship free and unrestrained. It often happens that whole families, husband, wife, and children, are separated by being sold to different purchasers, especially when they have not paid any part of their passage money... - Thus let him who wants to earn his piece of bread honestly and in a Christian manner and who can only do this by manual labor in his native country stay there rather than come to America. Source; Gottlieb Mittelberger, Journey to Pennsylvania (1756), cd. and tranv Oicar Handlin and lohn Clive (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, I960), 11-21. migrated to secure ample land for their children (Ameri- can Voices, "Gottlieb Mittelberger: The Perils of Migra- tion," above). German settlements soon dominated certain districts of eastern Pennsylvania, and thousands of Germans moved down the Shenandoah Valley into the western parts of Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas (Map 4.2). The migrants carefully guarded their language and cultural heritage, encouraging their American-born children to marry within the community. A minister in North Carolina admonished his congregation "not to contract any marriages with the English or Irish," explaining that "we owe it to our native country to do our part that German blood and the German language be preserved in America." Well beyond 1800 these settlers spoke German, read German- language newspapers, conducted church services in German, and preserved German agricultural practices, which included women taking an active part in plowing and harvesting. English travelers remarked that German women were "always in the fields, meadows, stables, etc. and do not dislike any work whatsoever." Most German PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 Two groups from Scotland (Scots and Scots Irish) numbered fifteen percent of the population and lived primarily in western Pennsylvania, the southern bacfccountry, and North Carolina, Those of German ancestry n und>cred about seven percent of the population and lived mostly in "Greater Pennsylvania." which consisted of Penn's colony and the adjacent Shenandoah Valley regions of Maryland and Virginia. Maps showing dominant ethnic or racial groops can be deceiving because they do not show relative size (a dominant group could include thirty percent or eighty percent of the inhabitants). Moreover, such maps do not reveal if a numerically dominant group enjoys political and economic power or is a subject people, as in the case of enslaved Africans. Penple of African origin accounted for twenty percent of the total population and were particularly numerous in the Tidewater regions of Maryland, Virginia, and South Carolina. Begin with this key. Then look for areas in which a particular group was strongly represented. In 1700 most colonists in British North America were of English origin, but by 1775 settlers of English descent constituted a minority of the total nonaboriginal population. African Americans now accounted for one-third of the residents of the South, while thousands of Germans and Scots-lrish migrants created ethnic and religious diversityt in the Middle Atlantic colonies and southern backcountry (see Table 4.1). migrants felt at ease living in a British-controlled colony, for few of them came from the politically active classes and many rejected political involvement on religious grounds. They engaged in politics only to protect their churches and cultural practices—insisting, for example, that as in Germany, married women should have the right to hold property and write wills. Migrants from Ireland formed the largest group of incoming Europeans, about 150,000 in number. Some were Catholic but most were the descendants of the Presbyterian Scots who had been sent to Ireland between 1608 and 1650 to bolster English control of its Catholic population. In Ireland the Scots faced discrimination and economic regulation from the dominant English. The Irish Test Act of 1704 excluded Scottish Presbyterians as well as Irish Catholics from holding public office; English mercantilist regulations placed heavy import duties on the woolens made by Scots- lrish weavers; and Scots-lrish farmers faced heavy taxes. "Read this letter, Rev. Baptist Boyd," a migrant to New York wrote back to his minister, "and tell all the poor folk of ye place that God has opened a door for their deliverance ... all that a man works for is his own; there are no revenue hounds [tax collectors] to take it from us here." Lured by such reports, thousands of Scots-lrish sailed for Philadelphia beginning in the 1720s and then moved to central Pennsylvania and southward down the Shenandoah Valley into the back- country of Maryland and Virginia. Like the Germans, the Scots-lrish vowed to keep their culture, holding firm to their Presbyterian faith and promoting marriage within the church. Religious Identity and Political Conflict In Western Europe the leaders of church and state condemned religious diversity, and some German ministers in Pennsylvania carried these sentiments to America, criticizing the separation of church and state in the colony. "The preachers do not have the power to punish anyone, or to force anyone to go to church," complained CHAPTER 4 Growth and Crisis in Colonial Society, 1720-1765 German Farm in Western Maryland Beginning in the 1730s, wheat became a major export crop in Maryland and Virginia. This engraving probably depicts a German farm, because the harvesters are using oxen, not horses, and women are working in the field alongside men. Using "a new method of reaping" that is possibly of German origin, the harvester cuts only the grain-bearing tip and leaves the wheat stalks in the fields, to be eaten by livestock. Liorary ol Congress. For more help analyzing this image, see the Online Study Guide at bedtordstmartlns.com/henretta. the minister Gottlieb Mittelberger. As a result, "Sunday is very badly kept. Many people plough, reap, thresh, hew or split wood and the like." Thus, Mittelberger con* eluded, "Liberty in Pennsylvania does more harm than good to many people, both in soul and body." Mittelberger ignored the fact that religious sects in Pennsylvania enforced moral behavior among their members through communal self-discipline. For example, each Quaker family attended a weekly worship meeting and a monthly discipline meeting. Four times a year a committee met with each family to make certain the children were receiving proper religious instruction, a reminder that fathers heeded. "If thou refuse to be obedient to God's teachings," Walter Faucit of Chester admonished his son, "thou will be a fool and a vagabond." The committee also supervised the moral behavior of adults; a Chester County meeting disciplined one of its members "to reclaim him from drinking to excess and keeping vain company." More important, Quaker meetings regulated marriages, granting permission only to couples with land and livestock sufficient to support a family. As a result, the children of well-to-do friends usually married within the sect, while poor Quakers remained unmarried, wed at later ages, or married without permission—in which case they were usually barred from Quaker meetings. These communal sanctions effectively sustained a self-contained and prosperous Quaker community. However, in the 1750s Quaker dominance in Pennsylvania came under attack. Scots-Irish Presbyterians living in frontier settlements west of the Susquehanna River challenged the pacifism of the Quaker-dominated assembly by urging a more aggressive Indian policy. Many of the newer German migrants also opposed the Quakers, demanding laws that respected their inheritance customs and fair representation in the provincial assembly. As a European visitor noted, Scots-Irish Presbyterians. German Baptists, and German Lutherans had begun to form "a general confederacy" against the Quakers, but they found it difficult to unite because of "a mutual jealousy, for religious zeal is secretly burning" (Map 4.3). These ethnic passions embittered the politics of the Middle Atlantic region. In Pennsylvania Benjamin Franklin disparaged the "boorish" character and "swarthy complexion" of German migrants, while in New York a Dutchman declared that he "Valued no English Law no more than a Turd." The Quaker-inspired experiment in cultural and religious diversity prefigured the passionate ethnic and social conflicts that would characterize much of American society in the centuries to come. PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 Enlightenment Philanthropy: The Philadelphia Hospital This imposing structure, built in 1753 with public funds and private donations, embodied two Enlightenment principles— that purposeful action could improve society and that the world should express reason and order (exhibited here in the symmetrical facade). Etchings such as this one, drawn about 1761, circulated widely, bolstering Philadelphia's reputation as the center of the American Enlightenment. Historical Society ot Pennsylvania American freedom from the threat of British political "slavery." Franklin popularized this practical-minded outlook of the Enlightenment in Poor Richard's Almanack (1732-1757), an annual publication read by thousands. In 1743 he helped found the American Philosophical Society, an institution devoted to "the promotion of useful knowledge," and proceeded to invent bifocal lenses for eyeglasses, the Franklin stove, and the lightning rod. Franklin's book on electricity, first published in England in 1751, won praise from the English scientist Joseph Priestley as the greatest contribution to science since Newton. Following in Franklin's footsteps, other ambitious printers in Philadelphia and other American cities published newspapers and gentleman's magazines, the first significant nonreligious publications to appear in the colonies. Thus, the European Enlightenment added a secular dimension to colonial intellectual life, preparing the way for the great American contributions to republican political theory by lohn Adams, lames Madison, and other Patriots during the Revolutionary era. American Pietism and the Great Awakening As some influential Americans—merchants and wealthy Virginia planters—and various urban artisans turned to deism, many other colonists embraced the European devotional movement known as Pietism. Pietists emphasized devout, or "pious," behavior, emotional church services, and a striving for a mystical union with God— appealing to the hearts, rather than the minds, of their congregations. Their teachings came to America with German migrants in the 1720s and sparked a religious revival among many farmers, artisans, and laborers. In Pennsylvania and New Jersey the Dutch minister Theodore Jacob Frelinghuysen moved from church to church, preaching rousing, emotional sermons to German settlers. In private prayer meetings he encouraged lay members to carry a message of spiritual urgency to growing congregations. A decade later William Tennent and his son Gilbert, Presbyterian clergymen who copied Frelinghuysen's approach, led revivals among Scots-Irish migrants throughout the Middle Atlantic region. Simultaneously, a native-born Pietistic movement appeared in Puritan New England. Puritanism had taken root in England as part of a Pietistic upsurge, and the first migrants to America had sustained that intensity. However, over the decades many New England congregations had lost their religious zeal. In the 1730s die minister Jonathan Edwards restored spiritual enthusiasm to the Congregational churches in the Connecticut River Valley. An accomplished philosopher as well as an effective preacher, Edwards urged his hearers—especially young men and women—to commit themselves to a life of piety and prayer (see American Lives, "Jonathan Edwards: Preacher, Philosopher, Pastor," p. 116). George Whitefield, a young English revivalist with what one historian has called a "flamboyant, highly sex- ualized style," transformed the local revivals into a "Great Awakening" that spanned the mainland settlements. Whitefield had experienced conversion after reading German Pietistic tracts and became a follower of John Wesley, the founder of English Methodism, who PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 The Founding of Dartmouth College In 176V. to bring Protestant Christianity to European settlers and Native Americans in the wilderness, Eleazar Wheelock moved his "Indian School" from Lebanon, Connecticut, to Hanover, New Hampshire. There it became Dartmouth College and, as this engraving shows, initially educated both Indians and whites. Dartmouth College Library, population) held real power in the church and used their control of parish finances to discipline Anglican ministers. One clergyman complained that dismissal awaited any minister who "had the courage to preach against tiny Vices taken into favor by the leading Men of his Parish." The Presbyterian Revival. The Great Awakening challenged both the Church of England and the power of the southern planter elite. In 1743 the bricklayer Samuel Morris, inspired by his reading of George Whitefield's sermons, led a group of Virginia Anglicans out of the established Church. Seeking a more vital religious experience, Morris and his followers invited New Light Presbyterian ministers from Scots-lrish settlements along the Virginia frontier to lead their prayer meetings. Soon these Presbyterian revivals spread across the backcountry and into the Tidewater region along the Atlantic coast, threatening the social authority of the Virginia gentry'. Planters and their well-dressed families were accustomed to arriving at Anglican services in elaborate carriages drawn by well-bred horses, and they often Haunted their power by marching in a body to their seats in the front pews. These potent reminders of the gentry's social superiority would vanish if freeholders attended New Light Presbyterian rather than Church of England services. Moreover, religious pluralism would threaten the government's ability to tax the population to support the established church. To prevent the spread of New Light doctrines, Virginia's governor denounced them as "false teachings," and Anglican justices of the peace closed down Presbyterian meetinghouses. This harassment kept most white yeomen families and poor tenants within the Church of England, as did the fact that most Presbyterian ministers were highly educated and sought converts mainly among skilled workers and propertied farmers. The Baptist Insurgency. Baptists succeeded where Presbyterians failed. The evangelical Baptist preachers who came to Virginia in the 1760s drew their congregations primarily from poor farmers by offering them solace and hope in a troubled world. The Baptists' central ritual was adult baptism, often involving complete immersion in water. Once men and women had CHAPTER 4 Growth and Crisis in Colonial Society, 1720-1765 Equally important, crucial Indian alliances began to crumble. Along the upper Ohio River the Delawares and Shawnees declared that they would no longer abide by Iroquois policies. In part, this Indian discontent stemmed from escalating Anglo-American demand for Indian lands from colonial speculators and recent European migrants. In the late 1740s the Mohawks rebuffed attempts by Sir William Johnson, a British Indian agent and land speculator, to settle Scottish migrants west of Albany. To the south, the Iroquois were infuriated when Governor Dinwiddie of Virginia and a group of prominent planters laid plans for "the Extension of His Majesties Dominions" into the upper Ohio River Valley, an area that they had traditionally controlled. Supported by influential London merchants, the Virginia speculators formed the Ohio Company in 1749 and obtained a royal grant of 200,000 acres along the upper Ohio River. "We don't know what you Christians, English and French intend," the outraged Iroquois complained, "we are so hemmed in by both, that we have hardly a hunting place left." To shore up the alliance with the Iroquois Nations, the British Board of Trade, the body charged with supervising American affairs, called for a great inter- colonial meeting with the Indians at Albany, New York, in June 1754. At the meeting the American delegates assured the Iroquois that they had no designs on their lands and asked for their assistance against the French. To bolster colonial defenses, Benjamin Franklin proposed a Plan of Union among the colonies with a continental assembly that would manage all western affairs: trade, Indian policy, and defense. But neither the Albany Plan nor a similar proposal by the Board of Trade for a political "union between ye Royal, Proprietary, & Charter Governments" ever materialized because both the provincial assemblies and the imperial government feared that a consolidated colonial government would undermine their authority. Britain's movement into the Ohio River Valley alarmed the French. They countered by constructing a series of forts, including Fort Duquesne at the point where the Monongahela and Allegheny Rivers join to The Siege of Louisbourg, 1745 Assisted by British redcoats, blue-coated Nesv England militiamen swarmed ashore on Cape Breton Island in May 1745 and laid siege to the formidable French citadel at Louisbourg. By late June the colonists' artillery had silenced a strategic French battery, allowing British warships to enter the harbor. Faced with a combined assault from land and sea, the French surrendered. Yale University Art Gallery. Mabel Brady Garvan Collection. CHAPTER 4 Growth and Crisis in Colonial Society, 1720-1765 British Economic Growth and the Consumer Revolution Britain owed its military and diplomatic success in large part to its unprecedented economic resources. Since 1700, when it had wrested control of many oceanic trade routes from the Dutch, Britain had been the dominant commercial power in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. By 1750 it was becoming the first country to undergo industrialization. Its new technology and work discipline made Britain the first—and for over a century the most powerful—industrial nation in the world. The new machines and new business practices of the Industrial Revolution allowed Britain to produce more wool and linens, more iron tools, paper, chinaware, and glass than ever before—and to sell those goods at lower prices. British artisans had designed and built water- and steam-driven machines that powered lathes for shaping wood, jennies and looms for spinning and weaving textiles, and hammers for forging iron. The new machines produced goods for more rapidly than human hands could. Furthermore, the entrepreneurs who ran the new factories drove their employees hard, forcing them to keep pace with the machines and work long hours. To market the resulting products, English and Scottish merchants launched aggressive campaigns in the rapidly growing mainland colonies, extending a full year's credit to American traders instead of the traditional six months. This first "consumer revolution" raised the living standard of many Americans, who soon were purchasing 20 percent of all British exports and paying for them by increasing their exports of wheat, rice, and tobacco (Figure 4.4). For example, Scottish merchants financed the settlement of the Virginia Piedmont, a region of plains and rolling hills just inland from the Tidewater counties. They granted planters and Scots- Irish migrants ample credit to purchase land, slaves, and equipment and took their tobacco crop in payment, exporting it to expanding markets in France and central Europe. In South Carolina planters supported their luxurious lifestyle by using British government subsidies to develop indigo plantations. By the 1760s they were exporting large quantities of the deep blue dye to English textile factories as well as exporting about 65 million pounds of rice a year to Holland and southern Europe. Simultaneously, New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia became the breadbasket of the Atlantic world, supplying Europe's exploding population with wheat at ever-increasing profits. In Philadelphia wheat prices jumped almost 50 percent between 1740 and 1765. This first American spending binge, like most subsequent splurges, landed many consumers in debt. Even during the boom times of the 1750s and early 1760s exports paid for only 80 percent of imported British goods. The remaining 20 percent—millions of pounds— was financed by Britain, both by the extension of mercantile credit and by Pitt's military expenditures in the colonies. As the war wound dosvn, the loss of military supply contracts and cash subsidies made it more difficult for Americans to purchase British goods. Colonial merchants looked anxiously at their overstocked warehouses and feared bankruptcy. "I think we have a gloomy prospect before us," a Philadelphia trader noted in 1765, "as there are of late some Persons failed, who were in no way suspected." The increase in transatlantic trade had FIGURE 4.4 Colonial Population, Imports from Britain, and the American Trade Deficit Around 1750 the rate of growth of imports from Britain into the American colonies outpaced the settlers' rate of population growth, indicating that consumption per capita was increasing. The colonists then went into debt to pay for these goods, running an annual deficit with their British suppliers. PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 New York Manor The Philipse Manor stretched over ninety thousand acres and included wills and warehouses as well as a grand manor house. In this unattributed painting, the artist garbs the women in the foreground in classical costumes, thereby linking the Philipses to the noble families of the Homan republic. To preserve their aristocratic lifestyle and the quasi-feudal leasehold system of agriculture, the Philipses joined other Hudson River manorial lords in suppressing the tenant uprisings of the 1760s. Historic Hudson Valley, Tartvtown, New York. raised living standards but also had made Americans more dependent on overseas creditors and international economic conditions. Land Conflicts In good times and bad the colonial population continued to grow, causing increased conflicts over land rights. The families who founded the town of Kent, Connecticut, in 1738 had lived in the colony for a century. Each generation sons and daughters had moved westward to establish new farms, but now they lived at the generally accepted western boundary of the colony. To proride for the next generation, Kent families joined other Connecticut farmers in 1749 to form the Susquehanna Company, a land-speculating venture. Hoping to settle the Wyoming Valley in northeastern Pennsylvania, the company petitioned the legislature to assert jurisdiction over that region on the basis of Connecticut's "sea-to- sea" royal charter of 1662. But King Charles II had subsequently granted these lands to William Penn, whose family invoked its proprietary rights and issued its own land grants. Soon settlers from Connecticut and Pennsylvania were burning down one another's houses. To avert further violence the two governments referred the dispute to the authorities in London, where it remained undecided at the time of independence (Map 4.6). Simultaneously, three different land disputes broke out in the Hudson River Valley. First, groups of settlers from Massachusetts moved across the imprecise border with New York and claimed freehold estates on manor lands controlled by the Van Rensselaer and Livingston families. Second, the Wappinger Indians asserted legal claims to their traditional lands, which had been granted by English governors to various manorial lords. Finally, Dutch and German tenants asserted ownership 17! Bet fron and valu, and) I'aclci eastr, rights the lar % 176 bany ( landlon fhe beh, and twe tnanoria 'date the setts sqUa Othci southern English n, based on j l'°r examp L°rd Gram CHAPTER 4 Growth and Crisis in Colonial Society. 1720-1765 MAP 4.6 Westward Expansion and Land Conflicts, 1750-1775 Between 1750 and 1775 the mainland population doubled— from 1.2 million to 2.5 million—sparking westward migration and legal battles over land, which had become increasingly valuable. Violence broke out in many areas, as tenant fanners and smallholders contested landlord titles in eastent areas and backcountry settlers fought with Indians, rival claimants, and eastern-dominated governments. rights to farms they had long held by lease and, when (he landlords ignored their claims, refused to pay rent. By 1766 the tenants in Westchester, Dutchess, and Albany Counties were in open rebellion against their landlords and used mob violence to close the courts. At the behest of the royal governor. General Thomas Gage and two British regiments joined local sheriffs and manorial bailiffs to suppress the tenant uprising, intimidate the Wappinger Indians, and evict the Massachusetts squatters. Other land disputes erupted in New Jersey and the southern colonies, where resident landowmers and English aristocrats successfully asserted legal claims based on long-dormant seventeenth-century charters. For example, one court decision upheld the right of Lord Granville, an heir of one of the original Carolina proprietors of 1660, to collect an annual tax on land in North Carolina; another decision awarded ownership of the entire northern neck of Virginia (along the Potomac River) to Lord Fairfax. This revival of proprietary power underscored the growing strength of the landed gentry and the increasing resemblance between rural societies in Europe and America. High-quality land on the Atlantic coastal plain was getting more expensive, and English aristocrats, manorial landlords, and wealthy speculators had control of much of it. Tenants and even yeomen farmers feared they soon might be reduced to the status of European peasants and searched for cheap freehold land in western regions near the Appalachian Mountains. Western Uprisings Movement to the western frontier created new disputes over Indian policy, political representation, and debts. Dur ing the war with France, Delaware and Shawnee warriors had attacked farms throughout central and western Pennsylvania, destroying property and killing and capturing hundreds of residents. Subsequently, the Scots- Irish who lived along the frontier wanted to push the Indians out of the colony, but pacifistic Quakers prevented such military action. In 1763 aband of Scots-lrish farmers known as the Paxton Boys took matters into their own hands and massacred twenty members of the peaceful Conestoga tribe. When Governor John Penn tried to bring the murderers to justice, about 250 armed Scots-lrish advanced on Philadelphia, prompting mobilization of the militia. Benjamin Franklin intercepted the angry mob at Lancaster and arranged a truce, narrowly averting a pitched battle. Prosecution of the accused men failed for lack of witnesses. Although the Scots-lrish dropped their demand for the expulsion of the Indians, the episode left a legacy of racial hatred and political resentment. The South Carolina Regulators. Violence also broke out in the backcountry of South Carolina, where land- hungry Scottish and Anglo-American settlers had clashed repeatedly with Cherokees during the war with France. After the war ended in 1763, a group of landowning vigilantes, the Regulators, tried to suppress outlaw bands of whites that were roaming the countryside and stealing cattle and other property. The Regulators also wanted greater political rights for their region and demanded that the eastern-controlled government provide them with more local courts, fairer taxes, and greater local representation in the provincial assembly. The South Carolina government, which was dominated by lowland rice planters, decided to compromise w ith the Regulators because it feared slave revolts if the militia was away in the backcountry. In 1767 the assembly agreed to create locally controlled courts in the western counties of the colony PART ONE The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775 and reduce the fees for legal documents. However, it refused to reapportion the assembly or lower western taxes. Eventually a rival backcountry group, the Moderators, raised an armed force of its own and forced the Regulators to accept the authority of the colonial government. Like the Paxton Boys in Pennsylvania, the South Carolina Regulators attracted attention to western needs but ultimately failed to wrest power from the eastern elite. Civil Strife in North Carolina. In 1766 another Regulator movement arose in the newly settled backcountry of North Carolina. After the Great War for Empire tobacco prices plummeted, and many debt- ridden farmers were forced into court. Eastern judges directed sheriffs to seize the property of bankrupt farmers and auction it off to pay creditors and court costs. Backcountry farmers—many of them migrants from Germany—resented merchants' lawsuits, not just because they generated high fees for lawyers and court officials but also because they violated rural custom. In both the Old History and Memory This visually striking highway marker, erected by a government agency in North Carolina, offers an official—and only partially correct—view of the past. Rather than assail the Regulators as extralegal vigilantes or outright lawbreakers (as many observers did at the time), the marker shrouds them in patriotism, as innocent victims of a vengeful British governor. Alamance Battle Field, photo by Mike Mayse. and New Worlds, smallholding farmers made loans among neighbors on trust and often allowed the loans to remain unpaid for years. To save their farms from grasping creditors and tax- hungry local officials. North Carolina debtors joined together in a Regulator movement. Disciplined mobs of farmers intimidated judges, dosed down courts, and broke into jails to free their comrades. Their leader, Herman Husband, focused his attention on misbehavior of local officials, urging his followers not to vote for "any Clerk, Lawyer, or Scotch merchant. We must make these men subject to the laws or they will enslave the whole community." But the North Carolina Regulators also proposed a coherent program of reforms, demanding passage of a law allowing them to pay their taxes in the "produce of the country" rather than in cash. They insisted on lower legal fees, greater legislative representation, and fairer taxes, proposing that each person be taxed "in proportion to the profits arising from his estate." In May 1771 Royal Governor William Tryon mobilized British troops and the eastern militia and defeated a large Regulator force at the Alamance River; at the end of the fighting thirty men lay dead and seven insurgent leaders were summarily executed. Not since Leisler's revolt in New York in 1689 (see Chapter 3) had a domestic political conflict caused so much bloodshed in America. In 1770 as in 1689, colonial conflicts became intertwined with imperial politics. In Connecticut the Reverend Ezra Stiles defended the North Carolina Regulators. "What shall an injured & oppressed people do," he asked, when faced with "Oppression and tyranny (under the name of Government)?" Stiles's remarks reflected growing resistance to British imperial control, a result of the profound changes that had occurred in the mainland colonies between 1720 and 1765. America was still a dependent society closely tied to Britain by trade, culture, and politics, but it was also an increasingly complex society with the potential for an independent existence. British policies would determine the direction the maturing colonies would take. ► For definitions of key terms boldfaced in this chapter, see the glossary at the end of the book. ► To assess your mastery of the material covered in this chapter, see the Online Study Guide at bedfordstmartins.com/henretta. ► For suggested references, including Web sites, see page SR-4 at the end of the book. ► For map resources and primary documents, see bedfordstmartins.com/henretta. Between 1700 and 1760 Britain's mainland colonies grew dramatically in numbers and wealth. A free- holding yeoman society flourished in New England. Men exercised firm authority within families, controlling their wives' property and providing inheritances for their children. As population growth threatened the freehold ideal, New England farmers averted a crisis by planting higher-yielding crops, sharing their labor and goods with one another, or moving to new frontier settlements. In the Middle Atlantic colonies, farmers prospered because of the rising European demand for wheat. A great influx of Germans and Scots-Irish created an ethnically and religiously diverse society and led to sharp conflicts with the Quakers over Indian policy and access to political power. Economic inequality increased as gentlemen farmers and entrepreneurs grew wealthy and a substantial group of landless workers appeared at the bottom of the social order. As the American colonies developed closer ties with Europe, they partook of its intellectual life. The rationalism of the European Enlightenment prompted educated Americans such as Benjamin Franklin to become deists and social reformers, while pietistic religion from Germany and England reinvigorated colonial churches. In the 1740s, the preaching of George YVhitefield prompted a Great Awakening that brought spiritual renewal and cultural conflict In the northern colonies enthusiastic New Lights condemned traditional Old Lights, while in Virginia evangelical Baptists converted white tenant farmers and enslaved blacks, challenging the dominance of the Anglican elite. At midcentury a variety of conflicts disrupted American life. Rival claims to the trans-Appalachian west sparked a major war between Britain and France that ended with the British conquest of Canada. The peace treaty excluded the French from North America, destroying the "playoff system" of the Iroquois and other native American peoples. Within the British colonies, landed proprietors battled with dissident tenants in New York and used the courts to uphold their land claims in Pennsylvania, Virginia, and the Carolinas. In the backcountry of Pennsylvania and the Carolinas yeomen farmers fought with Indians and formed Regulator movements to challenge eastern- controlled governments. Britain's North American settlements had become mature, conflict-ridden provinces. 1700- New Hudson River manors created 1714 1710s- Enlightenment ideas spread from Europe 1730s to America Deists rely on "natural reason" to define a moral code 1720s Germans and Scots-Irish settle in the Middle Atlantic colonies Theodore Jacob Frelinghuysen preaches Pietism to German migrants 1730s William and Gilbert Tennent lead Presbyterian revivals among Scots-Irish Jonathan Edwards preaches in New England 1739 George Whitefield sparks the Great Awakening 1740s- Growing shortage of farmland in New 1760s England Religious and ethnic pluralism in the Middle Atlantic colonies Rising grain and tobacco pnees Increasing rural inequality 1740s Great Awakening sparks conflict between Old Lights and New Lights Colleges established by religious denominations 1743 Benjamin Franklin founds the American Philosophical Society 1749 Virginia speculators create the Ohio Company Connecticut farmers form the Susquehanna Company 1750s Industrial Revolution begins in England Consumer revolution increases American imports and debt to Britain 1754 French and Indian War begins Meeting of Iroquois and Americans at Albany; Plan of Union 1756 Britain begins the Great War for Empire 1759 Britain captures Quebec 1760s Land conflict along the border between New York and New England Regulator movements in the Carolinas suppress outlaw bands and seek power Baptist revivals in Virginia 1763 Pontiac's uprising leads to the Proclamation of 1763 Treaty of Paris ends the Great War for Empire Scots-Irish Paxton Boys massacre Indians in Pennsylvania Anonymous Broadside, May 18, 1775 "To the Associators of the City of Philadelphia T oyalist fears that the "lower sort" would seize power 1—/during the conflict with Britain had a basis in fact. When the republican Patriots of Philadelphia mobilized laborers, sailors, and other workers into a military "Association" to take control of the city, they unleashed democratic aspirations for respect and equality. At first this quest took the form of protests against concrete grievances, as in the following broadside by a well- educated Philadelphian who supported the demands of ordinary Associators for an inexpensive uniform. These aspirations soon turned into appeals for political rights, and they partly account for the radically democratic character of the Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776 (see Chapter 7). A Considerable number of the Associators of this city, on considering the plan of an uniform recommended by a Committee of the Officers, at a late meeting are of opinion that it will be found too expensive for the generality, as well as inconvenient to them; that the aforesaid Officers could not, with propriety, take upon them to adopt of themselves an uniform for the whole city, without the approbation of the people, who are entitled to an equal consultation. That by adopting the cheapest uniform, such as that of a HUNTING SHIRT, as it will level all distinctions, answers the end of coat and jacket, and is within the compass of almost every person's ability, not costing at the utmost above ten shillings. The officers say that thev did not mean to impose any particular uniform upon the people, but then they should have given the privates an opportunity of making known their sentiments. An uniform is granted by all to be absolutely necessary, but let it be something cheap, which the generality can afford. A very material advantage which the HUNTING shirts have above [over) the present uniform recommended, is that they will answer all seasons of the year, as a person may wear neither coat nor jacket in warm weather, and in winter he may cloath under them as warm as he pleases. Had the hunting shirts been recommended by the Officers, it would have met the approbation of ninety- nine out of an hundred. A meeting of the Associators ought to be called immediately, that each man may have a voice in what so nearly concerns himself. The author is informed that some of the Captains of the different companies have proposed, that any of the men, who think they are not able to buy uniforms, may be supplied by them; now there are hundreds who could not afford it, yet would never submit to ask any man for a coat, neither would they appear in the ranks to be pointed at by those who had uniforms. The author | hopes) ... those gentlemen, who have partly fixed upon an expensive uniform, to concur in sentiment with him. Source: Pennsylvania History 52 (October 1985): 255-56. nonimportation. As a well-to-do New Yorker complained, "No man can be in a more abject state of bondage than he whose Reputation, Property and Life are exposed to the discretionary violence... of the community." As the crisis continued, these men rallied to the support of the royal governors. Other social groups also refused to support the resistance movement. In regions where many wealthy landowners became Patriots, such as the Hudson Valley of New York, tenant farmers supported the crown because they hated their landlords. Similar social divisions prompted some Regulators in the North Carolina backcountry and many farmers on the eastern shore of Chesapeake Bay in Maryland to oppose the policies advocated by the local Patriot gentry and to welcome imperial intervention. Enslaved blacks had even less reason to support the cause of their Patriot masters. A group of Virginia slaves, lames Madison reported in November 1774, planned to flee from their Patriot owners and had chosen "a leader who was to conduct them when the English troops should ar- rive." Many Quakers and Germans in Pennsylvania and New lersey tried to remain neutral because of pacifist religious principles and fear of political change. Beginning in 1774, prominent Americans of "loyal principles"—mostly royal officials, merchants with military contracts, clergy of the Church of England, and William Cobbett Peter Porcupine Attacks Pro-French Americans The Democratic-Republican followers of Thomas Jefferson declared that "he who is an enemy to the French Revolution, cannot be a firm republican." William Cobbett, a British journalist who settled in Philadelphia and wrote under the pen name "Peter Porcupine," contested this definition of republicanism. A strong supporter of the Federalist Party, Cobbett was eager to attack its opponents and did so frequently in caustic and widely read pamphlets and newspaper articles. Here he evokes the horrors of the Terror in France, during which thousands of aristocrats and ordinary citizens were executed, and warns that the triumph of Radical Republicanism would bring the same fate to the United States. France is a republic, and the decrees of the Legislators were necessary to maintain it a republic. This word outweighs, in the estimation of some persons (I wish I could say they were few in number), all the horrors that have been and that can be committed in that country. One of these modern republicans will tell you that he does not deny that hundreds of thousands of innocent persons have been murdered in France; that the people have neither religion nor morals; that all the ties of nature are rent asunder; . . . that its riches, along with millions of the best of the people, are gone to enrich and aggrandize its enemies; that its commerce, its manufactures, its sciences, its arts, and its honour, are no more; but at the end of all this, he will tell you that it must be happy, because it is a republic. I have heard more than one of these republican zealots declare, that he would sooner see the last of the French exterminated, than see them adopt any other form of government. Such a sentiment is characteristic of a mind locked up in a savage ignorance. Shall we say that these things never can take place among us?... We are not what we were before the French revolution. Political projectors from every corner of Europe, tremblers of society of every description, from the whining philosophical hypocrite to the daring rebel, and more daring blasphemer, have taken shelter in these States. We have seen the guillotine toasted to three times three cheers.... And what would the reader say, were I to tell him of a Member of Congress, who wished to see one of these murderous machines employed for lopping off the heads of the French, permanent in the Statehouse yard of the city of Philadelphia? If these men of blood had succeeded in plunging us into a war; if they had once got the sword into their hands, they would have mowed us down like stubble. The word Aristocrat would have been employed to as good account here, as ever it had been in France. We might, ere this, have seen our places of worship turned into stables; we might have seen the banks of the Delaware, like those of the Loire, covered with human carcasses, and its waters tinged with blood: ere this we might have seen our parents butchered, and even the head of our admired and beloved President rolling on a scaffold. 1 know the reader will start back with horror. His heart will tell him that it is impossible. But, once more, let him look at the example before us. The attacks on the character and conduct of the aged Washington, have been as bold, if not bolder, than those which led to the downfall of the unfortunate French Monarch [Louis XVI, executed in 1793]. Can it then be imagined, that, had they possessed the power, they wanted the will to dip their hands in his blood? Sourtr: William Cobbett, Peter Porcupine in America, ed. David A. Wilson (Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 19941, 150-54. fought an undeclared maritime war against France, pro- Rcpublican and anti-British immigrants from Ireland vehemently attacked Adams's foreign policy. Some Federalists responded in kind: "Were I president, 1 would hang them for otherwise they would murder me," declared a Philadelphia Federalist pamphleteer To silence its critics, in 1798 the administration enacted coercive measures. The Naturalization Act increased the residency requirement for American citizenship from five to fourteen years; the Alien Act authorized the deportation of foreigners; and the Sedition Act prohibited the publication of ungrounded or malicious attacks on the president or Congress. "He that is not for us is against us," thundered the Federalist Gazette of the United States. Prosecutors arrested more than twenty Republican newspaper editors and politicians, accused them of PART TWO The New Republic, 1775-1820 sedition, and won convictions and jail sentences against some of them. The Federalists' repressive actions created a constitutional crisis. Republicans charged that the Sedition Act violated the First Amendment's prohibition against "abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press." However, they did not appeal to the Supreme Court, both because the Court's power to review congressional legislation had not been established and because the Court was packed with Federalists. Instead Madison and Jefferson looked to the federal system—and the state legislatures—to remedy unconstitutional laws. "The powers of the federal government" resulted "from the compact to which the states are parties," Madison declared. At Jefferson's urging, in 1798 the Kentucky legislature declared the Alien and Sedition Acts to be "unauthoritative, void, and of no force," arguing that the states had a "right to judge" the constitutionality of national laws. The Virginia legislature passed a similar resolution that also followed Madison's "states' rights" interpretation of the Constitution. The debate over the Sedition Act set the stage for the election of 1800. Jefferson, once opposed in principle to political parties, now saw them as a valuable way"to watch and relate to the people" the activities of an oppressive government. Republicans strongly supported Jefferson's bid for the presidency, pointing to the wrongful imprisonment of newspaper editors and championing states' rights. President Adams responded to these attacks by reevaluating his foreign policy. Adams was a complicated man who was dogmatic and easily offended, but he also possessed great personal strength and determination. Rejecting the advice of Hamilton and other belligerent-minded Federalists to declare war against France (and benefit from an upsurge in patriotism), Adams put country ahead of party and entered into diplomatic negotiations that brought an end to the fighting. Nonetheless, the election of 1800 was the first "dirty" political campaign. Hie Federalists attacked Jefferson's character, branding him as an irresponsible pro-French radical, "the arch-apostle of irreligion and free thought," and both parties forced changes in state election laws to favor their candidates. A low Federalist turnout in Virginia and Pennsylvania and the three- fifths rule for slave representation (which boosted the number of electoral votes in the southern states) gave Jefferson a narrow 73 to 65 victory in the electoral college. But the Republican electors unexpectedly also gave seventy-three votes to Aaron Burr of New York (Jefferson's choice for vice president), throwing the presidential election into the House of Representatives. (The Twelfth Amendment, ratified in 1804, would remedy this constitutional defect by requiring electors to vote separately for president and vice president.) Ironically, as the era of Federalism and its aristocratic outlook came to an end, Alexander Hamilton ushered in a more democratic era. For thirty-five ballots. Federalists in the House of Representatives blocked Jefferson's election. Then Hamilton intervened. Calling Burr an "embryo Caesar" and the "most unfit man in the United States for the office of president," he persuaded key Federalists to permit Jefferson's selection. The Federalists' concern for political stability also played a role. As Senator James Bayard of Delaware explained, "It was admitted on all hands that we must risk the Constitution and a Civil War or take Mr. Jefferson." Jefferson called the election the "Revolution of 1800," and so it was. The bloodless transfer of power demonstrated that governments elected by the people could be changed in an orderly way, even in times of bitter partisan conflict and foreign crisis. In his inaugural address in 1801 Jefferson praised this achievement, declaring: "We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists." Despite the predictions of European conservatives, the new republican constitutional order of 1776 had survived a quarter century of economic and political turmoil. ► For definitions of key terms boldfaced in this chapter, see the glossary at the end of the book. ► To assess your mastery of the material covered in this chapter, see the Online Study tiuide at bedfordstmartins.com/henretta. For suggested references, including Web sites, see page SR-8 at the end of the book. ► For map resources and primary documents, see bedfordstmartins.com/henretta. The republican revolution began in the states, which between 1776 and 1780 wrote new constitutions. Most states established property qualifications for voting and a separation of powers that inhibited popular rule. The Pennsylvania and Vermont constitutions were more democratic, with a powerful one-house legislature and voting rights for most free men. The New Jersey constitution allowed property-owning women to vote, but most American women were excluded from the political sphere. A few women asserted claims of intellectual and social equality and sought greater legal rights, mostly without success. On the national level the government created by the Articles of Confederation began the orderly settlement of the trans- Appalachian West, but it lacked the authority to regulate foreign trade or raise enough revenue to pay off wartime debts. Clashes over debts and taxes also disrupted the state governments and culminated in 1786 in Shays's Rebellion, an uprising of indebted farmers in Massachusetts. The perceived weaknesses of the Confederation led nationalists and creditors to convene a constitutional convention in Philadelphia in 1787. The delegates devised a new constitution that derived its authority not from the states but from the people, who were directly represented in the lower house of the legislature. The delegates created a strong national government with the power to levy taxes, issue money, and control trade. Its legislation was to be the supreme law of the land. In several important states the Constitution was ratified by narrow margins because it diminished the sovereignty of the states and seemed to create a potentially oppressive central government immune from popular control. In 1789 George Washington became the first president under the new government and, working with the first Congress, established the executive and judicial departments. The economic policies of Washington's secretary of the treasury, Alexander Hamilton, favored northern merchants and financiers and led to the creation of the Federalist Party. Thomas Jefferson and James Madison organized farmers, planters, and artisans into a rival Republican Party. The French Revolution prompted bitter ideological struggles in the United States and, during an undeclared war with France, political repression in the form of the Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798. The peaceful transfer of power to Jefferson and the Republicans in 1800 ended a decade of political strife. 1776 Pennsylvania approves a democratic constitution John Adams, Thoughts on Government Propertied women allowed to vote in New Jersey (retracted in 1807) 1777 Articles of Confederation (ratified 1781) 1779 Judith Sargent Murray, "On the Equality of the Sexes' (published In 1790) 1780s Postwar commercial recession increases creditor-debtor conflicts in the states 1781 Confederation Congress charters Bank of North America 1784- Political and Land Ordinances outline settlement 1785 policy for new states 1785 Thomas Jefferson, Notes on the State of Virginia 1786 Commercial convention in Annapolis. Maryland Shays's Rebellion roils Massachusetts 1787 Northwest Ordinance Constitutional convention in Philadelphia 1787- States hold ratification conventions 1788 John Jay. James Madison, and Alexander Hamilton write the Federalist essays 1789 George Washington inaugurated as first president Judiciary Act establishes federal court system Outbreak of French Revolution 1790 Hamilton wins Congress's approval of redemption and assumption 1791 Bill of Rights ratified 1792 Mary Wollstonecraft, A Vindication of the Rights of Woman 1793 French create Republic and execute King Louis XVI Madison and Jefferson found Republican Party War between Britain and France: Washington's Proclamation of Neutrality 1794 Whiskey Rebellion in western Pennsylvania 1795 Jay's Treaty with Great Britain 1798 XYZ Affair (1797) prompts war with France Alien, Sedition, and Naturalization Acts Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions contest federal authority 1800 Jefferson elected president in "Revolution of 1800" PART TWO The New Republic, 1775-1820 humble achievements of thousands of yeomen and tenant families slowly transformed the landscape of the interior of the continent, turning forests into farms and crossroads into communities. The Republicans' Political Revolution Agricultural expansion was a central policy of the Republican Party and accounted for much of its appeal. From 180! to 1825 three Republicans from Virginia— Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and James Mon- roe—served two terms each as president. Supported by voters in the new western states and strong majorities in Congress, this "Virginia Dynasty" reversed many Federalist policies, completing what Jefferson called the Revolution of 1800. Western issues such as Indian policy and territorial disputes with Spain and Britain occupied the attention of politicians and, together with maritime disputes in the Atlantic, precipitated the War of 1812. The Jeffersonian Presidency Thomas Jefferson was an accomplished statesman, an insightful political philosopher, and a superb politician. On assuming the presidency in 1801 Jefferson became the first chief executive to hold office in the District of Columbia, the new national capital. However, his administration did not begin with a clean slate. After a dozen years of Federalist presidents the federal judiciary was filled with their appointees. The most important was the formidable John Marshall of Virginia, who presided over the Supreme Court. Moreover, in 1801 the outgoing Federalist-controlled Congress had passed a Judiciary Act. Tt created sixteen new judgeships and six additional circuit courts, which, along with a variety of existing patronage posts, President Adams had filled with "midnight appointments" just before he left office. The Federalists "have retired into the judiciary as a stronghold," Jefferson complained, "and from that battery all the works of Republicanism are to be beaten down and destroyed." Jefferson's fears were quickly realized. In 1798, during the dispute over the Alien and Sedition Acts, Republican- dominated legislatures in Kentucky and Virginia had asserted their authority to determine the constitutionality of national laws. However, the Constitution stated that "the judicial Power shall extend to all Cases ... arising under this Constitution [and] the Laws of the United States," implying that the Supreme Court held the final power of judicial review. This important political and constitutional issue came to the fore when James Madison, the new secretary of state, refused to deliver the commission appointing William Marbury, one of Adams's midnight appointees, as a justice of the peace in the District of Columbia. Marbury petitioned the Supreme Court to compel delivery, arguing that the Judiciary Act of 1789 gave the Court jurisdiction. However, in Marbury v. Madison (1803), Chief Justice Marshall ruled that while Mar- bury had a right to his commission, the Court did not have power under the Constitution to enforce that particular right. By using this reasoning Marshall cleverly condemned Madison's action while avoiding a direct confrontation with the Republican administration. More important, in ruling that the section of the Judiciary Act extending the Court's jurisdiction violated the Constitution, Marshall asserted the Court's power to overturn a national law and to exercise the power of judicial review. "It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is," Marshall declared, directly repudiating the Republican view that the state legislatures had that power. Ignoring Marshall's challenge, Jefferson and the Republicans used their newfound national power to reverse many Federalist policies. Charging the Federalists with grossly expanding the national government's size and power, Jefferson mobilized the Republican Congress to shrink it back. "The President has only to act and the Majority will approve," an observer noted. When the Alien and Sedition Acts expired in 1801, the Congress refused to reenact them, branding the acts as politically motivated and unconstitutional. It also amended the Naturalization Act to permit resident aliens to become citizens after five years. But the new president governed tactfully. Although Jefferson secured repeal of the Judiciary Act, thereby ousting forty of Adams's "midnight appointees," he appointed some Federalists to government posts and allowed competent Federalist bureaucrats to remain in their jobs. Apart from the midnight appointees, during eight years as chief executive he removed only 69 of 433 Federalist officeholders. In foreign affairs Jefferson faced an immediate crisis. In the 1790s the Barbary States of North Africa had systematically raided American merchant ships, and Federalist officials had paid an annual bribe ("tribute") to buy their protection. Initially Jefferson reversed this policy, declaring in 1801 that the United States would no longer pay tribute. When the Barbary "pirates" renewed their assaults, he ordered the U.S. Navy to retaliate. But Jefferson wanted to avoid all-out war, which would increase taxes and the national debt. So he accepted a diplomatic solution that granted a reduced tribute. In domestic matters Jefferson set a clearly Republican course. He abolished all internal taxes, including the excise tax that had sparked the Whiskey Rebellion of 1794. Addressing his party's fears of a military takeover, Jefferson reduced the size of the permanent army. He tolerated the economically important Bank of the United States (which he had condemned as unconstitutional in 1791), but as his secretary of the treasury Jefferson chose PART THREE Economic Revolution and Sectional Strife, 1820-1877 manufacture new types of products. Before 1830 power- driven machines and assembly lines mainly processed agricultural goods—pork, leather, wool, and cotton; subsequently they were used to fabricate goods and machines made of metal. Cyrus McCormick of Chicago developed power-driven conveyor belts to assemble reaping machines, and Samuel Colt built an assembly- line factory in Hartford, Connecticut, to produce his invention—the "six-shooter" revolver, as it became known. As a team of British observers noted apprehensively, "The contriving and making of machinery has become so common in this country, and so many heads and hands are at work with extraordinary energy, that ... it is to be feared that American manufacturers will become exporters not only to foreign countries, but even to England." The Textile Industry and British Competition British textile manufacturers were particularly worried about American competition. To protect its industrial leadership, the British government prohibited the export of textile machinery and the emigration of mechanics who knew how to build it. However, lured by high wages or offers of partnerships, thousands of British mechanics disguised themselves as ordinary laborers and set sail for the United States. By 1812 there were more than 300 British mechanics at work in the Philadelphia area alone. Samuel Slater was the most important of the immigrants. Slater came to America in 1789 after working for Richard Arkwright, the inventor and operator of the most advanced British machinery for spinning cotton. Having memorized the design of Arkwrright's machinery, the young Slater introduced his innovations in merchant Moses Brown's cotton mill in Providence, Rhode Island. The opening of Slater's factory in 1790 marks the advent of the American Industrial Revolu tion (see New Technology, "Cotton Spinning; From Spinsters to Machines," p. 289). American and British Advantages. In competing with British mills, American manufacturers had one major advantage: an abundance of natural resources. America's rich agriculture produced a wealth of cotton and wool, and from Maine to Delaware its rivers provided a cheap source of energy. As rivers cascaded downhill from the Appalachian foothills to the Atlantic coastal plain, they were easily harnessed to run power machinery. Industrial villages and towns sprang up along these waterways, dominated by massive textile mills—150 feet long, 40 feet wide, and four stories high (Map 10.1). MAP 10.1 New England's Dominance in Cotton Spinning, 1840 Although the South grew the nation's cotton, Boston anil Rhode Island entrepreneurs built most of the factories for spinning and weaving the cotton into cloth in Slew England, using the abundant waterpower of the region. The new factories relieil on the labor of young farm women and, later, of immigrants from Ireland and French-speaking regions of Canada. PART THREE Economic Revolution and Sectional Strife, 1820-1877 which "capital and labor stand opposed." To restore a just society, they devised a labor theory of value, arguing that the price of a product should reflect the labor required to make it. Moreover, they wanted artisans and farmers (and not merchants and factory owners) to reap most of the profit from the sales of products, to enable them "to live as comfortably as others." Appealing to the spirit of the American Revolution, which had destroyed the aristocracy of birth, they called for a new revolution to destroy the aristocracy of capital. Armed with this artisan-republican ideology, in 1836 union men organized nearly fifty strikes for higher wages. Women textile operatives were equally active. Competition in the cotton textile industry was fierce as output grew (at 5 percent per year) and prices fell (about 1 percent per year). As prices and profits declined, employers reduced workers' wages and imposed more stringent work rules. In 1828 women mill workers in Dover, New Hampshire, struck against new rules, winning some relief; six years later more than 800 Dover women walked out to protest wage cuts. In Lowell, Massachusetts, 2,000 women operatives backed a strike by withdrawing their savings from an employer-owned bank. The Boston Transcript reported that "one of the leaders mounted a pump, and made a flaming ... speech on the rights of women and the iniquities of the 'monied aristocracy.'" When conditions did not improve, young New England women refused to enter the mills, and impoverished Irish (and later French Canadian) immigrants took their places. Many of the new textile workers were men, foreshadowing the emergence of a predominantly male system of factory labor (see Chapter 17). By the 1850s workers faced yet another threat to their jobs. As machines produced more goods, the supply of manufactures exceeded the demand for them, prompting employers to lay off or dismiss workers. One episode of overproduction preceded the Panic of 1857—a financial crisis sparked by excess railroad investments—and resulted in a major recession. Unemployment rose to 10 percent, reminding Americans of the social costs of the new—and otherwise very successful—system of industrial production. The Expansion of Markets As American factories and farms turned out more goods, merchants and legislators created faster and cheaper ways to get those products to consumers— setting in motion a Market Revolution. Beginning in the 1820s they promoted the construction of a massive system of canals and roads to link the Atlantic coast states with one another and with the new states in the trails-Appalachian West. By 1860 nearly one-third of the nation's people lived in the Midwest (the five states carved out of the Northwest Territory—Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin—along with Missouri, Iowa, and Minnesota), where they created a complex society and economy that increasingly resembled that of the Northeast. Migration to the Southwest and the Midwest After 1820 vast numbers of men and women migrated to the West, following in the footsteps of the thousands who had already left the seaboard states (Map 10.2). Abandoned farms and homes dotted die countryside of the Carolinas, Vermont, and New Hampshire. "It is useless to seek to excite patriotic emotions" for one's state of birth, complained an easterner, "when self-interest speaks so loudly." Some migrant families wanted to acquire enough land to settle their children on nearby farms, recreating traditional rural communities. Others were more entrepreneurial and hoped for greater profits from the fertile soil of the western territories. By 1840 about 5 million people lived west of the Appalachians. As in the past the new pioneers migrated in three great streams. In the South plantation owners encouraged by the voracious demand for raw cotton moved more slaves into the Old Southwest (see Chapter 9), expanding the cotton kingdom in Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama and pushing on to Missouri (1821) and Arkansas (1836). "The Alabama Leaver rages here with great violence," a North Carolina planter remarked, "and has carried off vast numbers of our Citizens." Small-scale farmers from the Upper South, especially Virginia and Kentucky, created a second stream as they crossed the Ohio River into the Northwest Territory. Some of these migrants were fleeing planter- dominated slave states. In a free community, thought Peter Cartwright, a Methodist lay preacher from southwestern Kentucky, "I would be entirely dear of the evil of slavery... [and] could raise my children to work where work was not thought a degradation." These southerners introduced corn and hog farming to the southern regions of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. Each circle centers on a government land office and depicts the relative amount of land sold at that office. population center of American society had shifted significantly to the west. The Transportation Revolution Forges Regional Ties To enhance the "common wealth" of their citizens, the federal and state governments took measures to create a targer market. Beginning in the 1790s they chartered private companies to build toll-charging turnpikes in well-populated areas and subsidized road construction in the West. The most significant feat was the National Road, which started in Cumberland, Maryland, passed Wheeling (then in Virginia) in 1818, crossed the Ohio River in 1833, and reached Vandalia, Illinois, in 1839 (Map 10.3). The National Road and other interregional highways carried migrants and their heavily loaded wagons to the West, where they passed herds of livestock being driven to eastern markets. However, such long- distance road travel was too slow and expensive to transport manufactured goods and heavy farm crops. Canals and Steamboats. To carry wheat, corn, and manufactured goods to far-flung markets, Americans developed a water-borne transportation system of unprecedented size, complexity, and cost, beginning with the Erie Canal. When the New York legislature approved the building of the canal in 1817, no artificial waterway in the United States was longer than 28 miles—a reflection of their huge capital cost and the lack of American engineering expertise. The New York project had three things in its favor: the vigorous support of New York City merchants, who wanted access to western markets; the backing of New York's governor, DeWitt Clinton, who persuaded the legislature to finance the waterway from tax revenues, tolls, and bond sales to foreign investors; and the relative gentleness of the terrain west of /Albany. Even so, the task was enormous. Workers—many of them Irish immigrants—had to dig out millions of cubic yards of soil, quarry thousands of tons of rock to build huge locks to raise and lower boats, and construct vast reservoirs to ensure a steady supply of water. CHAPTER 10 The Economic Revolution, 1820-1860 artisans and laborers. In 1846 Cyrus McCormick moved his reaper factory from western Virginia to Chicago to be closer to his midwestern customers. St. Louis and Chicago were the fastest-growing boom towns and by 1860 had become the nation's third and fourth largest cities, respectively, after New York and Philadelphia. Yet the old Atlantic seaports—Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Charleston, and especially New York— remained important for their foreign commerce and increasingly as centers of finance and manufacturing. In 1817 New York merchants founded the New York Stock Exchange, which soon became the nation's chief market for securities. The New York metropolis grew at a phenomenal rate; between 1820 and 1860 the population quadrupled to more than 800,000 as tens of thousands of German and Irish immigrants poured into the city. Drawing on the abundant supply of labor, New York became a center of small-scale manufacturing. Entrepreneurs also developed the ready-made clothing industry, which relied on the labor of thousands of low-paid seamstresses, both native- and foreign-born. "The wholesale clothing establishments are... absorbing the business of the country," a "Country Tailor" complained to the New York Tribune"casting many an honest and hardworking man out of employment [and allowingj ... the large cities to swallow up die small towns." New York's growth stemmed primarily from its dominant position in foreign trade. It had the best harbor in the United States, and oceangoing vessels could sail or steam up the Hudson River to Albany and the Erie Canal. The city's merchants exploited these natural advantages. In 1818 four Quaker merchants founded the Black Ball Line, a service that operated on a regular schedule and carried cargo, people, and mail between New York and the European ports of Liverpool, London, and Le Havre. New York merchants likewise gained an unassailable lead in commerce with the newly independent Latin American nations of Brazil, Peru, and Venezuela. New York—based traders also took over the cotton trade by offering finance, insurance, and shipping to cotton exporters in southern ports. And by persuading the state government to build the Erie Canal, the city's merchants acquired a dominant position in the export of western grain to European markets. By 1840 the port of New York handled almost two-thirds of foreign imports into the United States, almost half of all foreign trade, and much of the immigrant traffic. Changes in the Social Structure The Industrial and Market Revolutions transformed the material lives of many Americans, allowing them to live in larger houses, cook on iron stoves, and wear better-made clothes. But the new economic order created distinct social classes: a wealthy industrial and commercial elite, a substantial urban middle class, and a mass of propertyless wage earners. By creating a class-divided society, industrialization posed a momentous challenge to American republican ideals. The Business Elite Before industrialization white American society had been divided into various ranks, with "notables" ruling over the "lower orders." But in rural society the different ranks shared a common culture: gentlemen farmers talked easily with yeomen about crop yields, while their wives conversed about the art of quilting. In the South humble tenants and aristocratic slave owners shared the same amusements: gambling, cockfighting, and horse racing. Rich and poor attended the same Quaker meetinghouse or Presbyterian church. "Almost everyone eats, drinks, and dresses in the same way," a European visitor to Hartford, Connecticut, reported in 1798, "and one can see the most obvious inequality only in the dwellings." The Industrial Revolution shattered this traditional order and created a society of classes, each with its own culture. The new economic system pulled many Americans into cities and made a few of them—the business elite of merchants, manufacturers, bankers, and landlords— very rich. In 1800 the lop 10 percent of the nation's families owned about 40 percent of the wealth; by 1860 the wealthiest 10 percent owned nearly 70 percent. In large cities—-New York, Chicago, Baltimore, New Orleans—the richest 1 percent of the population held more than 40 percent of all tangible property—such as land and buildings—and an even higher share of intangible property—such as stocks and bonds. Government tax policies allowed this accumulation of wealth. The U.S. Treasury raised most of its revenue from tariffs—taxes on imported goods such as textiles that were purchased mostly by ordinary citizens. State and local governments also favored the wealthier classes. They usually taxed real estate (farms, city lots, and buildings) and tangible personal property' (such as furniture, tools, and machinery) but almost never taxed the stocks and bonds owned by the rich or the inheritances they passed on to their children. Over time the wealthiest families consciously set themselves apart from the rest of the population. They dressed in well-tailored clothes, rode around town in fancy carriages pulled by fine horses, and lived in expensively furnished houses tended by butlers, cooks, coachmen, and other servants. The women of the family no longer socialized with those of lesser wealth, and the men no longer labored side by side with their journeymen. Instead, they became managers and directors, issuing orders through trusted subordinates to hundreds of factory operatives. Increasingly merchants, manufacturers, and bankers chose to live in separate residential areas, CHAPTER 10 The Economic Revolution, 1820-1860 received only five years of schooling). Ambitious parents were equally concerned with their children's character and stressed discipline, morality, and hard work. Puritans and other American Protestants had long believed that work in an earthly "calling" was a duty people owed to God. Now the business elite and the middle class gave this idea a secular twist: they celebrated work as socially beneficial, the key to a higher standard of living for the nation and social mobility for the individual. Benjamin franklin gave classical expression to the secular work ethic in his Autobiography, which was published in full in 1818 and immediately found a huge audience. Heeding Franklin's suggestion that an industrious man would become a rich one, tens of thousands of young American men worked hard, saved their money, adopted temperate habits, and practiced honesty in their business dealings. Countless magazines, children's books, self-help manuals, and novels taught the same lessons. The ideal of the "self-made man" became a central theme of American popular culture. lust as a rural-producer ethic had united the social ranks in pre-1800 America, this new goal of personal achievement and social mobility tied together the upper and middle classes of the new industrializing society. Knowing that many affluent families had risen from modest beginnings, middle-class men and women took them as models and shunned the rapidly increasing numbers of working families who owned nothing and had to struggle just to survive. The New Urban Poor As thoughtful business leaders surveyed the emerging social landscape, they concluded that the old yeoman society of independent families no longer seemed possible or even advisable. "Entire independence ought not to be wished for," Ithamar A. Beard, the paymaster of the Hamilton Manufacturing Company, told a mechanics' association in 1827. "In large manufacturing towns, many more must fill subordinate stations and must be under the immediate direction and control of a master or superintendent, than in the farming towns." Beard had a point. In 1840 all of the nation's slaves and about half of its native-born free workers were laboring for others rather than for themselves. The bottom 10 percent of this wage-earning labor force consisted of casual workers—those hired on a short-term basis for the most arduous jobs. Poor women washed clothes, while their husbands and sons carried lumber and bricks for construction projects, loaded ships and wagons, and dug out dirt and stones to build canals. When they could find work, these men earned "their dollar per diem," an "Old Inhabitant" wrote to the Baltimore American, but he reminded readers that most workers could never save enough "to pay rent, buy fire wood and eatables" for their families when the harbor froze up. During business depressions they bore the brunt of unemployment, and even in the best of times their jobs were unpredictable, seasonal, and dangerous. Other laborers had greater security of employment, but few were prospering. In Massachusetts in 1825 the daily wage of an unskilled worker was about two-thirds that of a mechanic; two decades later it w'as less than half as much. The 18,000 native-born and immigrant women who made men's clothing in New York City in the 1850s were even worse off, averaging less than $80 a year. These meager wages paid for food and rent and not much more, so many wage earners were unable to take advantage of the rapidly falling prices of manufactured goods. Only the most fortunate working families could afford to educate their children, pay the fees required for an apprenticeship, or accumulate small dowries so that their daughters could marry men with better prospects. Most families sent their children out to work, and the death of one of the parents often threw the survivors into dire poverty. As a charity worker noted, "What can a bereaved widow do, with 5 or 6 little children, destitute of every means of support but what her own hands can furnish (which in a general way does not amount to more than 25 cents a day)." By the 1830s most urban factory workers and unskilled laborers resided in well-defined neighborhoods. Single men and women lived in large, crowded boardinghouses, while families inhabited tiny apartments carved out of the living quarters, basements, and attics of small houses. As immigrants poured into the nation after 1840, urban populations soared and developers squeezed more and more buildings onto a single lot, interspersed with outhouses and connected by foul-smelling courtyards. Venturing into the slums of New York City in the 1850s, state legislators were shocked to find gaunt, shivering people with "wild ghastly faces" living amid "hideous squalour and deadly effluvia, the dim, undrained courts oozing with pollution, the dark, narrow stairways, decayed with age, reeking with filth, overrun with vermin." Living in such distressing conditions, many wage earners turned to the dubious solace of alcohol. Alcohol had long been an integral part of American life; beer and rum had lubricated ceremonies, work breaks, bam rais- ings, and games. But during the 1820s native-born urban wage earners led Americans to new heights of alcohol consumption. Aiding them were western farmers, who distilled corn and rye into gin and whiskey as a low-cost way to get their grain to market. By 1830 drinkers consumed enormous amounts of liquor every year—enough to provide every man, woman, and child in the United States with five gallons, more than three times present- day levels (see Voices from Abroad, "Frances Trollope: American Workers and Their Wives," p. 307). Drinking patterns changed as well. Workers in many craft unions "swore off" liquor, convinced that it would undermine their skilled work as well as their health and finances. But other workers began to drink on the job— CHAPTER 10 The Economic Revolution, 1820-1860 commitment to individual enterprise and moral discipline not only among middle-class Americans but also among many wage earners. Religion and the ideology of social mobility served as powerful cement, holding society together in the face of the massive changes brought by the spread of industrial enterprise and the market economy. Immigration and Cultural Conflict Between 1840 and 1860 about 2 million Irish immigrants, 1.5 million Germans, and 750,000 Britons poured into the United States, placing new strains on the American social order. Most immigrants avoided the South because they opposed slavery, shunned blacks, or feared competition from enslaved workers. Many German migrants settled on farms or in the growing cities of the midwestern states of Wisconsin, Iowa, and Missouri, often comprising a majority of the local residents. Other Germans and most of the Irish settled in the Northeast, where by 1860 they accounted for nearly one-third of white adults. Irish Poverty. The most prosperous immigrants were the British, many of whom were professionals, propertied farmers, and skilled workers. The majority of German immigrants also came from farming and artisan families and could afford to buy land in America. The poorest migrants were Irish peasants and laborers, fleeing a widespread famine caused by severe overpopulation and a devastating blight on the potato crop. Arriving in dire poverty the Irish found new homes in the cities of New England and New York and took low-skilled, low-paying jobs as laborers in factories and on construction projects and as servants in private residences. Many Irish immigrants lived in crowded tenements with primitive sanitation systems and were the first to die when epidemics swept through American cities. In the summer of 1849 a cholera epidemic took the lives of thousands of poor immigrants in St. Louis and Nesv York. In times of hardship and sorrow immigrants turned to their churches. Many Germans and virtually all the Irish were Catholics, and they fueled the growth of the Catholic Church. In the 1840s there were sixteen Catholic dioceses and seven hundred churches in the United States; by 1860 the number had increased to forty-five dioceses and twenty-five hundred churches. Under the guidance of their priests and bishops the Irish built an impressive network of institutions— charitable societies, orphanages, militia companies, parochial schools, and political organizations—that helped them maintain their cultural identity. Nativism. Owing in part to the religious fervor raised by the Second Great Awakening, the immigrants' Catholic beliefs and institutions stirred up fear and distaste among native-born citizens. A rash of anti-Catholic publications greeted the first Irish immigrants in the 1830s. One of the most militant critics of Catholicism was Samuel F. B. Morse (who would later make the first commercial adaptation of the telegraph). In 1834 Morse published Foreign Conspiracy against the Liberties of the United States, which warned of a Catholic threat to American republican institutions. Morse believed that Catholic immigrants would obey the dictates of Pope Pius IX, who had condemned republicanism as a false political ideology based on the sovereignty of the people rather than on the sovereignty of God. Republican-minded Protestants of An Anti-Catholic Riot When riots against Irish Catholics broke out in Philadelphia in 1844, the governor of Pennsylvania called out the militia to protect Catholic churches and residential neighborhoods. In the foreground, two Protestant rioters, depicted by the artist as well- dressed gentlemen, attack an Irish family with sticks, while in the background the militia exchanges musket fire with other members of the mob. Library Company ol Philadelphia PART THREE Economic Revolution and Sectional Strife, 1820-1877 many denominations shared Morse's fears, and Foreign Conspiracy became their textbook. The social tensions stemming from industrialization intensified anti-Catholic sentiment. Unemployed Protestant mechanics and factor)' workers joined mobs that attacked Catholics, accusing them of taking jobs and driving down wages; other Protestants organized Native American Clubs, which called for limits on immigration, the restriction of public office to native-born citizens, and the exclusive use of the Protestant version of the Bible in public schools. Many reformers supported the anti-Catholic movement for reasons of public policy—to prevent the diversion of tax resources to Catholic schools and to oppose alcohol abuse by many Irish men. These cultural conflicts also inhibited the growth of a strong labor movement because Protestant wage earners felt they had more in common with their Protestant employers than with their Catholic co-workers. In almost every large northeastern city religious and cultural conflicts led to violence. In 1834 in Charlestown, Massachusetts, a quarrel between Catholic laborers repairing a convent owned by the Ursuline order of nuns and Protestant workers in a neighboring brickyard turned into a full-scale riot and the burning of the convent. In Philadelphia the violence peaked in 1844 when the Catholic bishop persuaded public school officials to use the Catholic as well as the Protestant version of the Bible. Anti-Irish rioting incited by the city's Native American Clubs lasted for two months and escalated into open warfare between Protestants and the Pennsylvania militia. Thus, even as economic revolution brought prosperity to many Americans, it divided the society along the lines of class and, by encouraging the influx ol immigrants, created new ethnic and religious tensions. Differences of class and culture now split the North in much the same way that race and class had long divided the South. Yet overall the majority of white Americans shared a common commitment to a dynamic economic system based on private property and a vibrant political culture of democratic republicanism. ► For definitions of key terms boldfaced in this chapter, see the glossary at the end of the book. For map resources and primary documents, see bedfordstmartins.com/henretta. Between 1820 and 1860 the United States experienced an "industrial" and a "market" revolution that created a new economic structure. Merchants and manufacturers organized increasingly efficient systems of production and, aided by skilled mechanics, introduced water- and steam-powered machines to turn out huge quantities of goods. Simultaneously merchants, traders, and shopkeepers created a vast market system in which they exchanged these manufactures for grain, meat, cotton, leather, and wool produced by a rapidly growing—and westward-moving—farm population. Three streams of migrants transplanted the cultures of the plantation South, the Middle Atlantic, and yeoman New England into the Old Southwest, the Ohio River Valley, and the Old Northwest. State governments promoted this westward movement— and the creation of regional and national markets— by subsidizing the building of roads, canals, and railroads and creating a transportation system that was unprecedented in size and complexity. As domestic markets and production grew, urbanization accelerated in the Northeast, where industrial towns dotted the landscape, and New York City became the nation's largest city and leading trading center. Economic growth fostered the creation of new social classes: a wealthy urban business elite of merchants and manufacturers; a prosperous, educated, and well-housed middle class; and a mass of wage-earning laborers with little or no property. Some artisans and workers formed trade unions in generally unsuccessful efforts to improve their economic welfare; other working people lived in poverty and sought solace in drink. To improve the living conditions and the morals of the poor, upper-class Americans formed benevolent reform societies that promoted temperance, dispensed charity, and encouraged respect for the Christian Sabbath. Simultaneously, Charles Grandison Finney and other evangelical clergymen gave new life to the Second Great Awakening, enlisting millions of propertied farmers and middle-class Americans in a massive religious revival. Preaching the doctrine of "free moral agency," Finney urged Americans both to assist in their own salvation and to reform the world in which they lived. Protestant evangelicalism heightened the cultural conflict between native-born Americans and millions of Catholic immigrants from Ireland and Germany. Nativist writers attacked Irish Catholics as antirepublican, and American workers blamed immigrant labor for their economic woes—attitudes that led to ethnic riots in many northern cities. By 1860 the United States was a more prosperous society than ever before, and a more socially divided one. 1782 Oliver Evans develops automated flour mill 1790 Samuel Slater opens spinning mill in Providence, Rhode Island 1793 Eli Whitney manufactures cotton gins 1807 Robert Fulton launches the Clermont, the first American steamboat 1810s Cotton kingdom begins in Old Southwest 1814 Boston Manufacturing Company opens cotton mill in Waltham. Massachusetts 1817 Erie Canal begun: completed in 1825 1820 Minimum federal land price reduced to $1.25 per acre 1820s New England women become textile operatives Building-trade workers seek ten-hour workday Rise of Benevolent Empire 1821 End of Panic of 1819; fifteen-year boom begins 1824 Congress raises tariffs; Increased again in 1828 Gibbons v. Ogden promotes interstate trade 1830s Expansion of western commercial cities Labor movement gains strength Class-segregated cities Growth of temperance movement Creation of middle-class culture 1830 Charles Grandison Finney begins Rochester revival 1837 Panic of 1837 John Deere invents steel plow 1839 European financial crisis begins four-year depression In United States 1840s Irish and German immigration: ethnic riots 1850s Expansion of railroads Rise of machine-tool industry 1857 Financial panic after fourteen-year boom PART THREE Economic Revolution and Sectional Strife, 1820-1877 the nation's first Whig president and gave the Whigs a majority in Congress. The Tyler Administration. The Whig triumph was short-lived. One month after his inauguration Harrison died of pneumonia, and the nation got "Tyler Too." Vice President John Tyler of Virginia, who became president, had joined the Whig Party primarily because he opposed Jackson's stance against nullification. The Surge in Immigration, 1842-1855 Tlte failure of the potato crop prompted a wholesale migration of peasants from the overcrowded farms of western Ireland. Population pressure likewise spurred the migration of tens of thousands of German peasants, while the failure of the liberal political revolution of 1848 prompted hundreds of prominent German politicians and intellectuals to settle in the United States. Source: David M. Potter, Division and the Stresses ot Reunion, 1845-1876. Copyright © 1973 Scott, Foresman and Company. Reprinted by permission. issues Tyler was really a Democrat, sharing Jackson's hostility to the Second Bank and the American System. Consequently, he vetoed bills that would have raised tariffs and created a new national bank. Also like Jackson, Tyler favored the common man and the rapid settlement of the West. He approved the Preemption Act of 1841, which allowed cash-poor settlers to stake a free claim to 160 acres of federal land. By building a house and farming the land, they could buy the property later at a set price of $1.25 an acre. The split between Tyler and the Whigs allowed the Democrats to regroup. The party vigorously recruited supporters among subsistence farmers in the North and smallholding planters in the South. It cultivated the votes of the urban working class and was particularly successful among Irish and German Catholic immigrants— whose numbers had increased rapidly during the 1830s—supporting their demands for religious and cultural freedom (Figure 11.2). Thanks to these recruits, the Democrats remained the majority party in most parts of the nation. Their program of equal rights, states' rights, and cultural liberty was more attractive than the Whig platform of economic nationalism, moral reform, and individual mobility. The continuing struggle between Whigs and Democrats, each claiming to speak for "the people," completed the democratic revolution that European visitors found so troubling. The new system perpetuated many problematic political customs—denying women, Indians, and most African Americans an effective voice in public life— and introduced a few more dubious practices, such as the spoils system and a coarser standard of public debate. Yet the United States now boasted universal suffrage for white men as well as a highly organized system of representative government that was responsive to ordinary citizens. In their scope and significance these political initiatives matched the economic advances of the Industrial and Market Revolutions. For suggested references, including Web sites, see page SR-12 at the end of the book. ► For map resources and primary documents, see bed- fordstmartins.com/henretta. PART THREE Economic Revolution and Sectional Strife, 1820-1877 California Gold Prospectors Beginning in 1849, thousands of fortune seekers from all parts of the world converged on the California gold fields. By 1852 the state had 200,000 residents, including 25,000 Chinese, many of whom toiled in the gold fields as wage laborers. Working at the head of the Auburn Ravine in 1852, these prospectors are using a primitive technique—panning— to separate gold from sand and gravel. California Slate Library. its roots in republican ideology, and it had considerable appeal. Popular sovereignty would place decisions about slavery in the hands of local settlers and their territorial governments, removing the explosive issue from national politics. However, popular sovereignty was a vague and slippery concept. For example, did popular sovereignty mean that residents could accept or ban slavery when a territory was first organized or only when a territory had enough people to frame a constitution and apply for statehood? For their part, antislavery advocates were unwilling to accept any plan that might involve the expansion of slavery and stood firm for complete exclusion. In 1850 Senator Salmon P. Chase of Ohio, elected by a Democratic-Free-Soil coalition, and Senator William H. Seward, a New York Whig, urged federal authorities to restrict slavery within its existing boundaries and then extinguish it completely. Condemning slavery as "morally unjust, politically unwise, and socially pernicious" and invoking "a higher law than the Constitu- tion," Seward demanded bold action to protect freedom, "the common heritage of mankind." A Complex Compromise. Standing on the brink of disaster, senior Whigs and Democrats desperately sought a compromise to preserve the Union. Through a long and complex legislative process, Whig leaders Henry Clay and Daniel Webster and Democrat Stephen A. Douglas organized an interrelated package of six laws known collectively as the Compromise of 1850. To mollify the South, the Compromise included a new Fugitive Slave Act allowing slave owners to demand that federal magistrates in the free states help return runaway slaves. To satisfy the North, the legislation admitted California as a free state, resolved a boundary dispute between New Mexico and Texas in favor of New Mexico, and abolished the slave trade (but not slavery) in the District of Columbia. Finally, the Compromise organized the rest of the lands acquired from Mexico into the territories of New Mexico and Utah on the basis of popular sovereignty (Map 13.7). PART THREE Economic Revolution and Sectional Strife, 1820-1877 Presidential Election of 1852 In this cartoon, Franklin Pierce races toward the White House on a fleet Democratic horse while General Winfield Scott futilely heats his stubborn Wltig mule, which is pulled by members of the Know-Nothing Party ("Native Americans") and prodded by a group of African Americans. Hy identifying Scott and the Whigs as anti-foreigner and pro-black (because many Whigs opposed the Fugitive Slave Act of1850), the cartoonist seeks to garner votes for Pierce and the Democrats from New York's large population of Irish and German immigrants. Collection of Jamce L and David J, Freni, 1854 Douglas introduced a bill to extinguish Native American rights on the central Great Plains and organize a large territory to be called Nebraska. Because Nebraska was north of 36°30', it would be a free territory. Douglas's bill conflicted with the plans of southern senators and representatives, who wanted to extend slavery throughout the Louisiana Purchase. Moreover, like James Gadsden, southern leaders hoped that one of their cities—New Orleans, Memphis, or St. Louis— would become the eastern terminus of a transcontinental railroad. To win southern support for the organization of Nebraska, Douglas made two major concessions. First, he amended his bill so that it explicitly repealed the Missouri Compromise and organized the region on the basis of popular sovereignty. Second, Douglas agreed to the formation of two new territories, Nebraska and Kansas, giving slaveholders a chance to dominate the settlement of Kansas, the more southern territory (see Map 13.7). To persuade northerners and midwestemers, Douglas argued that Kansas would be settled primarily by nonslaveholders because its climate and terrain were not suited to plantation agriculture. After weeks of bitter debate, the Senate enacted the Kansas-Nebraska Act, which was strongly supported by President Pierce. However, the House of Representatives initially voted to kill the measure, as sixty-six northern Democrats defied parts- policy. Using all the powers at his disposal—patronage pressure, newspaper propaganda, floor management—Pierce persuaded twenty- two members to change their votes, and the measure squeaked through. Republicans and Know-Nothings. The price of this victory was enormous because passage of the Kansas-Ncbraska Act completed the destruction of the Whig Party and nearly wrecked the Democratic Party. Abolitionists and Free-Soilcrs denounced the act, calling it "part of a great scheme for extending and perpetuating supremacy of the slave power," and their message now fell on receptive ears. Antislavery northern Whigs and "anti-Nebraska" Democrats abandoned their respective parties to create a new Republican Party, named alter the party headed by Thomas lefferson. Emphasizing uncompromising opposition to the CHAPTER 13 The Crisis of the Union. 1844-1860 "Bleeding Kansas" The con frontal ion between North and South in Kansas took many forms. In the spring of 1859 Dr. John Day <seated) slipped across the border into Missouri and tried to lead thirteen escaped slaves to freedom in Kansas, only to be captured and jailed in St. Joseph, Missouri This serious- minded band of antislaver}' men, well armed with guns and Howie knives, attacked the jail and carried Doy back to Kansas. Kansas Slate Historical Society expansion of slavery, the Republicans ran a slate of candidates in the congressional election of 1854. Like most American parties, the Republican Part)' was a coalition of diverse groups—Free-Soilers, antislavery Democrats, conscience Whigs—but most of its founders shared a common philosophy. They opposed slavery because it degraded manual labor, enslaving blacks and thereby d rising down the wages and working conditions of free white workers. In contrast, Republicans as diverse as farmer Abijah Beckwith of Herkimer, New York, and Senator Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania celebrated the moral virtues of a society based on "the middling classes who own the soil and work it with their own hands." Abraham Lincoln, an Illinois Whig who became a Republican, articulated the party's vision of social mobility. "There is no permanent class of hired laborers among us," he argued, and every man had a chance to become a property owner. In the face of increasing class divisions in the industrializing North and Midwest, Lincoln and his fellow Republicans asserted the values of republican freedom and individual enterprise. Competing for Whig and Democratic votes was another new party, the American, or "Know-Nothing," Party. The American Party' had its origins in the anti- immigrant and anti-Catholic organizations of the 1840s (see Chapter 10). In 1850 these secret societies banded together as the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner and the following year they formed the American Party. The secrecy-conscious members sometimes answered outsiders' questions by saying, "I know nothing," giving the party its nickname, but its program was far from secret. Know-Nothings hoped to unite native-born Protestants against the "alien menace" of Irish and German Catholics, banning further immigration and instituting literacy tests for voting, hi 1854 the Know-Nothings gained control of the state governments of Massachusetts and Pennsylvania and, allied with the Whigs, commanded a majority in the U.S. House of Representatives. The emergence of a new major party led by nativists suddenly became a real possibility. "Bleeding Kansas." At the same time, the Kansas- Nebraska Act had created yet another political crisis. In 1854 thousands of settlers rushed into the Kansas Territory, putting Douglas's theory of popular sovereignty' to the test. On the side of slavery Senator David R. Atchison of Missouri organized residents of his state to cross into Kansas and vote in crucial elections there. Opposing him were agents of the abolitionist New England Emigrant Aid Society, which dispatched hundreds of Free-Soilers to Kansas. In March 1855 the Pierce administration stepped into the fray by accepting the legitimacy of the territorial legislature sitting in Lecompton, Kansas, which had been elected primarily by border-crossing Missourians and had adopted proslavery legislation. However, the majority of Kansas residents were Free-Soilers and refused allegiance to the Lecompton government. In May 1856 both sides turned to violence. A proslav- ery gang, seven hundred strong, sacked the tree-soil town of Lawrence, destroying two newspaper offices, looting stores, and burning down buildings (see American Voices, "Axalla John Hoole: 'Bleeding Kansas': A Southern View," p. 390). The attack enraged John Brown, an abolitionist from New York and Ohio, whose free-state militia force arrived too late to save the town. Brown was a complex man with a checkered past. Born in 1800, he had started more than twenty businesses in six states and had often been sued by his creditors. Despite his record of business failures, Brown had an intelligence and a moral intensity that won the trust of influential people, including leading abolitionists. Taking vengeance for the sack of Lawrence, he and a few followers murdered and mutilated five proslav- ery settlers. We must "fight fire with fire" and "strike terror in the hearts of the proslavery people," Brown declared. The sack of Lawrence and the "Pottawatomie massacre," as CHAPTER 14 Two Societies at War, 1861-1865 the nation's best military leaders, including Colonel Robert E. Lee of Virginia, a career officer whom General in Chief Winfield Scott recommended to Lincoln as field commander of the new Union army. .And they were geographically strategic. Kentucky, with its 500-mile border on the Ohio River, was essential to the movement of troops and supplies. Maryland was vital to the Union's security because it surrounded the nation's capital on the north. The weight of history decided the outcome in Virginia, the original home of American slavery. Three days after the fall of Fort Sumter, a Virginia convention passed an ordinance of secession by a vote of 88 to 55. The dissenting votes came mainly from the yeoman- dominated northwestern counties (see Map 14.1); elsewhere in Virginia whites rallied to the Confederate cause. As William Poague, a former Unionist lawyer, explained his decision to enlist in a Virginia artillery unit: "T he North was the aggressor. The South resisted her invaders." Refusing Scott's offer to command the Union troops, Robert E. Lee resigned from the army. "Save in defense of my native state," Lee told Scott, "I never desire again to draw my sword." Arkansas, Tennessee, and North Carolina quickly joined Virginia in the Confederacy. Lincoln moved aggressively to hold the rest of the Upper South. In May he ordered General George B. McClellan to take control of northwestern Virginia, thus securing the railway line between Washington and the Ohio Valley. In October voters in that predominantly yeoman region overwhelmingly approved the creation of a breakaway stale. West Virginia, which was admitted to the Union in 1863. The Union cause also triumphed in Delaware but received much less support in Maryland, where slaver)' was well entrenched. A pro-Confederate mob attacked Massachusetts troops marching between railroad stations in Baltimore, causing the war's first combat deaths: four soldiers and twelve civilians. When other Maryland secessionists destroyed railroad bridges and telegraph lines, Lincoln ordered military occupation of the state and imprisoned suspected secessionists, including members of the state legislature. He released them only in November 1861, after Unionists had gained control of the Maryland legislature. In Missouri, the key to communications and trade on the Missouri and upper Mississippi Rivers, Lincoln mobilized support among the large German American community. In July a force of German American militia defeated Confederate sympathizers commanded by the governor. Despite continuing raids by Confederate guerrilla bands led by William Quantril! and Jesse and Frank James, the Union retained control of Missouri (see Voices from Abroad, "Ernest Duveyier de Hau- ranne, German Immigrants and the Civil War within Missouri," p. 402). In Kentucky secessionist and Unionist sentiment was evenly balanced, so Lincoln moved cautiously. He waited until August, when Unionists took control of the state government, before ordering federal troops to halt Kentucky's thriving trade with the Confederacy in horses, mules, whiskey, and foodstuffs. When the Confederates responded to this cutoff by moving troops into Kentucky, the Unionist legislature asked for federal protection. In September Illinois volunteers under the command of the relatively unknown Brigadier General Ulysses S. Grant crossed the Ohio River and drove out the Confederates. Of the eight states of the Upper South, Lincoln had kept four (Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri) and a portion of a fifth (western Virginia) in the Union (Table 14.1). Setting Objectives and Devising Strategies Following the creation of the Confederacy, its leaders called on their people to defend its independence. At his inauguration in February 1861 lefferson Davis identified the Confederate cause with that of the American Revolution: like their grandfathers, white Southerners were fighting against tyranny and for the "sacred right of TABLE 14.1 Slavery and Secession Group Percentage of Whites in Percentage of Slave-owning Families Slaves in Population Original Confederate States 38% 47% Border States that l.ater Joined the Confederacy 24% 32% Border States that Remained in Union 14% 15% Ernest Duveyier de Hauranne German Immigrants and the Civil War within Missouri Tens of thousands of German immigrants settled in Missouri and other midwestern states in the two decades before the Civil War and, as the following letter by the Frenchman Ernest Duveyier de Hauranne indicates, most of them supported the Union cause. De Hauranne traveled widely, and his letters home offer an intelligent commentary on American politics and society during the Civil War. St. Louis, September 12, 1864 Missouri is to all intents and purposes a rebel state, an occupied territory where the Federal forces are really nothing but a garrison under siege; even today it is not certain what would happen if the troops were withdrawn. Party quarrels here are poisoned by class hatreds_The old Anglo-French families, attached to Southern institutions, harbor a primitive, superstitious prejudice in favor of slavery. Conquered now, but full of repressed rage, they exhibit the implacable anger peculiar to the defenders of lost causes_ The more recent German population is strongly abolitionist. They have brought to the New World the instincts of European democracy, together with its radical attitudes and all-or-nothing doctrines. Ancient precedents and worn-out laws matter little to them. They have not studied history and have no respect for hallowed injustices; but they do have, to the highest degree, that sense of moral principle which is more or less lacking in American democracy. They aren't afraid of revolution: to destroy a barbarous institution they would, if necessary, take an axe to the foundations of society. Furthermore, their interests coincide with their principles.... The immigrant arrives poor and lives by his work. A newcomer, having nothing to lose and caring little for the interests of established property owners, sees that the subjection of free labor to the ruinous competition of slave labor must be ended. At the same tune, his pride rebels against the prejudice attached to work in a land of slavery; he wants to reestablish its value. An abolitionist and a self-made man, he put himself firmly at the head of the German party, determined to crush the friends of slavery. He formed an army of Germans who are completely devoted to their chief.... [However,] bands of guerrillas hold the countryside, where they raid as much as they please; politics serves as a fine pretext for looting. Their leaders are officers from the army of the South who receive their orders from the Confederate government. .. . These "bushwackers," who ordinarily rob indiscriminately, maintain their standing as political raiders by occasionally killing some poor, inoffensive person. Finally, people bent on personal vengeance take advantage of the state of civil war: sometimes one hears of villages divided against themselves so bitterly that massacres are carried on from door to door with incredible ferocity.... You can see what emotions are still boiling in this region that is supposed to be pacified. Source: Ernest Duveyier de Hauranne, A frenchman in Lincoln's America (Chicago: Lakende Press, 1974), 305-9. self-government." As Davis put it, the Confederacy sought "no conquest, no aggrandizement, no concession of any kind from the states with which we were lately confederated; all we ask is to be let alone." The decision to focus on the defense of the Confederacy and not to conquer western territories gave southern leaders a strong advantage: they needed only a military stalemate to guarantee independence. However, the Confederacy's firm commitment to slavery undermined its support in Europe, where opposition to forced labor was strong, Alexander Stephens of Georgia, the vice president of the Confederacy, ruled out any plan for gradual emancipation, declaring that his nation's "cornerstone rests upon the great truth that the Negro is not equal to the white man, that slavery—subordination to the superior race— is his natural or normal condition." Lincoln made his first major statement on Union goals and strategy in a speech to Congress on July 4, economy. In desperation, he considered leading an expedition of former Confederate comrades to seize the riches of Mexico. A more promising avenue tor Forrest's energies, however, had by now opened up. From its obscure beginnings after the war, the Ku Klux Klan proliferated wildly across Tennessee and into neighboring states. What the Klan needed was a tough, respected figure able to impose order on the Invisible Umpire and prevent it from spinning out of control—none other than Nathan Bedford Forrest. At a clandestine meeting in Nashville sometime in late 1866, he accepted the job and donned the robes of Grand Wizard, the Klan's highest office. Forrests activities are mostly unknown because he worked in secrecy, but there is no mystery about why he gravitated to the Klan. For him, the Klan was politics by other means, the vehicle by which disfranchised former Confederates like himself might strike a blow against the despised Republicans who ran Tennessee. In many towns, including Memphis, the Klan became virtually identical to the Democratic clubs; in fact, Klan members—including Forrest—dominated the state's delegation to the Democratic national convention of 1868. On the ground the Klan unleashed a murderous campaign of terror against Republican sympathizers. Governor Brownlow responded resolutely, threatening to mobilize the state militia and root out the Klan. If Brownlow tried, answered Forrest, "there will be war, and a bloodier one than we have ever witnessed.... If the militia attack us, we will resist to the last; and, if necessary, I think 1 could raise 40,000 men in five days, ready for the field." For many months, Tennessee endured a high state of tension. In September 1868 a new law identified membership in the Klan as a felony, and the following February martial law was declared in nine Klan-ridden counties. But it was the Republicans, not the Klan, who cracked. In March 1869 Brownlow retreated to the U.S. Senate. The Democrats were on their way back to power, and the Klan, having served its purpose, was officially disbanded in Tennessee. Like many other Confederate heroes, Forrest might now have anticipated a comfortable life in politics. But he had too much blood on his hands. He was among the very last to be pardoned by President Johnson. His appearance at the Democratic convention in 1868 brought forth bitter Republican denunciations against "the Fort Pillow Butcher." Physical violence, moreover, still dogged his life, including the killing (he claimed self- defense) of a sharecropper on his plantation. What sealed Forrest's political fate, however, was the Ku Klux Klan. Forrest had regarded the Klan's mission in strictly political terms, its violence calibrated to the task of driving the Republicans from power. In this Forrest only reflected what conservative Southerners generally favored. KKK Flag Striking fear in the hearts of its enemies was a favorite tactic of Forrest's Ku Klux Klan—hence this menacing ceremonial flag front Tennessee, with its fierce dragon and mysterious Latin motto, "Because it always is, because it is everywhere, because it is aborninable." Chicago Historical Society But he could not curb the senseless brutality against blacks done in the Klan's name. Any ruffian, he complained, could put on a white sheet and go after his neighbors. But Forrest was the Grand Wizard, and even after he resigned, his name could not be dissociated from Klan savagery. Celebrated though he might have been, when it came to supporting him for political office, Democratic leaders kept their distance. So Forrest had to cash in his chips elsewhere, which he did as president and chief promoter of the Memphis St Selma Railroad. Beginning in 1869 he hawked bonds to communities along the proposed right of way and lobbied for state and county subsidies, expending his considerable reputation on an ambitious project linking Memphis by rail to northern Alabama and eastern Mississippi; all in vain. The unfinished Memphis & Selma collapsed after the Panic of 1873, and Forrest was left with nothing. Resilient to the end, he contracted with Selby County for convicts to work 1,700 acres of land he had rented on President's Island, four miles from Memphis. Leasing convicts was a practice notorious for horrendous abuses, but none were reported on President's Island. The swamp-ridden island, howrever, proved hard on him; he contracted a debilitating intestinal illness that ultimately proved fatal. After so many setbacks, his luck turned at least in this regard: against all odds, Nathan Bedford Forrest died peacefully in his bed on October 29,1877. The legacy he left, however, gave the South no peace. Racial violence plagued the land, and in 1915 the Ku Klux Klan revived, its victims extending beyond the black community to include Jews, Catholics, and immigrants. 