While war was never officially declared, for the next two years an undeclared naval war raged between France and the United States. THE ALIEN AND SEDITION ACTS Anti-French feeling continued to flourish, and many Federalists believed that French agents were everywhere, plotting to overthrow the government. New arrivals from foreign countries were soon held in particular suspicion, especially because many immigrants were active in the Democratic-Republican party. Some of the most vocal critics of the Adams administration were foreign-born. They included French and British radicals as well as recent Irish immigrants who lashed out at anyone who was even faintly pro-British, including the Federalist Adams. To counter what they saw as a growing threat against the government, the Federalists pushed through Congress in 1798 four measures that became known as the Alien and Sedition Acts. Three of these measures, the Alien Acts, raised the residence requirement for American citizenship from five years to 14 years and allowed the president to deport or jail any alien considered undesirable. The fourth measure, the Sedition Act, set fines and jail terms for anyone trying to hinder the operation of the government or expressing "false, scandalous, and malicious statements" against the government. Under the terms of this act, the federal government prosecuted and jailed a number of Democratic-Republican editors, publishers, and politicians. Outraged Democratic-Republicans called the laws a violation of freedom of speech guaranteed by the First Amendment. Although the system was optional, a storm of opposition erupted from well-to-do taxpayers. They saw no reason to support schools that their children, who were mostly enrolled in private schools, would not attend. Opposition also came from some German immigrants who feared that their children would forget the German language and culture. Within three years, however, about 42 percent of the elementary-school- age children in Pennsylvania were attending public schools. One remarkable leader in the public school reform movement was Horace Mann of Massachusetts. After a childhood spent partly at work and partly in poor schools, Mann declared, "If we do not prepare children to become good citizens, ... if we do not enrich their minds with knowledge, then our republic must go down to destruction, as others have gone before it." In 1837 he became the first secretary of the Massachusetts Board of Education. In 12 years of service, Mann established teacher-training programs and instituted curriculum reforms, lie also doubled the money that the state spent on schools. Other states soon followed Massachusetts's and Pennsylvania's good example. By the 1850s every state had provided some form of publicly funded elementary schools. In states in the far West and in Southern states, however, it took years before public schools were firmly established. •& spotlight If you attended school during the mid-to late-1800s, you probably would have used a McGuffeys reader. William H. McGuffey, a teacher and preacher in Ohio, first published his popular grade-school reading books in the 1830s. The readers, which had sold more than 60 million copies by 1879, taught reading, writing, and arithmetic, as well as the democratic cultural values of hard work, honesty, and love of country. They also contained little moral lessons to live by, such as "Idleness is the nest in which mischief lays its eggs." 1 TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. 3 million immigrants were added to the U.S. population that had numbered just over 20 million, t he majority of the immigrants were German or Irish. Most immigrants avoided the South because slavery limited their economic opportunity. What's more, Southerners were generally hostile to European, particularly Catholic, immigrants. German immigrants clustered in the upper Mississippi Y'alley and in the Ohio Valley. Most German immigrants had been farmers in Europe, but some became professionals, artisans, and shopkeepers in the United States. A SECOND WAVE Irish immigrants settled in the large cities of the East. Nearly a million Irish immigrants had settled in America between 1815 and 1844. Between 1845 and 1854 Irish immigration soared after a blight destroyed the peasants' staple crop, potatoes, which led to a famine in Ireland. The Great Potato Famine killed as many as 1 million of the Irish people and drove over 1 million more to new homes in America, Irish immigrants faced bitter prejudice, both because they were Roman Catholic and because they were poor. Frightened by allegations of a Catholic conspiracy to take over the country, Protestant mobs in New York, Philadelphia, and Boston rampaged through Irish neighborhoods. Native-born artisans, whose wages had fallen because of competition from unskilled laborers and factor)' production, considered Irish immigrants the most unfair competition of all. Their willingness to work for low wages under terrible conditions made the desperate Irish newcomers easy prey for employers who sought to break strikes with cheap labor. NATIONAL TRADES' UNION In their earliest attempts to organize, journeymen formed trade unions specific to each trade. For example, journeymen shoemakers tcONOM/f Smarting from the hostility around them. Irish immigrants soon began to view unions as an opportunity to advance their prospects. In fact, Irish dock workers organized New York City's most famous strike of the 1840s. When Irish women tailors organized the Ladies Industrial Association in New York City in 1845, their leader. Elizabeth Gray, denounced "tyrant employers." Though employers retained great power through the 1840s. unions did manage to win a few victories. This cartoon lithograph by Nathaniel Currier (1813-1888) was inspired by the California gold rush. Currier was a founder of the Currier and Ives company, which became famous for detailed lithographs of 19th-century daily life. Here Currier portrays some of the hordes of prospectors who flocked from all over the world to California in 1849. The mob wields picks and shovels, desperate to find any means of transport to the "Golden West." While some miners dive into the water, weighed down by heavy tools, one clever prospector has invented a new type of airship to speed him to the treasure. Analyzing Political Cartoons 1. How has the cartoonist added humor to this portrayal of the gold seekers? 2. What clues tell you that this cartoon is about the California gold rush? On June 6, 1848, Monterey's Mayor Walter Colton sent a scout to report on what was happening. .After the scout returned on June 14, the mayor described the scene that had taken place in the middle of the town's main street. A Personal Voice Walter. The blacksmith dropped his hammer, the carpenter his plane, the mason his trowel, the farmer his sickle, the baker his loaf, and the tapster his bottle. All were off for the mines. ... I have only a community of women left, and a gang of prisoners, with here and there a soldier who will give his captain the slip at first chance. I don't blame the fellow a whit; seven dollars a month, while others are making two or three hundred a day! —quoted in California: A Bicentennial History As gold fever traveled eastward, overland migration to California skyrocketed, from 400 in 1848 to 44,000 in 1850. The rest of the world soon caught the fever. Among the so-called forty-niners, the prospectors who flocked to California in 1849 in the gold rush, were people from Asia, South America, and Europe. IMPACT OF GOLD FEVER Because of its location as a supply center, San Francisco became "a pandemonium of a city," according to one traveler. Indeed, the city's population exploded from 1,000 in 1848 to 35,000 in 1850. Ferrying people and supplies, ships clogged San Francisco's harbor with a forest of masts. Louisa Clapp and her husband, Fayette, left the comforts of a middle-class family in New England to join the gold rush for adventure. After living in San Francisco for more than a year, the Clapps settled in a log cabin in the interior Comparing Cj Whalarov dreams did pen who sought g* I California slat with those "to settled in Or$n Chapter 9 mining town of Rich Bax. While her husband practiced medicine, Louisa tried her hand at mining and found it hardly to her liking. A Personal Voice " I have become a mineress; that is, if having washed a pan of dirt with my own hands, and procured therefrom three dollars and twenty-five cents in gold dust will entitle me to the name. I can truly say, with the blacksmith's apprentice at the close of his first day's work at the anvil, that i am sorry 1 learned the trade;' for 1 wet my feet, tore my dress, spoilt a pair of new gloves, nearly froze my fingers, got an awful headache, took cold and lost a valuable breastpin, in this my labor of love. They Saw the Elephant GOLD RUSH BRINGS DIVERSITY By 1849, California's population exceeded 100,000. The Chinese were the largest group to come from overseas. Free blacks also came by the hundreds, and many struck it rich. By 1855, the wealthiest African Americans in the country were living in California. The fast-growing population included large numbers of Mexicans as well. The California demographic mix also included slaves—that is until a constitutional convention in 1849 drew up a state constitution that outlawed slavery. California's application for statehood provoked fiery protest in Congress and became just one more sore point between irate Northerners and Southerners, each intent on winning the sectional argument over slavery. Nevertheless, California did win statehood in 1850. These miners are prospecting in Spanish Rat. California. On March 4, 1850, Calhoun, explaining that he was too ill to deliver a prepared speech, asked Senator James M. Mason of Virginia to deliver it for him. A Personal Voice john c. calhoun " I have, Senators, believed from the first that the agitation of the subject of slavery would, if not prevented by some timely and effective measure, end in disunion. ... The agitation has been permitted to proceed . . . until it has reached a period when it can no longer be disguised or denied that the Union is in danger. You have thus had forced upon you the greatest and the gravest question that can ever come under your consideration: How can the Union be preserved? —quoted in The Compromise of 1850, edited by Edwin C. Rozwertc Senator Calhoun called on the North to give the South "justice, simple justice." He demanded that slavery be allowed throughout the territories won in the war with Mexico. If it was not, he declared, the South would secede, or withdraw, from the Union. Once again, the issue of slavery had brought about a political crisis, deepening the gulf between the North anil the South. ▲ John C. Calhoun was vice- president under Differences Between North and South Senator Calhoun argued that although the North and the South had been politically equal when the Constitution was adopted, the "perfect equilibrium" between the two sections no longer existed. At any rate, the two sections certainly had developed different ways of life by the 18S0s. John Quincy Adams and Andrew Jackson. His last words were: "The South. The poor South.' INDUSTRY AND IMMIGRATION IN THE NORTH The North industrialized rapidly as factories turned out ever-increasing amounts of products, from textiles and sewing machines to farm equipment and guns. Railroads—with more than 20,000 miles of track laid during the 1850s—carried raw materials eastward and 304 Chapter 10 manufactured Roods and settlers westward. Small towns like Chicago matured into cities almost overnight, due to the sheer volume of goods and people arriving by railroad. Telegraph wires strung along the railroad tracks provided a network of instant communication for the North. Immigrants from Europe entered the industrial workplace in growing numbers. Many became voters with a strong opposition to slavery. They feared the expansion of slavery for two main reasons. First, it might bring slave labor into direct competition with free labor, or people who worked for wages. Second, it threatened to reduce the status of white workers who could not successfully compete with slaves. AGRICULTURE AND SLAVERY IN THE SOUTH Unlike the North, the South remained a predominantly rural society, consisting mostly of plantations and small farms. The Southern economy relied on staple crops such as cotton. Though one-third of the nation's population lived in the South in 1850, the South produced under 10 percent of the nation's manufactured goods. At the same time that Northern railroad lines were expanding, Southerners were mostly using rivers to transport goods. In addition, few immigrants settled in the South, because African Americans, wrhether enslaved or free, met most of the available need for Contrasting j| List three •are in which the tatiand the South differed in wrld 1800s. artisans, mechanics, and laborers. Those immigrants who did settle in the South, however, displayed significant opposition to slavery. For example, German- American newspapers in Texas and in Baltimore, Maryland published editorials in favor of universal voting rights and freedom for African Americans. The conflict over slavery rattled Southern society. In three Southern states, Mississippi, Louisiana, and South Carolina, African Americans were in the majority. In Alabama and Florida, African Americans composed almost half of the population. While blacks dreamed of an end to slavery, many Southern whites feared that any restriction of slavery would lead to a social and economic revolution. Furthermore, Calhoun warned that such a revolution would condemn blacks as well as whites "to the greatest calamity, and the [South] to poverty, desolation, and wretchedness." fil History Through Architecture } The Greek Revival was an architectural style that spread throughout the United Slates between 1825 and 1860. Like ancient Greek temples, many buildings in this style had columns on all four sides. This style was applied to all types ot buildings in Greek Revival architecture, from small houses to state capitols. The hot. humid climate of the South encouraged the development of a high torch and with columns rising to the full height of a building. These wide porches were unusual in the cooler climate of Europe but well-suited to tropical regions. In the lands of Greek Revival architects in the South, the torches became grand living spaces where families could find shelter from the summer heat. SKILLBUILDER Interpreting Visu.il Sources L How would you be able to tell that this home is an example of the Greek Revival style? 2. How did the architecture help cool the house? The Union in Peril 305 Aaalvdng Cmu-. Jl What impact I mthe slavery I tm nave on the namocratic and Wg patties? nomination to Northern Whigs who opposed the Fugitive Slave Act and gave only lukewarm support to the Compromise of 1850. Southern Whigs, however, backed the compromise in order to appear both proslavery and pro-Union. Because of Scott's position, the Whig vote in the South fell from 50 percent in 1848, to 35 percent in 1852, handing the election to the Democratic candidate f ranklin Pierce In 1854 the Kansas-Nebraska Act brought about the demise of the Whigs, who once again took opposing positions on legislation that involved the issue of slavery. Unable to agree on a national platform, the Southern faction splintered as its members looked for a proslavery, pro-Union party to join, while Whigs in the North sought a political alternative. NATIVISM One alternative was the American Party which had its roots in a secret organization known as the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner. Members of this society believed in nativism, the favoring of native-born Americans over immigrants. Using secret handshakes and passwords, members were told to answer questions about their activities by saying, "I know nothing." When nativists formed the American Party in 1854, it soon became better known as the Know-Nothing Party. Primarily middle-class Protestants, nativists were dismayed not only at the total number of new immigrants but also at the number of Catholics among them. To nativists, the Catholic immigrants who had Hooded into the country during the 1830s and 1840s were overly influenced by the Pope and could form a conspiracy to overthrow democracy. While the Democratic Party courted immigrant voters, nativists voted for Know-Nothing candidates. The Know-Nothing Party did surprisingly well at the polls in 1854. However, like the Whig Party, the Know-Nothings split over the issue of slavery in the territories. Southern Know-Nothings looked for another alternative to the Democrats. Meanwhile, Northern Know-Nothings began to edge toward the Republican Party. The 1854 campaign banner for the Know- Nothing Party reflects its members' fear and resentment of immigrants. Antislavery Parties Form Two forerunners of the Republican Party had emerged during the 1840s. In 1844 the tiny abolitionist Liberty Party—whose purpose was to pursue the cause of abolition by passing new laws—received only a small percentage of votes in the presidential election. Yet the Liberty Party won enough votes to throw the election to Democrat James K. Polk instead of Whig candidate Henry Clay. In 1848 the Free-Soil Party, which opposed the extension of slavery into the territories, nominated former Democratic president Martin Van Buren. Although the Free-Soil Party failed to win any electoral votes in 1848. it received 10 percent of the popular vote, thus sending a clear message: even if some Northerners did not favor abolition, they definitely opposed the extension of slavery into the territories. THE FREE-SOILERS Many Northerners were ITee-Soilers without being abolitionists. A number of Northern Free-Soilers supported laws prohibiting black settlement in their communities and denying blacks the right to vote. Soilers objected to slavery's impact on free white workers in the wage-based labor force, upon which the North depended. Abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison considered the Free-Soil Party "a sign of discontent with things political . . . reaching for something better.... It is a party for keeping Free Soil and not for setting men free." The Union in Peril 319 THE LURE OF SILVER AND GOLD The prospect of striking it rich was one powerful attraction of the West. The discovery of gold in Colorado in 1858 drew tens of thousands of miners to the region. Most mining camps and tiny frontier towns had filthy, ramshackle living quarters. Rows of tents and shacks with dirt "streets" and wooden sidewalks had replaced unspoiled picturesque landscapes. Fortune seekers of every description —including Irish, German, Polish, Chinese, and African-American men—crowd- ed the camps and boomtowns. A few hardy', business-minded women tried their luck too, working as laundresses, freight haulers, or miners. Cities such as Virginia City, Nevada, and Helena, Montana, originated as mining camps on Native American land. The Government Restricts Native Americans While allowing more settlers to move westward, the arrival of the railroads also influenced the government's policy toward the Native Americans who lived on the plains. In 1854, the federal government had passed an act that designated the entire Great Plains as one enormous reservation, or land set aside for Native American tribes. In the 1850s. however, the government changed its policy and created treaties that defined specific boundaries for each tribe. Most Native Americans spurned the government treaties and continued to hunt on their traditional lands, clashing with settlers and miners—with tragic results. One of the most tragic- events occurred in 1864. Most of the Cheyenne, assuming they were under the protection of the U.S. government, had peacefully returned to Colorado's Sand Creek Reserve for the winter. Yet General S. R. Curtis, U.S. Army commander in the West, sent a telegram to militia colonel John Chivington that read, "I want no peace till the Indians suffer more." In response, Chivington and his troops descended on the Cheyenne and Arapaho—about 200 warriors and 500 women and children—camped at Sand Creek. The attack at dawn on November 29, 1864 killed over 150 inhabitants, mostly women and children. DEATH ON THE BOZEMAN TRAIL The Bozeman Trail ran directly through Sioux hunting grounds in the Bighorn Mountains. The Sioux chief, Red Cloud (Mahpiua Luta), had unsuccessfully appealed to the government to end white settlement on the trail. In December 1866, the warrior Crazy Horse ambushed Captain William ). Fetterman and Ills company at Lodge Trail Ridge. Over 80 soldiers were killed. Native Americans called this fight the Battle of the Hundred Slain. Whites called it the Fetterman Massacre. Skirmishes continued until the government agreed to close the Bozeman Trail. In return, the Treaty of Fort Laramie, in which the Sioux agreed to live on a reservation along the Missouri River, was forced on the leaders of the Sioux in 1868. Sitting Bull {Tatanka lyotanka), leader of the Hunkpapa Sioux, had never signed it. Although the OgaJa and Brule Sioux did sign the treaty, they expected to continue using their traditional hunting grounds. 1831-1890 As a child, Sitting Bull was known as Hunkesnl, or Slow: he earned the name Tatanka lyotanka (Sitting Bull) after a fight with the Crow, a traditional enemy of the Sioux. Sitting Bull led his people by the strength of his character and purpose. He was a warrior, spiritual leader, and medicine man, and he was determined that whites should leave Sioux territory. His most famous fight was at the Little Bighorn River. About his opponent. George Armstrong Custer, he said. "They tell me l murdered Custer. It is a lie. . . . He was a fool and rode to his death.' After Sitting Bull's surrender to the federal government in 1881, his dislike of whites did not change. He was killed by Native American police at Standing Rock Reservation in December 1890. Analyzing Issues St What*** government's policy toward Native Amere* land? History Through (1908) Painter and sculptor Frederic Remington is best known for his romantic and spirited depictions of the Western frontier. Remington liked to paint in a single dominant color. Native Americans, cowboys at work, and other familiar Western scenes were all subjects of Remington's work. What do you learn about the work of the cowboy in this painting? year in operation. The following year, business more than doubled, to 75,000 head. Soon ranchers were hiring cowboys to drive their cattle to Abilene. Within a few years, the Chisholm Trail had worn wide and deep. A Day in the Life of a Cowboy The meeting of the Chisholm Trail and the railroad in Abilene ushered in the heyday Of the cowboy. As many as 55,000 worked the plains between 1866 and 1885. Although folklore and postcards depicted the cowboy as Anglo-American, about 25 percent of them were African American, and at least 12 percent were Mexican. The romanticized American cowboy of myth rode the open range, herding cattle and fighting villains. Meanwhile, the real-life cowboy was doing nonstop work. A DAY'S WORK A cowboy worked 10 to 14 hours a day on a ranch and 14 or more on the trail, alerl at all times lor dangers that might harm or upset the herds. Some cowboys were as young as 15; most were broken-down by the time they were 40. A cowboy might own his saddle, but his trail horse usually belonged to liis boss. He was an expert rider and roper. His gun might be used to protect the herd from wild or diseased animals rather than to hurt or chase outlaws. ROUNDUP Tile cowboy's season began with a spring roundup, in which he and other hands from the ranch herded all the longhorns they could find on the open range into a large corral. They kept the herd penned there for several days, until the cattle were so hungry that they preferred grazing to running away. Then the cowboys sorted through the herd, claiming the cattle that were marked with the brand ol their ranch and calves that still needed to be branded. After the herd was gathered and branded, the trail boss chose a crew for the long drive. THE LONG DRIVE This overland transport, or long drive, of the animals often lasted about three months. A typical drive included one cowboy for every 250 to 300 head of cattle; a cook who also drove the chuck wagon and set up camp; and a wrangler who cared for the extra horses. A trail boss earned $ 100 or more a month lor supervising the drive and negotiating with settlers and Native Americans. Chaim i it 13 dollars—for laying track in the West In one grant, both the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific received 10 square miles of public land for every mile of track laid in a state and 20 square miles of land for every mile of track laid in a territory. In the 1860s, the two companies began a race to lay track. The Central Pacific moved eastward from Sacramento, and the Union Pacific moved westward from Omaha. Civil War veterans, Irish and Chinese immigrants, African Americans, and Mexican Americans did most of the grueling labor. In late 1868, workers for the Union Pacific cut their way through the solid rock of the mountains, laying up to eight miles of track a day. Both companies had reached Utah by the spring of 1869. Fifteen years later, the country boasted five transcontinental railroads. The rails to the Fast and West Coasts were forever linked. Several thousand settlers were exodusters—African Americans who moved from the post-Reconstruction South to Kansas. Despite the massive response by homesteaders, or settlers on this free land, private speculators and railroad and state government agents sometimes used the law for their own gain. Cattlemen fenced open lands, while miners and woodcutters claimed national resources. Only about 10 percent of the land was actually settled by the families for whom it was intended. In addition, not all plots of land were of equal value. Although 160 acres could provide a decent living in the fertile soil of Iowa or Minnesota, settlers on drier Western land required larger plots to make farming worthwhile. Eventually, the government strengthened the Homestead Act and passed more legislation to encourage settlers. In 1889, a major land giveaway in what is now Oklahoma attracted thousands of people. In less than a day, land-hungry settlers claimed 2 million acres in a massive land rush. Some took possession of the land before the government officially declared it open. Because these settlers claimed land sooner than they were supposed to, Oklahoma came to he known as the Sooner State. Posters like the one shown here drew hundreds of thousands of settlers to the West. Among the settlers were thousands of exodusters—freed slaves who had left the South. A NATIONAL NETWORK By 1856, the railroads extended west to the Mississippi River, and three years later, they crossed the Missouri. Just over a decade later, crowds across the United States cheered as the Central Pacific and Union Pacific Railroads met at Promontory, Utah, on May 10, 1869. A golden spike marked the spanning of the nation by the first transcontinental railroad. Other transcontinental lines followed, and regional lines multiplied as well. At the start of the Civil War, the nation had had about SO,IKK) miles of track. By 1890, that figure was nearly six times greater. ROMANCE AND REALITY The railroads brought the dreams of available land, adventure, and a fresh start within the grasp of many Americans. This romance was made possible, however, only by the harsh lives of railroad workers. The Central Pacific Railroad employed thousands of Chinese immigrants. The Union Pacific hired Irish immigrants and desperate, out-of-work Civil War veterans to lay track across treacherous terrain while enduring attacks by Native Americans. Accidents and diseases disabled and killed thousands of men each year. In 1888, when the first railroad statistics were published, the casualties totaled more than 2,000 employees killed and 20,000 injured. RAILROAD TIME In spite of these difficult working conditions, the railroad laborers helped to transform the diverse regions of the country into a united nation. Though linked in space, each community still operated on its own time, with noon when the sun was directly overhead. Noon in Boston, for example, was almost 12 minutes later than noon in New York. Travelers riding from Maine to California might reset their watches 20 times. In 1869, to remedy this problem, Professor C. F. Dowd proposed that the earth's surface be divided into 24 time zones, one for each hour of the day. Under his plan, the United States would contain four zones: the Eastern, Central, Mountain, and Pacific time zones. The railroad companies endorsed Dowd's plan enthusiastically, and many towns followed suit. Finally, on November 18, 1883, railroad crews and towns across the country synchronized their watches. In 1884, an international conference set worldwide time zones that incorporated railroad time. The U.S. Congress, however, didn't officially adopt railroad time as the standard for the nation until 1918. As strong a unifying force as the railroads were, however, they also opened the way for abuses that led to social and economic unrest. A/ Opportunities and Opportunists Although the railroads paid all their employees poorly, Asians usually earned less than whites. The average pay for whites working a ten-hour day was $40 to $60 a month plus free meals. Chinese immigrants hired by the Central Pacific performed similar tasks from dawn to dusk for about $35 a month—and they had to supply their own food. The immigrants' working conditions were miserable, as depicted by artist Jake Lee below. In 1866, for example, the railroad hired them to dig a tunnel through a granite mountain. For five months of that year, the Chinese lived and worked in camps surrounded by banks of snow. The total snowfall reached over 40 feet. Hundreds of the men were buried in avalanches or later found frozen, still clutching their shovels or picks. The growth of the railroads influenced the industries and businesses in which Americans worked. Iron, coal, steel, lumber, and glass industries grew rapidly as they tried to keep pace with the railroads' demand for materials and parts. The rapid spread of railroad lines also fostered the growth of towns, helped establish new markets, and offered rich opportunities for both visionaries and profiteers. A New Industrial Age 443 in New York City's Union Square In members protest violence against striking coal miners in Colorado. with Gompers as its president, focused on collective bargaining, or negotiation between representatives of labor and management, to reach written agreements on wages, hours, and working conditions. Unlike the Knights of Labor, the AFL used strikes as a major tactic. Successful strikes helped the AFL win higher wages and shorter workweeks. Between 1890 and 19!5, the average weekly wages in unionized industries rose front SI7.50 to $24, and the average workweek fell front almost 54.5 hours to just under 49 hours. INDUSTRIAL UNIONISM Some labor leaders felt that unions should include all laborers—skilled and unskilled—in a specific industry. This concept captured the imagination of Eugene V. Debs, who attempted to form such an industrial union—the American Railway Union (ARU). Most of the new union's members were unskilled and semiskilled laborers, but skilled engineers and firemen joined too. In 1894, the new union won a strike for higher wages. Within two months, its membership climbed to 150,000, dwarfing the 90,000 enrolled in the four skilled railroad brotherhoods. Though the ARU, like tire Knights of Labor, never recovered after the failure of a major strike, it added to the momentum of union organizing, SOCIALISM AND THE IWW In an attempt to solve the problems faced by workers, L ugene Debs and some other labor activists eventually turned to socialism, an economic and political system based on government control of business and property and equal distribution of wealth. Socialism, carried to its extreme form— communism, as advocated by the German philosopher Karl Marx—would result in the overthrow of the capitalist system. Most socialists in late-19th-century America drew back from this goal, however, and worked within the labor movement to achieve better conditions for workers. In 1905, a group of radical unionists and socialists in Chicago organized the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), or the Wobblies. Headed by William "Big Bill" Haywood, the Wobblies included miners, lumberers, and cannery and dock workers. Unlike the ARU, the lW'W welcomed African Americans, but membership never topped 100,000. Its only major strike victory occurred in 1912. Yet the Wobblies, like other industrial unions, gave dignity and a sense of solidarity to unskilled workers. OTHER LABOR ACTIVISM IN THE WEST In April 1903, about 1,000 Japanese and Mexican workers organized a successful strike in the sugar-beet fields of Ventura County, California. They formed the Sugar Beet and Farm Laborers' Union of Oxnard. In Wyoming, the State Federation of Labor supported a union of Chinese and Japanese miners who sought the same wages and treatment as other union miners. These small, independent unions increased both the overall strength of the labor movement and the tension between labor and management. " The strike is the weapon of the oppressed. " Contrasting Fj How did craft unions art industnal unions differ9 Background See socw/isma page R44 in lie Economics Handbook. Hai the res moi Chapter 14 1884 Berlin Conference meets to divide Africa among European nations. \ rl m Xtw/ 1885 Indian National Congress forms. 1893 Fra estsbibw Indociiiu The year is 1880. New York City's swelling population has created a housing crisis. Immigrant families crowd into apartments that lack light, ventilation, and sanitary facilities. Children have nowhere to play except in the streets and are often kept out of school to work and help support their families. You are a reformer who wishes to help immigrants improve their lives. What would you do to improve conditions? Examine the Issues • How can immigrants gain access to the services they need? • What skills do newcomers need? • How might immigrants respond to help from an outsider? Visit the Chapter 15 links for more information about Immigrants and Urbanization. 1898 Hawaii Is annexed by the United States. 1900; McKinley la rcelocted. 1903 The Wright Brothers achieve the first successful airplane flight. j 1910 The ! appearance of i Halley's comet causes wide | spread panic. ; 1912 Woodrow : Wilson is elected ! president. 1900 1910 tutce 1901 The 1905 Workers revolt In 1908 Oil Is 1912 Qing Commonwealth of ; Australia Is founded. i St. Petersburg. Russia. discovered In Persia. dynasty In China is overthrown. ;i 1914 Panama Canal opens. Immigrants and Urbanization 459 Nf1 The New Immigrants Terms & Names Immigration from Europe, Asia, the Caribbean, and Mexico reached a new high in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. This wave of Immigration helped make the United States the diverse society it is today. •Ellis Island •Angel Island •melting pot •nativism •Chinese Exclusion Act •Gentlemen's Agreement One American's Story In 1871, 14-year-old Fong See came from China to "Gold Mountain"—the United States, long See stayed, worked at menial jobs, and saved enough money to buy a business. Despite widespread restrictions against the Chinese, he became a very successful importer and was able to sponsor many other Chinese who wanted to enter the United States. Fong See had achieved the American dream. However, as his great-granddaughter Lisa See recalls, he was not satisfied. A Personal Voice lisa see " He had been trying to achieve success ever since he had first set foot on the Gold Mountain. His dream was very 'American.' He wanted to make money, have influence, be respected, have a wife and children who loved him. In 1919, when he traveled to China, he could look at his life and say he had achieved his dream. But once in China, he suddenly saw his life in a different context. In America, was he really rich? Could he live where he wanted? ... Did Americans care what he thought? ... The answers played in his head—no, no, no. ' —On Gold Mountain Despite Fong See's success, he could not, upon his death in 1957, be buried next to his Caucasian wife because California cemeteries were still segregated. Fong Set's \ merit an Through the "Golden Door' Millions of immigrants like Fong See entered the United States in the late I9th and early 20th centuries, lured by the promise of a better life. Some of these immigrants sought to escape difficult conditions—such as famine, land shortages, or religious or political persecution. Others, known as "birds of passage," intended to immigrate temporarily to earn money, and then return to their homelands. Background From 1815 to 1848. a wave of [ tSWiutions— mostly sparked Oy a desire for constitutional governments— Shook Europe. In 1830,for example, the Wish people rose 19 against their I Russian rulers. EUROPEANS Between 1870 and 1920, approximately 20 million Europeans arrived in the United States. Before 1890, most immigrants came from countries in western and northern Europe. Beginning in the 1890s, however, increasing numbers came from southern and eastern Europe. In 1907 alone, about a million people arrived from Italy, Austria-Hungary, and Russia. Why did so many leave their homelands? Many of these new immigrants left to escape religious persecution. Whole villages of Jews were driven out of Russia by pogroms, organized attacks often encouraged by local authorities. Other Europeans left because of rising population. Between 1800 and 1900, the population in Europe doubled to nearly 400 million, resulting in a scarcity of land for farming. Farmers competed with laborers for too few industrial jobs. In the United States, jobs were supposedly plentiful. In addition, a spirit of reform and revolt had spread across Europe in the 19th century. Influenced by political movements at home, many young European men and women sought independent lives in America. CHINESE AND JAPANESE While waves of Europeans arrived on the shores of the East Coast, Chinese immigrants came to the West Coast in smaller numbers. Between 1851 and 1883, about 30 Chinese arrived. Many came to seek their fortunes after the discovery of gold in 1848 sparked the California gold rush. Chinese immigrants helped build the nation's railroads, including the first transcontinental line. When the railroads were completed, they turned to farming, mining, and domestic service. Some, like Fong See, started businesses. However, Chinese immigration was sharply limited by a congressional act in 1882. In 1884, the Japanese government allowed Hawaiian planters to recruit Japanese workers, and a Japanese emigration boom began. The United States' annexation of Hawaii in 1898 resulted in increased Japanese immigration to the West Coast. Immigration continued to increase as word of comparatively high American wages spread. The wave peaked in 1907, when 30,000 left Japan for the United States. By 1920, more than 200,000 Japanese lived on the West Coast. U.S. Immigration Patterns, as of 1900 Massachusetts at . Movement Where did the greatest number V/. I of Italian immigrants settle? It Movement From which country did the I rafiest percentage of immigrants come? ftSS SKILLBUILDER HANDBOOK, PAGE R28. Immigrants anil Urbanization 461 THE WEST INDIES AND MEXICO Between 1880 and 1920, about 260,000 immigrants arrived in the eastern and southeastern United States from the West Indies. They came trom Jamaica, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and other islands. Many West Indians left their homelands because jobs were scarce and the industrial boom in the United States seemed to promise work for everyone. Mexicans, too, immigrated to the United States to find work, as well as to flee political turmoil. The 1902 National Reclamation Act, which encouraged the irrigation of arid land, created new farmland in Western states and drew Mexican farm workers northward. After 1910, political and social upheavals in Mexico prompted even more immigration. About 700,000 people—7 percent of the population of Mexico at the time—came to the U.S. over the next 20 years. A- Life in the New Land No matter what part of the globe immigrants came from, they faced many adjustments to an alien—and often unfriendly—culture. A DIFFICULT JOURNEY By the 1870s, almost all immigrants traveled by steamship. The trip across the Atlantic Ocean from Europe took approximately one week, while the Pacific crossing from Asia took nearly three weeks. Many immigrants traveled in steerage, the cheapest accommodations in a ship's cargo holds. Rarely allowed on deck, immigrants were crowded together in the gloom, unable to exercise or catch a breath of fresh air. They often had to sleep in louse-infested bunks and share toilets with many other passengers. Under these conditions, disease spread quickly, and some immigrants died before they reached their destination. For those who survived, the first glimpse of America could be breathtaking. A Personal Voice rosa cavalleri European governments used passports to control the number of professionals and young men of military age who left the country. w America!. . . We were so near it seemed too much to believe. Everyone stood silent—like in prayer. . . . Then we were entering the harbor. The land came so near we could almost reach out and touch it. .. . Everyone was holding their breath. Me too. ... Some boats had bands playing on their decks and all of them were tooting their horns to us and leaving white trails in the water behind them. —Quoted In Rosa: The Life of an Italian immigrant ELLIS ISLAND After initial moments of excitement, the immigrants faced the anxiety of not knowing whether they would be admitted to the United States. They had to pass inspection at immigration stations, such as the one at Castle Garden in New York, which was later moved to Ellis Island in New York Harbor. About 20 percent of the immigrants at Ellis Island were detained for a day or more before being Inspected. However, only about 2 percent of those were denied entry. Can you do It? From 1892 to 1924, Ellis Island was the chief immigration station in the United States. An estimated 17 million immigrants passed through its noisy, bustling facilities. ANGEL ISLAND While European immigrants arriving on the East Coast passed through Ellis Island, Asians—primarily Chinese—arriving on the West Coast gained admission at Angel Island in San Francisco Hay. Between 1910 and 1940, about 50,000 Chinese immigrants entered the United States through Angel Island. Processing at Angel Island stood in contrast to the procedure at Ellis Island. Immigrants endured harsh questioning and a long detention in lilthy, ramshackle buildings while they waited to find out whether they would be admitted or rejected. COOPERATION FOR SURVIVAL Once admitted to the country, immigrants faced the challenges of finding a place to live, getting a joh, and getting along in daily life while trying to understand an unfamiliar language and culture. MThe requirements included proving they had never been convicted of a felony, demonstrating that they were able to work, and showing that they had some money (at least $25 after 1909). One inspector, Edward Ferro, an Italian immigrant himself, gave this glimpse of the process. A Personal Voice edward ferro " The language was a problem of course, but it was overcome by the use of interpreters. ... It would happen sometimes that these interpreters—some of them— were really softhearted people and hated to see people being deported, and they would, at times, help the aliens by interpreting in such a manner as to benefit the alien and not the government. —quoted In / Was Dreaming to Come to America Immigrants ami Urbanization 463 and spoke then native language. The ethnic communities were life rafts ior vocabulary immigrants. People pooled their money to build churches or synagogues. They synagogue: xe formed social clubs and aid societies. They founded orphanages and old people's of meetingfet homes, and established cemeteries. Prescott F. Hall, a founder in 1894 of the Immigration Restriction League, identified desirable immigrants as "British, German, and Scandinavian stock, historically free, energetic, progressive." Nativists thought that problems were caused by immigrants from the "wrong" countries— "Slav, I.atin, and Asiatic races, historically down-trodden . . . and stagnant." Nativists sometimes objected more to immigrants' religious beliefs than to their ethnic backgrounds. Many native-lxun Americans were Protestants and thought that Roman Catholic and Jewish immigrants would undermine the democratic institutions established by the country's Protestant founders. The American Protective Association, a nativist group founded in 1887, launched vicious anti-CathoIic attacks, and many colleges, businesses, and social clubs refused to admit Jews. In 1897, Congress—influenced by the Immigration Restriction League—passed a bill requiring a literacy test for immigrants. Those who could not read 40 words in English or their native language would be refused entry. Although President Cleveland vetoed the hill, it was a powerful statement of public sentiment. In 1917, a similar bill would be passed into law in spite of President Woodrow Wilson's veto. ANTI-ASIAN SENTIMENT Nativism also found a foothold in the labor movement, particularly in the West, where native-born workers feared that jobs would go to Chinese Vocabulary progressive: favoring advancement toward better conditions or rm ideas immigrants, who would accept lower wages. The depression of IK73 intensified anti-Chinese sentiment in California. Work was scarce, and labor groups exerted political pressure on the government to restrict Asian immigration. The founder of the Workingmen's Party, Denis Kearney, headed the anti-Chinese movement in California, He made hundreds of speeches throughout the state, each ending with the message, "The Chinese must go!" In 1882, Congress slammed the door on Chinese immigration for ten years by passing the Chinese Exclusion Act. This act banned entry to all Chinese except students, teachers, merchants, tourists, and government officials. In 1892, Congress extended the law for another ten years. In 1902, Chinese immigration was restricted indefinitely; the law was not repealed until 1943. THE GENTLEMEN S AGREEMENT The fears that had led to anti-Chinese agitation were extended to Japanese and other .Asian people in the early 1900s. In 1906, the local board of education in San Francisco segregated Japanese children by putting them in separate schools. When Japan raised an angry protest at this treatment of its emigrants, President Theodore Roosevelt worked out a deal. Under the Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907-1908, Japan's government agreed to limit emigration of unskilled workers to the United States in exchange for the repeal of the San Francisco segregation order. Although doorways for immigrants had been all but closed to Asians on the West Coast, cities in the East and the Midwest teemed with European immi- grants—and with urban opportunities and challenges. Fear and resentment of Chinese immigrants sometimes resulted in mob attacks, like the one shown here. For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Ellis Island •melting pot 'Chinese Exclusion Act •Angel Island *nativism •Gentlemen's Agreement l TAKING NOTES Create a diagram such as the one below. List two or more causes of each effect. Causes ► Effects t Immigrants i leave their i home countries. i Immigrants face i hardships in the i United States. Some nativists want to restrict immigration. Which group of immigrants do you think faced the greatest challenges in the United States? Why? What were the effects of the massive influx of immigrants to the U.S. in the late 1800s? What arguments can you make against nativism and anti-immigrant feeling? Think About: • the personal qualities of immigrants • the reasons for anti-immigrant feeling • the contributions of immigrants to the United States Immigrants ami Urbanization 465 t&M Diversity and the National Identity Before the first Europeans arrived, a variety of cultural groups—coastal fishing societies, desert farmers, plains and woodland hunters—inhabited North America. With the arrival of Europeans and Africans, the cultural mix grew more complex. Although this diversity has often produced tension, it has also been beneficial. As different groups learned from one another about agriculture, technology, and social customs, American culture became a rich blend of cultures from around the world. Spanish missionaries in the Southwest tried to impose their culture upon Native Americans. However, many Native Americans retained aspects of their original cultures even 3$ they took on Spanish ways. For example, today many Pueblo Indians of New Mexico perform ancient ceremonies, such as the Corn Dance, in addition to celebrating the feast days of Catholic saints. Later, the first cowboys—descendants of the Spanish—would introduce to white Americans cattle-ranching techniques developed in Mexico. The signers of the Declaration of Independence were descendants of immigrants. The founders' ancestors had come to North America in search of economic opportunity and freedom of religious expression. When the Second Continental Congress declared a "United States" in 1776, they acknowledged that the country would contain diverse regions and interests. At the midpoint of the Civil War, President Abraham Lincoln rsaaq the Emancipation Proclamation, freeing all slaves in areas of Bij Union that were in rebellion. Although the Proclamation couldn be enforced immediately, it was a strong statement of oppositnl to slavery, and it paved the way for African Americans' citizens* 466 Chapter 15 2000 Poet Emma Lazarus wrote the famous lines inscribed at the foot of the Statue of Liberty. 'Give me your tired, your poor. Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free... The statue's dedication took place during the most extensive wave of immigration the United States has ever known. Many native-born Americans felt that the newcomers should fully immerse themselves in their new culture. However, most immigrants combined American language and customs with their traditional ways. As immigrants celebrated Independence Day and Thanksgiving, they introduced into American culture new celebrations, such as Chinese New Year and Cinco de Mayo. In 1998, three countries (Mexico, China, and India) contributed a third of the total number of immigrants to the United States. The rest of 1998's immigrants came from countries as diverse as Vietnam. Sudan, and Bosnia. American athletes at the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney, Australia, reflected the increasing diversity of the U.S., pointing toward a future in which there may no longer be a majority racial or ethnic group. 1. Analyzing Motives Why do you think some groups have tried to suppress the culture of others over the course of history? Why have many groups persisted in retaining their cultural heritage? 2. Predicting Effects Research current U.S. policy on immigration. How might this policy affect cultural diversity? Write a short editorial from one of the following viewpoints: U.S. Immigration policy needs to change. U.S. immigration policy should be maintained. Immigrants ami Urbanization 467 me v>iiaiicngc5 of Urbanization Terms & Names The rapid growth of cities forced people to contend with problems of housing, transportation, water, and sanitation. Consequently, residents of U.S. cities today enjoy vastly improved living conditions. urbanization Americanization movement tenement mass transit Social Gospel movement •settlement house •Jane Addams One American's Story In 1870, at age 21. Jacob Riis left his native Denmark for the United States. Riis found work as a police reporter, a job that took him into some of New York City's worst slums, where he was shocked at the conditions in the overcrowded, airless, filthy tenements. Riis used his talents to expose the hardships of New York City's poor. A Personal Voice jacob riis "Be a little careful, please! The hall is dark and you might stumble over the children pitching pennies back there. Not that it would hurt them: kicks and cuffs are their daily diet. They have little else... Yes! What would you have? All the fresh air that ever enters these stairs comes from the hall-door that is forever slamming. . . . Here is a door. Listen! That short hacking cough, that tiny, helpless wail—what do they mean? . . . The child is dying with measles. With half a chance It might have lived; but it had none. That dark bedroom killed it. —How the Other Half Lives As many as 12 people slept In rooms such as this one In New York City, photographed b) Making a living in the late 19th and early 20th centuries was not easy. Natural and economic disasters had hit farmers hard in Europe and in the United States, and the promise of industrial jobs drew millions of people to American cities. The urban population exploded from 10 million to 54 million between 1870 and 1920. This growth revitalized the cities but also created serious problems that, as Riis observed, had a powerful impact on the new urban poor. Urban Opportunities The technological boom in the 19th century contributed to the growing industrial strength of the United States. The result was rapid urbanization, or growth of cities, mostly in the regions of the Northeast and Midwest. 468 Chapter 15 lAnlyzing j Until o\ j| Aliy did native I eon Americans tthe iration it' Most of the immigrants who streamed into the United States in the late 19th century became city dwellers because cities were the cheapest and most convenient places to live. Cities also offered unskilled laborers steady jobs in mills and factories. By 1890, there were twice as many Irish residents in New York City as in Dublin, Ireland. By 1910, immigrant families made up more than half the total population of 18 major American cities. The Americanization movement was designed to assimilate people of wide-ranging cultures into the dominant culture. This social campaign was sponsored by the government and by concerned citizens. Schools and voluntary associations provided programs to teach immigrants skills needed for citizenship, such as English literacy and American history and government. Subjects such as cooking and social etiquette were included in the curriculum to help the newcomers learn the ways of native-born Americans. */ Despite these efforts, many immigrants did not wish to abandon their traditions. Ethnic communities provided the social support of other immigrants from the same country. This enabled them to speak their own language and practice their customs and religion. However, these neighborhoods soon became overcrowded, a problem that was intensified by the arrival of new transplants from America's rural areas. New York City, 1910 Boundary between Brooklyn and Queens Ethnic enclaves ol at least 20% of population: Austro Hungarian "] German Q Irish Italian Russian Scandinavian ] Nomesidential 1. Place What general pattern of settlement do you notice? 2. Movement Which ethnic group settled in the largest area of New York City? MIGRATION FROM COUNTRY TO CITY Rapid improvements in farming technology during the second half of the 19th century were good news for some farmers but bad news for others. Inventions such as the McCormick reaper and the steel plow made farming more efficient but meant that fewer laborers were needed to work the land. As more and more farms merged, many rural people moved to cities to find whatever work they could. Many of the Southern farmers who lost their livelihoods were African Americans. Between 1890 and 1910, about 200,(XX) African Americans moved north and west, to cities such as Chicago and Detroit, in an effort to escape racial violence, economic hardship, and political oppression. Many found conditions only somewhat better than those they had left behind. Segregation and discrimination were often the reality in Northern cities. Job competition between blacks and white immigrants caused further racial tension. Immigrants ami Urbanization Reformers Mobilize 1860-1935 During a trip to England. Jane Addams visited Toynbee Hall, the first settlement house. Addams believed that settlement houses could be effective because there, workers would 'learn from life itself" how to address urban problems- She cofounded Chicago's Hull House in 1889. Addams was also an antiwar activist, a spokesperson for racial justice, and an advocate for quality-of-life issues, from infant mortality to better care for the aged. In 1931. she was a co-winner of the Nobel Peace Pnze. Until the end of her life. Addams insisted that she was just a "very simple person." But many familiar with her accomplishments consid er her a source of inspiration. As problems in cities mounted, concerned Americans worked to find solutions. Social welfare reformers targeted their efforts at relieving urban poverty. THE SETTLEMENT HOUSE MOVEMENT An early reform program, the Social Gospel movement, preached salvation through service to the poor. Inspired by the message of the Social Gospel movement, many 19th-century reformers responded to the call to help the urban poor. In the late 1800s, a few reformers established settlement houses, community centers in slum neighborhoods that provided assistance to people in the area, especially immigrants. Many settlement workers lived at the houses so that they could learn firsthand about the problems caused by urbanization and help create solutions. Run largely by middle-class, college-educated women, settlement houses provided educational, cultural, and social services. They provided classes in such subjects as English, health, and painting, and offered college extension courses. Settlement houses also sent visiting nurses into the homes of the sick and provided whatever aid was needed to secure "support for deserted women, insurance for bewildered widows, damages for injured operators, furniture from the clutches of the installment store." Settlement houses in the United States were founded by Charles Stover and Stanton Coit in New York City in 1886. jane Addams—one of the most influential members of the movement—and Ellen Gates Starr founded Chicago's Hull House in 1889. In 1890, Janie Porter Barrett founded l ocust Street Social Settlement in Hampton, Virginia—the first settlement house for African Americans. By 1910, about 400 settlement houses were operating in cities across the country. The settlement houses helped cultivate social responsibility toward the urban poor. 1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •urbanization 'tenement 'Social Gospel movement *Jane Addams • Americanization movement *mass transit 'settlement house Re-create the spicier map below on your paper. List urban problems on the vertical lines. Fill in details about attempts that were made to solve each problem. Why did immigrants tend to group together in cities? Which solution (or attempted solution) to an urban problem discussed in this section do you think had the most impact? Why? What effects did the migration fna rural areas to the cities in the late 19th century have on urban socdl Think About: • why people moved to cities I • the problems caused by rapid I urban growth • the differences in the expert ences of whites and blacks I Chatter 15 THE POLITICAL MACHINE An organized group that controlled the activities of a political party in a city, the political machine also offered services to voters and businesses in exchange for political or financial support. In the decades after the Civil War, jxrlitical machines gained control of local government in Baltimore, New York, San Francisco, and other major cities. The machine was organized like a pyramid. At the pyramid's base were local precinct workers and captains, who tried to gain voters' support on a city block or in a neighborhood and who reported to a ward boss. At election time, the ward Ikjss worked to secure the vote in all the precincts in the ward, or electoral district. Ward bosses helped the poor and gained their votes by doing favors or providing services. As Martin Lomasney, elected ward boss of Boston's West End in 1885, explained, "There's got to l>e in every ward somebody that any bloke can come to . ,. and get help. Help, you understand; none of your law and your justice, but help." At the top of the pyramid was the city boss, who controlled the activities of the political party throughout the city. Precinct captains, wrard bosses, and the city' boss worked together to elect their candidates and guarantee the success of the machine, ft- A corrupt 19th- century boss robs the city treasury by easily cutting government red tape, or bureaucracy. THE ROLE OF THE POLITICAL BOSS Whether or not the boss officially served as mayor, he controlled access to municipal jobs and business licenses, and influenced the courts and other municipal agencies. Bosses like Roscoe Conkling in New York used their power to build parks, sewer systems, and waterworks, and gave money to schools, hospitals, and orphanages. Bosses could also provide government support for new businesses, a service for which they were often paid extremely well. It was not only money that motivated city bosses. By solving urban problems, bosses could reinforce voters' loyalty, win additional political support, and extend their influence. IMMIGRANTS AND THE MACHINE Many precint captains and political bosses were first- generation or second-generation immigrants. Few w'ere educated beyond grammar school. They entered politics early and worked their way up from the bottom. They could speak to immigrants in their own language and understood the challenges that newcomers faced. More important, the bosses were able to provide solutions. The machines helped immigrants with naturalization (attaining full citizenship), housing, and jobs—the newcomers' most pressing needs. In return, the immigrants provided what the political bosses needed—votes. §/ "Big Jim" Pendergast, an Irish-American saloonkeeper, worked his way up from precinct captain to Democratic city boss in Kansas City by aiding Italian, African-American, and Irish voters in his ward. By 1900, he controlled Missouri state politics as well. A Personal Voice james pendergast "I've been called a boss. All there is to It is having friends, doing things for people, and then later on they'll do things for you. . . . You can't coerce people into doing things for you—you can't make them vote for you. I never coerced anybody in my life. Why did immigrants support pcM machines? RACIAL DISCRIMINATION African Americans were mostly excluded from public secondary education. In 1890, fewer than 1 percent of black teenagers attended high school. More than two-thirds of these students went to private schools, which received no government financial support. By 1910, about 3 percent of African Americans between the ages of 15 and 19 attended high school, but a majority of these students still attended private schools. EDUCATION FOR IMMIGRANTS Unlike African Americans, immigrants were encouraged to go to school. Of the nearly 10 million European immigrants settled in the United States between 1860 and 1890, many were Jewish people fleeing jroverty and systematic oppression in eastern Europe. Most immigrants sent their children to .America's free public schools, where they quickly became "Americanized." Years after she became a citizen, the Russian Jewish immigrant Mary Antin recalled the large numbers of non-English-speaking immigrant children. By the end of the school year, they could recite "patriotic verses in honor of George Washington and Abraham Lincoln . . . with plenty of enthusiasm." Some people resented the suppression of their native languages in favor of English. Catholics were especially concerned because many public school systems had mandata- ry readings from the (Protestant) King James Version of the Bible. Catholic communities often set up parochial schools to give their children a Catholic education. Thousands of adult immigrants attended night school to learn English and to qualify for American citizensJtip. Employers often offered daytime programs to Americanize their workers. At his Model T plant in Highland Park, Michigan, Henry Ford established a "Sociology Department," because "men of many nations must lie taught American ways, the English language, and the right way to live." l ord's ideas were not universally accepted. Labor activists often protested that Ford's educational goals were aimed at weakening the trade union movement by teaching workers not to confront management. & Expanding Higher Education Although the number of students attending high school had increased by the turn of the century, only a minority of Americans had high school diplomas. At the same time, an even smaller minority—only 2.3 percent—of America's young people attended colleges and universities. CHANGES IN UNIVERSITIES Between 1880 and 1920, college enrollments more than quadrupled. And colleges instituted major changes in curricula and admission policies. Industrial development changed the nation's educational needs. The research university emerged—offering courses in modern languages, the physical sciences, and the new disciplines of psychology and sociology. Professional schools in law and medicine were established. Private colleges and universities required entrance exams, but some state universities began to admit students by using the high school diploma as the entrance requirement. HIGHER EDUCATION FOR AFRICAN AMERICANS After the Civil War, thousands of freed African Americans pursued higher education, despite their exclusion from white institutions. With the help of the l-reedinen's Bureau and other groups, blacks founded Howard, Atlanta, and Fisk Universities, all of w'hich opened tfOW $ T/t/iVy In 1922, Thomas Alva Edison wrote, "I believe that the motion picture is destined to revolutionize our educational system and that in a tew years it will supplant. . . the use of textbooks." Today's high schools show that the brilliant inventor was mistaken. Recently, some people have predicted that computers will replace traditional classrooms and texts. Computers allow video course- sharing. In which students in many schools view the same instructors. Students also use computers to access up-to-the- minute scientific data, such as weather information. Vocabulary parochial school: a school supported by a church parish Summarizing B/ What institutions encouraged European immigrants to become assimilated? 490 Chapter 16 SfOTLIGHr Booker T. Washington argued for a gradual approach to racial equality—suggesting that 'it is at the bottom of life we must begin, and not at the top." Ten years later. W. E. B. Du Bois denounced this view of gradual equality. Du Bois demanded full social and economic equality for African Americans, declaring that "persistent manly agitation is the way to liberty." In 1909 the Niagara Movement, founded by Du Bois in 1905. became the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), with Du Bois as the editor of its journal. The Crisis. He wrote. "We refuse to surrender.,. leadership ... to cowards and trucklers. We are men; we will be treated as men." The NAACP continues the fight for racial equality today. Some moderate reformers, like Booker T. Washington, earned support from whites. Washington suggested that whites and blacks work together for social progress. A Personal Voice booker t. Washington To those of the white race ... I would repeat what I say to my own race. . . . Cast down your bucket among these people who have, without strikes and labour wars, tilled your fields, cleared your forests, bullded your railroads and cities, and brought forth treasures from the bowels of the earth. ... In all things that are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress. —Atlanta Exposition address. 1895 Washington hoped that improving the economic skills of African Americans would pave the way for long-term gains. People like Ida B. Wells and W. L. B. Du Bois, however, thought that the problems of inequality were too urgent to postpone. Sr VIOLENCE African Americans and others who did not follow the racial etiquette could face severe punishment or death. All too often, blacks who were accused of violating the etiquette were lynched. Between 1882 and 1892, more than 1,400 African-American men and women were shot, burned, or hanged without trial in the South. Lynching leaked in the 1880s and 1890s hut continued well into the 20th century. Summdri/ii| B) Wtiatm Booker T Washington's views about establishing lacuf equality? DISCRIMINATION IN THE NORTH Most African Americans lived in the segregated South, but by 1900, a number of blacks had moved to Northern cities. Many blacks migrated to Northern cities in search of belter-paying jobs and social equality. But after their arrival, African Americans found that there was racial discrimination in the North as well. African Americans found themselves forced into segregated neighborhoods. ITiev also faced discrimination in the workplace. Labor unions often discouraged black membership, and employers hired African-American labor only as a Iasi resort and fired blacks before white employees. Sometimes the competition between African Americans and working-class whites became violent, as in the New York City race riot of 1900. Violence erupted after a young black man, believing that his wife was being mistreated by a white policeman, killed the policeman. Word of the killing spread, and whites retaliated by attacking blacks. Northern blacks, however, were not alone in facing discrimination. Non-whites in the West also faced oppression. Discrimination in the West Western communities were home to people of many backgrounds working and living side by side. Native Americans still lived in the Western territories claimed by the United States. Asian immigrants went to America's Pacific Coast in search of wealtli and work. Mexicans continued to inhabit the American Southwest. African Americans were also present, especially in former slave-holding areas, such as Texas. Still, racial tensions often made life difficult. MEXICAN WORKERS In the late 18(K>s, the railroads hired more Mexicans than members of any other ethnic group to construct rail lines in the Southwest. Chapter 16 =JPV"t v A Mexican track workers for the Southern Pacific railroad posed for this group photo taken sometime between 1910 and 1915. Vocabulary peon: a worker bound in servitude ba landlord BBttOI Mexicans were accustomed to the region's hot, dry climate. But Hie work was grueling, and the railroads made them work for less money than other ethnic groups. Mexicans were also vital to the development of mining and agriculture in the Southwest. When the 1902 National Reclamation Act gave government assistance for irrigation projects, many southwest desert areas bloomed. Mexican workers became the major labor force in the agricultural industries of the region. Some Mexicans, however, as well as African Americans in the Southwest, were forced into debt peonage, a system that bound laborers into slavery in order to work off a debt to the employer. Not until 1911 did the Supreme Court declare involuntary peonage a violation of the Thirteenth Amendment. EXCLUDING THE CHINESE By 1880, more than 100,000 Chinese immigrants lived in the United States. White people's fear of job competition with the Chinese immigrants often pushed the Chinese into segregated schools and neighborhoods. Strong opposition to Chinese immigration developed, and not only in the West. (See Chinese Exclusion Act, page 465.) Racial discrimination posed terrible legal and economic problems for nonwhites throughout the United States at the turn of the century. More people, however, whites in particular, had leisure time for new recreational activities, as well as money to spend on a growing arrray of consumer products. 1 TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Ida B. Wells 'grandfather clause -Jim Crow laws •poll tax 'segregation 'Plessy v. Ferguson •debt peonage I Review the section, and find five key I events to place on a time line as I shown. Event Event 1900 Event | Which Event Event How did segregation and discrimination affect the lives of African Americans at the turn of the 20th century? What did some African-American leaders do to fight discrimination? of these events do you think "as most important? Why? How did the challenges and opportunities for Mexicans in the United States differ from those for African Americans? Think About: • the types of work available to each group • the effects of government policies on each group • the effect of the legal system on each group Life at the Turn of the 20th Century 495 Today, when Americans use the telephone, an automated voice often greets them with instructions about which buttons to press. In the 19th century, every telephone call had to be handled by a telephone operator, a person who connected wires through a switchboard. Young men, the first telephone operators, proved unsatisfactory. Patrons complained that the male operators used profane language and talKed back to callers. Women soon largely replaced men as telephone operators, and were willing to accept the ten-dol- lar weekly wage. Department stores advertised shopping by telephone as a convenience. One ad in the Chicago telephone book of 1904 declared, "Every (telephone] order, inquiry, or request will be quickly and intelligently cared for." The ad pictured a line of female telephone operators. one out of five American women held jobs; 25 percent of them worked in manufacturing. The garment trade claimed about half of all women industrial workers. They typically held the least skilled positions, however, and received only about half as much money as their male counterparts or less. Many of these women were single and were assumed to be supporting only themselves, while men were assumed to be supporting families. Women also began to fill new jobs in offices, stores, and classrooms. These jobs required a high school education, and by 1890, women high school graduates outnumbered men. Moreover, new business schools were preparing bookkeepers and stenographers, as well as training female typists to operate the new machines. Af DOMESTIC WORKERS Many women without formal education or industrial skills contributed to the economic survival of their families by doing domestic work, such as cleaning for other families. After almost 2 million African- American women were freed from slavery, poverty quickly drove nearly half of them into the work force. They worked on farms and as domestic workers, and migrated by the thousands to big cities for jobs as cooks, laundresses, scrub- women, and maids. Altogether, roughly 70 percent of women employed in 1870 were servants. Unmarried immigrant women also did domestic labor, especially when they first arrived in the United States. Many married immigrant women contributed to the family income by taking in piecework or caring for boarders at home. Telephone operators manually conned phone calls In 1915. Analwiog (arises A, What knvfcct job opportunities prompted more women to complete high school? Women Lead Reform Dangerous conditions, low wages, and long hours led many female industrial workers to push for reforms. Their ranks grew after 146 workers, mostly young women, died in a 1911 fire in the Triangle Shirtwaist factory in New York City. Middle- and upper-class women also entered the public sphere. By 1910, women's dubs, at which these women discussed art or literature, were nearly half a million strong, l hese clubs sometimes grew into reform groups that addressed issues such as temperance or child labor. WOMEN IN HIGHER EDUCATION Many of the women who became active in public life in the late 19th century had attended the new women's colleges. Vassar Chaimhh 17 Scouts. Creel's propaganda campaign was highly effective. However, while the campaign promoted patriotism, it also inflamed hatred and violations of the civil liberties of certain ethnic groups and opponents of the war. Attacks on Civil Liberties Increase Early in 1917, President Wilson expressed his fears about the consequences of war hysteria. ["mm idea Developing Rntdrii.il ftnpectivi- 9 Wat effect Mthe war have in the lives of wt immigrants9 A Personal Voice woodrow wilson Once lead this people into war and they'll forget there ever was such a thing as tolerance. To fight you must be brutal and ruthless, and the spirit of ruthless brutality will enter into the very fiber of our national life, infecting Congress, the courts, the policeman on the beat, the man In the street. Conformity would be the only virtue, and every man who refused to conform would have to pay the penalty. —quoted In Cobb of 'The World' The president's prediction came true. As soon as war was declared, conformity indeed became the order of the day. Attacks on civil liberties, both unofficial and official, erupted. ANTI-IMMIGRANT HYSTERIA The main targets of these attacks were Americans w'ho had emigrated from other nations, especially those from Germany and Austria-Hungary. The most bitter attacks were directed against the nearly 2 million Americans who had been born in Germany, but other foreign- born persons and Americans of German descent suffered as well. S/ Many Americans with German names lost their jobs. Orchestras refused to play the music of Mozart, Bach, Beethoven, and Brahms. Some towns with German names changed them. Schools stopped teaching the German language, and librarians removed books by German authors from the shelves. People even resorted to violence against German Americans, Hogging them or smearing them Political Cartoons )- After the United States entered the war. government propaganda helped inflame prejudice against recent Immigrants. In the suspicious atmosphere of the time, conspiracy theories flourished, and foreign spies were believed to be everywhere. This cartoon reveals the hysteria that gripped the country In 1917. SKILLBUILDER Analyzing Political Cartoons 1. What is happening in this cartoon? 2. What does the cartoonist suggest will happen to 'enemy aliens"? Stripped! .tteSfeSva, By J. H. Casscl The First World War 597 with tar and feathers. A mob in Collinsville, Illinois, wrapped a German flag around a German-born miner named Robert Prager and lynched him. A jury' cleared the mob's leader. Finally, in a burst of anti-German fervor, Americans changed the name of German measles to "liberty measles." Hamburger—named after the German city Of Hamburg—became "Salisbury steak" or "liberty sandwich," depending on w hether you were buying it in a store or eating it in a restaurant. Sauerkraut wras renamed "liberty cabbage," and dachshunds turned into "liberty pups." ESPIONAGE AND SEDITION ACTS In June 1917 Congress passed the Espionage Act, and in May 1918 it passed the Sedition Act. Under the Espionage and Sedition Acts a person could be fined up to $10,000 and sentenced to 20 years in jail for interfering with the war effort or for saying anything disloyal, profane, or abusive about the government or the war effort. Like the Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798, these laws clearly violated the spirit of the First Amendment, their passage led to over 2,000 prosecutions for loosely defined antiwar activities; of these, over half resulted in convictions. Newspapers and magazines that opposed the war or criticized any of the Allies lost their mailing privileges. The House of Representatives refused to seat Victor Berger, a socialist congressman from Wisconsin, because of his antiwar views. Columbia University fired a distinguished psychologist because he opposed the war. A colleague who supported the war thereupon resigned in protest, saying, "If we have to suppress everything we don't like to hear, this country is resting on a pretty wobbly basis." The Espionage and Sedition Acts targeted socialists and labor leaders. Eugene V. Debs was handed a ten-year prison sentence for speaking out against the war and the draft. I he anarchist Emma Goldman received a two-year prison sentence and a $10,000 line for organizing the No Conscription League. This Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) sticker encourages workers to join The War Encourages Social Change Wars often unleash powerful social forces. The period of World War I was no exception; important changes transformed the lives of African Americans and women. the union. AFRICAN AMERICANS AND THE WAR Black public opinion about the war was divided. On one side were people like W. E. B. Du Hois, who believed that blacks should support the war effort. W. E. B. Du Bols ► A Personal Voice w. e. b. du bois "That which the German power represents today spells death to the aspirations of Negroes and all darker races for equality, freedom and democracy. . . . Let us, while this war lasts, forget our special grievances and close our ranks shoulder to shoulder with our own white fellow citizens and the allied nations that are fighting for democracy. —"Close Ranks" Vocabulary sedition: reoefer against ones government; treason Andlwing Effects 0/ What impart did die EsponM and SetWwites have on free speech? Du Bois believed that African-American support for the war would strengthen calls for racial justice. In contrast, William Monroe Trotter, founder of the Boston Guardian, believed that victims of racism should not support a racist government. Trotter condemned Du Bois's accommodationist approach and favored protest instead. Nevertheless, despite grievances over continued racial inequality in the United States, most African Americans backed the war. THE GREAT MIGRATION In concrete terms, the greatest effect of the First World War on African Americans' lives was that it accelerated the Great Migration, the large-scale movement of hundreds of thousands of Southern blacks to cities in the North. This great population shift had already begun before the war in the late 19th century, when African Americans trickled northward to escape the Jim Crow South—but after the turn of the century, the trickle became a tidal wave. Several factors contributed to the tremendous increase in black migration. First, many African Americans sought to escape racial discrimination in the South, which made it hard to make a living and often threatened their lives. Also, a boll weevil infestation, aided by floods and droughts, had History Through (1940-41) This painting by Jacob Lawrence shows three of the most common destinations for African Americans leaving the South. Why do you think the artist has not shown any individual facial features? tUkinK wiccs 1 How did (open [unities African -s? ruined much of the South's cotton fields. In the North, there were more job opportunities. For example, Henry Ford opened his automobile assembly line to black workers in 1914. The outbreak of World War I and the drop in European immigration increased job opportunities for African Americans in steel mills, munitions plants, and stockyards. Northern manufacturers sent recruiting agents to distribute free railroad passes through the South. In addition, the publisher of the black-owned newspaper Chicago Defender bornbarded Southern blacks with articles contrasting Dixieland lynchings with the prosperity of African Americans in the North. & The First World War. Racial prejudice against African Americans in the North sometimes took violent forms. In July 1917, a race riot exploded in East St. Louis. Illinois. White workers, furious over the hiring of African Americans as strikebreakers at a munitions plant, rampaged through the streets. Forty blacks and rune whites died. Another riot erupted in July 1919 in Chicago when a 17 year- old African American swam from the water off a "black beach" to the water off a "white beach." There, white bathers threw rocks at him until he drowned. African Americans retaliated, and several riots broke out in the city. Order was restored after several days of violence that involved about 10.000 people. However, racial prejudice against African Americans also existed in the North, The press of new migrants to Northern cities caused overcrowding and intensified racial tensions. Nevertheless, between 1910 and 1930, hundreds of thousands of African Americans migrated to such cities as Chicago, New York, and Philadelphia. Author Richard Wright described the great exodus. A Personal Voice richard wright " We are bitter no more; we are leaving! We are leaving our homes, pulling up stakes to move on. We look up at the high southern sky and remember all the sunshine and all the rain and we feel a sense of loss, but we are leaving. \Ne VooV. out art. the wide green tieids which our e-jes saw when we first came Into the world and we feel full of regret, but we are leaving. We scan the kind black faces we have looked upon since we first saw the light of day, and. though pain is in our hearts, we are leaving. We take one last furtive look over our shoulders to the Big House— high upon a hill beyond the railroad tracks—where the Lord of the Land lives, and we feel glad, for we are leaving. —quoted in 12 Million Black Voices WOMEN IN THE WAR While African Americans began new lives, women moved into jobs thal had been held exclusively by men. They became railroad workers, cooks, dockworkers, and bricklayers. They mined coal and took part in shipbuilding. At the same time, women continued to fill more traditional jobs as nurses, clerks, and teachers. Many women worked as volunteers, serving at Red Cross facilities and encouraging the sale of bonds and the planting of victory gardens. Other women, such as Jane Addams, were active in the peace movement. Addams helped found the Women's Peace Party in 1915 and remained a pacifist even after the United States entered the war. A Personal Voice bartolomeo vanzetti In all my life I have never stole, never killed, never spilled blood. . . . We were tried during a time . . . when there was hysteria of resentment and hate against the people of our principles, against the foreigner. ... I am suffering because I am a radical and indeed I am a radical; I have suffered because I was an Italian and indeed I am an Italian. ... If you could execute me two times, and if I could be reborn two other times. I would live again to do what I have done already. §/ Analyzing Events B) According to Vanzetti, Wat were the teasm for his imprison ] ment? —quoted in The National Experience In 1961, new ballistics tests showed that the pistol found on Sacco was in fact the one used to murder the guard. However, there was no proof that Sacco had actually pulled the trigger. Limiting Immigration During the wave of nativist sentiment, "Keep America for Americans" became the prevailing attitude. Anti-immigrant attitudes had been growing in the United States ever since the 1880s, when new immigrants began arriving from southern and eastern Europe. Many of these immigrants were willing to work for low wages in industries such as coal mining, steel production, and textiles. But after World War 1, the need for unskilled labor in the United States decreased. Nativists believed that because the United States now had fewer unskilled jobs available, fewer immigrants should be let into the country. Nativist feelings were fueled by Bat I"ji round On August 23. 1977, eMCB|50 years ate the executions. MassachuseB governor MrtM Dukakis decM that Sacco tea Vanzetti had ret been given a hr j trial. An Ivv, man Ku Y this Chapter 20 the fact that some of the people involved in postwar labor disputes were immigrant anarchists and socialists, who many Americans believed were actually Communists. Racist ideas like those expressed by Madison Grant, an anthropologist at the American Museum of Natural History in New York City, fed people's attitudes. A Personal Voice madison grant The result of unlimited immigration is showing plainly In the rapid decline in the birth rate of native Americans . . . [who] will not bring children into the world to compete in the labor market with the Slovak, the Italian, the Syrian and the Jew. The native American is too proud to mix socially with them. —quoted. As a result of the Red Scare and anti-immigrant feelings, different groups of bigots used anti-communism as an excuse to harass any group unlike themselves. One such group was the Ku Klux Klan (KKK). The KKK was devoted to "100 percent Americanism." By 1924, KKK membership reached 4.5 million "white male persons, native-born gentile citizens." The Klan also believed in keeping blacks "in their place," destroying saloons, opposing unions, and driving Roman Catholics, Jews, and foreign-born people out of the country. KKK members were paid to recruit new members into their world of secret rituals and racial violence. Though the Klan dominated state politics in many states, by the end of the decade its criminal activity led to a decrease in power. THE QUOTA SYSTEM From 1919 to 1921, the number of immigrants had grown almost 600 percent—from 141,000 to 805,000 people. Congress, in response to nativist pressure, decided to limit immigration from certain countries, namely those in southern and eastern Europe. The F.mergency Quota Act of 1921 set up a quota system. This system established the maximum number of people who could enter the United States from each foreign country. Tire goal of the quota system was to cut sharply European immigration to the United States. As the charts on page 622 show, the system achieved that goal. As amended in 1924, the law limited immigration from each European nation to 2 percent of the number of its nationals living in the United States in 1890. this provision discriminated against people from eastern and southern Europe—mostly Roman Catholics and Jews—-who hail not started coming to the United States in large numbers until after 1890. Later, the base year was shifted to 1920. In 1927, the law reduced the total number of persons to be admitted in any one year to 150,000. In addition, the law prohibited Japanese immigration, causing much ill will between the two nations. Japan—which had faithfully kept the Gentlemen's Agreement to Limit emigration to the United States, negotiated by Theodore Roosevelt in 1907—expressed anger over the insult. In 1925, nearly 60.000 Ku Klux Klan members marched along Pennsylvania Avenue In Washington, D.C. Politics of the Roaring Twenties U.S. Patterns of Immigration, 1921-1929 Immigration to the United States, 1921 and 1929. What are the only areas to register an increase in immigration to the U.S,? 2. How did the quota system affect where immigrants came from? The map and graph below show the change in immigration patterns resulting from the Emergency Quota Act. among other factors. Hundreds of thousands of people were affected. For example, while the number of immigrants from Mexico rose from 30,758 in 1921 to 40.154 in 1929, the number of Italian immigrants dropped drastically from 222.260 in 1921 to 18,008 in 1929. Ellis Island in Upper New European Immigrants. York Harbor was the port of entry for most Developing Bittorival Perspective fij Why did Congress make dary.es in imnugfation laws Jung the 1920s? A Time of Labor Unrest The national origins quota system did not apply to immigrants from the Western Hemisphere, however. During the 1920s, about a million Canadians and almost 500,000 Mexicans crossed the nation's borders. Si Another severe postwar conflict formed between labor and management. During the war, the government wouldn't allow workers to strike because nothing could interfere with the war effort. The American Federation of Labor (Al l.) pledged to avoid strikes. However, 1919 saw more than 3,000 strikes during which some 4 million workers walked off the job. Employers didn't want to give raises, nor did they want employees to join unions. Some employers, either out of a sincere belief or because they saw a way to keep wages down, attempted to show that union members were planning a revolution. Employers labeled striking workers as Communists. Newspapers screamed, "Plots to Establish Communism." Three strikes in particular grabbed public attention. Strikers included THE BOSTON POLICE STRIKE The Boston police had not been given a raise since the beginning of World War L Among their many grievances was that they had been denied the right to unionize. When representatives asked for a raise and were fired, the remaining policemen decided to strike. Massachusetts governor Calvin Coolidgc called out the National Guard. He said, " There is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody, anywhere, any time." The strike ended but members weren't allowed to return to work; new jvolicemen were hired instead. People praised Coolidge for saving Boston, it not the nation, from communism and anarchy. In the 1920 election he became Warren G. Harding's vice- presidential running mate. working women tailors who fought for improved working conditions. THE STEEL MILL STRIKE Workers in the steel mills wanted the right to negotiate for shorter working hours and a living wage. They also wanted union recognition and collective bargaining rights, in September 1919, the U.S. Steel Corporation refused to meet with union representatives. In response, over 300 workers walked off their jobs. Steel companies hired strikebreakers— employees who agreed to work during the strike—and used force. Striking workers were beaten by police, federal troops, and state militias. Then the companies instituted a propaganda campaign, linking the strikers to Communists. In October 1919, negotiations between labor and management produced a deadlock. President Woodrow Wilson made a written plea to the combative "negotiators." ,ng "etfte id the (otee Mthe (rue. A Personal Voice woodrow wilson At a time when the nations of the world are endeavoring to find a way of avoiding international war. are we to confess that there is no method to be found for carrying on industry except . . . the very method of war? . . . Are our industrial leaders and our industrial workers to live together without faith in each other? —quoted in Labor in Crisis The steel strike ended in January 1920. In 1923, a report on the harsh working conditions in steel mills shocked the public. The steel companies agreed to an eight-hour day, but the steelworkers remained withoul a union. ^ Politics of the Roaring Twenties. While many people have come to the U.S. seeking political and religious freedom, economic opportunity has also been a key reason for immigration. In 1905, for instance, almost half a million people from southern and eastern Europe migrated to the United States in search of economic freedom and opportunity. as well as to escape religious persecution. Many found work at menial jobs for low pay but still were able to save enough money to eventually open their own businesses. Economic Opportunity The courage to take risks, the confidence to rely on one's self, the strength to stand in the face of despair, and the resourcefulness to make the most of opportunity— these are all qualities often considered distinctly American. Freedom requires individuals to discover or create opportunities tor themselves. However, the government has also played a key role in distributing and creating economic opportunities. 1830s-1860s Even before 1763, Americans looked toward the untamed west in search of greater wealth and freedom. In the 1830s, the Mormons went west to escape religious as well as economic persecution. The government helped to expand economic opportunities for whites by first clearing the land of its native inhabitants, relocating them to reservations or killing them. As the nation claimed ownership of the land, it also gave 5 I away. The Homestead Act of 1862 provided free of charge 160 j acres of public land to anyone 21 years of age or olderorthe j| head of a family who had inhabited the land for five years and had improved it. This provided Americans a chance to be independent and self-sufficient if they would work hard. From 1862 until 1900. between 400.000 and 600,000 families were pm vided homesteads. A Personal Voice billy Sunday " The reign of tears is over! THE NEW URBAN SCENE At the beginning of the 1920s, New York, with a population of 5.6 million people, topped the list of big cities. Next came Chicago, with nearly 3 million, and Philadelphia, with nearly 2 million. Another 65 cities claimed populations of 100,000 or more, and they grew more crowded by the day. Life in these booming cities was far different from the slow-paced, intimate life in America's small towns. Chicago, for instance, was an industrial powerhouse, home to native-born whites and African Americans, immigrant Poles, Irish, Russians, Italians, Swedes, Arabs, I rench, and Chinese. Each day, an estimated 300,000 workers, 150,000 cars and buses, and 20,000 trolleys filled the pulsing downtown. At night people crowded into ornate movie theaters and vaudeville houses offering live variety shows. for small-town migrants, adapting to the urban environment demanded changes in thinking as well as in everyday living. The city was a world of competition and change. City dwellers read and argued about current scientific and social ideas, they judged one another by accomplishment more often than by background. City dwellers also tolerated drinking, gambling, and casual dating— worldly behaviors considered shocking and sinful in small towns. Although many African Americans found their voice in llie NAACP, they still faced daily threats and discrimination. Marcus Garvey, an immigrant from Jamaica, believed that African Americans should build a separate society. His different, more radical message of black pride aroused the hopes of many. In 1914, Garvey founded the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA). In 1918, he moved the UNIA to New York City and opened offices in urban ghettos in order to recruit followers. By the mid- 1920s, Garvey claimed he had a million followers. He appealed to African Americans with a combination of spellbinding oratory, mass meetings, parades, and a message of pride. James Weldon Johnson worked as a school principal, newspaper editor, and lawyer in Florida. In 1900, he wrote the lyrics for "Lift Every Voice and Sing." the song that became known as the black national anthem. The first stanza begins as follows: "Lift every voice and sing Till earth and heaven ring, Ring with the harmonies of Liberty; Let our rejoicing rise High as the listening skies. Let it resound loud as the rolling sea. * In the 1920s, Johnson straddled the worlds of politics and art. He served as executive secretary of the NAACP, spearheading the fight against lynching. In addition, he wrote well-known works, such as God's Trombones. a series of sermon-like poems, and Black Manhattan, a look at black cultural life in New York during the Roaring Twenties. The Roaring Life of the 1920s 659 Background Relief programs largely discriminated against African Americans. However, some black organizations. like the National Urban League, were able to give pnvate help. tammari/ing J How did the ' Depression minorities? Others built makeshift shacks out of scrap) materials. Before long, numerous shantytowns—little towns consisting of shacks—sprang up. An observer recalled one such settlement in Oklahoma City: "Here were all these people living in old, rusted-out car bodies. . . . There were people living in shacks made of orange crates. One family with a whole lot of kids were living in a piano box. . . . People were living in whatever they could junk together." Every day the poor dug through garbage cans or begged. Soup kitchens offering free or low-cost food and bread lines, or lines of people waiting to receive food provided by charitable organizations or public agencies, became a common sight. One man described a bread line in New York City. A Personal Voice Herman shumlin Two or three blocks along Times Square, you'd see these men, silent, shuffling along in a line. Getting this handout of coffee and doughnuts, dealt out from great trucks. ... I'd see that flat, opaque, expressionless look which spelled, for me, human disaster. Men . . . who had responsible positions. Who had lost their jobs, lost their homes, lost their families . . . They were destroyed men. —quoted in Hard Times Conditions for African Americans and Latinos were especially difficult. Their unemployment rates were higher, and they were the lowest paid. They also dealt with increasing racial violence from unemployed whites competing for the same jobs. Twenty-four African Americans died by lynching in 1933. Latinos—mainly Mexicans and Mexican Americans living in the Southwest—were also targets. Whites demanded that Latinos be deported, or expelled from the country, even though many had been born in America. By the late 1930s, hundreds of thousands of people of Mexican descent relocated to Mexico. Some left voluntarily; others were deported by Ihe federal government. THE DEPRESSION IN RURAL AREAS l ife in rural areas was hard, but it did have one advantage over city life; most farmers could grow food for their families. With falling prices and rising debt, though, thousands of farmers lost their land. Between 1929 and 1932, about 400,000 farms were lost through foreclosure—the process by which a mortgage holder takes back property if an occupant has not made payments. Many farmers turned to tenant farming and barely scraped out a living. Although the suffering of the 1930s was severe for many pe& pie, it was especially grim for African Americans. Hard times were already a fact of life for many blacks, as one African- American man noted: "The Negro was born in depression. It didn't mean too much to him, The Great American Depression. .. . The best he could be is a janitor or a porter or shoeshine boy. It only became official when it hit the white man." Nonetheless, the African- American community was very hard hit by the Great Depression. In 1932, the unemployment rate among African Americans stood at over 50 percent, while the overall unemployment rate was approximately 25 percent. The Great Depression Begins 679 ' 'v . } : ' The Dust Bowl, 1933-1936 n Chicago, Nov. 1933 Crowds at Chicago Exposition world's fair are caught in 50 mph gale of dust. Nebraska. 1935-1937 Over two years, federal workers help soil conservation by planting 360.000 trees and completing 62 dams. THE DUST BOWL The drought that began in the early 1930s wreaked havoc on the Great I'lains. During the previous decade, farmers from Texas to North Dakota had used tractors to break up the grasslands and plant millions of acres of new farmland. Plowing had removed the thick protective layer of prairie grasses. Farmers had then exhausted the land through overproduction of crops, and the grasslands became unsuitable for farming. When the drought and winds began in the early 1930s, little grass and few trees were left to hold the soil down. Wind scattered the topsoil, exposing sand and grit underneath. The dust traveled hundreds of miles. One windstorm in 1934 picked up millions of tons of dust from the plains and carried it to East Coast cities. The region that was the hardest hit, including parts of Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, New Mexico, and Colorado, came to be known as the Dust Bowl. Plagued by dust storms and evictions, thousands of farmers and sharecroppers left their land behind. They packed up their families and few belongings and headed west, following Route 66 to California. Some of these migrants—known as Okies (a term that originally referred to Oklahomans but came to be used negatively for all migrants)—found work as farmhands. But others continued to wander in search ol work. By the end of the 1930s, hundreds of thousands of farm families had migrated to California and other Pacific Coast states. 1. Region Which states were in the r known as the Dust Bowl? 2. Movement Why might most of the mgi who left the Dust Bowl have trawled west? "Migrant Mother" became one of the most recognizable symbols of the Depression and perhaps the strongest argument In support of New Deal relief programs. Roy Stryker, who hired Lange to document the harsh Mng conditions of the time, described the mother: "She has all the suffering of mankind In her. but all the perseverance too. A restraint and a strange courage." ^ Lange reflected upon her assignment. "I saw and approached the hungry and desperate mother, as if drawn by a magnet. . . She said that they had been living on frozen vegetables from the surrounding fields, and birds that the children killed. She had Just sold the tires from her car to buy food." SKILLBUILDER Interpreting Visual Sources 1. What might the woman be thinking about? Why do you think so? 2. Why do you think "Migrant Mother" was effective in persuading people to support FDR's relief programs? The New Deal 703 In February 1936, Dorothea Lange visited a camp in Niporno, California, where some 2.500 destitute pea pickers lived in tents or, like this mother of seven children, in lean-tos. Lange talked briefly to the woman and then took five pictures, successively moving closer to her subjects and directing more emphasis on the mother. The last photo, "Migrant Mother" (at right), was published in the San Francisco News March 10, 1936. o One American's Story The New Deal Brings New Opportunities In some ways, the New Deal represented an important opportunity for minorities and women, but what these groups gained was limited. Long-standing patterns of prejudice and discrimination continued to plague them and to prevent their full and equal participation in national life. WOMEN MAKE THEIR MARK One of the most notable changes during the New Deal was the naming of several women to important government positions. Frances Perkins became America's first female cabinet member. As secretary of labor, she played a major role in creating the Social Security system and super- Pedro J. Gonzalez came to this country from Mexico in the early 1920s and later became a United States citizen. As the first Spanish-language disc jockey in Los .Angeles, Gonzalez used his radio progrant to condemn discrimination against Mexicans and Mexican Americans, who were often made scapegoats for social and economic problems during the Depression. For his efforts, Gonzalez was arrested, jailed, and deported on tmmped-up charges. later in life, he reflected on his experiences. New Deal policies and actions affected various social and ethnic groups. The New Deal made a lasting impact on increasing the government's role in the struggle for equal rights. A Personal Voice pedro j. gonzalez Seeing how badly they treated Mexicans back In the days of my youth I could have started a rebellion. But now there could be a cultural understanding so that without firing one bullet, we might understand each other. We [Mexicans] were here before they [Anglos] were, and we are not, as they still say, 'undesirables' or 'wetbacks.' They say we come to this land and it's not our home. Actually, it's the other way around. —quoted in the Los Angeles Times, December 9. 1984 Pedro J. Gonzalez became a hero to many Mexican Americans and a symbol of Mexican cultural pride. His life reflected some of the difficulties faced by Mexicans and other minority groups in the United States during the New Deal era. Frtlru J. hunnta and the Fight fm Mexican tiaaiai Rightc Terms & Names Frances Perkins •Mary McLeod Bethune •John Collier •New Deal coalition • Congress ol Industrial Organizations 710 Chapter 23 Marian Anderson sang from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial on April 9. 1939. Many Mexican Americans were long-time residents or citizens of the United States. Others came during the 1920s to work on farms in Texas, California, and Arizona. Valued for their low-cost labor dur ing the good times, these migrant workers became the target of hostility during the Great Depression. Many returned to Mexico willingly, while others were deported by the United States government. During the 1930s. as many as 400,000 persons of Mexican descent, many of them U.S. citizens, were deported to Mexico. THE PRESIDENT FAILS TO SUPPORT CIVIL RIGHTS Despite efforts to promote racial equality, Roosevelt was never committed to full civil rights for African Americans. He was afraid of upsetting white Democratic voters in the South, an important segment of his supporters. He refused to approve a tederal antilynch- ing law and an end to the poll tax, two key goals of the civil rights movement. Further, a number of Mew Deal agencies clearly discriminated against African Americans, including the NRA, tire CCC, and the TVA. these programs gave lower wages to African Americans and favored whites. African Americans recognized the need to fight for their rights and to improve conditions in areas that the New Deal ignored. In 1934, they helped organize the Southern Tenant Farmers Union, which sought to protect the rights of tenant farmers and sharecroppers, both white and black. In tLie North, the union created tenants' groups and launched campaigns to increase job opportunities. In general, however, African Americans supported the Roosevelt administration and the New Deal, generally seeing them as their best hope for the future. As one man recalled, "Roosevelt touched the temper of the black community. You did not look upon him as being white, black, blue or green. He was President Roosevelt." fit Mexican-American Fortunes Mexican .Americans also tended to support the New Deal, even though they received even fewer benefits than African Americans did. Large numbers of Mexican Americans had come to the United States during the 1920s, settling mainly in the Southwest. Most found work laboring on farms, an occupation that was essentially unprotected by state and federal laws. During the Depression, farm wages fell to as little as nine cents an hour. Farm workers who tried to unionize period: a performance by the African-American singer Marian Anderson in 1939. When the Daughters of the American Revolution chose not to allow Anderson to perform in their concert hall in Washington, D.C., because of her race, Eleanor Roosevelt resigned from the organization. She then arranged for Anderson to perform at the Lincoln Memorial on Easter Sunday. At the concert, Walter White, an official of the NAACP, noticed one girl in the crowd. A Personal Voice Walter white " Her hands were particularly noticeable as she thrust them forward and upward, trying desperately ... to touch the singer. They were hands which despite their youth had known only the dreary work of manual labor. Tears streamed down the girl's dark face. Her hat was askew, but In her eyes flamed hope bordering on ecstasy.... If Marian Anderson could do it, the girl's eyes seemed to say. then I can. too. —A Man Called Wlute Lvuludlini; 5* Evaluated actions and policies of tf" Roosevelt aOnitr.iStratto# Civil ngtits. 712 Chapti.r 23 —i Identifying Prohlcim Q Why was life dflicult (or farm larmiers during the Depression? often met with violence from employers and government authorities. Although the CCC and WPA helped some Mexican Americans, these agencies also discriminated against them by disqualifying from their programs migrant workers who had no permanent address. Native Americans Gain Support Thing | Wwt changes tor Americans *"SuKofttte 'Deal? Native Americans received strong government support from tire New Deal, in 1924, Native Americans had received full citizenship by law. In 1933, President Roosevelt appointed .John Collier as commissioner of Lndian affairs. Collier helped create the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934. This act was an ment policy. It moved away from assimilation and toward Native American autonomy. It also helped to restore some reservation lands to tribal ownership. The act mandated changes in three areas: • economic—Native American lands would belong to an entire tribe. This provision strengthened Native American land claims by prohibiting the government from taking over unclaimed reservation lands and selling them to people other than Native Americans. • cultural—The number of boarding schools tor Native American children was reduced, and children could attend school on the reservations. • political—Tribes were given permission to elect tribal councils to govern their reservations. extreme change in govern- Some Native Americans who valued their tribal traditions hailed the act as an important step forward. Others who had become more "Americanized" as individual landowners under the previous Dawes Act objected, because they were tired of white people telling them what was good for them. S> ▲ John Collier talks with Chief Richard, one of several Native American chiefs attending the Four Nation Celebration held at Niagara Falls. New York, in September 1934. FDR Creates the New Deal Coalition Although New Deal policies had mixed results for minorities, these groups generally backed President Roosevelt. In fact, one of FDR's great achievements was to create the New Deal coalition—an alignment of diverse groups dedicated to supporting the Democratic Party. The coalition included Southern whites, various urban groups, African Americans, and unionized industrial workers. As a result, Democrats dominated national politics throughout the 1930s and 1940s. LABOR UNIONS FLOURISH As a result of the Wagner Act and other prolabor legislation passed during the New Deal, union members enjoyed better working conditions and increased bargaining power. In their eyes, President Roosevelt was a "friend of labor." Libor unions donated money to Roosevelt's reelection campaigns, and union workers pledged their votes to him. Between 1933 and 1941, union membership grew from less than 3 million to more than 10 million. Unionization especially affected coal miners and workers in mass-production industries, such as the automobile, rubber, and electrical industries. It was in these industries, too, tiiat a stmggle for dominance within the labor movement began to develop. The Mew Deni 713 RECRUITING AND DISCRIMINATION For many minority groups—especially African Americans, Native Americans, Mexican Americans, and Asian Americans—the war created new dilemmas. Restricted to racially segregated neighborhoods and reservations and denied basic citizenship rights, some members of these groups questioned whether this was their war to fight. "Why die for democracy for some foreign country when we don't even have it here?" asked an editorial in an African-American newspaper. On receiving his draft notice, an African American responded unhappily, "Just carve on my tombstone, 'Here lies a black man killed fighting a yellow man for the protection of a white man.'" DRAMATIC CONTRIBUTIONS Despite discrimination in the military, more than 300,000 Mexican Americans joined the armed forces. While Mexican Americans in l.os Angeles made up only a tenth of the city's population, they suffered a fifth of the city's wartime casualties. About one million African Americans also served in the military. Alrican- American soldiers lived and worked in segregated units and were limited mostly to noncombat roles. After much protest, African Americans did finally see combat beginning in April 1943. Asian Americans took part in the struggle as well. More than 13,000 Chinese Americans, or about one of every five adult males, joined the armed forces. In addition, 33,000 Japanese Americans put on uniforms. Of these, several thousand volunteered to serve as spies and interpreters in the Pacific war. "During battles," wrote an admiring officer, "they crawled up close enough to be able to hear [Japanese] officers' commands and to make verbal translations to our soldiers." Some 25,000 Native Americans enlisted in the armed services, too, including S00 women. Their willingness to serve led The Saturday Evening Post to comment, "We would not need the Selective Service if all volunteered like Indians." At A Production Miracle l ariy in February 1942, American newspapers reported the end of automobile production for private use. The last car to roll off an automaker's assembly line was a gray sedan with "victory trim,"—that is, without chrome-plated parts. This was just one more sign that the war would affect almost every aspect of life. THE INDUSTRIAL RESPONSE Within weeks of the shutdown In production, the nation's automobile plants had been retooled to produce tanks, planes, boats, and MAWIPflt | ( onlraxting A> How dri the American response to tfe Japanese east m Pearl Harbor 4ft? from Japanese expectations? The Production Miracle Aircraft and Ship Production, 1940-45 U.S. Budget Expenditure, 1941-45 Source fhc Times tV the Second Wortti Wat SKILLBUILDER Interpreting Graphs 1. Study the first graph. In what year did aircraft and ship production reach their highest production levels? 2. How does the second graph help explain how this production miracle was possible? 770 Chapter 25 THE ITALIAN CAMPAIGN Even before the battle in North Africa was won, Roosevelt, Churchill, and their commanders met in Casablanca. At this meeting, the two leaders agreed to accept only the unconditional surrender of the Axis powers. That is, enemy nations would have to accept whatever terms of peace the Allies dictated. The two leaders also discussed where to strike next. The Americans argued that the best approach to victory was to assemble a massive invasion fleet in Britain and to launch it across the English Channel, through France, and into the heart of Germany. Churchill, however, thought it would be safer to first attack Italy. The Italian campaign got off to a good start with the capture of Sicily in the summer of 1943, Stunned by their army's collapse in Sicily, Ihe Italian government forced dictator Benito Mussolini to resign. On July 25, 1945, King Victor Emmanuel III summoned II Duce (Italian for "the leader") to his palace, stripped him of power, and had him arrested. "At this moment," the king told Mussolini, "you are the most hated man in Italy." Italians began celebrating the end of the war. Their cheers were premature. Hitler was determined to stop the Allies in Italy rather than fight on German soil. One of the hardest battles the Allies encountered in Europe was fought less than 40 miles from Rome. This battle, "Bloody Anzio," lasted four months—until the end of May 1944—and left about 25,000 Allied and 30,000 Axis casualties. During the year after Anzio, German armies continued to put up strong resistance. The effort to free Italy did not succeed until 1945, when Germany itself was close to collapse. S HEROES IN COMBAT Among the brave men who fought in Italy were pilots of the all-black 99th Pursuit Squadron—the Tuskegee Airmen. In Sicily, the squadron registered its first victory against an enemy aircraft and went on to more impressive strategic strikes against the Gennan forces throughout Italy. The Tuskegee Airmen won two Distinguished Unit Citations (the military's highest commendation) for their outstanding aerial combat against the German Luftwaffe. Another African-American unit to distinguish itself was the famous 92nd Infantry Division, nicknamed the Buffaloes. In just six months of fighting in Europe, the Buffaloes won 7 Legion of Merit awards, 65 Silver Stars, and 162 Bronze Stars for courage under fire. Like African Americans, most Mexican Americans served in segregated units. Seventeen Mexican- American soldiers were awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor. .An all-Mexican-American unit—Company E of the 141st Regiment, 36th Division—became one of the most decorated of the war. Japanese Americans also served in Italy and North Africa. At the urging of General Delos Emmons, the army created the 100th Battalion, which consisted of 1,300 Hawaiian Nisei. (The word Nisei refers to American citizens whose parents had emigrated from Japan.) The 100th saw brutal combat and became known as the Purple Heart Battalion, looter the 100th was merged into the all-Nisei 442nd Regimental Combat Team. It became the most decorated unit in U.S. history. On May 31,1943, the 99th Pursuit Squadron, the first group of African- American pilots trained at the Tuskegee Institute, arrived in North Africa. The United States in World War 11 779 ECONOMIC GAINS The war years were good ones for working people. As defense industries boomed, unemployment fell to a low of 1.2 percent in 1944. Even with price and wage controls, average weekly pay (adjusted for inflation) rose 10 percent during tire war. And although workers still protested long hours, overtime, and night shifts, they were able to save money for the future. Some workers invested up to half their paychecks in war bonds. Farmers also prospered during the war. Unlike the depression years, when farmers had battled dust storms and floods, the early 1940s had good weather for growing crops. Farmers benefited from improvements in farm machinery and fertilizers and reaped the profits from rising crop prices. As a result, crop production increased by 50 percent, and farm income tripled. Before the war ended, many farmers could pay off their mortgages. Women also enjoyed employment gains during the war, although many lost their jobs when the war ended. Over 6 million women had entered the work force for the first time, boosting the percentage of women in the total work force to 35 percent. A third of those jobs were in defense plants, which offered women more challenging work and better pay than jobs traditionally associated with women, such as as waitressing, clerking, and domestic service. With men away at war, many women also took advantage of openings in journalism and other professions. "The war really created opportunities for women," said Winona Espinosa, a wife and mother who became a riveter and bus driver during the war. "It was the first time we got a chance to show that we could do a lot of things that only men had done before." The war gave women the chance to prove they could be just as productive as men. But their pay usually did not reflect their productivity. alary a: the act ng from pt country or nto another it*, did World I cause the ation In addition to revamping the economy, the war triggered one of the greatest mass migrations in American history. Americans whose families had lived for decades in one place suddenly uprooted themselves to seek work elsewhere. More than a million newcomers poured into California between 1941 and 1944. Towns with defense industries saw their populations double and even triple, sometimes almost overnight. As shown in the map to the right, African Americans left the South for cities in the North in record numbers. A/ The United States in World War Tt 797 \n#lv/ing Oiiiscv & What caused the race riots in me 1940s? Wherever African Americans moved, however, discrimination presented tough hurdles. In 1942, civil rights leader James farmer founded an interracial organization called the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) to confront urban segregation in the North. That same year, CORK staged its first sit-in at a segregated Chicago restaurant. As African-American migrants moved into already overcrowded cities, tensions rose. In 1943, a tidal wave of racial violence swept across the country. The worst conflict erupted in Detroit on a hot Sunday afternoon in June. What started as a tussle between blacks and whites at a beach on the Detroit River mushroomed into a riot when white sailors stationed nearby joined the fray. The fighting raged for three days, fueled by false rumors that whites had murdered a black woman and her child and that black rioters had killed 17 whites, tty the time President Roosevelt sent federal troops to restore order, 9 whites and 25 blacks lay dead or dying. The violence of 1943 revealed to many Americans—black and white alike— just how serious racial tensions had become in the United States. Mexican Americans also experienced prejudice during the war years. In the violent summer of 1943, Los Angeles exploded in anti-Mexican "zoot-suit" riots. Tltc zoot suit was a style of dress adopted by Mexican-American youths as a symbol of their rebellion against tradition. It consisted of a long jacket and pleated pants. Broad-brimmed hats were often worn with the suits. The riots began when 11 sailors in Los Angeles reported that they had been attacked by zoot-suit-wear- ing Mexican Americans. This charge triggered violence involving thousands of servicemen and civilians. Mobs poured into Mexican neighborhoods and grabbed any zoot-suiters they could find. The attackers ripped off their victims' clothes and beat them senseless. The riots lasted almost a week and resulted in the beating of hundreds of Mexican-American youth and other minorities. Despite such unhappy experiences with racism, many Mexican Americans believed that their sacrifices during wartime would lead to a better future. These Mexican Americans, involved in the 1943 Los Angeles riots, are seen A Personal Voice manuel de la raza here leaving jail to make court This war... is doing what we in our Mexican-American movement had planned to do in one generation. ... It has shown those 'across the tracks' that we all share the same problems. It has shown them what the Mexican American will do. what responsibility he will take and what leadership qualities he will demonstrate. After this struggle, the status of the Mexican Americans will be different. —quoted in A Different Mirror A History of Multicultural America The United States in World War 799 Japanese Relocation Camps, 1942 1. Location How many Japanese internment camps existed in 1942? 2. Place Why do you think the majority of these camps were located in the West? On March 3. 1942, a Japanese-American mother carries her sleeping daughter during their relocation to an internment camp. Internment of Japanese Americans While Mexican Americans and African Americans struggled with racial tension, the war produced tragic results for Japanese Americans. When the war began, 120,000 Japanese Americans lived in the United States. Most of them were citizens living on the West Coast. The surprise Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in Hawaii had stunned the nation. After the bornbing, panic-stricken citizens feared that the Japanese would soon attack the United States. Frightened people believed false rumors that Japanese Americans were committing sabotage by mining coastal harbors and poisoning vegetables. This sense of fear and uncertainty caused a wave of prejudice against Japanese Americans, tarly in 1942, the War Department called for the mass evacuation of all Japanese Americans from Hawaii. General Delos Emmons, the military' governor of Hawaii, resisted the order because 37 percent of the people in Hawaii were Japanese Americans. To remove them would have destroyed the islands' economy and hindered U.S. military' operations there. However, he was eventually forced to order the internment, or confinement, of 1,444 Japanese Americans, 1 percent of Hawaii's Japanese-American population. On the West Coast, however, panic and prejudice ruled the day. In California, only ! percent of the people were Japanese, but they constituted a minority large enough to stimulate the prejudice of many whites, without being large enough to effectively resist internment. Newspapers whipped up anti-Japanese sentiment by running ugly stories attacking Japanese Americans. On February 19, 1942, President Roosevelt signed an order requiring the removal of people of Japanese ancestry from California and parts of Washington, Oregon, and Arizona. Based on strong recommendations from the military, he justified this step as necessary for national security. In the following weeks, the army rounded up some 110,000 Japanese Americans and shipped them to ten hastily constructed remote "relocation centers," euphemisms for prison camps. 2. fi a 800 Chapter 25 Analyzing Motives {!) Wily did President Roosevelt order Die Internment of Japanese Americans? About two-lhirds were Nisei, or Japanese people born in this country of parents who emigrated from Japan. Thousands of Nisei had already joined the armed forces, and to Ted Nakashima. an architectural draftsman from Seattle, the evacuation seemed utterly senseless. A Personal Voice ted nakashima " [There are] electricians, plumbers, draftsmen, mechanics, carpenters, painters, farmers—every trade—men who are able and willing to do all they can to lick the Axis. . . . We're on this side and we want to help. Why won't America let us? —from New Republic magazine. June 15. 1942 No specific charges were ever filed against Japanese Americans, and no evidence of subversion was ever found. Faced with expulsion, terrified families were forced to sell I heir homes, businesses, and all their belongings for less than their true value. Japanese Americans fought for justice, botli In the courts and in Congress. The initial results were discouraging. In 1944, the Supreme Court decided, in Korematsu v. United Suites, that the government's policy of evacuating Japanese Americans to camps was justified on the basis of "military necessity." (See pages 802-803.) After the war, however, the Japanese American Citizens League (|ACL) pushed the government to compensate those sent to the camps for their lost property, in 1965, Congress authorized the spending of 538 million for that purpose—less than a tenth of Japanese Americans' actual losses. The JACL did not give up its quest for justice. In 1978, it called for the payment of reparations, or restitution, to each individual that suffered internment. A decade later, Congress passed, and President Ronald Reagan signed, a bill that promised 520,000 to even- Japanese American sent to a relocation camp. When the checks were sent in 1990, a letter from President George Bush accompanied them, in which he stated. "We can never fully right the wrongs of the past. But we can take a clear stand for justice and recognize that serious injustices were done to Japanese Americans during World War 11." THE RULING The Court upheld Korematsu's conviction and argued that military necessity made internment constitutional. Executive Order 9066 was clearly aimed at one group of people—Japanese Americans. Korematsu argued that this order was unconstitutional because it was based on race. Writing for the Court majority, Justice Hugo Black agreed "that all legal restrictions which curtail the civil rights of a single racial group are immediately suspect." However, in this case, he said, the restrictions were based on "a military imperative" and not "group pun* ishment based on antagonism to those of Japanese ori- gin." As such, Justice Black stated that the restrictions were constitutional. Compulsory exclusion of large groups, . . . except under circumstances of direct emergency and peril, is inconsistent with our basic governmental institutions. But when under conditions of modern warfare our shores are threatened by hostile forces, the power to protect must be commensurate with the threatened danger. Justice Frank Murphy, however, dissented—he opposed the majority. He believed that military necessity was merely an excuse that could not conceal the racism at die heart of the restrictions. This exclusion . .. ought not to be approved. Such exclusion goes over the very brink of constitutional power' and falls into the ugly abyss of racism. Two other justices also dissented, but Korematsu's conviction stood. "No person shall ... be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law." "I hereby authorize and direct the Secretary of War... to prescribe military areas in such places and of such extent as he . , . may determine, from which any or all persons may be excluded." 802 Chapter 25 Id I About 110,000 Japanese Americans were forced into I pemment camps, as shown above, during World War II.Many had to sell their businesses and homes at great loss.Thousands were forced to give up their possessions. [ In the internment camps, Japanese Americans lived in I iprison-like setting under constant guard. The Court ruled that these government actions did not siolate people's rights because the restrictions were pud on military necessity rather than on race. Hut the nment treated German Americans and Italian Wicans much differently. In those instances, the gov- nent Identified potentially disloyal people but did I not harass the people it believed to be loyal. By contrast, j the government refused to make distinctions between upland potentially disloyal Japanese Americans. l HISTORICAL IMPACT (In the end, the internment of Japanese Americans ame a national embarrassment. In 1976, President aid R. Ford repealed Executive Order 9066. A President Clinton presents Fred Korematsu with a Presidential Medal of Freedom during a ceremony at the White House on January 15,1998. Similarly, the Court's decision in Korennitsu became an embarrassing example of court-sanctioned racism often compared to the decisions on Dred Scott (1857) and Messy v. Ferguson (1896). In the early 1980s, a scholar conducting research obtained copies of government documents related to the Hirabayaslii arid Korematsu cases. T he documents showed that the army had lied to the Court in the 1940s. Japanese Americans had not posed any security threat. Korematsu's conviction was overturned in 1984. I lirabayashi's conviction was overturned in 1986. In 1988, Congress passed a law ordering reparations payments to surviving Japanese Americans who had been detained In the camps. II l Hypothesizing The internment of Japanese Americans during World War II disrupted lives and ripped apart families. What do you think can be done today to address this terrible mistake? How can the government make amends? 2. <r Visit the links for Historic Decisions of the Supreme Court to locate the three dissenting opinions in Korematsu written by Justices Frank Murphy, Robert Jackson, and Owen Roberts. Read one of these opinions, and then write a summary that states its main idea. What constitutional principle, If any, does the opinion use? The United States in World War It 803 Poverty Leads to Activism Despite ongoing poverty, during the 1950s, African Americans began to make significant strides toward the reduction of racial discrimination and segregation. Inspired by the African-American civil rights movement, other minorities also began to develop a deeper political awareness and a voice. Mexican-American activism gathered steam after veterans returned from World War II, and a major change in government policy under Eisenhower's administration fueled Native American protest. MEXICANS SEEK EMPLOYMENT Many Mexicans had become U.S. citizens during the 19th century, when the United States had annexed the Southwest after the War with Mexico. Large numbers of Mexicans had also crossed the border to work in the United States during and after World War I. When the United States entered World War II, the shortage of agricultural laborers spurred the federal government to initiate, in 1942, a program in which Mexican braceros (bra-sar'os), or hired hands, were allowed into the United States to harvest crops. Hundreds of thousands of braceros entered the United States on a short-term basis between 1942 and 1947. When their employment was ended, the braceros were expected to return to Mexico. However, many remained in the United States illegally. In addition, hundreds of thousands of Mexicans entered the country illegally to escape poor economic conditions in Mexico. In 1942, Mexican farm workers on their way to California bid farewell to their families. THE LONGORIA INCIDENT One of the more notorious instances of prejudice against Mexican Americans involved the burial of Felix Longoria. Longoria was a Mexican-American World War II hero who had been killed in the Philippines. The only undertaker in his hometown in Texas refused to provide Longoria's family with funeral services. In the wake of the Longoria incident, outraged Mexican Americans stepped up their efforts to stamp out discrimination. In 1948, Mexican-American veterans organized the G.l. Forum. Meanwhile, activist Ignacio Lopez founded the Unity League of California to register Mexican-American voters and to promote candidates who would represent their interests. S NATIVE AMERICANS CONTINUE THEIR STRUGGLE Native Americans also continued to fight for their rights and identity. From the passage of the Dawes Act, in 1887, until 1934, the policy of the federal government toward Native Americans had been one of "Americanization" and assimilation. In 1924, the Snyder Act granted citizenship to all Native Americans, but they remained second-class citizens. In 1934, the Indian Reorganization Act moved official policy away from assimilation and toward Native American autonomy. Its jtassage signaled a change in federal policy. In addition, because the government was reeling from Background In 1954, the U.S.launched a program desisted to find and return undocumented immigrants to Mexico. The Pacific Coast region's moderate climate allows for year-round harvesting. Most of California's migrant farm workers work on large fruit farms for much of the year. More than 62.000 workers make their way up to Washington each year to pick cherries, apples, and other crops. Workers along the Midwest and East Coast streams, where crops are smaller, must keep moving in order to find work. These workers picking strawberries in Michigan will soon move on. For example, one family may travel to Ohio for the tomato harvest and then return to Michigan to pick apples before heading back to Texas for the winter months. The nation's 3 million farm workers are responsible for harvesting much of the fruit and vegetables that families eat each day. Most field workers on United States farms remain in one place most of the year. Others are migrant workers, who move with their entire family from one region to the next as the growing seasons change. Nationally, migrant workers make up around 10 percent of hired farm workers, depending on the season and other factors. As the map shows, there were three major streams of migrant worker movements in the 1960s: the Pacific Coast, the Midwest, and the Atlantic Coast. While these paths may have changed slightly since then, the movement of migrant workers into nearly every region of the nation continues today. Paths Midwest paths Atlantic Coast paths Vest-found wort Migrant base areas 250 500 miles 250 500 kilometers v\ While some workers along the Atlantic Coast stream m in Florida, like the workers shown here picking , others travel as far north as New Hampshire New York. There, they work from March through mber. Due to the winters, migrant workers in of the Midwest and Atlantic regions can find work to only six months out of the year. 2. Creating a Database Pose a historical question about the relationship between crops and planting seasons. For example, what types of crops are harvested In Michigan during the fall? Then research and create a database that answers this and other such questions. The New Frontier anil the Great Society ^ The map above shows the three major streams of migrant worker movements in the 1960s. 1.IMMIGRATION The Great Society also brought profound changes to the nation's immigration laws. The Immigration Act of 1924 and the National Origins Act of 1924 had established immigration quotas that discriminated strongly against people from outside Western Europe, the Act set a quota of about 150,000 people annually, it discriminated against southern and eastern Europeans and barred Asians completely. the Immigration Act of 1965 opened the door for many non-European immigrants to settle in the United States by ending quotas based on nationality. THE ENVIRONMENT In 1962, Silent Spring, a book by Rachel Carson, had exposed a hidden danger: the effects of pesticides on the environment. Carson's hook and the public's outcry resulted in the Water Quality Act of 1965, which required states to clean up rivers. Johnson also ordered the government to search out the worst chemical polluters. "There is no excuse ... for chemical companies and oil refineries using our major rivers as pipelines for toxic wastes." Such words and actions helped trigger the environmental movement in the United States. (See Chapter 32.) CONSUMER PROTECTION Consumer advocates also made headway. They convinced Congress to pass major safety laws, including a truth-in-packaging law that set standards for labeling consumer goods. Ralph Nader, a young lawyer, wrote a book, Unsafe at Any Speed, that sharply criticized the U.S. automobile industry' for ignoring safety concerns. His testimony helped persuade Congress to establish safety standards for automobiles and tires. Precautions extended to food, too. Congress passed the Wholesome Meat Act of 1967. "Americans can feel a little safer now in their homes, on the road, at the supermarket, and in the department store," said Johnson. When President Johnson signed the Medicare bill in 1965, only half of the nation's elderly had health insurance. Today, thanks largely to Medicare, nearly all persons 65 years or older are eligible. In 2002, federal spending on Medicare was about $224 billion. In recent years, experts have debated over whether Medicare can be sustained In the face of changing trends: (1) people are living longer. (2) health care continues to become more expensive. and (3) the large baby boomer generation is moving toward retirement age. Though most Americans are not in favor of cutbacks to Medicare, the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 reduced federal spending on Medicare from 1998 through 2002 by $112 billion. Reforms of the Warren Court The wave of liberal reform that characterized the Great Society also swept through the Supreme Court of the 1960s. Beginning with the 1954 landmark decision Brown v. Board of Education, which ruled school segregation unconstitutional, the Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren look an activist stance on the leading issues of the day. Several major court decisions in the 1960s affected American society. The Warren Court banned state-sanctioned prayer in public schools and declared state-required loyalty oaths unconstitutional. It limited the power of communities to censor books and films and said that free speech included the wearing of black armbands to school by antiwar students. Furthermore, the Court brought about change in federal and state reapportionment and the criminal justice system. CONGRESSIONAL REAPPORTIONMENT In a key series of decisions, the Warren Court addressed the issue of reapportion men t, or the way in which states redraw election districts based on the changing number of people in them. By I960, about 80 percent of Americans lived in cities and suburbs. However, many states had tailed to change their congressional districts to reflect this development; instead, rural districts might have fewrer than 2(X),000 people, while some urban districts had more than 600,000. Thus the voters in rural areas had more representation—and also more power—than those in urban areas. Chief Justice Earl Warren The New Frontier and the Great Society 897 Background See Plessy v. Ferguson on page 496. Analyzing Effects A) What were the effects of the Supreme Court decision Plessy v. Ferguson? PLESSY V. FERGUSON During the 1890s, a number of other court decisions and state laws severely limited African- American rights. In 1890, Louisiana passed a law requiring railroads to provide "equal but separate accommodations for the white and colored races." In the Plessy v. Ferguson case of 1896, the Supreme Court ruled that this "separate but equal" law did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment, which guarantees all Americans equal treatment under the law. Armed with the Plessy decision, states throughout the nation, but especially in the South, passed what were known as Jim Crow laws, aimed at separating the races. These laws forbade marriage between blacks and whites and established many other restrictions on social and religious contact between the races. There were separate schools as well as separate streetcars, waiting rooms, railroad coaches, elevators, witness stands, and public restrooms. The facilities provided for blacks were always inferior to those for whites. Nearly every day, African Americans faced humiliating signs that read: "Colored Water"; "No Blacks Allowed"; "Whites Only!" * After the Civil War, some African Americans tried to escape Southern racism by moving north. This migration of Southern African Americans speeded up greatly during World War I, as many African-American sharecroppers abandoned farms for the promise of industrial jobs in Northern cities. However, they discovered racial prejudice and segregation there, too. Most could find housing only in all-black neighborhoods. Many white workers also resented the competition for jobs. This sometimes led to violence. In 1948, the white government of South Africa passed laws to ensure that whites would stay in control of the country. Those laws established a system called apartheid, which means "apart- ness." The system divided South Africans into four segregated racial groups—whites, blacks, coloreds of mixed race, and Asians. It restricted what jobs nonwhites could hold, where they could live, and what rights they could exercise. Because of apartheid, the black African majority were denied the right to vote. In response to worldwide criticism, the South African government gradually repealed the apartheid laws, starting in the late 1970s. In 1994. South Africa held its first all race election and elected as president Nelson Mandela, a black anti-apartheid leader whom the white government had imprisoned for nearly 30 years. U.S. School Segregation, 1952 Kans. Texas Segregation required. I tee photos of the public schools for white I dtotn (top) and for black children (above) in a I Bouthem town in the 1930s show that separate I unities were often unequal in the segregation era. Region In which regions were schools segregated by law? In which were segregation expressly prohibited? Civil Rights 907 leading civil rights groups began to drift apart. New leaders emerged as the movement turned its attention to the North, where African Americans faced not legal segregation but deeply entrenched and oppressive racial prejudice. NORTHERN SEGREGATION The problem facing African Americans in the North was de facto segregation—segregation that exists by practice and custom. De facto segregation can be harder to tight than de jure (de joor'e) segregation, or segregation by law, because eliminating it requires changing people's attitudes rather than repealing laws. Activists in the mid-1960s would find it much more difficult to convince whites to share economic and social power with African Americans than to convince them to share lunch counters and bus seats. De facto segregation intensified after African Americans migrated to Northern cities during and after World War LI. This began a "white flight," in which great numbers of whites moved out of the cities to the nearby suburbs. By the mid- 1960s, most urban African Americans lived in decaying slums, paying rent to landlords who didn't comply with housing and health ordinances. The schools for African-American children deteriorated along with their neighborhoods. Unemployment rates were more than twice as high as those among whites. In addition, many blacks were angry at the sometimes brutal treatment they received from the mostly white police forces in their communities. In 1966, King spearheaded a campaign in Chicago to end de facto segregation there and create an "open city." On July 10, he led about 30,000 .African Americans in a march on City Hall. In late July, when King led demonstrators through a Chicago neighborhood, angry whites threw rocks and bottles. On August 5, hostile whites stoned King as he led 600 marchers. King left Chicago without accomplishing what he wanted, yet pledging to return. URBAN VIOLENCE ERUPTS In the mid 1960s, clashes between white authority and black civilians spread like wildfire. In New York City in July 1964, an encounter between white police and African-American teenagers ended in the death of a 15-year-old student. This sparked a race riot in central Harlem. On August 11, 1965, only live days after President Johnson signed the Voting Between 1964 and 1968, more than 100 race riots erupted in major American cities. The worst included Watts In Los Angeles in 1965 (top) and Detroit in 1967 (right). In Detroit, 43 people were killed and property damage topped $40 million. a. ( om paring A, How were crd rights problems in Northern cities similar to those in the South? Live Americans Seek Equality Terms A Names Latinos and Native Americans confronted injustices in the 1960s. Cesar Chavez United Farm Workers Organizing Committee Campaigns for civil rights and economic justice won better representation and opportunity for Latinos and Native Americans. One American's Story Jessie Lopez de la Cruz's life changed one night in 1962, when Cesar Chavez came to iter home. Chavez, a Mexican-American farm worker, was trying to organize a union for California's mostly Spanish-speaking farm workers. Chavez said, "The women have to be involved. They're the ones working out in the fields with their husbands." Soon Jessie was in the fields, talking to farm workers about the union. • La Raza Unida * American Indian Movement (AIM) A Personal Voice jessie lopez de la cruz Wherever I went to speak ... I told them about . .. how we had no benefits, no minimum wage, nothing out in the fields—no restrooms, nothing. ... I said. Well! Do you think we should be putting up with this in this modem age? . . . We can stand up! We can talk back! . . . This country is very rich, and we want a share of the money those growers make [off] our sweat and our work by exploiting us and our children!' —quoted in Moving the Mountain: Women Working for Social Change The efforts of Jessie Lopez de la Cruz were just part of a larger rights movement during the turbulent anil revolutionary 1960s. As African Americans were lighting for civil rights, latinos and Native Americans rose up to assert their own rights and improve their lives. Carrying signs that say "Strike" (hoefea). Mexican-American farm workers protest poor working conditions. The Latino Presence Grows latinos, or Americans of latin American descent, are a large and diverse group. During the 1960s, the Latino population in the United States grew from 3 million to more than 9 million. As the presence of Latinos in the United States grew, so too did their demand for greater representation and better treatment. During the 1960s, latinos demanded not only equal opportunity, but also a respect for their culture and heritage. This group includes descendants of the nearly 100,000 Mexicans who had lived in territories ceded by Mexico to the United States in 1848. Another million or so Mexicans came to the United States in the 1910s, following Mexico's revolution. Still others came as bntceros, or temporary laborers, during the 1940s and 1950s. In the 1960s close to half a million Mexicans immigrated, most in search ot better paying jobs. Puerto Ricans began immigrating to the United States after the U.S. occupation of Puerto Rico in 1898. As of 1960, almost 900,000 Puerto Ricans were living in the continental United States, including almost half a million on New York City's West Side. Large Cuban communities also formed in New York City and in Miami and New Jersey. This is because hundreds of thousands of Cubans, many of whom were academics and professionals, tied to the United States in 1959 to escape Fidel Castro's Communist rule. In addition, tens of thousands of Salvadorans, Guatemalans, Nicaraguans, and Colombians immigrated to the United States after the 1960s to escape civii war and chronic poverty. Wherever they had settled, during the 1960s many Latinos encountered ethnic prejudice and discrimination in jobs and housing. Most lived in segregated barrios, or Spanish-speaking neighborhoods. The Latino jobless rate was nearly 50 percent higher than that of whites, as was the percentage of latino families living in poverty. In the 1960s and 1970s, thousands of poor Mexicans illegally crossed the 2.000-mile border between the United States and Mexico each year. The journey these illegal aliens undertook was often made more difficult by "coy- otes." guides who charged large amounts of money to help them cross the border, but who often didn't deliver on their promises. Illegal immigrants' problems didn't end when they entered the United States, where they were dented many social services, including unemployment insurance and food stamps. In addition, the Immigration and Naturalization Service urged businesses to refrain from hiring them. As a result, some owners stopped employing people with Latino names, including legal immigrants. An lira of Social Change 975 THE FARM WORKER MOVEMENT As Jessie Lopez de la Cruz explained, thousands working on California's fruit and vegetable farms did backbreaking work for little pay and few' benefits. Cesar Chavez believed that farm workers had to unionize, that their strength would come from bargaining as a group. In 1962, Chavez and Dolores Huerta established the National Farm Workers Association. Four years later, this group merged with a Filipino agricultural union (also founded by Huerta) to form the United I arm Workers Organizing Committee (UFWCX'). Chavez and his fellow organizers insisted that California's large fruit and vegetable companies accept their union as the bargaining agent for the farm workers. Chavez, like Martin Luther King. Jr., believed in nonviolence. In 1965, when California's gra|>e growers refused to recognize the union, Chavez sent farm workers across the country to convince supermarkets and shoppers to boycott California grapes. Chavez then went on a three-week fast in which he lost 55 pounds. The efforts of Chavez and the farm workers eventually paid off. In 1970, Huerta negotiated a contract between the grape growers and the UFWOC. Union workers w'ould finally be guaranteed higher w'ages and other benefits long denied them. §/ CULTURAL PRIDE The activities of the California farm workers helped to inspire other Latino "brown power" movements across the country. In New York, members of the Puerto Rican population began to demand that schools offer Spanish-speak- ing children classes taught in their own language as well as programs about their culture. In 1968, Congress enacted the Bilingual Education Act, which provided funds for schools to develop bilingual and cultural heritage programs for non-English-speaking children. Young Mexican Americans started to call themselves Chicanos or Chicanas—a shortened version of "Mexicanos" that expressed pride in their ethnic heritage. A Chicano community action group called the Brown Berets formed under the leadership of David Sanchez. In 1968, the Brown Berets organized walkouts in East Los Angeles high schools. About 15,000 Chicano students walked out of class demanding smaller classes, more Chicano teachers and administrators, and programs designed to reduce the high latino dropout rate. Militant Mexican-American students also won the establishment of Chicano studies programs at colleges and universities. POLITICAL POWER Latinos also organized politically during the 1960s. Some worked within the two-party system. For example, the Mexican American Political Association (MAPA) helped elect Los Angeles politician Edward Roybal to the House of Representatives. During the 1960s, eight Hispanic Americans served in the House, and one Hispanic senator was elected— Joseph Montoya of New Mexico. The League of United Latin American Citizens (l.ULAC) had formed in 1929 to fight segregation and other forms of discrimination. In the 1940s and into the 1950s, l.ULAC had filed lawsuits to desegregate schools throughout the Southwest, and in 1954, they helped win Mexican Americans the right to serve on juries. In the 1960s, some LULAC education and jobs programs won funding as pilot programs in LBJ's Great Society. Other Latinos, like Texan Jose Angel Gutierrez, sought to create an independent Latino political movement. In 1970, he established La Raza Unida < Mexican-Americans United). In the 1970s, la Raza Unida ran Latino candidates in five states and won races for mayor, as well as positions on school boards and city councils. 1927-1993 Cesar Chavez spoke from experience when he said, "Many things in farm labor are terrible." As a teenager, Chavez moved with his family from farm to farm, picking crops. "The worst crop was the olives." Chavez recalled. "The olives are so small you can never fill the bucket." The seeds of protest grew early in Chavez. As a teenager, he once went to a theater that was segregated—whites on one side of the aisle and Mexicans on the other side. *1 really hadn't thought much about what I was going to do, but I had to do something," Chavez recalled. The future union leader sat down in the whites-only section and stayed there until the police arrived and arrested him. Analyzing Effects B, What impact did the grape boycott have? Background Prior to 1960. 32 Hispantcs had been erected to Congress, beginning "ith Joseph Hemancte in 1822. 976 Charier 31 Still other latinos tixik on a more confrontational tone. In 1963, one-time evangelical preacher Reies Tijerina founded the Alianza Federal de Mercedes (Federal Alliance of land Grants) to help reclaim U.S. land taken from Mexican landholders in the 19th century. He and his followers raided the Rio Arriba County Courthouse in Tierra Amarilla, New Mexico, in order to force authorities to recognize the plight of New Mexican small farmers. They were later arrested. Vocabulary homogeneous: uniform or similar throughout. Why did Native fans resist Bation? Native Americans Struggle for Equality .As are Latinos, Native Americans are sometimes viewed as a single homogeneous group, despite the hundreds of distinct Native American tribes and nations in the United States. One thing that these diverse tribes and nations have shared is a mostly bleak existence in the United States and a lack of autonomy, or ability to control and govern their own lives. Through the years, many Native Americans have clung to their heritage, refusing to assimilate, or blend, into mainstream society. Native American nationalist Vine Deloria, jr., expressed the view that mainstream society was nothing more Ilian "ice cream bars and heart trouble and . , . getting up at six o'clock in the morning to mow your lawn in the suburbs." Despite their cultural diversity1, Native Americans as a group have been the poorest of Americans and have suffered from the highest unemployment rate. They have also been more likely than any other group to suffer from tuberculosis and alcoholism. Although the Native American population rose dining the 1960s, the death rate among Native American infants was nearly twice the national average, while life expectancy was several years less than for other Americans. In 1954, the Eisenhower administration enacted a "termi- nation" fvolicy to deal with these problems, hut it did not respect Native American culture. Native Americans were relocated from isolated reservations into mainstream urban American life. The plan failed miserably. Most who moved to the cities remained desperately poor. In 1961, representatives from 61 Native American groups met in Chicago and drafted the Declaration of Indian Purpose, which stressed the determination of Native Americans to "choose our own way of life." The declaration called for an end to the termination program in favor of new policies designed to create economic opportunities for Native Americans on their reservations. In 1968, President Lyndon Johnson established the National Council on Indian Opportunity to "ensure that programs reflect the needs and desires of the Indian people." £" VOICES OF PROTEST Many young Native Americans were dissatisfied with the slow pace of reform. Their discontent fueled the growth of the American Indian Movement (AIM), an often militant Native American rights organization. While AIM began in 1968 largely as a self-defense group against police brutality, it soon branched out to include protecting the rights of large Native American populations in northern and western states. Whereas many Native Americans rejected assimilation, Ben Nighthorse Campbell has chosen to work within the system to improve the lives of Native Americans. Campbell's father was a North Cheyenne, and his great- grandfather. Black Horse, fought in the 1876 Battle of the Little Bighorn—in which the Cheyenne and the Sioux defeated Lieutenant Colonel George Custer. In 1992. Campbell was elected to the U,S. Senate from Colorado, marking the first time since 1929 that a Native American had been elected to the Senate. Campbell stated that while his new job covered the entire nation, the needs of Native Americans would always remain a high pnority. An Era of Social Change. Dr. Antonia Coello Novello served as surgeon general under President Bush. GAINS FOR LATINOS Latinos became the fastest growing minority during the 1980s. By 1990, they constituted almost nine percent of the population, and demographers estimated that Latinos would soon outnumber African Americans as the nation's largest minority group. About two out of three Latinos were Mexican Americans, who lived mostly in the Southwest. A Puerto Rican community thrived in the Northeast, and a Cuban population was concentrated in Florida, like African Americans, Latinos gained political power during the 1980s. Toney Anaya became governor of New Mexico, while Robert Martinez became governor of Florida. In August 1988, President Reagan appointed I .a urn Cavazos as secretary of education. In 1990, President Bush named Dr. Antonia Coello Novello to the post ot surgeon general. Many Latinos supported bilingual education. They feared that abandoning Spanish would weaken their distinctive culture. In the words of Daniel Villanueva, a television executive, "We want to be here, but without losing our language and our culture. They are a richness, a treasure that we don't care to lose." The Bilingual Education Act of 1968 and the 1975 amendent to the Voting Rights Act enabled Spanish speakers to attend school and vote in their own language, but by the mid-1980s opposition to bilingualism was rising. Critics argued that it slowed the rate at which Spanish-speaking people entered mainstream American life. They also feared that the nation would become split (retween English speakers and Spanish speakers. Affirmative action refers to the effort to provide education and employment opportunities for historically disadvantaged groups, such as women and racial and ethnic minorities. The federal government first instituted affirmative action policies under the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Presidents Reagan and Bush actively opposed affirmative action and racial quotas. In the 1990s. President Clinton supported affirmative action. Despite his support, in 1996, voters in California approved a referendum that did away with state affirmative action programs. In 2001, the future of affirmative action was uncertain. President Bush expressed support for equal opportunity, but his Attorney General, John Ashcroft, was denounced by civil rights groups, in part because of his anti affirmative action record. NATIVE AMERICANS SPEAK OUT Native Americans also became more self-conscious of their dignity and more demanding of their rights. In the 1970s, they organized schools to teach young Native Americans about their past. They also began to fight for the return of ancestral lands wrongfully taken from them. During the 1980s, the Reagan administration slashed aid to Native Americans for health, education, and other services. Driven to find new sources of revenue, Native Americans campaigned for gambling casinos on their land as a way to bring in money. After the Supreme Court ruled in favor of Native Americans, many tribes opened Las Vegas-style casinos, which provided additional funding for the tribes that operated them. Nonetheless, the long-term problems faced by Native Americans have not been solved by gambling casinos, although the new wealth has helped to some extent. L> AN EXPANDING ASIAN-AMERICAN POPULATION Asian Americans were the second-fastest growing minority in the United States during the 1980s, By 1992, the U.S. population included about 8.3 million Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders. Asian Americans constituted 3.25 percent of the population. Some have cited Asian Americans as an example of how minorities can succeed in the U.S. Yet while Asian Americans have low crime rates, low school dropout rates, and low divorce rates, Asian-American unemployment and poverty have been higher than the national figures. Vocabulary demographer: a person who studies the characteristics of human population, such as growth, density, and distribution Identifying Problems What problems did Native Americans face in the 1980s? 1050 Chapter 33 GfrM'HY Sunbelt; Rustbelt, Ecotopia In the 1970s, people on the move created new names for areas to which they moved. Tire West was sometimes called Ecotopia because of its varied scenery and ecological attractions. The South and Southwest were called the Sunbelt because of their warm climate. The North Central and Northeast regions were called the Rustbelt because many of their aging factories had been closed. As a geographical term, region is used to designate an area with common features or characteristics that set it apart from its surroundings. For example, the Mississippi Valley Is a large physical region; Warren Woods is a small physical region. The term is often used for groups of states that share an area and certain characteristics. As people move from state to state, and from region to region, they gradually transform the balance of political and economic power in the nation. Each census in recent times has recorded how certain states have gained population and others have lost population. If the gains or losses are large enough, a state's representation in the U.S. House of Representatives will increase or decrease commensurately. Americans on the Move. Bernard L. Weinstein and Robert E. Firestine, Regional Growth and Decline in the United States (1978) / Between 1970 and 1975. the pop ulation center of the United States, which had generally moved westward for 17 decades, suddenly moved southward as well. The arrows show the net number of Americans who migrated and their patterns of migration in the early 1970s. The West gained 311.000 from the Northeast plus 472,000 from the North Central region, for a total of 783,000 people. However, it also lost 75,000 people to the South. During the 1980s and 1990s the southward and westward shift continued. Regional Internal Migration, 1982-1998 Source US Census Bureau 1052 Chapter 33 Americans on the Move, 1990-2000 Between 1990 and 2000, our country's population grew by a record 32,7 million people to 281.4 million. For the first time in the 20th century, all 50 states gained people between census years. During the 1990s. Texas eclipsed New York to become the nation's second-most populous state behind California. Sixty percent of the Texas increase has been driven by Hispanic growth. (betowj Housing development near Mile. California. 1990 While all 50 states gained in population during the decade, the population of Washington. D.C.. decreased by nearly 6 percent. FLORIDA During the 1990s. Florida's population increased 23.5 percent, making it the nation's fourth-largest. With so many new residents, Florida gained two additional House seats, bringing its congressional delegation to 25. 1. Analyzing Distributions Which states lost the most people between 1990 and 2000? Which states gained the most people? 2. Creating a Graph Choose one of the most populous states and then pose a historical question about population in that state. Create a graph or graphs that show various aspects of population for the state you have chosen. Be sure that the graph(s) help to answer the question you posed. Then display the graph!s) and the question in the classroom. The Changing Face of America At the end of the 20th century, the U.S. population grew more diverse both in ethnic background and in age. Americans of all backgrounds share common goals: the desire for equal rights and economic opportunity. One American's Story Terms & Names urban flight gentrification Proposition 187 Every ten years the United States conducts a census, or head count of its population. The results of the census determine, among other things, how billions of federal dollars are spent for housing, health care, and education over the coming decade. The Census Bureau estimates that the 1990 census undercounted Latinos by more than five percent. This undercount resulted in a loss of millions of dollars of aid to municipalities with large latino populations, as well as denying Latinos political representation in all levels of government. During the latest census conducted in 2000, Antonia Hernandez, President and General Counsel of the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund (MAI DED, spearheaded the national ;Hdgasc Cantar! Make Yourself Count! campaign. MALDEF workers canvassed neighborhoods urging residents to complete the census. They stressed that all information was confidential and discussed the high stakes of being counted. A Personal Voice antonia hernandez "The census not only measures our growth and marks our place in the community, but it is the first and indispensable step toward fair political representation, equal distribution of resources, and enforcement of our civil rights. —Public statement for /H&gase Contar! campaign. 2000 Data from the 2000 census revealed that the Hispanic population had grown by close to 58 percent since 1990, reaching 35.3 million. The 2000 census also confirmed a vast increase in what were once ethnic minorities. Urban Flight Antonia Hernandez. MAIDEFs president One of the most significant sociocultural changes In American history has been the movement of Americans from the cities to the suburbs. The years after World War II through the 1980s saw a widespread pattern ol urban flight, the process in which Americans left the cities and moved to the suburbs. At mid-century, the population of cities exceeded that of suburbs. By 1970, the ratio became even. 1088 Chapter 34 SUBURBAN LIVING While many suburbanites continued to commute to city jobs during the 1990s, increasing numbers of workers began to telecommute, or use new communications technology, such as computers, modems, and fax machines, to work from their homes. Another notable trend was the movement of minority populations to the suburbs. Nationwide, by the early 1990s, about 43 percent of the Latino population and more than half of the Asian-Amcrican population lived in suburbs. Suburban growth led to intense competition between suburbs and cities, and among the suburbs themselves, for business and industry. Since low-rise suburban homes yielded low tax revenues, tax-hungry suburbs offered tax Incentives for companies to locate within their borders. These Incentives resulted in lower tax revenues for local governments—meaning that less funds were available for schools, libraries, and police departments. Consequently, taxes were often Increased to fund these community services as well as to build the additional roads and other infrastructure necessary to support the new businesses. The shift of populations from cities to suburbs was not the only significant change in American life in the 1990s. The American public was also growing older, and its aging raised complex issues for American policymakers. The Aging of America The 2000 census documents that Americans were older than ever before, with a median age of 35.3—two years older than a decade prior. Increased longevity and the aging of the baby boom generation were the primary reasons for the rising median age. Behind the rising median age lie several broad trends. The country's birthrate has slowed slightly, and the number of seniors has increased as Americans live longer because of advances in medical care and living healthier lifestyles. The number of people over 85 has increased at a faster rate than any other segment of the population, to 4.3 million in the year 2000. The graying of America has placed new demands on the country's programs that provide care for the elderly. These programs accounted for only 6 percent of tiie national budget in 1955. It was projected that tire programs would consume about 39 percent of the budget by 2005. The major programs that provide care for elderly and disabled people are Medicare and Social Security. Medicare, which [rays medical expenses for senior citizens, began in 1965, when most Americans had lower life expectancies. By 2000, tire costs of this program exceeded $200 billion. ^ Senior athletes compete at the first U.S. National Senior Olympics held In St. Louis, Missouri, in 2000. The Graying of America, 1990-2030 Year Number of Americans Percent of U.S. 65 and older' population 1990 31.081 12.4 2000 34.837 12.7 1 2020 53.733" 16.5" 1 2030 70.319*' 20" 'numbers in thousands ''projected totals Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2000 " * SKILLBUILDER Interpreting (harts 1. Between what years is America's elderly population expected to grow the most? 2. By roughly what percentage is America's elderly population expected to increase between 1990 and 2030? Vocabulary infrastructure: the basic facilities, services, and installations needed for the functioning of a community or society 1090 Chapter 34 Predicting Effects B" What are the factors that will force an eventual restructuring of Social Security? Social Security, which pays benefits to retired Americans, was designed to rely on continued funding from a vast number of younger workers who would contribute taxes to support a small number of retired workers. That system worked well when younger workers far outnumbered retirees and when most workers didn't live long after retirement. in 1996, it took Social Security contributions from three workers to support every retiree. By 2030, however, with an increase in the number of elderly persons and an expected decline in the birthrate, there will be only two workers' contributions available to support each senior citizen. Few issues loomed as large in the 2000 presidential election as what to do about Social Security. If President Bush and Congress do not restructure the system, Social Security will eventually pay out more money than it will take in. Some people suggest that the system be reformed by raising deductions for workers, taxing the benefits paid to wealthier Americans, and raising the age at which retirees can collect benefits. 5i The Shifting Population In addition to becoming increasingly suburban and elderly, the population of the United States has also been transformed by immigration. Between 1970 and 2000, the country's population swelled from 204 million to more than 284 million. Immigration accounted for much of that growth. As the nation's newest residents yearned for U.S. citizenship, however, other Americans debated the effects of immigration on American life. A CHANGING IMMIGRANT POPULATION The most recent immigrants to the United States differ from immigrants of earlier years. The large numbers of immigrants who entered the country before and just after 1900 came from Europe. Change in U.S. Immigration, 2000 Increase in Number of Immigrants | 200% or greater □ 100 to 199% □ 66 to 99% |] 65% or less rm j Immigrant population increased nationally by 65% Source: U.S. Census Bureau 1. Movement Which states show the greatest rise in numbers of immigrants? 2. Movement In the past, immigrants settled in the U.S. along borders and coastlines. Has this changed in 2000? Explain. The United States in Today's World 1091. In contrast, about 45 percent of immigrants since the 1960s have come from the Western Hemisphere, primarily Mexico, and 30 percent from Asia. In Mexico, for example, during three months in 1994-1995, the Mexican pest) was devalued by 73 percent. The devaluation made the Mexican economy decline. As a result, almost a million Mexicans lost their jobs. Many of the unemployed headed north in search of jobs in the United States. This search for a better opportunity continues today as thousands of immigrants and refugees—more than 2,000 legal and 4,000-10,000 illegal—arrive each day. About 4,000 of those who enter illegally are deported to Mexico shortly after crossing the U.S.-Mexico border. To help those seeking more opportunity in America, in July 2001, President Bush's administration proposed a temporary guest worker program for the 3 million Mexicans residing illegally In the United States. Based on the 2(KK) census, it was reported that patterns of immigration are changing the country's ethnic and racial makeup. By 2001, for example, California had become a majority minority state, with Asian Americans, Latinos, African Americans, and Native Americans making up more than half its population. The 2000 census indicated that if current trends continue, by the year 2050 Latinos will become the nation's largest minority community overall. DEBATES OVER IMMIGRATION POLICY The presence of such a large number of immigrants has also added to the continuing debate over U.S. immigration policies. Many Americans believe that theiT country can't absorb more immigrants. By the early 1990s, an estimated 3.2 million illegal immigrants from Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Haiti had made their way to the United States. Many illegal immigrants also arrived from Canada, Poland, China, and Ireland. They took jobs many Americans turned down, as farm workers and domestic servants—often receiving the minimum wage or less and no benefits. By 2001, between 5 and 6 million illegal immigrants resided in the United States. Hostility toward illegal immigration peaked in California and Florida, two states with high percentages of immigrants. In 1994, Florida Governor Lawton Chiles filed suit against theU.S. government for "its continuing failure to enforce or rationally administer its own immigration laws." That same year, California passed Proposition 187, which cut all education and nonemergency health benefits to illegal immigrants. By March 1998. Proposition 187 was ruled unconstitutional. Although never implemented, the law inspired political participation among Hispanic voters, who saw themselves as targets. As more immigrants make their way to the U.S. and the nation's ethnic composition changes, debates about immigration will continue. Those who favor tighter restrictions argue that immigrants take desired jobs. Others, however, point to America's historical diversity and the new ideas and energy immigrants bring. Background The U.S. Census has asked a race question on ever) census since the first survey in 1790. Since 1890. the categories and definitions have changed with nearly every census. Comparing £/ How are current argumeTO against immigration similar to those used in the past? 1092 Chapter 34 Immigrants to the United States have been part of a worldwide movement pushing people away from traditional means of support and pulling them toward better opportunities. Most immigrants have left their homelands because of economic problems, though some have fled oppressive governments or political turmoil. War has often been the deciding factor for people to immigrate to the United States or to migrate within the country. Others have migrated to escape poverty, religious persecution, and racial violence. But the chief lure in coming to the United States or migrating within ils borders continues to be the opportunity to earn a living. With hope and apprehension, millions of foreign immigrants poured into America's pulsing cities during the early 20th century. Bringing with them values, habits, and attire from the Old World, they faced a multitude of new experiences, expectations, and products in the New World. Many native-born Americans feared that the new immigrants posed a threat to American culture. Instead of the immigrants being allowed to negotiate their existence by combining the old with the new. they were pressured to forget their old cultures, languages, and customs for more "American" ways. Immigration and Migration Throughout the 19th century, Americans continued their movement westward to the Pacific Ocean. Victory in the War with Mexico in 1848 greatly increased the amount of land under American control, and thousands of Americans moved out West to take advantage of it. Two important consequences emerged from this movement. First, following the discovery of gold in California, hundreds of thousands of people from around the world rushed in to strike it rich. Within a year, there were enough residents in California to qualify it for statehood. Second. Americans disagreed over whether the new lands should be open to slavery. That disagreement fueled the fires that led to the Civil War. Throughout the 20th century, African Americans migrated across the United States. In the Great Migration of the early 20th century, they left their homes in the rural South. Of the millions of African Americans who left, most moved to cities, usually in the North. The Second Migration, sparked by World War II, allowed African Americans to take industrial jobs— many formerly held by whites—to support the war effort. This migration had lasting consequences for the civil rights movement. Many African Americans who remained in the South moved to cities, where they developed organizations that helped them fight segregation. 970-2000 In 1964. 603 Vietnamese lived in the United States. A decade later, as the Vietnam War ended, hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese refugees fled their homeland for other nations, including the United States. Vietnamese immigration to America continued, and by 1998 there were nearly 1 million Vietnamese-born persons living in the United States. The men and women who made this long and arduous journey from Vietnam are part of the changing face of U.S. immigration. Beginning in the 1970s, Asians and Latin Americans replaced Europeans as the two largest immigrant groups in the United States. Between 1970 and 1990, about 1.5 million Europeans journeyed to America's shores. During that same period. roughly 5.6 million Latin Americans and 3.5 million Asians arrived. This trend continued into the 1990s. as the largest immigrant groups in the United States in 1995 hailed from Mexico, the Philippines. Vietnam, and China. These most recent arrivals to America have come for largely the same reasons—greater freedom and economic opportunity and the chance to begin a new life. 1. Forming Generalizations Based on what you have read about immigration, what generalizations can you make about the causes that led to a rise in the number of immigrants to the United States? How have wars affected the flow of immigration? How does this affect economic change? 2. Research Interview family members and people in your community to find out how immigration and migration have shaped your current surroundings. Try to record specific stories and events that compare a recent immigration with one in the more distant past. The United States in Today's World 1095 The Debate over Immigration Should new laws restrict or expand immigration? Briam Saiti left war-torn Bosnia and arrived in New York City, where he worked to save money to send for his brother and parents. Rut his family may never be able to join him. For hundreds of years, immigrants working for their dreams have shaped the United States. Latino ranchers developed many of the tools and skills of the American cowboy. Chinese laborers laid the tracks of the transcontinental railroad. African Americans, though not voluntary immigrants, labored to develop the agriculture of the South and the industry of the North. Farmers and workers of every origin and ethnicity' built the nation we know today. But immigration has been argued throughout American history. In the 1700s, Benjamin Franklin worried about the number of Germans immigrating to Pennsyl-vania. Anti-immigration sentiment spurred the nativist movement that developed in the 1830s and the "America First" campaign of the 1920s. Americans today are divided on the issue. Some agree with New York City mayor Rudolph Giuliani that immigrants "challenge us with new ideas and new perspectives." Others side with Dan Stein of the Federation for American Immigration Reform, who has said "The U.S. has this terrible problem. . . . The smartest people in the world want to come here." that "large-scale immigration is not serving the needs and interests of the country." From 1900 into the 1940s, economic troubles and rapid population growth spurred more than 16 million Europeans to move to the United States. The same pressures have recently hit Asia and Latin America, with the same effect on the United States. Between 1970 and 1998, the immigrant population of the United States nearly tripled, soaring to over 26 million. Complicating the debate lias been the issue of illegal immigrants. By 1996, some 5 million people had entered the country illegally. Most undocumented immigrants have jobs but usually receive low pay and no benefits. Although these people do not pay taxes, they also often receive government-funded services. Pete Wilson, the former governor of California, echoed his constituents when he said, "There's a right way to come to America and a wrong way." In 1994, California's voters approved Proposition 187, denying illegal immigrants access to public education and state-funded health care. A federal court later ruled that law unconstitutional. In 1996, Congress passed a law that toughened measures to bar illegal entry into the United States. Those who favor limits claim that immigrants take jobs from Americans. However, data suggest that immigration has not hurt the economy and may have helped fuel its growth. At the same time that millions of immigrant workers— including undocumented workers— were joining the work force, unemployment fell from 7.1 percent in 1980 to 4.3 percent in March 2001, the lowest rate in 30 years. Another economic argument focuses on wages. Economists agree that immigrants tend to work for lower wages than native-born workers. History of Immigration in the United States 1751 1853 1882 1896 1921 Benjamin Franklin denounces German immigrants. Nativists form Know- Nothing Party to protest increase in immigration (page 319). Chinese Exclusion Act severely restricts immigration from China (page 460). President Cleveland vetoes bill requiring immigrants to pass literacy test. Emergency Quota Act begins era of limits on immigration (page 621). 1106 Members of the Latin American community. In Los Angeles raise their hands to bless fruit baskets as a sign of immigrants' daily work In California's fields. The sign reads "This fruit Is the product of immigrants' labor." A team of Harvard University economists estimated that one-third of the gap between low-paid and high-paid workers results from higher numbers of immigrants. Nut they also reported that other factors—foreign trade, declining union membership, and new technology—play a greater role in lowering wages. At the other end of the spectrum, immigrants fill skilled, high- paying jobs as well. Current law allows 195,000 highly skilled immigrants to enter the country each year. Businesses have lobbied hard for Congress to increase this num- I ber. Yale University economist Jennifer Hunt sees the irony in this issue: "The U.S. has this terrible I problem.... The smartest people in the world want to come here." I Some people are concerned that I many immigrants never become citizens and so fail to completely participate in American life. Statistics show that the percentage of immigrants gaining citizenship declined from 64 percent In 1970 to 35 percent in 1997, the lowest rate in the past century. Experts attribute the sharp drop to a variety of factors, including rising numbers of illegal immigrants, a backlog of applications, and a presumed lack of interest among many immigrants. The oath of U.S. citizenship carries with it such responsibilities as voting, serv ing on Juries, and, in some cases, military service. The diversity of population in the United States has raiseci concerns that America has no common culture. Some say that at 10 percent of the population, foreigners are too numerous in America. Historian David Kennedy' points out that in 1910 the percentage was much higher—14.7 percent. 1965 1994 1996 2000 Immigration Act loosens restrictions In place since 1921 Ipage 897). California passes Proposition 187. excluding benefits to Illegal Immigrants (page 1092). Congress passes laws that limit benefits to illegal immigrants. Census Bureau estimates nation's foreign-born at 28.4 million, or 1 in 10 residents (page 1092). Those who favor limits claim that new immigrants do not mix with other groups, forming ethnic neighborhoods that divide society. Others believe that immigrants enrich American life with diverse music, arts, and ideas. The issue of asylum—providing a safe place for people fleeing an oppressive government—has been the toughest of all. While immigration is allowed for political asylum, those who flee famine or poverty are turned away. Are such choices fair? In the words of social scientist Nathan Glazer, "Poorly paid officials must make decisions that would stump a professor of ethics." Some rules allow relatives of immigrants to enter the country. Representative Lamar Smith of Texas believes that these rules admit immigrants who "have no marketable skills and end up on welfare." As Glazer notes, concern about the number of immigrants conflicts with sympathy for those "trying to bring in wives, children, parents, brothers, and sisters." Alan Simpson, a former U.S. senator, believes that there are simply too many immigrants. Slow immigration for five years, he proposed, to gain "breathing space." But Americans remain divided. In Gallup polls conducted at the turn of this century, 43 percent of those answering favored the Simpson idea, while 54 percent agreed that immigration should either be kept at its present level or increased. How might the measures restneting illegal immigrants affect future laws that regulate legal immigration? CLASSZONE.COM Visit the links for the Epilogue to find out more about The Debate over Immigration. Epilogue 1107 Bill of Rights n. the first ten amendments to the U.S. Constitution, added In 1791 and consisting of a forma) list of citizens' rights and freedoms. the use of both gold and silver as a basis for a national monetary system, (p. 428) black codes n. the discriminatory laws passed throughout the post-CtvifWar South which severely restricted African Amen cans lives, prohibiting such activities as traveling without permits, carrying weapons, serving on juries, testifying against whiles, and marrying whites, (p. 379) blacklist IblakTlst] n. a list of about 500 actors, writers, produc ers, and directors who were not allowed to work on Hollywood films because of their alleged Communist connections, (p. 824) Black Panthers n. a militant African-American political organization formed in 1966 by Huey Newton and Bobby Seale to fight police brutality and to provide services in the ghetto, (p. 926) Black Power n, a slogan used by Stokely Carmichael in the 1960s that encouraged African-American pride and political and social leadership, (p. 926) Black Tuesday n. a name given to October 29. 1929. when stock prices fell sharply, (p. 674) Bleeding Kansas n, a name applied to the Kansas Territory in the years before the Civil War. when the territory was a battleground between proslavery and antislavery forces, (p. 316) blitzkrieg [bl its'krcg ] n, from the German word meaning "lightning war," a sudden, massive attack with combined air and ground forces, intended to achieve a quick victory, (p. 745) blockade [blb-kacKj n, the use of ships or troops to prevent movement into and out of a port or region controlled by a hostile nation, (p. 202) bonanza [ba-nSn'za] farm n. an enormous farm on which a single crop is grown, (p. 424) Bonus [bo'rws] Army n. a group of World War I veterans and their families who marched on Washington, D.C., in 1932 to demand the immediate payment of a bonus they had been promised for military service, (p. 688) bootlegger [boni'lcg ar] n. a person who smuggled alcoholic beverages into the United States dunng Prohibition, (p. 643) Boston Massacre [bo'stan masVkarj n. a dash between British soldiers and Boston colonists In 1770, in which five of the colonists were killed, (p. 98) Boston Tea Party n. the dumping of 18.000 pounds of tea into Boston Harbor by colonists m 1773 to protest the Tea Act. (p. 99) Boulder [bol'dar] Dam n. a dam on the Colorado River—now called Hoover Dam—that was built during the Great Depression as part of a public works program intended to stimulate business and provide jobs. (p. 686) Boxer Rebellion n. a 1900 rebellion in which members of a Chinese secret society sought to free their country from Western Influence, (p. 563) bracero [bra-sar'o] n. a Mexican laborer allowed to enter the United States to work for a limited period of time during World War II. (p. 868) bread line n. a line of people waiting for free food. (p. 679) brinkmanship [brmgk'man-ship'l n. the practice of threatening an enemy with massive military retaliation for any aggression. (p. 829) Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka n. a 1954 case in which the Supreme Court ruled that 'separate but equal" education for black and white students was unconstitutional (p. 908) Bull Moose Party n, a name given to the Progressive Party, formed to support Theodore Roosevelt's candidacy for the presidency in 1912. (p. 536) buying on margin [rniir'jin) n. the purchasing of stocks by paying only a small percentage of the price and borrowing the rest. (p. 673) cabinet [kab'.i-nTt] n. the group of department heads who serve as the president's chief advisers, (p. 183) Camp David Accords [a-kOrdz*) n. historic agreements between Israel and Egypt, reached in negotiations at Camp David in 1978. (p. 1022) capitalism |k;rp'i tl i/ .wij n. an economic system in which private individuals and corporations control the means of production and use them to earn profits, (p. 275) carpetbagger Ikar'pU bMg'ar] n. a Northerner who moved to the South after the Civil War. (p. 385) cash crop n. a crop grown by a farmer for sale rather than for personal use, (p. 72) Central Powers n. the group of nations—led by Germany, Austria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire—that opposed the Allies in World War I. (p. 580) checks and balances r. the provisions in the U.S. Constitution that prevent any branch of the U.S. government from dominating the other two branches, (p. 143) Chinese Exclusion Act n. a law. enacted in 1882. that prohibited alt Chinese except students, teachers, merchants, tourists, and government officials from entering the United States, (p. 465) Chisholm [diTz'am] Trail n. the major cattle route from San Antonio, Texas, through Oklahoma to Kansas, (p. 415) chlorination n. a method of purifying water by mixing it with chemical chlorine. 