Many settled in South Carolina, while others found sanctuary in Rhode Island, New York, and Virginia. Present: Jewish Immigration Following the tragic events of World War II, thousands of homeless European Jews came to the United States. Many Eastern lews, particularly from Iran and Syria, soon followed. With the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, many Russian Jews migrated to America. Unlike the Russian immigrants of the 1800s, these Jews had little opportunity to maintain Jewish customs or to study Hebrew. Life in New France The company that founded New France wanted to make money from the fur trade, and so they did not need settlers to clear the land and build farms. As a result the colony grew slowly, and by 1666 it had just over 3,000 people. Most of the fur traders did not even live in the colony. Known as coureurs de bois (ku-RUHR-duh-BWAH), or "runners of the woods," the fur traders lived among the Native Americans with whom they traded. They learned their languages and customs and often married Native American women. Tire fur traders were not the only ones who traveled into the woods to live with the Native Americans. Soon after the founding of Quebec, Jesuit missionaries arrived intend ing to convert the Native Americans to Christianity. Known as "black rot>es" to the Native Americans, the Jesuits tried to live among the local people and teach them the Catholic faith. y Reading Check 9 Explaining Why did King Francis I of France send Verrazano and Cartier to America? New France Expands The slow growth of New France worried the French as they watched the Spanish and English build prosperous colonies farther south. Finally, in 1663, France's king Louis XIV seized control of New France and made it a royal colony. His government then launched a series of projects to expand the colony's population. The French government began by shipping over 4,000 immigrants to New France. It then sent over 900 young women to provide wives for the many single men in the colony. If a woman under 16 or a man under 20 married, they received a royal wedding gift. Parents who had more than 10 children received financial bonuses. Fathers whose children did not get married early were fined. By the 1670s the population was nearly 7,000, and by 1760 it was over 60,000. Exploring the Mississippi In addition to promoting immigration to New France, the French government began exploring North America. In 1673 a fur trader named Louis Joliet and a Jesuit priest named Jacques Marquette set off in search of a waterway the Algonquian people called the "big river"—the Mississippi. Canoeing along inland lakes and rivers, the two men finally found the Mississippi River and followed it as far south as the Arkansas River. In 1682 Rene-Robert Cavelier de La Salle (known as Lord La Salle) followed tire Mississippi all the way to the Gulf of Mexico, becoming the first European to do so. 56 CHAPTER 2 Colonizing America England and Spain while White was in England, and he was not able to return until 1590. When he finally returned, the colony was gone. There were no bodies, only empty houses and the letters "CRO" carv ed on a post, possibly referring to the Croatoan—a Native American group who lived nearby. No one knows what happened, and the fate of the "Lost Colony" of Roanoke remains a mystery today. Summarizing Why did England want to establish outposts in America? Jamestown Is Founded Shortly after the war with Spain ended in 1604, a group of English investors petitioned the new king of England, James 1, for a charter to plant colonies in Virginia. In 1606 James granted the charter. Their new company was named the Virginia Company. On December 20, 1606, the Virginia Company sent three small ships—the Susan Constant, the Godspeed, and the Discovery—and 144 men to Virginia. After a difficult trip, the ships arrived off the coast of North America, and the colonists founded a settlement on the banks of a river. In honor of their king, they named the river the James River and their settlement Jamestown. Unfortunately, the colonists' site turned out to be too close to the sea. The land they selected was swampv and swarming with malaria-carrying mosquitoes. The location was just the beginning of Jamestown's problems. Early Troubles Most of Jamestown's colonists were townspeople. They knew little about living in the woods and could not make use of the abundant fish and game around them. Even worse, none of the colonists knew how to raise livestock or cultivate crops. Additional problems occurred when the upperclass "gentlemen" among the colonists refused to do manual labor. Making matters worse, Jamestown's governing council argued constantly and could not make decisions. The results of all of these problems were nearly catastrophic. Lawlessness, sickness, and food shortages all took their toll. Although about 200 new settlers arrived in 1608, only 53 colonists were still alive by the end of the year. All of the remaining colonists may have died as well, in fact, had it not been for two men— Captain John Smith and Chief Powhatan. Captain John Smith, a member of the colony's governing council, emerged as Jamestown's only strong leader. Born into a poor family. Smith had left home as a young man to become a soldier of fortune. In late 1607, with winter approaching and the colony short of food. Smith explored the region around Jamestown and began trading with the local Native Americans—a group called the Powhatan Confederacy, led by Chief Powhatan. It was this trade that helped the colony get through its first two winters. Frustrated by events in Jamestown, the Virginia Company appointed a new governor with absolute authority, Thomas West, Lord De La Warr. To | entice settlers, the company offered land Pocahontas 1596-1617 In 1623 Captain John Smith told a remarkable tale to a British commission investigating the Virginia Company. In 1607 Native Americans had captured him and prepared, as he said, to "beate out his braines" Just then, Pocahontas, the 11 -year-old daughter of Chief Powhatan, "got his head in her armes, and laid her owne upon his to save him from death." Although her father watched the English with concern, Pocahontas continued to interact with the people in the Jamestown settlement. Unfortunately, her friendliness and curiosity were not kindly repaid. While visiting a nearby Native American settlement in 1613, Pocahontas was abducted by Captain Samuel Argali, a Jamestown resident. Pocahontas was supposedly being held as ransom for the lives of English prisoners and for arms, tools, and food. After the Native Americans gave what they could, however, the English still refused to return Pocahontas. The following year, a battle seemed imminent when the two sides met but two of Pocahontas's brothers were so excited to see her that they agreed to work out a truce. Soon thereafter, a member of the Virginia Company named John Rolfe announced to the colonial administrator that he and Pocahontas had fallen in love, and he asked to marry her. After hearing the proposal. Chief Powhatan gave his consent, and the couple soon married. Eventually, Pocahontas bore one son, whom they named Thomas. In 1616 Pocahontas traveled with her husband and son to England to search for investors for the Virginia Company. Unfortunately, Pocahontas grew ill in 1617, just before the family was due to return to America, and she died of pneumonia or smallpox. 62 CHAPTER 2 Colonizing America to anyone who worked for the colony for seven years. The offer produced results. In August 1609, 400 new settlers arrived in Jamestown. The arrival of so many settlers late in the summer created a crisis. There was not enough food, nor could enough be grown before winter. Governor De La Warr had not arrived yet, and John Smith had suffered a gunpowder bum and returned to England. Without strong leadership, the colony rapidly deteriorated. As winter neared, the settlers began to steal food from the Native Americans. In response, Native American warriors attacked the settlers. The winter of 1609 and 1610 became known as the "starving time." The colonists at Jamestown ate "dogs, rats, snakes, toadstools, [and] horsehides," and a few settlers even engaged in cannibalism, digging up corpses from graves and eating them. By the spring of 1610, only 60 settlers were still alive. They abandoned Jamestown and headed downriver. On the way, they met three English ships heading for the colony. On board were supplies, 150 more settlers, and the colony's governor, Lord De La Warr. De La Warr convinced the settlers to stay. Instead of returning to Jamestown, however, many decided to establish other towns along the James River. By 1618 there were several towns in Virginia. De La Warr's deputy, Thomas Dale, then drafted a harsh code of law's for Jamestown, Settlers were organized into work gangs and required to work at least six hours per day. Dale's discipline saved the colony, but Jamestown still did not thrive, in 1614 Dale decided to permit private cultivation. Settlers could acquire three acres of land if they gave the colony one month of work and 21/-. barrels of corn. Whatever else they produced, they could keep. According to one colonist, Ralph Hamor, the new' system dramatically increased production: 64When our people were fed out of the common store and labored jointly ... glad was the man that could slip from his labor... presuming that howsoever the harvest prospered, the general store must maintain them, by which means we reaped not so much com for the labors of 30 men, as three men have done for themselves.^ —quoted in Colonial America The new policy ensured Jamestow'n's survival, but the colony still had to find a product to sell for profit in England. The solution w'as a product King James had already condemned as a "vile weed [of] black stinking fumes [that wrere] baleful to the nose, harmful to the brain, and dangerous to the lungs"— tobacco. Tobacco Saves the Colony Well before the founding of Jamestown, the Spanish began shipping tobacco from their Caribbean colonies to Europe. Smoking tobacco became very popular in Europe in the early 1600s. The Jamestow'n settlers had tried growing tobacco, but the local variety was too bitter. One colonist named John Rolfe continued to experiment, using seeds imported from Trinidad. He developed a new' curing method, and in 1614 he shipped about 2,600 pounds (1,180 kg) to England. Rolfe's tobacco was not as good as Spanish tobacco, but it sold for a good price, and the settlers soon began planting large quantities of it. The First Assembly In 1618 the new' head of the Virginia Company in London, Edwin Sandys, introduced major reforms to attract settlers. The first reform gave the colony the right to elect its own assembly to propose laws. The first general assembly met in the Jamestow'n church on July 30, 1619. The new' Virginia government included a governor, 6 councilors, and 20 representatives, 2 from each of the colony's 10 towns. The representatives were called burgesses, and the assembly was called the House of Burgesses. CHAPTER 2 Colonizing America 63 Headlights Lure Settlers To entice new settlers to Virginia, the company also introduced the system of head rights, in which new settlers who bought a share in the company or paid for their passage were granted 50 acres of land. They were given 50 more acres for each family member over 15 years of age and for each servant they transported to Virginia. Up to that point, Jamestown had been a colony made up mostly of men. In 1619 the Virginia Company sent about 90 women to the colony. The first Africans also arrived in 1619 when a slave ship stopped to trade. The settlers purchased 20 Africans as "Christian servants," not enslaved people. The Africans had been baptized, and at that time English law said that Christians could not be enslaved. Virginia Becomes a Royal Colony The new policies triggered a wave of immigration. By 1622 more than 4,500 settlers had arrived in Virginia. The dramatic increase in settlers alarmed the Native Americans. In March 1622, they attacked Jamestown, burning homes and killing nearly 350 settlers. The settlers eventually put an end to the uprising, but the colony was devastated. The uprising was the final shaw for King James. An English court revoked the company's charter, and Virginia became a royal colony run by a governor appointed by the king. Describing Mow did Captain John Smith and the Powhatan Confederacy save Jamestown? Maryland Is Founded A joint-stock company had founded Virginia, but the colony north of it resulted from the aspirations of one man, George Calvert, Lord Baltimore. Lord Baltimore had been a member of the English Parliament until he converted to Catholicism. This decision ruined his career, but he remained a good friend of King James I and his son, Charles I. Catholics were opposed in England for much the same reason as Puritans. Catholics did not accept the king as head of the Church, nor did they accept the authority of Anglican bishops and priests. They were viewed as potential traitors who might help Catholic countries overthrow the English king. Consequently, they were forbidden to practice law or teach school. As he watched the persecution of his fellow Catholics, Lord Baltimore decided to found a colony where Catholics could practice their religion. In 1632 King Charles granted him a large area of land northeast of Virginia. Baltimore named the new colony Maryland. Baltimore owned Maryland, making it England's first proprietary colony. The proprietor, or owner, could govern the colony any way he wished. He could appoint officials, coin money, impose taxes, establish courts, grant lands, and create towns. In most respects, he had a king's powers. Lord Baltimore died shortly before settlers arrived in his colony In 1634, 20 gentlemen, mostly Catholic, and 200 servants and artisans, mostly Protestant, arrived in Maryland. Despite Baltimore's hope that Maryland would become a Catholic refuge, most of its settlers were Protestant, although the government officials and most large estate owners were Catholic. The friction between the two groups plagued the colony for many years. Analyzing Why did Lord Baltimore found Maryland? u Checking for Understanding 1. Define: Puritan, joint-stock company, privateer, burgesses, headright, proprietary colony. 2. Identify: John Cabot Walter Raleigh, Powhatan Confederacy. 3. Explain how tobacco saved Jamestown. Reviewing Themes 4. Geography and History How did the enclosure movement change England's society? Critical Thinking 5. Interpreting What caused friction in the Maryland colony? 6. Categorizing Use a graphic organizer similar to the one below to list three ways the Virginia Company tried to attract settlers to the Jamestown colony. Ways to Attract Settlers Analyzing Visuals 7. Analyzing Art Examine the painting on pages 60 and 61. What factors contributed to the growing rivalry between Spain and England? Writing About History 8. Persuasive Writing Take on the role of Captain John Smith of Jamestown. Write a town circular explaining to your fellow colonists why trading with the Powhatan Confederacy is a good survival strategy. 64 CHAPTER 2 Colonizing America money the king owed his father. In 1680 William Penn petitioned the king for a grant of land between New York and Maryland to settle tine debt. The request put the king in a dilemma. Although granting a colony was a cheap wav to pay off the debt, the young man belonged to a religious group Charles had banned and persecuted. William Penn was a Quaker. The Quakers Quakers believed that everyone had their own "inner light" from God. There was no need for a church or ministers. Even the Bible had less authority than a person's inner light. Quakers objected to all political and religious authority, including forcing people to pay taxes or serve in the military. They advocated pacifism—opposition to war or violence as a means to settle disputes. Quaker beliefs put them into conflict with the government as well as other religions. To escape opposition, many Quakers fled to America, but they were persecuted in almost every colony. This convinced the Quakers that they needed their own colony, but they probably would never have been granted one had it not been for William Penn. The "Holy Experiment" William Penn was one of the few wealthy Quakers and a good friend of King Charles. Penn became involved in Quaker attempts to create a colony in the 1670s, when he and other Quakers bought New )ersey from Berkeley and Carteret. Many Quakers moved to New Jersey, but Penn did not think it was the best solution since the Puritan settlers there were1 hostile to Quakers. In 1680 Penn asked King Charles for his own colony across the Delaware' River from New Jersey. Charles agreed but insisted that the new' colony be called Pennsylvania (or Penn's Woods) in honor of William Penn's father. Penn regarded Pennsylvania as a "holy experiment" where complete political and religious freedom would be practiced. He also believed that Native Americans had been treated unjustly in other colonies, and he resolved to w'in the friendship of those who lived in Pennsylvania. In Lite 1682, Penn made good on his w'ord when he signed the Treaty of Shackamaxon, in which the Lenni Lenape, a Native American group, ceded land to the colonists. Interpreting Maps What four colonies made up the Middle Colonies? 2. Applying Geography Skills The area claimed by New York and New Hampshire became which state? allowed anyone who owned land or paid taxes to vote, but it was confusing in structure. After several confrontations with settlers over the government's structure, Penn issued a new charter establishing a legislative assembly elected directly by the voters. The proprietor appointed the governor. The charter gave the right to vote to all colonists who owned 50 acres of land and professed a faith in Jesus Christ. Despite this example of discrimination against non-Christians, the charter guaranteed all Pennsylvanians the right to practice their religion without interference. Penn also made land readily available to settlers, a practice that attracted thousands of colonists. Many were English Quakers, but large numbers of Germans and Scots-Irish migrated to the colony as well. By 1684 Pennsylvania had over 7,000 colonists, and by 1700 Philadelphia rivaled Boston and New York City as a center for trade and commerce. Student Web Activity Visit the American Vision Web site at tav.glencoe.com and click on Student Web Activities— Chapter 2 for an activity on the founding of Pennsylvania. CHAPTER 2 Colonizing America 75 In 1682, as Penn began to build his colony, he bought three counties south of Pennsylvania from the Duke of York. These "lower counties" later became the colony of Delaware. Evaluating Why did William Penn regard Pennsylvania as a 'holy experiment"? New Southern Colonies King Charles and his advisers were very interested in the land south of Virginia. The year before he granted New York to his brother James, Charles II awarded a vast territory south of Virginia to eight other friends and political allies. The land was named Carolina, from the Latin version of "Charles." The Southern Colonies, c. 1733 o OCX'S Geography Skills 1. Interpreting Maps What five colonies made up the Southern Colonies? 2. Applying Geography Skills What natural barrier served as the western border of the Southern Colonies? North Carolina From the beginning, Carolina developed as two separate regions. North Carolina was home to a small and scattered population. Most of fhe settlers were farmers who began drifting into the region from Virginia in the 1650s. North Carolina did not have a good harbor, and the coastline, protected by the Outer Banks, was very hard for ships to reach. As a result, the colony grew very slowly, and bv 1700 only 3,000 people lived in the region. Eventually North Carolina farmers began growing tobacco. They also began to export naval supplies such as tar, pitch, and turpentine. South Carolina The proprietors who had been granted Carolina were never interested in the northern part of the colony. South Carolina, on the other hand, was believed to be suitable for growing sugarcane. The first settlers arrived in South Carolina in 1670. They named their settlement Charles Town (today called Charleston), after King Charles. Sugarcane, it turned out, did not grow well in this region. The first product South Carolina exported in large quantity was deerskin, which had become popular for leather in England. The colony also began to capture Native Americans and ship them to the Caribbean, where the demand for enslaved workers was high. The Georgia Experiment in the 1720s, General James Oglethorpe, a wealthy member of Parliament, was appalled to find that many people in England were in prison simply because they could not pay their debts. He asked King George II for a colony south of Carolina where the poor could start over. The English government saw advantages to a new southern colony. It might help England's poor, and it would provide a strategic buffer between South Carolina and Spanish Florida. King George granted Oglethorpe and 19 other trustees permission in 1732 to settle a region between the Savannah and Altamaha Rivers. The new colony was named I Georgia, in honor of the king. Oglethorpe led the first settlers to the mouth of the Savannah River in 1733. The Georgia trustees banned slavery, rum, and brandy in the new colony' and limited land grants to 500 acres. The colony attracted settlers from all over Europe, including Scots, Welsh, Germans, Swiss, I Italians, and a few Portuguese Jews. Increasingly the settlers objected to the colony's I rules. In the 1740s, the trustees lifted restrictions on I brandy, rum, and slavery; in 1750 they granted the I settlers an elected assembly. In 1751 Georgia became a royal colony. America-—particularly into the Middle Colonies, where land was still available. At the same time, this population explosion created a huge demand for wheat to feed the soaring number of people in Europe. Between 1720 and 1770, wheat prices more than doubled in the colonies. This brought a surge of prosperity to the Middle Colonies. The rapid rise of the wheat trade and the arrival of so many new settlers changed the society of the Middle Colonies. Some farmers became very wealthy by hiring poor immigrants to work on their farms for Wages. This enabled them to raise large amounts of wheat for sale. Other colonists became wealthy as entrepreneurs, or businesspeople who risked their money by buying land, equipment, and supplies and then selling them to the new immigrants for a profit. One of the reasons the American colonies had few History Through Art Bethlehem, Pennsylvania This painting of a town in the Middle Colonies represents a typical layout of that region of colonial America. What was the main cash crop in the Middle Colonies? industries and had to import so many manufactured goods from England was that the British government limited manufacturing in the colonies. Money to invest in factories was also scarce. The wheat boom created a new group of capitalists, people who had money to invest in new businesses, industry did not develop on a large scale during the colonial era, but these early capitalists did build large gristmills near New York and Philadelphia that produced tens of thousands of barrels of flour for export. Other early entrepreneurs in the Middle Colonies established glass and pottery works. Although many farmers prospered from growing wheat, very few became wealthy, primarily because of the limited technology of the time. There were no mechanical harvesters, so all of the wheat had to be cut by hand using a sickle. Threshing, or separating the grain from the chaff, also had to be done by hand by beating the grain with a wooden flail. Using sickles, most farm families could harvest no more than 15 acres of wheat in a season. This was enough to produce a small surplus, but not enough to make most farmers rich. Only those farmers who were able to hire workers or who had extra land that they could rent to tenant farmers became wealthy. As a result, distinct classes developed in the Middle Colonies, as they did in the other regions. At the top were wealthy entrepreneurs who owned large farms and other businesses. Tn the middle were many farmers who owned only a few acres and could generate a small surplus from their land. At the bottom of society were landless workers, who either rented land from large landowners or worked for wages. y Reading Check Explaining Why did the colonies experience a population boom in the early 1700s? mssm Checking for Understanding t. Define: town meeting, selectmen, bill of exchange, triangular trade, artisan, entrepreneur, capitalist. 2. identify: Grand Banks, fall line, meetinghouse. 3. Describe the different social classes in New England and the Middle Colonies. Reviewing Themes 4. Culture and Traditions How did Puritanism affect the development of New England society and government? Critical Thinking 5. Understanding Cause and Effect How did the geography of the New England and Middle Colonies contribute to their economic development? 6. Categorizing Use a graphic organizer similar to the one below to show the effects of wheat farming on the Middle Colonies. Effects Wheat / Farming v: Analyzing Visuals 7. Examining Maps Study the map of a New England town on page 93. Would the practice of "Holy Watching" have been easy to do in this town? Why or why not? Writing About History 8. Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are barrel maker in the New England Colonies. Write a letter to a government official stating the problems you have that you want the government to address. CHAPTER 3 Colonial Ways of Life 97 Population Growth The birthrate in the American colonies was high in the 1700s. Most women married in their early twenties, typically to men in their early to mid-twenties. On average, colonial women gave birth to seven children, although giving birth to twice that number of children was not uncommon. Between 1640 and 1700, the population of the American colonies increased from 25,000 to more than 250,000. In the 1700s, the population more than doubled every 25 years. More than 1 million colonists lived in America in the 1750s, and by the time of the American Revolution, the population had reached roughly 2.5 million people. Women in Colonial Society In the American colonies, as in Europe, law and custom gave men greater authority and importance than women—in politics and in the household. In the early colonial era, married women had no legal status. A married woman could not own anything, and all of the property she brought into the marriage became her husband's. In most colonies, a married woman could not make a contract, be party to a lawsuit, or make a will. Husbands were the sole guardians of the children and were allowed to physically discipline both their wives and their children. Single women and widows, on the other hand, had considerably more rights. They could own and manage property, file lawsuits, and run businesses. In the 1700s, the status of married women improved considerably. In most colonies, for example, husbands could not sell or mortgage their land without their wife's signature on the contract. Also, in several colonies, married women began engaging in business as well. Despite the legal limitations, many colonial women worked outside of their homes. Women operated taverns and shops, managed plantations, ran print shops, and published newspapers. Health and Disease improvements in housing and sanitation helped American colonists resist some diseases. Still, they frequently suffered from typhoid fever, tuberculosis, cholera, diphtheria, "fluxes" (diar- rhea), "malignant fever" (influenza), typhus, and scarlet fever. These diseases ravaged residents in colonial cities. When an epidemic of deadly smallpox swept through Boston in 1721, the scientific interests of a minister and the knowledge of enslaved Africans combined to save hundreds of lives. Reverend Cotton Mather, a Puritan leader, had read that the Turks had successfully developed an inoculation for smallpox. Making inquiries among enslaved Africans, Mather discovered that they also knew this technique. At Mather's urging. Dr. Zabdiel Boylston, a Boston physician and friend, inoculated willing Bostonians against the disease. The Destroyer, being enraged at the Proposal of any Thing, that may rescue the Lives of our poor People from him, has taken a strange Possession of the People on this Occasion. They rave, they rail, they blaspheme; they talk not only like Ideots but also like Franticks,... I also am an Object of their Fury... 39 —quoted in The Colonial Image The daring experiment proved to be a great success. Of the 6,000 people who were not inoculated and caught smallpox, about 900, or 15 percent, died. In stark contrast, only 6 of the 241 inoculated people, or less than 3 percent, died of the disease. Summarizing What rights did colonial law deny women? Immigrants in Colonial America The American colonies grew rapidly due to immigration and a high birthrate. Hundreds of thousands of free white immigrants arrived between 1700 and 1775, settling throughout the colonies. At the same time, traders brought large numbers of enslaved Africans to America, mostly to the Southern Colonies. German Immigrants Arrive in Pennsylvania America's first large group of German immigrants came to Pennsylvania looking for religious freedom. First to arrive were a group of Mennonites who founded Germantown in 1683. Large-scale CHAPTER 3 Colonial Wavs of Life 105 German immigration to Pennsylvania started in the early 1700s. By 1775, more than 100,000 Germans had arrived in the colony, where they made up about one-third of the population. Known as the Pennsylvania Dutch (from their own word Deutsche, meaning "German"), these settlers became some of the colony's most prosperous farmers. They introduced the Conestoga wagon, which later generations would adapt for use in crossing the country. As early as the 1720s, many Germans also headed south along the Great Philadelphia Wagon Road to the Shenandoah River valley of Virginia. From there they spread throughout the backcountry of Virginia and the Carolinas. The Scotch-lrish Head West The Scotch-Irish were descendants of the Scots who had helped England claim control of Northern Ireland. Beginning in 1717, rising taxes, poor harvests, and religious discrimination convinced many Scotch-lrish to flee Ireland. An estimated 150,000 Scotch-lrish immigrated to the American colonics between 1717 and 1776. Scotch-lrish also followed the Great Philadelphia Wagon Road south into the backcountry of the Southern Colonies. Colonial America's Jewish Community A small group of Jews, fleeing from the Portuguese in Brazil and seeking an opportunity to practice their religion, first arrived in the colonies in New Amsterdam (later called New York City) in 1654. By 1776 approximately 1,500 Jews lived in the colonies. Most lived in the cities of New York, Philadelphia, Charles Town, Savannah, and Newport, where they were allowed to worship as they pleased. They made their living as artisans and merchants. Unlike in western Europe, where Jews could not own property or participate in professions, colonial Jews lived and worked alongside Christians. y Reading Check Explaining Why did many Germans immigrate to Pennsylvania in the 1700s? Africans in Colonial America Although the Scotch-lrish settled in many colonies, most headed to Pennsylvania. Unwilling and often unable to purchase land, many migrated west to the frontier, where they occupied vacant land. Many Africans arrived in the colonies from many different regions of West Africa. In the colonies, they tried to maintain their specific languages and traditions even though white planters intentionally bought slaves from different regions who spoke different languages to make it difficult for them to plot rebellion. Africans Build a New Culture in South Carolina, where rice cultivation required a large, coordinated workforce, Africans worked and lived in larger groups than in other Southern Colonies. Their isolation from the white planters resulted in a more independent African culture, which developed its own language called Gullah. Gullah combined English and African words, and it allowed Africans from a variety of homelands to converse. In the Chesapeake region, where more of the enslaved population had been born in America, Africans spoke English. Using a common language helped Africans from diverse backgrounds develop a new culture in America. African traditional religious beliefs became mixed with the practices of the Christian faith. African rhythms became a part of new musical forms. The fear of being sold and separated i n H John Peter Zenger 1697-1746 In 1710 Britain had paid for German families to immigrate to the American colonies. In time, one of these immigrants, 13-year-old John Peter Zenger, would help change colonial society By 1726 Zenger was running a failing printing business in New York. His only successful venture to this point had been to print the colonies' first arithmetic text. In 1732 Zenger's luck changed when an unpopular royal governor dismissed New York's chief justice from office. The chief justice hired Zenger to publish an anti-government newspaper. In 1734 Zenger's paper called the royal governor's supporters "(he dregs and scandal of human nature." Zenger was arrested and charged for printing libel, or slanderous information. Indeed, according to British law, criticizing the royal governor—even if the criticisms were true—was a grave offense. For the eight months he spent in prison, a defiant Zenger continued to edit his newspaper through a hole in his cell door. Date of emancipation immediate emancipation Gradual emancipation Slaveholders could legally free slaves Slaveholders required to obtain county court approval to free slaves Slaveholders could not legally free slaves No formal abolition Geography Skills 1. Interpreting Maps Which state was the last to pass emancipation? 2. Applying Ceography Skills Within five years after the war ended, some states passed emancipation. How many did so, and why did they do so at this time? status of both women and African Americans in the years following the end of the conflict. Women at War Women played a vital role in the Revolutionary War, contributing on both the home front and the battlefront. With their husbands and sons at war, some women took over running the family farm. Others traveled with the army—cooking, washing, and nursing the wounded. Women also served as spies and couriers, and a few even joined the fighting. Mary Ludwig Hays, known as Molly Pitcher, carried water to Patriot gunners during the Battle of Monmouth. Margaret Corbin accompanied her husband to battle, and after his death she took his place at his cannon and held the position until the battle ended. The American Revolution After the war, as Americans began to think about what their revolutionary ideals implied, women made some advances, they could more easily obtain a divorce, and they gained greater access to education. in 1779 Judith Sargent Murray wrote an essay entitled "On the Equality of the Sexes." The essay argued that women were as intelligent as men but lacked the education needed to achieve more in life. After the Revolution, many schools for girls were founded, and the number of women able to read increased. African Amoricans Thousands of enslaved African Americans obtained their freedom during the Revolution. In an effort to undermine the colonial economy and hurt the rebellion in the South, the British Army freed thousands of enslaved people. British officials, however, also seized thousands of African Americans and shipped them to British plantations in the Caribbean. Many planters promised to free their slaves if the I slaves fought against the British. General Washington, in order to counter the British offer to free enslaved people who joined the British, permitted African Americans to join the Continental Army. He also urged state militias to admit African Americans and to offer freedom to all who served. About 5,000 African Americans fought in the militias and the Continental Army during the Revolutionary War. After the Revolution, more enslaved Africans I gained their freedom. Many American leaders realized that enslaving people did not fit in with the new language of liberty and equality. Opposition to slav- cry had been growing steadily even before the I Revolution, especially in the northern and middle I states. After the war began, emancipation, or freedom I from enslavement, became a major issue. Many Northern states took steps to end slavery. Vermont banned slavery' in 1777. In 1780 Pennsylvania freed I all children born enslaved when they reached age 28. Rhode Island decreed in 1784 that enslaved men I born thereafter would be free when they turned 21 I and women when they turned 18. In 1799 New York I freed enslaved men born that year or later when I they reached age 28 and women when they reached I age 25. The ending of slavery in the North was thus a I gradual process that took several decades. Discrimination did not disappear with the I increase in African American freedom. While I enslaved, some African Americans worked in skilled I positions, such as blacksmithing. Northern whites | did not want free African Americans taking these jobs from them. African Americans often were unable to get more than menial jobs—digging, carrying, loading, or sweeping. Free African Americans also faced voting restrictions, segregation, and possible kidnapping and transportation into the South, where they would again be enslaved. Despite the hardships, freedom offered choices. Once free, African Americans typically moved to the cities to find employment. Some found opportunities in previously barred occupations, such as artists or ministers. Often, they discarded their former names or worked for several years to purchase the freedom of friends or family members. A small group of African Americans achieved some wealth and social status. The discrimination of Northern whites encouraged them to focus on building their own distinct culture. Religion was a strong element of that emerging culture. Now free to enter the ministry, African Americans created their own style of worship. In 1816 African American church leaders formed the first independent African American denomination, the African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church. The story was quite different in the South. The South relied heavily on enslaved labor to sustain its agricultural economy. As a result. Southern lead- ers—most of whom were slaveholders them- selves—showed little interest in abolishing slavery. Only Virginia took steps toward ending the institution. In 1782 the state passed a law encouraging manumission, or the voluntary freeing of enslaved persons, especially for those who had fought in the Revolution. Through this law, about 10,000 slaves obtained their freedom, but the vast majority remained in bondage. The Loyalists Flee Many women and African Americans found their lives little changed as a result of the Revolution, but for many Loyalists, the end of the war changed everything. Because of their support for the British, Loyalists often found themselves shunned by former friends, and state governments sometimes seized their property. Unwilling to live under the new gov'eminent and often afraid for their lives, approximately 100,000 Loyalists Bed the United States after the war. Some went to England or the British West Indies, but most moved to British North America, particularly to Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and the region near Niagara Falls. This region was part of Quebec at the time, but in 1791, Britain made it a separate colony called Upper Canada. Today it is the province of Ontario. Americans grappled with what to do with the property and assets of Loyalists. In North Carolina, Patriots confiscated Loyalist lands outright. Officials in New York also seized Loyalist lands and goods, claiming the "sovereignty of the people of this state in respect to all property." Other public officials opposed such actions. The Massachusetts Constitution of 1780, for example, extended the rights of "life, liberty, and property" to Loyalists, and gave much of the land seized from departing Loyalists to their agents or relatives who had remained behind. Summarizing How did life change for women, African Americans, and Loyalists after the Revolutionary War? An American Culture Emerges In the United States, victory over the British united Americans and created powerful nationalist feelings. The Revolutionary War helped this process in two ways. First, Americans in all of the states had a common enemy. Soldiers from all over the country fought side by side in each other's states. Second, the History Through Art Joseph Brant Gilbert Stuart painted this portrait of Joseph Brant, leader of the Mohawks, who sided with the Loyalists dunng the Revolution After the Treaty of Parts, Brant led a large group ol Iroquois north into British Canada. Why did Brant and other Loyalists leave the United States? shall have been presented to him, the Same shall be a Law, in like Manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their Adjournment prevent its Return, in which Case it shall not be a Law. [3.1 Every Order, Resolution, or Vote to which the Concurrence of the Senate and House of Representative- may be necessary (except on a question of Adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the United States; and before the Same shall take Effect, shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives according to the Rules and Limitations prescribed in the Case of a Bill. Section 8 [1.1 The Congress shall have the Power to lay and col It Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises, to pay the Debts and provide for the common Defence and general Welfare of the United States; but all Duties, Imposts and Excises shall be uniform throughout the United States; To borrow Money on the credit of the United States [3.] To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes; [4.1 To establish an uniform Rule of Naturalization, and uniform Laws on the subject of Bankruptcies throughour the United States; [5.| To coin Money, regulate the Value thereof, and of foreign Coin, and fix the Standard of Weights and Measure [6.1 To provide for the Punishment of counterfeiting the Securities and current Coin of the United States; Potato famine Hawthorne's Scarlet American Party forms strikes Ireland Letter published An American Story By June of 1850, Daniel Gurney had made up his mind. He was going to leave his impoverished town in Ireland and move to the United States. The enthusiastic letters he had received from friends convinced him that life had to be better in the United States. Ireland was suffering a devastating famine. Tens of thousands of citizens were dying of starvation, while many more were fleeing the country. By August 1850, Guiney and a group from his neighborhood had moved to Buffalo, New York. After settling in, Guiney wrote back home about the wondrous new land where they now resided. ••We mean to let you know our situation at present.... We arrived here about five o'dock in the afternoon of yesterday, fourteen of us together, where we were received with the greatest kindness of respectability___When we came to the house we could not state to you how we were treated We had potatoes, meat, butter, bread, and tea for dinner.... If you were to see Denis Reen when Daniel Danihy dressed him with clothes suitable for this country, you would think him to be a boss or steward, so that we have scarcely words to state to you how happy we felt at present.^9 —quoted in Out of Ireland The New Wave of Immigrants Daniel Guiney was just one of the millions of immigrants who came to the United States in search of a better life in the mid-1800s. The arrival of these newcomers coincided with a time w'hen Americans were blazing new paths in a host of cultural CHAPTER 8 T he Spirit of Reform 273 The Bay and Harbor of New York Immigrants arrive in New York City- Castle Carden, thebe# mg in the distant left, served as a processing facility for immigrants beginning in 1855 Many imnvjpJ saw posters such as this one (left) advertising passage between Liverpool and Boston. What two | nationalities made up the majority of immigrants to America during the mid-1800s? areas, including religion, art, and literature. Together, these events helped bring great changes to American society in the years before the Civil War. Between 1813 and 1860, the United States experienced a massive influx of immigrants. Ch er 5 million foreigners arrived on its shores. Many had fled violence and political turmoil at home, while others sought to escape starvation and poverty. Most of these newcomers found opportunity and a fresh start, but some also found discrimination and prejudice. Newcomers From Ireland and Germany The largest wave of immigrants, almost 2 million, came from Ireland. The driving force behind the massive exodus was the onset of widespread famine in 1845, w hen a fungus destroyed much of the nation's crop of potatoes, a mainstay of the Irish diet. Most Irish immigrants arrived in the United States with no money and few marketable skills. They generally settled in the industrialized cities of the Northeast, where many worked as unskilled laborers and servants. Between 1813 and 1860, Germans represented the second largest group of immigrants. By 1860 over 1.5 million Germans had arrived in the United States. Most had enough money to move beyond the large eastern cities and settle in the Midwest. There thev became farmers or went into business. Like most other immigrants, Germans reveled in their newfound sense of freedom and liberty. German immigrant August Bliimmer expressed this sentiment in* letter he w'rote in 1838: fofoOver there [Germany] common sense and free speech lie in shackles_I invite you to come over here, should you want to obtain a clear notion of genuine public life, freedom of people and a sense of being a nation.... I have never regretted that I came here, and never! never! again shall I bow my head under the yoke of despotism and folly.^^ —quoted in News from the Land of Freedom Nativism While immigrants often found a new sense of freedom in the United States, some encountered discrimination. Hie presence of people Iron different cultures, with different languages and different religions, produced feelings of nalivi-.ni.at hostility toward foreigners. In the 1800s, many Americans were strongh anti-Catholic. Many prominent ministers preached 274 CHAPTER 8 The Spirit of Reform anh-Catholic sermons. Occasionally, anti-Catholic riots erupted. The arrival of millions of predominantly Catholic Irish and German immigrants led to the rise of several nativist groups, such as the Supreme Order of the Star Spangled Banner, founded in 1849. These groups pledged never to vote for a Catholic and pushed for laws banning immigrants and Catholics from holding public office. In July 1854, delegates from these groups formed the American Party. Membership in the partv was secret, and those questioned were obliged to answer, "I know nothing." The Know-Nothings, as the party was nicknamed, built a large following in the 1850s. Analyzing Why did nativism become so strong in the mid-1800s? Ami A Religious Revival As immigrants added to the diversity of society, lericans were transforming the society in which they lived. One important change came in American religious Life, where traditional Protestantism experienced a dramatic revival, and new forms of worship became prominent. The Second Great Awakening By the end of the 1700s, many church leaders sensed that Americans' commitment to organized religion was weakening. This deterioration was due in large part to the growth of scientific knowledge and rationalism, notions that challenged the doctrine of faith. In the early 1800s, religious leaders organized to revive Americans' commitment to religion. The resulting movement came to be called the Second Great Awakening. It began in Kentucky, among frontier farmers, and quickly spread to the rest of the country, leaders of the various Protestant denomi- nations—most often Methodists, Baptists, and Presbyterians—held camp meetings that attracted thousands of followers for Jays of song, prayer, and emotional out- rings of faith. The basic message of the Second Great Awakening was that individuals must read- mitGod and Christ into their daily lives. The new revivalism rejected the traditional (Calvinist idea that only a chosen few were fined for salvation. Instead, ministers Ueached that all people could attain grace trough faith. One of the most prominent advocates of this new message was a Presbyterian minister named Charles Grandison Finney. Finney preached that each person contained within himself or herself the capacity for spiritual rebirth and salvation. Finney helped found modem revivalism. His camp meetings were carefully planned and rehearsed to create as much emotion as possible. He compared his methods to those used by politicians and salespeople, and he used emotion to focus people's attention on his message. Finney began preaching in upstate New York, where he launched a series of revivals in towns along the Erie Canal. He then took his message to the cities of the Northeast. Finney also serv ed as president of Oberlin College in Ohio, the first college in the United States to admit women and African Americans. Although Oberlin became a center for social reform movements in the United States, Finney warned against using politics to change society. He believed that if Christian ideas reformed people from within, society would become better, but if people remained selfish and immoral, political reforms would not make any difference. New Religious Groups Emerge A number of other religious groups also flourished during this period. The Unitarians and Universalists broke away from the New England Congregational Church. Unitarians reject the idea that Jesus was the son of God, arguing instead that he was a great teacher. Their name comes from the belief that God is a unity, not a trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, Universalists believe in the universal salvation of souls. They reject the idea of hell and believe Cod intends to save everyone. History Through Art Religious Zeal J. Maze Burban's Religious Camp Meeting dramatizes religious revivalism, showing a charismatic preacher reaching many in the audience. From studying the image, can you suggest other reasons people might want to attend1 Native Americans Guide to Reading Main Idea The settlement of the West dramatically [hanged the way of life of the Plains Indians he) Terms and Names nomad, annuity, Little Crow, Indian Peace Commission, George A. Custer, Ghost Dance, assimilate, allotment, Dawes Act Preview of F.vents Reading Strategy Sequencing As you read about the crisis facing Native Americans during the late 1800s, complete a time line to record the battles between Native Americans and the U.5. government and the results of each. Reading Objectives • Discuss conflicts that arose between the Plains Indians and American settlers. • Summarize problems caused by attempts to assimilate Native Americans. Section Theme Individual Action Some Native American groups fought the federal government in an attempt to keep their ancestral homelands. 18(2 1864 1876 — 1887 1890 — Dakota Sioux Sand Creek Massacre Battle of the Dawes Act Wounded Knee qxising Little Bighorn Massacre An American Story In October 1867, a Comanche chief named Ten Bears arrived with other Native American leaders and their followers at Medicine Lodge Creek in present-day Kansas to meet with federal treaty-makers and army officers. The federal officials wanted them to sign a treaty agreeing to move to confined areas called reservations and to submit to American authority. In return, the government offered them food, housing, instruction in farming, and other assistance. After listening to the treaty-makers, Ten Bears spoke against moving to a reservation: ifeThat which you say we must now live on is too small. The Texans have taken away the places where the grass grew the thickest_The white man has the country which we loved, and we only wish to wander on the prairie until we die39 In the end, Ten Bears and the other chiefs had little choice but to sign the treaty. The army's main representative at the council. General William Tecumseh Sherman, told them bluntly that they would have to accept the deal: "You can no more stop this than you can stop the sun or moon; you must submit and do the best you can." —adapted from Tribes of the Southern Plains Culture of the Plains Indians For centuries the Great Plains was home to many Nativ e American nations. Some lived in communities as farmers and hunters, but most were nomads who roamed vast distances, following their main source of food—the buffalo. Despite their differences, the groups of Plains Indians were similar in many ways. They lived in extended family networks and had a close relationship with nature. Plains CHAPTER 13 Settling ihe West 425 Tndian nations, sometimes numbering several thousand people, were divided into bands consisting of up to 500 people. A governing council headed each band, but most members participated in making decisions. Gender determined the assignment of tasks. Women generally performed domestic tasks: rearing children, cooking, and preparing hides. Men performed tasks such as hunting, trading, and supervising the military life of the band. Most Plains Indians practiced a religion based on a belief in the spiritual power of the natural world. y Reading Check Comparing In what ways were different groups of Plains Indians similar? Cultures Under Pressure As ranchers, miners, and farmers moved onto the Plains, they deprived Native Americans of their hunting grounds, broke treaties guaranteeing certain lands to the Plains Indians, and often forced them to relocate to new territory. Native Americans resisted by attacking wagon trains, stagecoaches, and ranches Occasionally an entire group would go to waragains nearby settlers and troops. The first major dashool the Plains began in 1862, when the Sioux people in Minnesota launched a major uprising. The Dakota Sioux Uprising The Dakota Sioiay agreed to live on a small reservation in Minnesota.lt exchange for moving to the reservation, the L'nil States government issued annuities, or payments)! reservation dwellers, at least once per year. Tlw annuities, however, amounted to only between 5and 30 cents an acre, and much of that money endedta in the hands of American traders. These traders oftar made up stories about debts owed to them by thei Dakota, and they took the annuities as payments. Congress made things worse for the Dakota uo 1862 by delaying annuities. By August the payments were a month late, and some of the Dakota fcnt starving. Chief Little Crow asked traders to provide his people food on credit. "If they' are hungry," trade? Andrew Myrick replied, "let them eat grass or the? Medicine Crow, a war chief of the Crow people, solemnly poses for a photographer during a conference in Washington, D.C., in 1880.The Crow and the Sioux were ancestral enemies, and so Medicine Crow and his warriors agreed to act as scouts against the Sioux for the soldiers and settlers of the Great Plains.The Crows' valiant service, however, could not preserve their independence. Apache leader Geronimo surrenders at Skeleton Canyon in 1886. women or children died. General Nelson Miles later called Chivington's attack "the foulest and most unjustifiable crime in the annals of America," but a Senate committee investigating the incident decided that Chivington should not be charged. The truth of what really happened remains unknown. A Doomed Plan for Peace Fetterman's Massacre and the Sand Creek Massacre, along with several other incidents, convinced Congress that something had to be done to end the growing conflict with Native Americans on the Great Plains. In 1867 Congress formed an Indian Peace Commission, which proposed creating two large reservations on the Plains, one for the Sioux and another for southern Plains Indians. Agents from the federal government's Bureau of Indian Affairs would run the reservations | Tire army would be given authority to deal with am groups that refused to report or remain there. This plan was doomed to failure. Pressuring I Native American leaders into signing treaties, as negotiators had done at Medicine Lodge Creek ia 1867, did not ensure that chiefs or their followers would abide by the terms. Those who did move tv reservations faced much the same conditions that drove the Dakota Sioux to violence—poverty. I despair, and the corrupt practices of American [ traders. Native American Battles and Reservations, late 1800s PACIFIC1 l oCtiA'N l '40; 1851: Native Americans agree to the construction of roads and forts on their lands. 1868: The Sioux agree to move to a reservation in the Black Hills. 1201/1/ / 400 miles * 0 400 kilometers Lambert Equal-Area projection k Fort | Reservation in 1890 ffc Battle •<— Route of the Navajo's Long Walk. 1864 A Treaty Site Route of Chief Joseph and the Nez Perce, 1877 —1890 border mill Explaining What proposal did toe Indian Peace Commission present to the Plains Indians? k * Interpreting Maps Where did Chief Joseph finally give up his flight from the U.S. Army? Applying Geography Skills What physical and gee-1 graphic factors contributed to Native Americans beq | located to reservations? The Last Native American Wars By the 1870s, many Native Americans on the southern Plains had left ibe reservations in disgust. They preferred hunting buffalo on the open ' Plains, so they joined others who had also shunned the reservations. Buffalo, however, were rapidly disappearing. Beginning with the Gold Rush, migrants crossing the Plains had killed Jthousands of the animals. I Following the Civil War, professional buffalo hunters invaded the area, seeking buffalo hides for markets In the East. Other hunters killed merely t" sport, leaving carcasses to rot. Then I railroad companies hired sharpshooters to kill large numbers of buffalo that were obstructing rail traffic. The army, determined to force Native Americans onto reservations, encouraged buffalo lilling. By 1889 very few of the animals remained. I Battle of the Little Bighorn in 1876 I fortune hunters overran the Lakota Sitting Bull 1831-1890 In June ! 876, a showdown loomed between Custer's troops and the Lakota Sioux who had left their reservation. Lakota chief Sitting Bull sought help for his people from the supreme power they called Wakan Tanka, or the "Great Mystery," by performing the Sun Dance. Before dancing, an assistant made many small cuts in the chief's arms and shoulders. Then Sitting Bull raised his bleeding arms to heaven and danced around a sacred pole with his eyes on the sun. He continued to dance through the night and into the next day, when he entered a death-like trance. When he revived, he told of a vision in which he saw white soldiers upside down. The Lakota were encouraged by Sitting Bull's dream and the sacrifice he had made tor them. Many felt that his Sun Dance helped bring them victory over Custer. Sitting Bull remained devoted to the traditional religious practices of his people even after he and his followers reluctantly returned to the reservation under pressure from the army. Federal authorities regarded ceremonies like the Sun Dance—practiced in one form or another by many Plains Indians—as heathen and subversive. In 1883 the federal government outlawed the Sun Dance and many other Native American religious rites. Sbuxreservation in South Dakota to mine gold in the Back Hills. The Lakota saw no reason why they Mould abide by a treaty that American settlers were violating, and many left the reservation that spring to hunt near the Bighorn Mountains in southeastern Montana, The government responded by sending an expedition commanded by General Alfred H. Terry, nitenant Colonel George A. Custer, commander of the Seventh Cavalry, was with the expedition. An tisive officer, Custer underestimated the fighting opabilities of the Lakota and Cheyenne. On June 25,1876, Custer launched a three-pronged attack in broad daylight on one of the largest groups of Native American warriors ever assembled on the Great Plains. It consisted of about 2,500 Lakota and venne warriors camped along the Little Bighorn Newspapers portrayed Custer as the victim of a massacre. The army stepped up its campaign against the Native Americans. Chinese Exclusion Act Haymarket Riot in American Protective Ellis Island immigration United States opens Angel passed Chicago Association founded center opens facility for Asian immigrants An American Story In 1894, the day the steamer tickets arrived for the Hayye family, Hannah Hayye became an instant celebrity in her small village in Russian-occupied Poland. Hannah's husband had left for the United States three years earlier to prepare a new home for the Hayye family in Boston. Now that Hannah had received the tickets, she and her four children would finally be able to join him. A stream of curious visitors began to pour into the house. Hannah's daughter Mary, then 13 years old, described the crowd: iWThey wanted to handle the ticket, and mother must read them what is written on it.... Were we not all going to have new dresses to travel in? Was it sure that we could get kosher food on the ship' And with the questions poured in suggestions.... Mother mustn't carry her money in a pocketbooi She must sew it into the lining of her jacket... .99 Before the family left they gave away almost all their belongings and spent their last night at at uncle's home. "I did not really sleep," recalled Mary. "Excitement kept me awake, and my aunt snored hideously. In the morning, I was going away from Polotzk, forever and ever. I was going on a wonder ful journey. I was going to America. How could I sleep?" —adapted from Witnessing Ammt Europeans Flood Into the United States By the 1890s, more than half of all immigrants in the United States were eastern southern Europeans, including Italians, Greeks, Poles, Slavs, Slovaks, Russians. Armenians. Like the Hayye family, many of the 14 million immigrants who came tn United States between 1860 and 1900 were eastern European Jew's. 464 CHAPTER 15 Urban America "Old" and "New" Immigrants, 1870-1900 Pull Factors Plenty of land & plenty of work Higher standard of living Democratic political system Opportunity for social advancement Geography Skills Europeans abandoned their homelands and beaded to the United States for many reasons. Many roor rural farmers came simply because the United States had plenty of jobs available and few immigration restrictions. Vet Europe in the late 1800s offered plenty of jobs in its booming industrial cities, so economic factors were not the only reason people migrated. Many moved to avoid forced military service, which in some nations could last for many years. Others, especially Jews living in Poland and Russia, Sed toavoid religious persecution. By the late 1800s, most European states had made moving to the United States easy. Immigrants were allowed to take their savings with them, and most countries had repealed old laws that had (arced peasants to stay in their villages and had banned skilled workers from leaving the country. At the same time, moving to the United States offered a chance to break away from Europe's class 1. Analyzing Maps From which region did the majority of U.S. immigrants come? 2. Applying Geography Skills In what year did immigration from northern and western Europe reach its highest level? system and move to a democratic nation where they had a chance to move up the social ladder. The Atlantic Voyage Getting to the United States was often very difficult. Most immigrants booked passage in steerage, the most basic and cheapest accommodations on a steamship. Edward Steiner, an Iowa clergyman who posed as an immigrant in order to w rite a book on immigration, described the miserable quarters: 66Narrow, steep and slippery stairways lead to it. Crowds everywhere, ill smelling bunks, uninviting washrooms—this is steerage. The odors of scattered orange peelings, tobacco, garlic and disinfectants meeting but not blending. No lounge or chairs for CHAPTER 15 Urban America 465 Different Viewpoints Two Views of Immigration The history of immigration to the United States has been both celebrated and criticized Many millions of immigrants arrived in the United States in the late 1800s. The newcomers sought opportunity, enriched American culture, and caused concerns. Here, two political cartoons address the immigration issue. Anti-Immigration "Columbia's Unwelcome Guests" shows another view of immigration. In this 1885 cartoon, the figure of Columbia bars entry to anarchists. Socialists, and Communists who enter from the sewers of Europe's darker society. Some of the inscriptions on the column pedestal beside Columbia read "Anarchy is not liberty," and "When a Man's Rights End, teaming From History Pro-Immigration His Neighbor's Begin. 1. According to the cartoons, why were people concerned about immigrants coming to the United States? 2. Which cartoon best expresses your own views on immigration today? Why? Uncle Sam plays the role of Noah in this cartoon. As immigrants file two by two into the safety of the ark, they leave behind the dangers of Europe that are darkening the sky. A sign lists some reasons people came to the United States to begin a new life. comfort, and a continual babble of tongues—this is steerage. The food, which is miserable, is dealt out of huge kettles into the dinner pails provided by the steamship company. When it is distributed, the stronger push and crowd_99 —quoted in World of Our Fathers At the end of a 14-day journey, the passengers usually disembarked at Ellis Island, a tiny island in New York Harbor. There, a huge three-story building served as the processing center for many of the immigrants arriving on the East Coast after 1892. Ellis Island Most immigrants passed through Ellis Island in about a day. They would not soon forget their hectic introduction to the United States. A medical examiner who worked there later described how "hour after hour, ship load after ship load . . . the stream of human beings with its kaleidoscopic variations was . . . hurried through Ellis Island by the equivalent of 'step lively' in every language of the earth.'' In Ellis Island's enormous hall, crowds of immigrants filed past the doctor for an initial inspection "Whenever a case aroused suspicion," an inspector wrote, "the alien was set aside in a cage apart iron the rest . . . and his coat lapel or shirt marked with colored chalk" to indicate the reason for the isolation About one out of five newcomers was marked with an "H" for heart problems, "K" for hernias, "Sc"for scalp problems, or "X" for mental disability Newcomers who failed the inspection might be separated from their families and returned to Europe. Ethnic Cities Many of those who passed the El - Island inspections settled in the nation's cities. By the 1890s, immigrants made up significant percentages of Urban America some of the country's largest cities, including New fork,Chicago, Milwaukee, and Detroit. Jacob Riis, a Danish-born journalist, observed in 1890 that a map of New York City, "colored to designate nationalities, would show more stripes than on the skin of a zebra." In the cities, immigrants lived in neighborhoods that were often separated into ethnic groups, such as 'Little Italy" or the Jew ish "Lower East Side" in New York City. There they spoke their native languages and re-created the churches, synagogues, clubs, and spapers of their homelands. How well immigrants adjusted depended partly on how quickly they learned English and adapted to American culture. Immigrants also tended to adjust well if they had marketable skills or money, or if they settled among members of their own ethnic group. As many as one in three immigrants returned to Europe shortly after coming to the United States. Some had never planned to stay and had come simply to make a little money before returning home. Explaining How did immigration affect demographic patterns in the United States? Asian Immigration to America Many Chinese immigrants began crossing the Pacific to arrive in the United States in the mid-180Os. By that time, China's population had reached about TO million, and the country was suffering from severe unemployment, poverty, and famine. The 1848 discovery of gold in California began to lure Chinese immigrants to the United States. Then, in 1850, the Taiping Rebellion erupted in their homeland. This insurrection against the Chinese government took some 20 million lives and caused such suffering that thousands of Chinese left for the United States. In the early 1860s, as the Central Pacific Railroad began construction of its portion of the transcontinental railroad, the demand for railroad workers further increased Chinese immigration. Chinese immigrants mainly settled in western nties, where they often worked as laborers or servants it in skilled trades. Others worked as merchants. Because native-born Americans kept them out of y businesses, some Chinese immigrants opened iboirown. To save enough to buy his own laundry, one grant, Let1 Chew, had to work for two years as a cant: ••I did not know how to do anything, and I did not understand what the lady said to me, but she showed me how to cook, wash, iron, sweep, dust make beds, wash dishes, clean windows, paint and brass, polish the knives and forks, etc., by doing the things herself and then overseeing my efforts to imitate her.99 —quoted in A Sunday Between Wars Another group of Asians, the Japanese, also immigrated to the United States. Until 1900, however, their numbers remained small. Japanese immigration spiraled upward between 1900 and 1910 as Japan began building both an industrial economy and an empire. Both developments disrupted the economy of Japan and caused hardships for its people, thus stimulating emigration. Until 1910 Asian immigrants arriving in San Francisco first stopped at a two-story shed at the wharf. As many as 500 people at a time were often squeezed into this structure, which Chinese immigrants from Canton called muk uk, or "wooden house." In January 1910, California opened a barracks on Angel Island to accommodate the Asian immigrants. Most of the immigrants were young males in their teens or twenties, who nervously awaited the results of their immigration hearings in dormitories packed with double or triple tiers of bunks. This unpleasant delay could last for months. On the walls of the detention barracks, the immigrants wrote anonymous poems in pencil or ink. Some even carved their verse into the wood. Student Web Activity Visit the American Vision Web site at tayjjjencoe com and dick on Student Web Activities— Chapter 15 for an activity on immigration. y Reading Check 3 Making Generalizations Why did Chinese immigrants come to the United States? Anget Island Over 200,000 immigrants from Japan and China arrived on the West Coast during the late 1800s. The Resurgence of Nativism Eventually the wave of immigration led to increased feelings of nativism on the part of many Americans. Nativism is an extreme dislike for immigrants by native-born people and a desire to limit immigration. It had surfaced earlier in the 1800s during another large wave of immigration. In the 1840s and 1850s, it had focused primarily on Irish immigrants. Now anti-immigrant feelings focused on Asians, Jews, and eastern Europeans. Nativists opposed immigration for many reasons. Some feared that the influx of Catholics from Ireland and southern and eastern Europe would swamp the mostly Protestant United States, giving the Catholic Church too much power in the American government. Many labor unions also opposed immigration, arguing that immigrants would work for low wages or accept work as strikebreakers, thus undermining American-born workers. Prejudice Against Newcomers in the Northeast and Midwest, increased feelings of nativism led to the founding of two major anti-immigrant organizations. One, called the American Protective Association, claimed to have 500,000 members in 1887. The organization's founder, Henry Bowers, despised Catholics and foreigners and committed his group to stopping immigration. Membership peaked at about one million but declined rapidly after the economic recession of 1893 ended. In the West, where sentiment against the Chinese was very strong, widespread racial violence erupted. Denis Kearney, himself an Irish immigrant, organized the Workingman's Party of California in the 1870s to fight Chinese immigration. The partyAvon seats in California's legislature and made opposition I to Chinese immigration a national issue. Explain why nativist organizations opposed foreign immigrants. Reviewing Themes 5. Geography and History What routes did European and Asian immigrants take to get to the United States? Critical Thinking 6. Analyzing Why did some Americans blame immigrants for the nation's problems? 7. Organizing Complete a graphic organizer by listing reasons nativists opposed immigration to the United States. Analyzing Visuals 8. Analyzing Political Cartoons Compare the cartoons on page 466 What conclusions can you draw about American views on immigration in the late 1880s? Why do you think various people viewed immigration differently? Writing About History 9. Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are an immigrant who arrived in the 1800s. Write a letter to a relative in your home country describing your feelings during processing at either Ells Island or Angel Island. Urban America developed the electric trolley car. The following year, hmond, Virginia, opened the country's first electric trolley line. In the largest cities, congestion became so bad that "eers began looking for ways to move mass trans! off the streets. Chicago responded by building an elevated railroad, while Boston, followed by New York, built the first subway systems. Summarizing What new technologies helped people in the late 1800s get to and from work? Separation by Class In the growing cities, wealthy people and the working class lived in different parts of town. So too did the middle class. The boundaries between neigh- Iborhoods were quite definite and can still be seen in many American cities today. High Society During the last half of the 1800s, the wealthiest families established fashionable districts in lire hearts of cities. Americans with enough money could choose to construct a feudal castle, an English imanor house, a French chateau, a Tuscan villa, or a Persian pavilion. In Chicago, merchant and real estate developer Potter Palmer chose a castle. In New York, nelius Vanderbilt's grandson commissioned a '1 million French chateau equipped with a two-story dining room, a gymnasium, and a solid marble bathroom. Middle-Class Gentility American industrialization not only made the wealth of people like Potter Palmer possible; it also helped create a growing middle class. The nation's rising middle class included tors, lawyers, engineers, managers, social workers, architects, and teachers. It was typical for many people in the emerging middle class to move away from the central city. Some took advantage of the new uter rail lines to move to "streetcar suburbs." During this period, middle-class salaries were about twice that of the average factory worker. In 1905 a college professor earned a middle-class salary of $1,100. That amount, however, still proved insufficient for one Itnm-of-the-century professor's wife, who complained: 6*We pay eighteen dollars a month for this poorly built, eight small-roomed house__With all this straining to live comes a wish from the President and Trustees of the college that we mingle more in town society__Who can afford the evening dress to go? Or the evening's sewing left undone?99 —quoted in A Sunday Between Wars '' History Through Art The lesson This painting by John Barnard Whittaker depicts the lifestyle of a wealthy family in the 1870s. What are several element of this painting that show the family's wealth? The Working Class The majority of American city dwellers at the turn of the century would have considered an eight-room house an absolute luxury. In New York, three out of four residents squeezed into tenements, dark and crowded multi-family apartments. To supplement the average industrial worker's annual income of $445, many families sent their young children to work in factories or rented precious space to a boarder. Zalmen Yofteh, a journalist, lived in a New York tenement as a child. He recalled: 66With ... one dollar a day [our mother] fed and clothed an ever-growing family. She took in boarders. Sometimes this helped; at other times it added to the burden of living. Boarders were often out of work and penniless; how could one turn a hungry man out? She made all our clothes. She walked blocks to reach a place where meat was a penny cheaper, where bread was a half cent less. She collected boxes and old wood to burn in the stove... .99 —quoted in How We Lived y Reading Check Explaining What social dass grew as a result of industrialization in the late 1800s? Urban America Hi HISTORY The swelling tide of immigration to U.S. cities in the late 1800s led to deplorable living conditions and almost unbearable congestion. By 1890, more than two-thirds of New York's 1.5 million residents lived in overcrowded apartment buildings called tenements. On the Lower East Side, one of the most densely populated areas in the world, people frequented vibrant outdoor markets such as this one on Hester Street for goods from eggs to rugs to pots and pans. Gossip, haggling, and cries of street peddlers— mostly in Yiddish in this Jewish neighborhood—echoed down the street from dawn to dusk. Urban Problems City living posed threats such as crime, violence, fire, disease, and pollution, especially for the working poor like Yoffeh and his family. The rapid growth of cities only made these problems worse. Minor criminals, such as pickpockets, swindlers, and thieves, thriv ed in crowded urban living conditions. Major crimes multiplied as well. From 1880 to 1900, the murder rate jumped sharply from 25 per million people to more than 100 per million people. In comparison, the murder rate in 1999 was 57 per million people. Native-born Americans often blamed immigrants for the increase in crime and violence. In reality, the crime rate for immigrants was not significantly higher than that for other Americans. Alcohol did contribute to violent crime, both inside and outside the home. Danish immigrant Jacob Riis, who documented slum life in his 1890 book Hozv the Other Half Liven, accused saloons of "breeding poverty," corrupting politics, bringing suffering to the wives and children of drunkards, and fostering "the corruption of the child" by selling beer to minors. Disease and pollution posed even bigger threats Improper sewage disposal contaminated city drinking water and triggered epidemics of typhoid fever and cholera. Though flush toilets and sewer system existed in the 1870s, pollution remained a sevcir problem as horse waste was left in the streets, smok belched from chimneys, and soot and ash accumulated from coal and wood fires. Drawing Conclusions Mr, were diseases and pollution big problems in American cities in it* late 1800s? Urban Politics A new kind of political system developed to meet these urban problems. This system provided tial city services in return for political power. 472 CHAPTER IS Urban America Immigrants Arrive In Chicago 1. How did the location of Chicago influence its development? 2. Pose and answer five questions about the geographic distributions and patterns shown on this model. CHAPTER 15 Urban America 475 newcomers.The inse t map at left— an enlargement of the highlighted rectangle on the lithograph—shows the Hull House neighborhood in Chicago's West Side in 1893. Hull I louse was established by social reformer Jane Addams to "investigate and improve the conditions in the industrial districts of Chicago." The neighborhood was one of the city's poorest. Its tenement buildings were disease-ridden and dangerous, crowding about 2~0 residents into each acre.Jane Addams wroterThe streets are inexpressibly dirty, the number of schools inadequate, sanitary legislation unenforced, the street lighting bail, the paving miserable and altogether lacking in the alleys " Tile neighborhood was also one of the most ethnically diverse As the inset shows, the bewildered new immigrants tended to settle in enclaves that had already been established by others from their homeland.They banded together as they learned about the wavs of the new land. Many immigrants found comfort in social life centered on the church or synagogue. Younger immigrants were more eager to abandon their old customs. Many of them quickly adopted American clothes and manners, learned to speak English, and tried to make American friends. A major port anti a con duit for the nation's east-west rail travel, Chicago was a booming industrial center for the lumber, grain, meatpacking, and mail-order businesses at the end of the 1800s. Since the early 1870s, more ships had been docking in Chicago than in New York. Baltimore, Philadelphia. Charleston, and San Francisco combined. The city's expansion was phenomenal. In 50 years, it grew from a modest frontier town to the second-largest city in the country. Immigrants swarmed into Cliicago seeking jobs. Poles found work slaughtering livestock; Irish laying railroads; Russian and Polish Jews making clothes; Swedes constructing buildings and Italians forging steel. Women established boardinghouses, took in sewing to do at home, anti worked in factories. In most factories, the hours were long and the working conditions difficult noisy, hot, grimy, and overcrowded. By the beginning of the 1900s, three-fourths of the people in this teeming metropolis were European immigrants and their American-born children. Ethnic neighborhoods dotted the city, as did blocks of tenements thrown up to house the flood of The Rise of Segregation Main Idea In the late 1800s, Southern states passed laws that denied African Americans the right to vote and imposed segregation on them. key Terms and Names sharecropper, poll tax, grandfather clause, segregation, Jim Crow laws, lynching, Ida B. Wells, W.E.B. Du Bois Preview of Events Guide to Reading Reading Strategy Organizing As you read about the South in the 1890s, complete a web diagram like the one below by listing ways that states disfranchised African Americans and legalized discrimination. 1886 Colored Farmers' National Alliance formed -1887 Florida passes Jim Crow laws -1890 Mississippi introduces voting restrictions Heading Objectives • Discuss how African Americans in the South were disfranchised and how segregation was legalized. • Describe three major African Amenta leaders' responses to discrimination Section Theme Individual Action African Amencans stood up to fight against discrimination the United States. 1895 Booker T. Washington proposes Atlanta Compromise An American Story In the fall of 1892, H.S. Doyle, a young African American preacher, defied Georgia's power structure—dominated by whites and Democrats—by giving more than 60 speeches on behalf of a white Populist, Tom Watson, who was running for Congress. Doyle took that risk because Watson was doing something almost unbelievable for a Southern politician. He was urging poor whites and blacks to unite against the wealthy white elite. "You are kept apart that you may be separately fleeced of your earnings," Watson told a racially mixed audience at one gathering. "The accident of color can make no difference in the interests of farmers." Shortly before the election, Doyle himself received a death threat. Watson offered the preacher refuge in his home and alerted supporters in the area. An estimated 2,000 Populists gathered there with guns in hand. The crowd then marched to the local courthouse, where Watson vowed to protect Doyle and other African American Populists. The thousands of local boards were the heart of the n. The members of the draft boards were civil- I ians from local communities. Progressives believed local people, understanding community needs, culd know which men to draft. Eventually about 2.8 lion Americans were drafted. Approximately ^million others volunteered for military service. African Americans in the War Of the nearly IBODOO African Americans who were drafted, about served overseas as combat troops. African nerican soldiers encountered discrimination and irjudicc in the armv, where they served in racially gated units almost always under the supervi- | son of white officers. Despite these challenges, many African American diers fought with distinction in the war. For nple, the African American 92nd and 93rd ntrv Divisions fought in bitter battles along | the Western Front. Many of them won raise from both the French commander, IMarshal Henri Petain, and the United (States commander. General John Pershing. Be entire 369th Infantry Division won I in highly prized French decoration, the six de Guerre ("war cross"), for gallantry la combat. Women in the Military World War I was Be first war in which women officially rved in the armed forces, although only in combat positions. Women nurses had ved in both the army and navy since the 1900s, but as auxiliaries. Nurses were Inot assigned ranks, and the women were Ijottechnically enlisted in the armv or navy. As the military prepared for war in 1917, it 1 a severe shortage of clerical workers ause so many men were assigned to active jty. Early in 1917, the navy authorized the istment of women to meet its clerical needs. The women wore a standard uniform and were assigned the rank of yeoman. By the end of the war, over 11,000 women had served in the navy. Although most performed clerical duties, others served as radio operators, electricians, pharmacists, photographers, chemists, and torpedo assemblers. Unlike the navy, the army refused to enlist women. Instead, it began hiring women as temporary employees to fill clerical jobs. The only women to actually serve in the army were in the Army Nursing Corps. Army nurses were the only women in the military to be sent overseas during the war. Over 20,000 nurses served in the army during the war, including more than 10,000 overseas. Describing How did Congress ensure that the United States would have enough troops to serve In World War I? Organizing Industry The progressive emphasis on careful planning and scientific management shaped the federal government's approach to mobilizing the American war economy. To efficiently manage the relationship between the federal government and private companies, Congress created special boards to coordinate mobilization of the economy. Instead of having the government control the economy, these boards emphasized cooperation between big business and government. Business executives, professional ^Picturing History Women and War Although not allowed in combat, many women served in auxiliary positions. such as nursing. Here, Birmingham, Alabama, women collect money dunng a Red Cross parade in 1918. In what other capacities did women serve during the war? The NWLB frequently pressured industry to grant 'important concessions to workers, including wage toereases, an eight-hour workday, and the right of unions to organize and bargain collectively. In "change, labor leaders agreed not to disrupt war production with strikes or other disturbances. As a result, membership in unions increased by just over one million between 1917 and 1919. This massive population movement :d the racial makeup of such cities as Chicago, NeW York, Cleveland, and Detroit. xican Americans Head North African Amer- i were not the only group to migrate north dur- j the war. Continuing political turmoil in Mexico i the wartime labor shortage in the United States uivinced many Mexicans to head north. Between (17 and 1920, over 100,000 Mexicans migrated into is, Arizona, California, and New Mexico, provid- labor for the farmers and ranchers of the hwest. Agency Purpose War Industries Organized industry to increase Board efficiency, maximizing production Railroad Assumed temporary control of Administration rail lines to modernize equipment and increase operating efficiency Food Supervised agricultural production, Administration promoted food conservation and rationing Fuel Increased production of coal and Administration oil; maintained conservation of fuel with such innovations as daylight savings time National War Maintained cooperation between Labor Board industry management and labor unions; acted as mediator to prevent and quickly settle disputes Committee Provided propaganda to rally on Public citizen support for all aspects Information of the war effort Chart Skills 1. Interpreting Charts Which agency worked with manufacturers and labor unions? 2. Analyzing How did the Fuel Administration's daylight savings time plan achieve its goal? Meanwhile, tens of thousands of Mexican Americans headed north to Chicago, St. Louis, Omaha, and other cities to take wartime factory jobs. Many Mexican Americans faced hostility and discrimination when they arrived in American cities. Like other immigrants before them, they tended to settle in their own separate neighborhoods, called barrios, where they could support each other. y Reading Check Evaluating How permanent were women's advances in the wartime workplace? Ensuring Public Support Progressives in the government did not think coordinating business and labor was enough to ensure the success of the war effort. They also believed that the government should take steps to shape public opinion and build support for the war. CHAPTER 19 World War I and Its Aftermath 587 Inflation Leads to Strikes Many companies had been forced to raise wages during the war, but inflation now threatened to wipe out all the gains workers had made. While workers wanted higher wages to keep up with inflation, companies wanted to hold down wages because inflation was also driving up their operating costs. During the war, the number of workers in unions had increased dramatically. By the time the war ended, workers were better organized and much more capable of organizing strikes than they had been before. Many business leaders, on the other hand, were determined to break the power of the unions and roll back the gains labor had made. These circumstances led to an enormous wave of strikes in 1919. Bv the end of the year, more than 3,600 strikes involving more than 4 million workers had taken place. The Seattle General Strike The first major strike took place in Seattle, when some 35,000 shipyard workers walked off the job demanding higher wages and shorter hours. Soon other unions in Seattle joined the shipyard workers and organized a geneii strike. A general strike is a strike that involvesri workers living in a certain location, not just workers in a particular industry. The Seattle general strike involved more than 60,000 people and paralyzed the I city for five days. Although the strikers returned to work without making any gains, their actions won ried many Americans because the general strike"1 a common tactic used in Europe by Communists and! other radical groups. The Boston Police Strike Perhaps the most farad strike of 1919 took place in Boston, when roughly* percent of the police force walked off the job. Rins and looting soon erupted in the city, forcing the governor of Massachusetts, Calvin Coolidge, to send ir the National Guard. When the strikers tried to return to work, the police commissioner refused to accept them. He fired the strikers and hired a new polia force instead. Despite protests, Coolidge agreed the men should: be fired. He declared, "There is no right to stnl* mT H | ^ W 1 M 600 CHAPTER 19 World War I and lu Aftermath Effects of World War I on the United States Developments in the War War-tom economies of Europe Russian Revolution Industrial demand of wartime Sacrifices of wartime; disappointment with Versailles Peace Treaty Boom in U.S. economy; emergence of U.S. as world industrial leader "Red Scare" in postwar U.S.; suspicion of immigrants Internal migration in U.S., especially African American migration to Northern cities Failure to join League of Nations World War I had profound effects on the United States. Interpreting Why did the destruction of European economies cause in industrial boom in the United States? Brare ' against the public safety by anybody, anywhere, any- time'' Coolidge's response brought him to national attention and earned him widespread public support. It also convinced the Republicans to make Coolidge I their sice presidential candidate in the 1920 election. The Steel Strike Shortly after the police strike mded, one of the largest strikes in American history when an estimated 350,000 steelworkers went strike for higher pay, shorter hours, and recognition of their union, Elbert H. Gary, the head of U.S. Steel, refused even to talk to union leaders. Instead, ttie company set out to break the union by using anti- immigrant feelings to divide the workers. Many steelworkers were immigrants. The company blamed the strike on foreign radicals and called lor loyal Americans to return to work. Meanwhile, the company hired African Americans and Mexicans as I replacement workers and managed to keep its steel I Bills operating despite the strike. Clashes between I company guards and strikers were frequent, and in I Gary; Indiana, a riot left 18 strikers dead. In early | January of 1920, the strike collapsed. The failure of the strike set back the union cause in the steel industry, steelworkers remained unorganized until 1937. Explaining What caused the wave of strikes in 1919? Racial Unrest Adding to the nation's economic turmoil was the rn of hundreds of thousands of American sol- trom Europe who needed to find employment. Many African Americans who had moved north during the war were also competing for jobs and housing. Frustration and racism combined to produce violence. In the summer of 1919, over 20 race riots broke out across the nation. The worst violence occurred in Chicago. On a hot July day, African Americans went to a whites-only beach. Both sides began throwing stones at each other. Whites also threw stones at an African American teenager swimming near the beach to prevent him from coming ashore, and he drowned. A full-scale riot then erupted in the city. Angry African Americans attacked white neighborhoods while whites attacked African American neighborhoods. The riot lasted for almost two weeks. In 1920, Attorney General A Mitchell Palmer instituted raids on antigovemment activists and many immigrants, often violating their civil liberties in the process Whom did Palmer appoint to coordinate these investigations? Americans had long been suspicious of Communist ideas. Throughout the late 1800s, many Americans had accused immigrants of importing radical socialist and Communist ideas into the United States and blamed them for labor unrest and violence. Now Communists had seized control of an entire nation, and fears surged that they would try to incite revolutions elsewhere. These fears seemed to be confirmed in 1919, when the Soviet Union formed the Communist International— an organization for coordinating the activities of Communist parties in other countries. The Red Scare Begins As strikes erupted across the United States in 1919, the fear that Communists, or "reds," as they were called, might seize power led to a nationwide panic known as the Red Scare, Seattle's mayor, Oie Hanson, spoke for others when he condemned the leaders of the Seattle general strike as revolutionaries who wanted to "take possession of our American government and try to duplicate the anarchy of Russia." In April the postal service intercepted more than 30 parcels addressed to leading businesspeople and politicians that were triggered to explode when opened. In June eight bornbs in eight cities expiate within minutes of one another, suggesting a nationwide conspiracy. One of them damaged the homed United States Attorney General A. Mitchell Palma in Washington, D.C. Most people believed the bornb- ings were the work of Communists or other revolutionaries trying to destroy the American way of lift The Palmer Raids Declaring that a "blaze of rev* lution" was "burning up the foundations of society,' Palmer took action. He established a special divisionj1 within the Justice Department, the Genera! II Intelligence Division, headed by J. Edgar Hoover I This division eventually became the Federal Burra I of Investigation (FBI). From late 1919 to the springof I 1920, Palmer organized a series of raids on the headquarters of various radical organizations. Although I evidence pointed to no single group as the bornber I Palmer's agents focused on foreign residents and I immigrants. The authorities detained thousands of I suspects and deported, or expelled from the country: I nearly 600 of them. 602 CHAP TER 19 World War I and Its Aftermath Palmer's agents often disregarded the civil liberties of the suspects. Officers entered homes and fices without search warrants. People were mistreated and jailed for indefinite periods of time and ere not allowed to talk to their attorneys. For a while, Palmer was regarded as a national hero. His raids, however, failed to turn up any hard dence of revolutionary conspiracy. When his dire iction that violence would rock the nation on May Day 1920—a popular European celebration of ers—proved wrong. Palmer lost much of his ibility and soon faded from prominence. The Red Scare greatly influenced people's attitudes during the 1920s. Americans often linked radi- " m with immigrants, and that attitude led to a call tor Congress to limit immigration. Examining After World War I, why were Americans suspicious of some union leaders? An End to Progressivism Economic problems, labor unrest, and racial ten- s.as well as the fresh memories of World War 1, all bined to create a general sense of disillusionment in the United States. By 1920 Americans wanted an aid to the upheaval. During the 1920 campaign, Ohio ernor James M. Cox and his running mate, tant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt, ran on a platform of keeping alive Woodrow Wilson's ssive ideals. The Republican candidate, Warren Harding, called for a return to "normalcy." He I that what the United States needed was a return Itethe simpler days before the Progressive Era reforms: 6i[0ur] present need is not heroics, but healing; not nostrums, but normalcy; not revolution, but restoration; not agitation, but adjustment; not surgery, but serenity; not the dramatic, but the dispassionate;... not submergence in internationality, but sustainment in triumphant nationality.** —quoted in Portrait of a Nation Harding's sentiments struck a chord with voters, and he won the election by a landslide margin of over 7 million votes. Americans were weary of more crusades to reform society and the world. They hoped to put the country's racial and labor unrest and economic troubles behind them and build a more prosperous and stable society. Explaining How was Harding able to win the presidential election of 1920? Checking for Understanding I. Define: ast of living, general strike. J deport. 11 Identify: Red Scare, A. Mitchell Palmer, I J. Edgar Hoover. 11, Describe the conditions that African I Americans faced after the end of World I War I. Reviewing Themes It Continuity and Change Why did I Republican Warren G. Harding win the I election of 1920? Critical Thinking 5. Analyzing How did the Palmer raids deprive some citizens of their civil rights? 6. Organizing Use a graphic organizer similar to the one below to list the causes of the Red Scare in the United States. Analyzing Visuals 7. Analyzing Photographs Study the photograph on page 600. How might parades such as this one mobilize African Americans to work for an end to discrimination? Writing About History 8. Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are a European immigrant working in a factory in the United States in 1919. Write a letter to a relative in Europe describing the feelings of Americans toward you and other immigrants. CHAPTER 19 World War I and Its Aftermath 603 A Clash of Values Guide to Reading Main Idea During the 1920s, clashes between traditional and modern values shook the United States. key Terms and Names anarchist, eugenics, Ku Klux Klan, Emergency Quota Act, flapper, Fundamentalism, evolution, creationism, police powers, speakeasy Preview of Events I ♦ 1919 Reading Strategy Organizing As you read about Americans' reactions to immigrants in the 1920s, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by filling in the causes and effects of anti-immigrant prejudices. Causes Effects Anlilmmigrdnl Prejudices Reading Objectives • Explain the rise in racism and natn m in the 1920s. • Describe the clash of values in the 1920s and the changing status of women. Section Theme Continuity and Change The rapid changes of the early 1900s challenged Americans who wanted to preserve traditional values. ♦1929 Eighteenth Emergency National Origins Sacco and Vanzetti Amendment ratified Quota Act passed Act passed executed 1933 Prohibition repealed An American Story In 1911 Alfred Levitt left a small town in Russia to immigrate to New York City. Like many immigrants before and since, he had big ambitions, despite his poor English and lack of education. He wanted to forget his Russian heritage and become a successful American: tiiMy conscious drive when I got here was to escape the rigors of poverty, to become somebody of importance. This I don't mean economically, but someone who can justify his presence on the planet I wonder: Who am I? What am I here for? At seventeen years, the first question for me, though, was: What was I going to do? What will I become?... I made up my mind, as young as I was, that I'm going to amount to something in the world, and I'm not going to continue being one of those who starve. *9 —quoted in Centenarians: The Story of the Twentieth Century by the Americans Who Lived I Levitt did indeed "amount to something." A successful artist he lived the rest of his life in New York City. Twenty of his paintings are part of the permanent collection of the city's Metropolitan Museum of Art. Nativism Resurges As the 1920s opened, an economic recession, an influx of immigrants, and racial and cultural tensions combined to create an atmosphere of disillusionment and intolerance The fear and prejudice many felt toward Germans and Communists expanded to include all immigrants. This triggered a general rise in racism and in nativism, tty desire to protect the interests of old-stock Americans against those of immigrants. 610 CHAPTER 20 The Jaxz Age I During World War I, immigration to the United States had dropped sharply. By 1921, however, it had returned to prewar levels, with the majority of immigrants at this time coming from southern and eastern Europe. Many Americans saw immigrants as a threat tostability and order. The arrival of millions of immigrants also seemed to pose a threat to the four million recently demobilized military men and women searching for work in an economy with soaring unemployment and rising prices. As the new immigrants, many of whom were unskilled workers, sought to enter the workforce and establish a foothold in American life, many of them ■countered ethnic and religious prejudices. The experience of two Italian immigrants, Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, exemplified the prejudices and fears of the period. Die Sacco-Vanzetti Case Shortly after 3:00 rm. on April 15,1920, two men shot and killed two employees of the Slater & Morrill Shoe Company in South Braintree, Massachusetts, and robbed the company of its 515,000 payroll. Police subsequently arrested Nicola Sacco, a shoemaker, and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, a fish peddler. The Sacco and Vanzetti case created a furor, as newspapers around the country revealed that the two immigrants were anarchists, or people who oppose ill forms of government. They also discovered that I Sacco owned a gun similar to the murder weapon and that the bullets used in the murders matched those in I Sacco's gun. Although no one at the time knew' if I Sacco and Vanzetti were guilty, many people leaped to that conclusion because the two men were Italian immigrants and anarchists. Others viewed the case as an example of prejudice against people based on their ethnic origin and political beliefs. On July 14, 1921, a jury found Sacco I and Vanzetti guilty, and the judge sen- I traced them to death. Many Americans, aught up in the antiforeign fever of the time, applauded the verdict and the I penalty. Over the next six years, lawyers I filed numerous appeals for a new trial, but all were denied. In April 1927, a spe- I rial Massachusetts commission studied Idhe case and upheld the verdict. Four I months later, on August 23, 1927, Sacco I and Vanzetti were executed, proclaiming their innocence all the while. Cl (5ee I fou're the Historian on pages 618-619 for more I tkmtion on Sacco and Vanzetti) Pseudo-Scientific Racism Nativist and racist feelings in the 1920s were reinforced by the beliefs of the eugenics movement. Eugenics is a pseudo-sci- ence (or false science) that deals with improving hereditary traits. Developed in Europe in the early 1900s, eugenics emphasized that human inequalities were inherited and warned against breeding the "unfit" or "inferior." Eugenics fueled the nativists' argument for the superiority of the "original" American stock—white Protestants of northern European descent. Political, intellectual, and cultural figures like Woodrow Wilson and Henry Cabot Lodge embraced eugenics. By doing so, they lent authority to racist theories, w'hich reinvigorated the nativist argument for strict immigration control. Return of the Ku Klux Klan At the forefront of the movement to restrict immigration was the Ku Klux Klan, or KKK. The old KKK had flourished in the South after the Civil War and used threats and violence to intimidate newly freed African Americans. The new KJan had other targets as well—Catholics, Jews, immigrants, and other groups believed to represent "un-American" values. William J. Simmons founded the new Ku Klux Klan in Atlanta, Georgia, in 1915. A former circuit- riding Methodist preacher, Simmons pledged to preserve America's white, Protestant civilization. In the 1920s, Klan publicity claimed that the organization w'as fighting for "Americanism." The Klan attracted few members until 1920, when Simmons hired public relations entrepreneurs Edward Young Clarke and Elizabeth Tyler, paying j]U\_ Analyzing Political Cartoons New Immigrants This cartoon portrays the feelings ol many Amencans who were opposed to immigration. What comment does the cartoon make about immigrants? them a commission of $8 of every $10 initiation fee for a new Klan recruit. Clarke and Tyler divided the nation into regions and paid more than 1,000 "sales- people" to promote the Klan. As a result of their strategy, membership in the Ku Klux Klan exploded, reaching nearly 4 million by 1924 as it spread beyond the South and into Northern cities. The Klan began to decline in the late 1920s, however, largely as a result of scandals and power struggles involving its leaders. Membership shrank, and politicians whom the Klan supported were voted out of office. The sharp reduction in immigrants due to new immigration laws further disabled the Klan, depriving it of a major issue. The Klan never again had a major impact on politics. lTT*l 0 Explaining Why did many Americans oppose immigration after World War I? Controlling Immigration After World War I, American immigration policies changed in response to the postwar recession and nativist pleas to "Keep America American." Even big business, which previously favored unrestricted immigration as a source of cheap labor, now feared the new immigrants as radicals. In 1921 President Harding signed the Emergency Quota Act, which established a temporary quota system, limiting immigration. According to this act, only three percent of the total number of people in any ethnic group already living in the United States, as indicated in the 1910 census, could be admitted in a single year. This theoretically restricted die number of immigrants from all countries, but in practice it discriminated heavily against people from southern and eastern Europe. Ethnic identity and national origin thus determined admission to the United States. Henry Curran, the commissioner of Ellis Island from 1922 to 1926, commented on the heartbreak caused by the Emergency Quota Act: *6The hardest quota cases were those that separated families. When part of the family had been born in a country with a quota still open, while the other part had been born in a country whose quota was exhausted, the law let in the first part and deported the other part. Mothers were torn from children, husbands from wives. The law came down like a sword between them39 —quoted in Ellis Island: Echoes from a Nation's Past The National Origins Act of 1924 in 1924 th* National Origins Act made immigrant restrictiont permanent policy. The law also tightened the quota system, setting quotas at two percent of each national group residing in the country' in 1890.8: moving back the year to 1890, an even larger proportion of the quotas were allotted to immigrants from northwestern Europe. A second part of the act, which took effect in 1929, replaced the 1924 quotas with a limit oi 150,000 immigrants admitted per year. In addition.| the percentage allotted to each nationality would now be based on the 1920 census. This resulted m northwestern European countries accounting tor 87 percent of the total immigration quota. Hispanic Immigration to the United States Tfe immigration acts of 1921 and 1924 reduced thn available labor pool in the United States. While workers and unions rejoiced at the reduction in competition for jobs, employers desperately needed laborers for agriculture, mining, and railroad work. Mexican immigrants helped to fill this need. The first wave of Mexican immigration to the United States followed the passage of the Newlands Reclamation Act of 1902, which provided funds for irrigation projects in the arid Southwest. Factory farms soon dominated the landscape, and they needed large numbers of agricultural laborers. By 1914 more than 70,000 Mexican immigrants had poured into the United States many of them fleeing the terror and aftermath of the Mexican Revolution of 1910. A larger wave of immigration brought more than 600,000 Mexicans to the United States between 1914 and the end of the 1920s. The National Origins An of 1924 exempted natives of the Western Hemisphere from the quota system. As the demand for cheap farm labor in California and the Southwest steadily increased, Mexican immigrants crossed the border in record numbers. y Reading Check Explaining How did Hispanic immigrants help shape the national identity of the United Stats1 The New Morality Many groups that wanted to restrict immigrate also wanted to preserve what they considered tofe traditional values. They feared that a "new morality' was taking over the nation. Challenging traditional 612 CHAPTER 20 The Jazz Age ways of seeing and thinking, the new morality glorified youth and personal freedom and influenced various aspects of American society. The New Morality Ideals of the loving family and personal satisfaction—views popularized in magazines and other media—influenced popular news on relationships. As the bring and emotional aspects of marriage grew in importance, the ideas of romance, pleasure, and friendship became linked to successful marriages. Advice books in the 1920s dispensed such hints as. Have lots of pleasure that both husband and wife enjoy.. . and above all, be mod friends." Women in the workforce also began to define the new morality. Many single, working-class women held jobs amply because they needed the wages for themselves or for their families. For some young, angle women, work was a way to break away from parental l authority and establish a per- 1 sonal identity. Work also provided the wages that allowed women to participate in the consumer culture. Women who attended college in the 1920s often found support for their emerging sense of independence Women's colleges, in particular, encouraged their students to pursue careers and to challenge traditional ideas about the nature of women and their rale in society'. She smoked cigarettes, drank prohibited liquor, and dressed in attire considered too revealing by many Zelda Fitzgerald, wife of writer F. Scott Fitzgerald, symbolized the flapper spirit. She urged women to be "light-hearted [and] unconventional" rather than focused on "a career that calls for hard work." While flappers pursued social freedoms, other women sought financial independence by entering the workforce, many of them as salesclerks, secretaries, or telephone operators. A few made contributions in science, medicine, law, or literature. In science, Florence Sabin's medical research led to a CHAPTER 20 The Jazz Age 613 African American Politics I The racial pride that sparked the artistic achieve- I mentsof the Harlem Renaissance also fueled the politi- I cal and economic aspirations of many African I .Americans. The postwar years saw the development of new attitudes among African Americans, who forged new roles in life and in politics. For many, the sight of the 1,300 African American men of the Fifteenth ;iment of New York's National Guard, returning fern the war and marching through Manhattan and home to Harlem, symbolized these aspirations. W.E.B. Du Bois, editor of The Crisis, captured the new sense of it and defiance of African Americans: 66We return. We return from fighting. The music Louis Armstrong and Duke Ellington helped to make famous originated from the spirituals and work songs of African slaves. These songs were a blend of African rhythms and European melodies and harmonies, which African slaves encountered after arriving in North America. This music evolved into ragtime during the late 1800s and early 1900s. By the 1920s, artists had combined aspects of ragtime with the uniquely African American sounds of the blues, and thus jazz was born. Why do you think music often spreads easily across different cultures? Representatives in 1922. The Senate defeated the bill, but the NAACP continued to lobby against lynching throughout the 1920s and 1930s. Its ongoing efforts kept the issue in the news and probably helped to reduce the number of lynchings that took place. One of the NAACP's greatest political triumphs occurred in 1930 with the defeat of Judge John J. Parker's nomination to the U.S. Supreme Court. The NAACP joined with labor unions to launch a highly organized national campaign against the North Carolina judge, who allegedly was racist and antilabor. By a narrow margin, the Senate refused to confirm Parker's nomination. His defeat demonstrated that African American voters and lobby groups had finally begun to achieve enough influence to affect national politics and change decisions in Congress. While some people were fighting for integration and improvement in the economic and political position of African Americans, other groups began to emphasize black nationalism and black pride. Eventually, some began to call for black separation from white society. Black Nationalism and Marcus Garvey a dynamic black leader from Jamaica, Marcus Garvey, captured the imagination of millions of African Americans with his call for "Negro Nationalism," which glorified the black culture and traditions of the past. Inspired by Booker T. Washington's call for self- reliance, Garvey founded the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNTA), an organization aimed at promoting black pride and unity. The central message of Garvey's Harlem-based movement was that African Americans could gain economic and CHAPTER 20 The Jazz Age Self-Check Quiz Visit the American Vision Web site at tav.glencoe.com and click on Self-Check Quizzes— Chapter 20 to assess your knowledge of chapter content. A Black Man Talks of Reaping I have sown beside all waters in my day. I planted deep, within my heart the fear That wind or fowl would take the grain away. I planted safe against this stark, lean year. I scattered seed enough to plant the land In rows from Canada to Mexico But for my reaping only what the hand Can hold at once is all that I can show. Yet what I sowed and what the orchard yields My brother's sons are gathering stalk and root. Small wonder then my children glean in fields They have not sown, and feed on bitter fruit. a. What does Bontemps mean by "what the hand can hold at once is all that I can show" and "bitter fruit"? b. What major theme of Harlem Renaissance writing is evident in this poem? Practicing Skills & Synthesizing Information Read the subsections titled 'Nativism Resurges" and "Pseudo-Scientific Racism" at the beginning of Section 1. What information is presented in the first subsection? The second? Synthesize the information in these two subsections and write a short statement that describes American attitudes toward immigrants during the 1920s. Chapter Activities S, Research Project Work with another student to research the art of Georgia O'Keeffe of the 1920s. Examine how her efforts reflect the characteristics of the Jazz Age, such as experimentation and innovation. Present your findings to the class. a American History Primary Source Document Library CD-ROM Under The Roaring Twenties, read "The Movies" by Preston William Slossen. Work with a few of your classmates to write an article that compares and contrasts the motion picture industry in the 1920s with the motion picture industry today. iiing Activity . Persuasive Writing Imagine that you are living during the early 1920s. Marcus Garvey is campaigning to lead African Americans to a new settlement to be founded in Liberia. Write a letter to a newspaper editor in which you take a U.S. Immigration, 1921 and 1925 1921 1925 Canada and Latin America Central Europe 22% Other countries 2% Northern and Western Europe 16% Eastern and Southern Europe 42% Asia 1% Other countries 1% Northern and Western Europe , . . 27% Eastern and Southern Europe 4% Source: Historical Statistics ol the United States position on the merits of Garvey's plan. In your letter, describe how you think this plan will affect the nation and your own community. Geography and History 32. The circle graphs above show immigration numbers in the United States in 1921 and 1925. Study the graphs and answer the questions below. a. Interpreting Graphs What significant changes in immigration do the circle graphs show? b. Applying Geography Skills Why did these changes in immigration occur between 1921 and 1925? Standardized Test Practice Directions: Choose the best answer to the following question. Test-Taking Tip: First you must be clear on the meaning of nativism. Then use the process of elimination to rule out the one answer that seems the least related to the definition of nativism. CHAPTER 20 The Jazz Age 633 in History Mary McLeod Bethune 1875-1955 Mary McLeod Bethune was born into a poor South Carolina family, the 15th of 17 children. Although she worked from a young age picking cotton and washing clothes, Bethune was determined to get an education. She won a scholarship to a seminary in North Carolina and later graduated from the Moody Bible Institute in Chicago. Bethune then began teaching at the Haines Institute. In 1904 she founded a school in Florida for the children of African American railroad workers. "I rang doorbells," she later recalled. "I wrote articles... distributed leaflets, [and] invaded churches, clubs, lodges, [and] chambers of commerce." Gradually she raised enough money to found the Daytona Normal and Industrial School, later known as Bethune College. Bethune's efforts gained her a national reputation. In the 1920s, she visited the White House to discuss African American affairs. She also became a good friend of Eleanor Roosevelt. In 1936 FDR appointed her director of the Negro Division of the National Youth Administration (NYA), which provided job training for young people. Bethune also founded the National Council of Negro Women to support civil rights In later years, she advised Presidents Truman and Eisenhower. Frances Perkins 1882-1965 From the moment she became FDR's secretary of labor at the age of 50, Frances Perkins confronted the challenge of being the first female cabinet member in the nation's history. Perkins studied social work at Columbia University. Early in her career, she assisted Jane Addams at Hull House and worked with Florence Kelley of the Consumers' League. From her lobbying efforts there, Perkins learned how to deal with politicians. Perkins first met Roosevelt when she worked for the New tort Committee on Safety, lobbying state legislators to limit the wort week for women to 54 hours. When Roosevelt became govern®" 1928, he appointed Perkins state industrial commissioner. After Roosevelt won the presidency in 1932, he asked Pertins* head the Department of Labor. Upon taking the job, Perkins tori many areas that needed improvement: offices that were run dm disorganized files, and lax work schedules, conditions she qi*h remedied. Given her background, it was fitting that one of Perkins's nwpr tasks was to head the team that designed the Social Secuntypro- gram. She also supervised implementation of the Fair Labor Standards Act and built up the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The white South, which had been the core erf the Democratic Party, now became just one part of a new coalition that included farmers, laborers, African Americans, new immigrants, ethnic minorities, women, progressives, and intellectuals. First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt helped bring about the change in the African American and women's vote. She had demonstrated strong sympathies toward these groups, with whom she spoke in her many tours of the country. She recounted her experiences tea her husband and persuaded him to address at least some of their problems in his New Deal programs. African Americans and women made some modest gains during the New Deal. For example, the president appointed a number of African Americans to positions in his administration; informally, they became known as the Black Cabinet Roosevelt also tried to see that New Deal relief programs did not exclude African Americans. A similar approach guided New Deal policies toward women. Roosevelt appointed the first woman to a cabinet post, Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins, and assigned many women to lower-level jobs in the federal bureaucracy. Even so, the general view vn that women did not need federal government acta : to ensure equal treatment, but rather to provideoayj tain protections for them. The Election of 1936 To oppose Roosevelt, Republicans nominated Kansas Governor AT Landon. Although London favored some New policies, he declared it was time "to unshackki. five and free the spirit of American enterprise.'! the election neared, Landon became more a The New Deal "violates the basic ideals of American system," he declared. "If we are to serve our American form of government, this istration must be defeated." Despite Landon's attacks, Roosevelt and the' Deal remained overwhelmingly' popular with American people. The challenge from left-wing icals also proved much weaker than exp marily because Huey Long had been assassina' Louisiana in September of 1935. Long's sup joined with those of Father Coughlin and Frata Townsend in the summer of 1936 to formalTM 696 CHAPTER 2.3 Roosevelt and the New Deal or to the other countries where they applied. As a result, millions of Jews remained trapped in Nazi- dominated Europe. Several factors limited Jewish immigration to the United States. First, Nazi orders prohibited Jews from taking more than about four dollars out of Germany. Second, many countries refused to accept Jewish immigrants. In the United States, laws restricted granting a visa to anyone "likely to become a public charge." American customs officials tended to assume that this applied to Jews since Germany had forced them to leave any wealth behind. High unemployment rates in the 1930s also made immigration politically unpopular. Few Americans wanted to raise immigration quotas, even to accommodate European refugees. The existing immigration policy allowed only a total of 150,000 immigrants annually, with a fixed quota from each country. The law permitted no exceptions for refugees or victims of persecution. At an international conference on refugees in 1938, several European countries, the United States, and Latin America stated their regret that they could not take in more of Germany's Jews without raising their immigration quotas. Meanwhile, Nazi propaganda chief Joseph Goebbels announced that "if there is any country that believes it has not enough Jews, I shall gladly turn over to it all our Jews." Hitler also declared himself "ready to put all these criminals at the disposal of these countries... even on luxury ships." As war loomed in 1939, many ships departed fro® Germany crammed with Jews desperate to escape Some of their visas, however, had been forged or sold illegally, and Mexico, Paraguay, Argentina, and Costa Rica all denied access to Jews with such document; So too did the United States. On May 27,1939, the SS St. Louis entered the harbor in Havana, Cuba, with 930 Jewish refugees on board. Most of these passengers hoped to go to the United States eventually, but they had certificate improperly issued by Cuba's director of immigration giving them permission to land in Cuba. When the ships arrived in Havana, the Cuban government, partly in response to anti-Semitic sentiment stirred up by Nazi propaganda, revoked the certificates and refused to let the refugees come ashore. For several days, the ship's captain steered his ship in circles off the coast of Florida, awaiting official permission to dock at a United States port. Denied such permiy sion, the ship turned hack toward Europe on junen The forlorn passengers finally disembarked in France, Holland, Belgium, and Great Britain. Within two years, the first three of these countries fell under Nazi domination. Many of the refugees brought to these countries aboard the SS St. Louis perished in the Nazis' "final solution." Analyzing Why did many levs remain in Germany even though they were persecuted? After the war broke out, the Nazis methodically deprived Jews of their rights, confining many to overcrowded ghettos. After weeks of fierce resistance, Jews in the Warsaw ghetto were rounded up for deportation to concentration camps in May 1943. Women in the Defense Plants During the Depression, many people believed married women should not work outside the home, especially if it meant taking jobs away from men trying to support their families. Most women who did work were young, single, and employed in traditional female jobs. The wartime labor shortage, however, forced factories to recruit married women to do industrial jobs that traditionally had been reserved for men. Although the government hired nearly 4 million women for mostly clerical jobs, it was the women in the factories who captured tire public's imagination. The great symbol of the campaign to hire women was "Rosie the Riveter," a character from a popular song by the Four Vagabonds. Tire lyrics told of Rosie, who worked in a factory while her boyfriend served in the marines. Images of Rosie appeared on posters, in newspapers, and in magazines. Eventually 2.5 million women went to work in shipyards, aircraft factories, and other manufacturing plants. For many older mid- dle-class women like Inez Sauer, working in a factory changed their perspective: Hi learned that just because you're a woman and have never worked is no reason you can't leant. The job really broadened me. . . . I had always been in a shell; I'd always been protected. But at Boeing I found a freedom and an independence I had never known, After the war I could never go back to playing bridge again, being a clubwoman_when I knew there were things you could use your mind for. The war changed my life completely. —quoted in Eyewitness to World WarII Although most women left the factories after the war, their success permanently changed American attitudes about women in the workplace. African Americans Demand War Work Althaea factories were hiring women, they resisted hiring African Americans. Frustrated by the situation, A. Philip Randolph, the head of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters—a major union for African American railroad workers—decided to take action He informed President Roosevelt that he was organizing "from ten to fifty thousand (African Americans] to march on Washington in the interest! of securing jobs ... in national defense and . . . integration into the- military and naval forces." In response, Roosevelt issued1 Executive Order 8S02, on June 25,144L The order declared, "there shall be no discrimination in the employment of I workers in defense industries or gov-] eminent because of race, creed, color] or national origin." To enforce the order, the president created the Fair Employment Practices Commission-! the first civil rights agency established] by the federal government since the Reconstruction era. Mexicans Become Farmworken The wartime economy needed workers in many different areas. To help farmers in the Southwest overcoat: the labor shortage, the government introduced the Bracero Program in 1942. Bracero is Spanish for worker The federal government arranged for Mexican farmworkers to help in the harvest. Over 200,000 Mexicans carts to the United States to help harvest The Navajo Code Talkers 1942-1945 When American marines stormed an enemy beach, they used radios to communicate. Using radios, however, meant that the Japanese could intercept and translate the messages. In the midst of the battle, however, there was no time to use a code machine. Acting upon the suggestion of Philip Johnston, an engineer who had lived on a Navajo reservation as a child, the marines recruited Navajos to serve as "code talkers." The Navajo language was a "hidden language"—it had no written alphabet and was known only to the Navajo and a few missionaries and anthropologists. The Navajo recruits developed a code using words from their own language to represent military terms. For example, the Navajo word jay-sho, or "buzzard," was code for bornber; lotso, or "whale," meant battleship; and na-ma-si, or "potatoes," stood for grenades. Code talkers proved invaluable in combat. They could relay a message in minutes that would have taken a code machine operator hours to encipher and transmit. At the battle of Iwo Jima, code talkers transmitted more than 800 messages during the first 48 hours as the marines struggled to get ashore under intense bornbardment. Over 400 Navajo served in the marine corps as code talkers. Sworn to secrecy, their mission was not revealed until many years after the war. In 2001 Congress awarded the code talkers the Congressional Cold Medal to recognize their unique contribution to the war effort. Population migration between regions NORTH Detroit * o O " Memphis* <5 % Fort Ml Worth Dallas / SOUTH Houston H Baton.Rou9e. Mobile New York City ington, D.C. (ruit and vegetables in the Southwest. Many also helped to build and maintain railroads. The Bracero ogram continued until 1964. Migrant farmworkers came an important part of the Southwest's agri- lltural system. Describing How did mobilizing the economy help end the Depression? A Nation on the Move The wartime economy created millions of new I cobs, but the Americans who wanted these jobs did I not always live nearby. To get to the jobs, 15 million nericans moved during the war. Although the embly plants of the Midwest and the shipyards (of the Northeast attracted many workers, most ericans headed west and south in search of jobs. Taken together, the growth of southern California Bind the expansion of cities in the Deep South created new industrial region—the Sunbelt. For the first Itime since the Industrial Revolution began in the nited States, the South and West led the way in nufacturing and urbanization. 'The Housing Crisis Perhaps the most difficult task :,g cities with war industries was deciding where Input the thousands of new workers. Many people 1 to live in tents and tiny trailers. To help solve the ising crisis, the federal government allocated over 1 billion to build public housing, schools, and minify centers during the war. Although prefabricated government housing d tiny rooms, thin walls, poor heating, and almost no privacy, it was better than no housing at all. Nearly two million people lived in government- built housing during the war. Racism Explodes Into Violence African Americans began to leave the South in great numbers during World War I, but this "Great Migration," as historians refer to it, slowed during the Depression. When jobs in war factories opened up for African Americans during World War IT, the Great Migration resumed. When African Americans arrived in the crowded cities of the North and West, however, they were often met with suspicion and intolerance. Sometimes these attitudes led to violence. The worst racial violence of the war erupted in Detroit on Sunday, June 20, 1943. The weather that day was sweltering. To cool off, nearly 100,000 people crowded into Belle Isle, a park on the Detroit River. Fights erupted between gangs of white and African American teenage girls. These fights triggered others, and a full-scale riot erupted across the city. By the time the violence ended, 25 African Americans and 9 whites had been killed. Despite the appalling violence in Detroit, African American leaders remained committed to their Double V campaign. The Zoot Suit Riots Wartime prejudice erupted elsewhere as well. In southern California, racial tensions became entangled with juvenile delinquency. Across the nation, crimes committed by young people rose dramatically. In Los Angeles, racism against Mexican Americans and the fear of juvenile crime became linked because of tire "zoot suit." CHAPTER 25 America and World War II A zoot suit had very baggy, pleated pants and an overstuffed, knee-length jacket with wide lapels. Accessories included a wide-brimmed hat and a long key chain. Zoot-suit wearers usually wore their hair long, gathered into a ducktail. The zoot suit angered many Americans. In order to save fabric for the war, most men wore a "victory suit"—a suit with no vest, no cuffs, a short jacket, and narrow lapels. By comparison, the zoot suit seemed unpatriotic. In California, Mexican American teenagers adopted the zoot suit. In June 1943, after hearing rumors that zoot suiters had attacked several sailors, 2,500 soldiers and sailors stormed into Mexican American neighborhoods in Los Angeles. They attacked Mexican American teenagers, cut their hair, and tore off their zoot suits, The police did not intervene, and the violence continued for several days. The city of Los Angeles responded by banning the zoot suit. Racial hostility against Mexican Americans did not deter them from joining the war effort. Approximately 500,000 Hispanic Americans served in the armed forces during the war. Most—about 400,000—were Mexican American. Another 65,000 were from Puerto Rico. They fought in Europe, North Africa, and the Pacific, and by the end of the war, 17 Mexican Americans had received the Medal of Honor. Japanese American Relocation when japan attacked Pearl Harbor, many West Coast Amencans turned their anger against Japanese Americans. Mote attacked Japanese American businesses and homes. Banks would not cash their checks, and grocers refused to sell them food. Newspapers printed rumors about Japanesesp" in the Japanese American community. Member* nt Congress, mayors, and many business and labor leaders demanded that all people of Japanese ancestry be removed from the West Coast. They did not believe that Japanese Americans would remain loyal to the United States in the face of war with Japan. On February 19, 1942, President Roosevelt gave in to pressure and signed an order allowing the IVar Department to declare any part of the United State-to be a military zone and to remove anybody they wanted from that zone. Secretary of War Henry Stimwn declared most of the West Coast a military zone and ordered all people of Japanese ancestry' to evacuate to 10 internment camps. Not all Japanese Americans accepted the relocation without protest. Fred Korematsu argued that his rights had been violated and took his case to the Supreme Court. In December 1944, in Korematsu v. the United States, the Supreme Court ruled that the relocation was constitutional because it was based noton race, but on "military urgency." Shortly afterward, the Court did rule in Er Parte Endo that loyal American citizens amid not be held against their will. In early 1945, therefore, the government began to release the Japanese Americans from the camps. C3 (See page 1081 for more information on Korematsu v. the United States.! Despite the fears ai\d rumors, no Japanese .American was ever tried for espionage or sabotage. Japanese Americans served as translators for the army during the war in the Pacific. The all-Japanese IXIth Battalion, later integrated into the 442nd Regimental Combat Team, was the most highly decorated unit in World War 11. I After the war, the Japanese American Citizens League (JACL) tried to help Japanese Americans who I had lost property during the relocation. Tn 1988 President Reagan apologized to Japanese Americans on behalf of the U.S. government and signed legislation granting $20,000 to each surviving Japanese American who had been interned. luiimmntnt ^Picturing History Rationing Products War rationing affected everyone. Women painted seams on their legs to make It appear they were wearing stockings, because silk was needed to make parachutes instead of stockings. Wtiy was rationing so vital ro the war effort? Comparing Why did racism lead to violence in Detroit and Los Angeles in 1943? Daily Life in Wartime America Housing problems and racial tensions were serious difficulties during the war, but mobilization strained society in many other ways as well. Prices rose, materials were in short supply, and the question dhow to pay for it all loomed ominously over the entire war effort. Wage and Price Controls As the economy mobilized, the president worried about inflation. Both ages and prices began to rise quickly during the war because of the high demand for workers and raw terials. To stabilize both wages and prices, Roosevelt created the Office of Price Administration (OPA) and the Office of Economic Stabilization fOES). The OES regulated wages and the price of products. The OPA regulated all other prices. Despite some problems with labor unions, the OPA and OES were able to keep inflation under control. While the OPA and OES worked to control inflation, the War Labor Board (WLB) tried to prevent strikes that might endanger the war effort. In support, most American unions issued a "no strike pledge," and instead of striking, asked the WLB to serve as a mediator in wage disputes. By the end of the war, the WLB had helped to settle over 17,000 disputes involving more than 12 million workers. Blue Points, Red Points The demand for raw materials and supplies created shortages. The OPA began rationing, or limiting the availability of, mnnv products to make sure enough were available for military use. Meat and sugar were rationed to provide enough for the army. To save gasoline and rubber, gasoline was rationed, driving was restricted, and the speed limit was set at 35 miles per hour. Every month each household would pick up a book of ration coupons. Blue coupons, called blue points, controlled processed foods. Red coupons, or red points, controlled meats, fats, and oils. Other coupons controlled items such as coffee and sugar. When people bought food, they also had to give enough coupon points to cov er their purchases. CHAPTER 23 America and World War 11 Iceland. NATO members agreed to come to the aid of any member who was attacked. For the first time in its history, the United States had committed itself to maintaining peace in Europe. Six years later, NATO allowed West Germany to rearm and join its organization. This decision alarmed Sosie: leaders. They responded by organizings military alliance in Eastern Europe, which became known as the Warsaw Pact. The United States also created other regional alliances. Tine Organization of American States (OAS) started in 1948 and the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATOi formed in 1954. Evaluating vVhat triggered the beginning of the Berlin airlift? ^Picturing History Bucking the Blockade The Berlin airlift became a symbol of American determination to resist the Soviet Union's effort to control Berlin. For how many months did American pilots supply Berlin with food and supplies? The Cold War Spreads to East Asia The Berlin Airlift The decision to create West Germany convinced the Soviets that they would never get the reparations they wanted. In late June 1948, Soviet troops cut all road and rail traffic to West Berlin. The blockade provoked a crisis. President Truman sent long-range bornbers with atomic weapons to bases in Britain. General Lucius Clay, the American commander in Germany, warned of what might happen. "If we mean to hold Europe against communism, then we must not budge," he said. The challenge was to keep West Berlin alive without provoking war with the Soviets. In June 1948, Truman ordered the Berlin airlift to begin. For 11 months, cargo planes supplied Berliners with food, medicine, and coal. The airlift continued through the spring of 1949, bringing in over 2 million tons erf supplies. Stalin finally lifted the blockade on May 12. The Berlin airlift symbolized American determination to stand by Berlin. NATO The Berlin blockade convinced many Americans that the Soviets were bent on conquest. The public began to support a military alliance with Western Europe. By April 1949, an agreement had been reached to create tire North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)—a mutual defense alliance. NATO initially Included 12 countries: the United States, Canada, Britain, France, Italy, Belgium, Denmark, Portugal, the Netherlands, Norway, Luxembourg, and Tine Cold War eventually spread beyond Europe. Conflicts also emerged in Asia, where events in China and Korea brought abouta new attitude toward Japan. Civil War and Revolution in China in China. Communist forces led by Mao Zedong had been struggling against the Nationalist government led bv Chiang Kai-shek since the late 1920s. During World War 11, the two sides suspended their war to resist Japanese occupation. With the end of World WarII however, civil war broke out again. Although Mae made great gains, neither side could win, and neither would accept a compromise. To prevent a Communist revolution in Asia, the United States sent the Nationalist government $2bil- lion in aid beginning in the mid-1940s, but it squats dered this advantage with poor military planning and corruption. By 1949 the Communists had captured the Chinese capital of Beijing and moved southward! while support for the Nationalists declined. In August 1949, the State Department discontinued aid to the Chinese Nationalists. The defeated Nationalists then fled the Chinese mainland forlhe small island of Taiwan (Formosa). The victorious Communists established the People's Republic* China in October 1949. After the Fall China's fall to communism shocked j Americans. To make matters worse, in September M* the Soviet Union announced that it had successful!! 786 CHAPTER 26 The Cold War Begins . 5 v- ty remained invisible to most Americans, who assumed that the country's general prosperity had provided everyone with a comfortable existence. The writer Michael Harrington, however, made no such assumptions. During the 1950s, Harrington set out to chronicle poverty in the United States. In his book. Vie Other America, published in 1962, he alerted those in the mainstream to what he saw in the run-down and hidden communities of the country: 46Tens of millions of Americans are, at this very moment, maimed in body and spirit, existing at levels beneath those necessary for human decency. If these people are not starving, they are hungry, and sometimes fat with hunger, for that is what cheap foods do. They are without adequate housing and education and medical care39 —from The Other America The poor included single mothers and the elderly; minority immigrants such as Puerto Ricans and Mexicans; rural Americans, black and white; and inner city residents, who remained stuck in crowded slums as wealthier citizens fled to the suburbs. Poverty also gripped many Americans in the nation's palachian region, which stretches from msylvania to Georgia, as well as Native ericans, many of whom endured grinding poverty whether they stayed on reservations or migrated to cities. rnoMics The Decline of the Inner City The poverty in the 11950s was most apparent in the nation's urban centers. As white families moved to the suburbs, many I inner cities became home to poorer, less educated I minority groups. The centers of many cities deteriorated, because as the middle class moved out, their I ox money went with them. This deprived inner cities I of the tax dollars necessary to provide adequate pub- I lie transportation, housing, and other services. I When government tried to help inner city resi- I dents, it often made matters worse. During the 1950s, Ibrexample, urban renewal programs tried to elimi- I rate poverty by tearing down slums and erecting new high-rise buildings for poor residents. The crowded conditions of these high-rise projects, powever, often created an atmosphere of violence. Itbegovernment also unwittingly encouraged the res- Bidents of public housing to remain poor by evicting Mem as soon as they began to earn any money. | In the end, urban renewal programs actually Hgroyed more housing space than they created. Too often in the name of urban improvement, the wrecking ball destroyed poor people's homes to make way for roadways, parks, universities, tree- lined boulevards, or shopping centers. African Americans Many of the citizens left behind in the cities as families fled to the suburbs were African American. The large number of African American inner city residents resulted largely from the migration of more than 3 million African Americans from tire South to the North between 1940 and 1960. Many African Americans had migrated in the hopes of finding greater economic opportunity and escaping violence and racial intimidation. For many of these migrants, however, life proved to be little better in Northern cities. Fewer and fewer jobs were available as numerous factories and mills left the cities for suburbs and smaller towns in order to cut their costs. Long-standing patterns of racial discrimination in schools, housing, hiring, and salaries in the North kept inner-city African Americans poor. The last hired and the first fired for good jobs, they often remained stuck in the worst-paying occupations. In 1958 African American salaries, on average, equaled only 51 percent of what whites earned. History ^Picturing Inner-City Poverty This young African American girl in Chicago's inner city struggles to lill a bowl with water that has frozen due to lack of heat Why did the numbers of poor in the country's inner cities grow in the 1950s? Poverty and racial discrimination also deprived many African Americans of other benefits, such as decent medical care. Responding to a correspondent who had seen A Raisin in the Sun, Lorraine Hansberry wrote, "The ghettos are killing us; not only our dreams ... but our very' bodies. It is not an abstraction to us that the average [African American | has a life expectancy of five to ten years less than the average white." Several African American groups, such as the NAACP and the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), pressed for greater economic opportunity for African Americans. In general, however, these organizations met with little success. Hispanics African Americans were not the only minority group that struggled with poverty. Much of the nation's Hispanic population faced the same problems. During the 1950s and early 1960s, the Bracero program brought nearly 5 million Mexicans to the United States to work on farms and ranches in the Southwest The Braceros were temporary contract workers, and many later returned home. Some came with their families, however, and about 350,000 settled permanently in the United States. These laborers, who worked on large farms throughout the country, lived a life of extreme poverty and hardship. They toiled long hours for little pay in conditions that were often unbearable. As Michael Harrington noted, "[The nation's migrant ^Picturing History Vocational Training Native American Franklin Beaver learns to become a stone mason at this vocational school sponsored by the U.S. Indian Bureau Why was the government trying to bnng Native Americans into mainstream society? laborers] work ten-eleven-twelve hour days in temperatures over one hundred degrees. Sometimes I there is no drinking water. . . . Women and children 1 work on ladders and with hazardous machinery Babies are brought to the field and are placed in cradles' of wood boxes." Away from the fields, many Mexican families lived in small, crudely built shacks, while some did not even have a roof over their heads. "They sleep where they can, some in the open," Harrington nuted about one group of migrant workers. "They eat when they can (and sometimes what they can)." The nation j would pay little attention to the plight of Mexican farm laborers until the 1960s, when the workers began to organize for greater rights. Native Americans Native Americans also faced challenges throughout the postwar era of prosperity I By the middle of the 1900s, Native Americans—who made up less than one percent of the population- were the poorest group in the nation. Average annual family income for Native American families, for example, was $1,000 less than that for African Americans. | After World War II, during which many Native American soldiers had served with distinction, the U.S. government launched a program to bring Native Americans into mainstream society—whether they wanted to assimilate or not. Under the plan, which became known as the termination policy, the federal government withdrew all official recognition of the Native American groups as legal entities and made them subject to the same laws as white citizens. \ the same time, the government encouraged Native Americans to blend in to larger society by helping them move off the reservations to cities such as Minneapolis, Minnesota. Although the idea of integrating Native Americans I into mainstream society began with good intentions, 1 some of its supporters had more selfish goals. Speculators and developers sometimes gained rich farmland at the expense of destitute Native American groups. Most Native Americans found termination a disastrous policy that only deepened their poverty. In the mid-1950s, for example, the Welfare Council of Minneapolis described Native American living conditions in that city as miserable. "One Indian famA. of five or six, living in two rooms, will take in relatives and friends who come from the reservations seeking jobs until perhaps fifteen people will he crowded into the space," the council reported, During the 1950s, Native Americans in Minneapolis could expect to live only 37 years, compared toft In 1965 VISTA (Volunteers in Service to America) was created as part of President Johnson's war on poverty. Roused by the social consciousness of the early 1960s, thousands of students and young people focused their energy into working with local agencies in low-income communities around the nation. One of VISTA's basic themes was to help local communities mobilize their own resources. Since 1993 VISTA has been a part of the AmeriCorps network of service programs. One created a new cabinet agency, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, in 1965. Its first Secretary, Robert Weaver, was the first African I American to serve in a cabinet. A broad-based pro- pam informally called "Model Cities" authorized | ltderal subsidies to many cities nationwide. The Els, matched by local and state contributions, sup- ed an array of programs, including transporta- health care, housing, and policing. Since many I blessed urban areas lacked sufficient or affordable | housing, legislation also authorized about $8 billion I tobuild houses for low- and middle-income people. | One notable Great Society' measure changed I lie composition of the American population: the I immigration Reform Act of 1965. For a brief time, this |Kt maintained a strict limit on the number of immi- prants admitted to the United States each year: 170,000 torn the Eastern Hemisphere and 120,000 from the I festern Hemisphere, ft did, however, eliminate the I ational origins system established in the 1920s, which I ad given preference to northern European immi- I ants, The new measure opened wider the door of the United States to newcomers from all parts of Europe, as well as from Asia and Africa. Summarizing What were the Great Society programs? Legacy of the Great Society The Great Society programs touched nearly every aspect of American life and improved thousands if not millions of lives. In the years since President Johnson left office, however, debate has continued over whether or not the Great Society' was truly a success. In many ways, the impact of the Great Society was limited. In his rush to get as much done as he could, Johnson did not calculate exactly how his programs might work. As a result, some of them did not work as well as people had hoped. Furthermore, the programs grew so quickly they were often unmanageable and difficult to evaluate. Cities, states, and groups eligible for aid began to expect immediate and life-changing benefits. These CHAPTER 28 The New Frontier and the Great Society' 859 senators had to vote for cloture to stop a filibuster. This meant that a minority of senators opposed to civil rights could easily prevent the majority from enacting new civil rights laws. Worried the bill would never pass, many African Americans became even more disheartened. Then President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963, and his vice president, Lyndon Johnson, became president. Johnson was from Texas and had been the leader of the Senate [Democrats before becoming vice president. Although I he had helped push the Civil Rights Acts of 1957 and 1 1960 through the Senate, he had done so bv weaken- I ing their provisions and by compromising with other I Southern senators. i To the surprise of the .civil rights movement, I johnson committed himself wholeheartedly to getting Kennedy's program, including the civil rights I;bill, through Congress. Unlike Kennedy, Johnson was I very familiar with how Congress operated, having [served there for many years. He knew how to build public support, how to put pressure on members of Congress, and how to use the rules and procedures to I get what he wanted. j In February 1964, President Johnson's leadership [began to produce results. The civil rights bill passed the House of Representatives by a majority of 290 to 130. The debate then moved to the Senate. In June, after 87 days of filibuster, the Senate finally voted to End debate by a margin of 71 to 29—four votes over the two-thirds needed for cloture. On July 2, 1964, I lent Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 aw. Civil Rights Act of 1964 was the most compre- ve civil rights law Congress had ever enacted. It the federal government broad power to prevent I discrimination in a number of areas. How did Dr. King lobby I Congress to expand the right to participate in the democratic I process? The Struggle for Voting Rights Even after the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed, voting rights were far from secure. The act had focused on segregation and job discrimination, and it did little to address voting issues. The Twenty-fourth Amendment, ratified in 1964, helped somewhat by' eliminating poll taxes, or fees paid in order to vote, in federal (but not state) elections. African Americans still faced hurdles, however, when they tried to vote. As the SCLC and SNCC stepped up their voter registration efforts in the South, their members were often attacked and beaten, and several were murdered. Across the South, bornbs exploded in African American businesses and churches. Between June and October 19o4, arson and bornbs destroyed 24 African American churches in Mississippi alone. Convinced that a new law was needed to protect African American voting rights. Dr. King decided to stage another dramatic protest. The Selma March In January 1965, the SCLC and Dr. King selected Selma, Alabama, as the focal point for their campaign for voting rights. Although African Americans made up a majority of Selma's Voting Rights In the early 1960s, Afncan Americans Cl 1APTER 29 The Civil Rights Movement 879 1,300 buildings, and the damage in property loss was estimated at $250 million. The governor of Michigan, who viewed the smoldering city from a helicopter, remarked that Detroit looked like "a city that had been bornbed." The Kerner Commission in 1967 President Johnson appointed the National Adv isory Commission | on Civil Disorders, headed by Governor Otto Kerner of Illinois, to j: study the causes of the urban riots and to make recommendations to Pprevent them from happening [again in the future. The Kerner Commission, as it became known, conducted a detailed study of the problem. The commission blamed white society and white racism for the majority of the problems in the inner city. "Our nation is moving toward two societies, one black, one white—separate and unequal," it concluded. The commission recommended the creation of 1 million new jobs in the inner citv, the construction of 6 million new units of public housing, and a newed federal commitment to fight de facto segre- I gation. President Johnson's war on poverty, how- I per, which addressed some of the same concerns for er-city jobs and housing, was already underway. I Saddled with massive spending for the Vietnam War, however. President Johnson never endorsed the :ommendations of the commission. * ^cruring History Anger in Chicago When Dr. King refocused the civil rights movement on the North, some white Americans protested. What did King do to draw attention to slum conditions in Chicago? Explaining What was the federal government's response to the race riots in Los Angeles and Detroit? The Shift to Economic Rights By the mid-1960s, a number of African American leaders were becoming increasingly critical of Martin .uther King's nonviolent strategy. They felt it had led to improve the economic position of African Americans. What good was the right to dine at restaurants or stay at hotels if most African Americans could not afford these services anyway? Dr. King became sensitive to this criticism, and in 1%3 he began to focus on economic issues. In 1965 Albert Rabv, president of a council |dI community organizations that worked to improve conditions for Chicago's poor, invited Dr. King to visit the city. Dr. King and his staff had never conducted a civil rights campaign in the North. By focusing on the problems that African Americans faced in Chicago, Dr. King believed he could call greater attention to poverty and other racial problems that lay beneath the urban race riots. To call attention to the deplorable housing conditions that many African American families faced. Dr. King and his wife Coretta moved into a slum apartment in an African American neighborhood in Chicago. Dr. King and the SCLC hoped to work with local leaders to improve the economic status of African Americans in Chicago's poor neighborhoods. The Chicago Movement, however, made little headway. When Dr. King led a march through the all- white suburb of Marquette Park to demonstrate the need for open housing, he was met by angry white mobs similar to those in Birmingham and Selma. Mayor Richard Daley ordered the Chicago police to protect the marchers, but he wanted to avoid any repeat of the violence. He met with Dr. King and proposed a new program to clean up the slums. Associations of realtors and bankers also agreed to promote open housing. In theory, mortgages and rental property would be available to everyone, regardless of race. In practice, very' little changed. Describing How did Dr. King and SCLC leaders hope to address economic concerns? CHAPTER 29 Che Civil Rights Movement 083 New Approaches to Civil Rights Guide to Reading Main Idea Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, minority groups developed new ways to improve their status in the United States. Key Terms and Names affirmative action, Allan Bakke, busing, Jesse Jackson, Congressional Black Caucus, Cesar Chavez, La Raza Unida, bilingualism, American Indian Movement Reading Strategy Sequencing As you read about the civil rights movement's new approaches, complete a time line similar to the one below to record new groups and their actions. An American Story In 1968 Vernon and Clyde Bellecourt, along with other Native Americans in Minneapolis, were struggling to earn a living. The Bellecourts decided to take a stand against their conditions. Spurred by the 1960s protest movements and by reawakened pride in their culture, the brothers helped organize the American Indian Movement (AIM). AIM's goal was to combat discrimination and brutality by the local police. Vernon recalled how AIM worked: 66They got a small grant from the Urban League of Minneapolis to put two-way radios in their cars and to get tape recorders and cameras. They would listen to the police calls, and when they heard ... that police were being dispatched to a certain community or bar, they'd show up with cameras and take pictures of the police using more than normal restraint on people.... AIM would show up and have attorneys ready. Often they would beat the police back to the station. They would have a bondsman there, and they'd start filing lawsuits against the police department. —quoted in Native American Testimony Fighting for Greater Opportunity At a time of heightened protest in the United States, Native Americans began raising their voices for reform and change. Other groups did as well. During the 1960s and early 1970s, Hispanic Americans organized to improve their status in society. If businesses opened their doors wider to minorities, more of them could begin building better lives. In one example of affirmative action's impact, Atlanta witnessed a significant increase in minority job opportunities shortly after Maynard Jackson became its first African American mayor in 1973. When Jackson took office, less than one percent of all city contracts went to African Americans, even The Day the Pitcher Refused to Play In a time when noisy demonstrations were the rule, one American's quiet observance of his religious laws captured the nation's attention. Sandy Koufax, star pitcher for the Los Angeles Dodgers baseball team, chose not to pitch the opening game of the 1965 World Series because the event fell on Yom Kippur, the holiest day of the Jewish calendar. On this day, Jews are expected to abstain from work, and Koufax felt that included playing baseball. Picturing History Equal Opportunity Allan Bakke graduated from medical school after the Supreme Court overturned the University of California's use of specific racial quotas. How did the Bakke case affect affirmative adion? though they made up about half of Atlanta's population. Jackson used the expansion of the city's airport to redress this imbalance by opening the bidding process for airport contracts more w idely to minority firms. Through his efforts, small companies and minority firms took on 25 percent of all airport construction work, earning them some $125 million in contracts. Challenges to Affirmative Action Affirmative action programs did not go unchallenged. Critics viewed them as a form of "reverse discrimination.'' They claimed that qualified white w'orkers were kept from jobs, promotions, and a place in schools because a certain number of such positions had been set aside for minorities or women. One of the more notable attacks on affirmative action came in 1974, after officials at the University of California Medical School at Davis turned down the admission of a w'hite applicant named Allan Bakke for a second time. When Bakke learned that slots had been set aside for minorities, he sued the school. Bakke argued that by admitting minority applicants, some of whom had scored lower than Bakke on their exams, the school had discriminated against him due to his race. In 1978, in University of California Regents v. Bakke, the Supreme Court, in a 5 to 4 ruling, declared that the university had indeed violated Bakke's rights. On the other hand, it ruled that schools could use racial criteria as part of their admissions process so long as they did not use "fixed quotas." While Bakke was not a strong and definitive ruling, the Court had nevertheless supported affirmative action programs as constitutional. QJ (See page 1082 for more information on University of California Regents v. Bakke.J CHAPTER 31 I he Politics of Protest nomination. Although both attempts were unsuccessful, Jackson did win over millions of voters. African Americans also became more influential in Congress. In 1971 African American members of Congress reorganized an existing organization into the Congressional Black Caucus in order to more dearly represent the concerns of African Americans. Another leader who emerged was Louis Farrakhan of the Nation of Islam. In 1994 he helped organize the Million Man March, a gathering of African American men in Washington, D.C., to promote self-reliance and community responsibility. Examining What were the goals of affirmative action policies? Hispanic Americans Organize Hispanic Americans also worked for greater rights in tliis period. In 1960 about 3 million Hispanics lived in the United States. By the late 1960s, that number had increased to 9 million. Hispanics came to the United States from different places and for different reasons. Many Puerto Ricans migrated to eastern cities, particularly New York, to find jobs. Cubans often came to flee their country's Communist regime. The largest Hispanic group was Mexican Americans, many of whom arrived during and after World War II to work on huge farms in the South and West. Hispanics often faced prejudice and limited access to adequate education, housing, and employment. Encouraged by the civil rights movement, they began to organize a protest movement. Cesar Chavez and the UFW One notable Hispanic American campaign was the effort to win rights for farmworkers. Most Mexican American farm laborers earned little pay, received few benefits, and had no job security. In the early 1960s, Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta organized two groups that fought for farmworkers. In 1965 the groups cooperated in a strike against California growers to demand union recognition, increased wages, and better benefits. When employers resisted, Chavez enlisted college students, churches, and civil rights groups to organ- ze a national boycott of table grapes, one of California's largest agricultural products. An estimated 17 million citizens stopped buying them, and industrv profits tumbled. Under the sponsorship of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organization (AFL-CIO), in 1966 Chavez and Huerta merged their two organizations into one—the United Farm Workers (UFW). The union's combined strength ensured that the boycott would continue. The boycott ended in 1970, when the grape growers finally agreed to a contract to raise wages and improve working conditions. Growing Political Activism Hispanic Americans became more politically active during the 1960s and 1970s. In 1969 josd Angel Gutierrez organized a new political party in Texas called La Raza Unida, or "the United People." Working with similar organizations in Colorado and California, the group mobilized Mexican American voters with calls for job-training programs and greater access to financial institutions. In the 1970s, the party demonstrated significant strength at the polls. During this period, a growing number of Hispanic youths became involved in civil rights. In March 1968, about 1,000 Mexican American students and their teachers at an East Uos Angeles high school walked out of their classrooms to protest racism. One issue both Hispanic students and political leaders promoted was bilingualism, the practice of teaching immigrant students in their own language Student Web Activity Visit the American Vision Web site at tav.glencoe.com and click on Student Web Activities— Chapter 31 for an activity on protest movements. U.S. Hispanic Population Growth Sinre 1QR0 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 Year Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States. Graph Skills 1. Interpreting Graphs The U.S. Hispanic population is made up of which main groups? 2. Drawing Conclusions Why have Hispanic Americans experienced growing political influence in recent years? CHAPTER 31 The Politics of Protest 935 TrOmCf in History Dolores Huerta 1930- Dolores Huerta began her career as an elementary school teacher, but she soon left, believing that she could do more good for Mexican Americans outside the classroom. "I couldn't stand seeing kids come to class hungry and needing shoes," she said. "I thought I could do more by organizing farmworkers than by trying to teach their hungry children." In die early 1950s, Huerta helped found the Stockton, California, chapter of the Community Service Organization (CSO). This grassroots group led voter registration drives, pushed for improved public services, and fought for legislation on behalf of low-income workers. It was through her work with the CSO that Huerta met Cesar Chavez. Together, they organized farmworkers into a union and fought for better wages and working conditions. Jose Angel Gutierrez 1944- As a young social activist, Jos£ Angel Gutierrez set out to organize Mexican Americans from Crystal City, Texas, into a political force. In 1970 his newly founded political party. La Razo Unida, participated in local elections. Over the next few years, Mexican Americans gained control of Crystal City's school system and government. As La Raza Unida gained a more national following Gutierrez became a prominent figure. He eventually stepped away from the political scene, serving first as a judge and then as a college professor. Gutierrez found it difficult to stay away from politics, however, and in 1993, he ran unsuccessfully for a U.S. Senate seat. After that, he established his own legal center. Looking upon Gutierrez's career, one historian said, "He represents the new breed of Chicano professionals produced by the colleges and universities but he is still a Chicano with the old dream of revolution" while they also learned English. Many Hispanics argued they would be at a competitive disadvantage with native English speakers unless they had schooling in their native language. Congress supported their arguments, passing the Bilingual Education Act in 1968. This directed school districts to set up classes for immigrants in their own language as they were learning English. In recent years there has been some movement away from bilingualism in states with large Hispanic populations. Some educators argue that total immersion in English is the soundest road to educational success. Some American voters opposed bilingual education, believing it makes it more difficult for a child to adjust to American culture and that it was costly besides. The U.S. Supreme Court, however, upheld bilingualism in 1974. Explaining How did Hispanic Americans increase their economic opportunities In the 1960s? Native Americans Raise Their Voices Native Americans in 1970 were one of the nation's smallest minority groups, constituting less than one percent of the U.S, population. Few' minority' groups, however, had more justifiable grievances than the descendants of America's original inhabitants. The average annual family income of Native Americans was $1,000 less than that of African Americans The Native American unemployment rate was 10 times the national rate. Joblessness was particularly high on reservation lands, where nearly half of all Native Americans lived. Most urban Native Americans suffered from discrimination and from limited education and training. The bleakest statistic of all showed that life expectancy among Native Americans was almost seven years below' the national average. To improve conditions, many Native Americans began organizing in the late 1960s and 1970s. A Protest Movement Emerges in 1961 more than 400 members of 67 Native American groups gathered in Chicago to discuss ways to address their numerous problems. They issued a manifesto, known as the Declaration of Indian Purpose, calling for policies to create greater economic opportunities on reservations. Unlike other groups demanding more assimilation into mainstream society, many Native Americans wanted greater independence from it. They took a step tow'ard this goal in 1968 when Congress passed the Indian Civil Rights Act. It guaranteed reservation residents the protections of the Bill of Rights, hut it also recognized the legitimacy of local reservation law. Native Americans who viewed the government's reform efforts as too modest formed more militant groups, such as the American Indian Movement (AIM). Typically, such groups employed a more combative style. In 1969 AIM made a symnbolic protest. The Politics of Protest Following his victory, Nixon set out to attract even more Southerners to the Republican Party, an effort that became known as the Southern strategy. Toward this end, the president fulfilled his agreements with Thurmond and took steps to slow desegregation. During his tenure, Nixon worked to overturn several civil rights policies. He reversed a Johnson administration policy, for example, that had cut off federal funds for racially segregated schools. A Law-and-Order President Having also won the presidency with a promise of law and order, Nixon immediately set out to battle crime in America. His administration specifically targeted the nation's antiwar protesters. Attorney General John Mitchell declared that he stood ready to prosecute "hard-line militants" who crossed state lines to stir up riots. Mitchell's deputy, Richard Kleindienst, went even further with the boast, "We're going to enforce the law against draft evaders, against radical students, against deserters, against civil disorders, against organized crime, and against street crime." Nixon also went on the attack against the recent Supreme Court rulings that expanded the rights of accused criminals. Nixon openly criticized the Court and its chief justice, Earl Warren. The president promised to fill vacancies on the Supreme Court with judges who would support the rights of law enforcement over the rights of suspected criminals. When Chief Justice Warren retired shortly after Nixon took office, the president replaced him with Warren Burger, a respected conservative judge. He also placed three other conservative justices on the Court, including one from the South. The Burger Court did not reverse Warren Court rulings on the rights of criminal suspects. It did, however, refuse to expand those rights further. For example, in Stone v Powell (1976), it agreed to limits on the rights of defendants to appeal state convictions to the federal judiciary. The Court also continued to uphold capita) punishment as constitutional. Q] (Seepage 1085 for mm information on Stone v. Powell.) The New Federalism President Nixon's Republican constituency also favored dismantling a number of federal programs and giving more control to state and local governments. Nixon called this New Federalism. He argued that it would provide the government agencies that were closest to the citizens the opportunity to address more of their issues. "I reject the patronizing idea that government in Washington, D.C., " inevitably more wise and more efficient than government at the state or local level," Nixon declared. "The idea that a bureaucratic elite in Washington knows what's best for people . . .is really a contention that people cannot govern themselves." Under the New Federalism program. Congress passed a series of revenue-sharing bills that granted federal funds to state and local agencies to use. Although revenue sharing was intended to give state and local agencies more power, over time it gave the federal government new' power. As states came to depend on federal funds, the federal government could impose conditions on the states. Unless they met those conditions, their funds would be cut off. While he worked to limit federal government responsibilities, Nixon also sought to increase the power of the executive branch. Nixon did not Romans Acosta Banuelos 1925- On her first day of business in downtown Los Angeles, California, Romana Acosta Banuelos made $36 selling tortillas. That was in 1949. She made great strides after that, becoming a successful businessperson and serving as U.S. treasurer in the 1970s. Born in 1925 in a small town in Arizona to Mexican American immigrants, Banuelos spent part of her childhood on a ret itive's small ranch in Mexico. Rising early, she tended the crops and helped her mother make empanadas (Mexican turnovers) to sell to local restaurants. "My mother was the type of woman that taught us how to live in any place and work with what we have." That lesson inspired Bahuelos to start her own business when she returned to the United States at the age of 19. Gradually her business grew, and by the mid-1960s, it was thriving. In 1979 Romana's Mexican Food Products employed about 400 people and had sales of some $12 million annually. Banuelos worked at more than accumulating wealth. She contributed to scholarships for Mexican American students, especially those interested in business, which Banuelos believes is an important path to political influence. With a number of partners, she also founded the Pan-American National Bank. It too was successful. Banuelos' success and community leadership led to President Nixon's appointing her as U.S. treasurer in 1971. 954 CHAPTER 32 Politics ;uul Economics 