Washington retires. Washington had been reelected in 1792. However, he always kept aloof from party strife, and he refused to run for a third term. In 1797, he once more returned to Mount Vernon and private life. Looking back on his Presidency, George Washington was not entirely happy with what had been accomplished. He was worried at the growth of political parties. And he feared that the United States w-as about to become involved with the quarrels of European nations. He had, however, much cause for satisfaction. The United States government, under the new Constitution, was working. It had established its credit, both at home and abroad. And it had proved that it had the power to enforce its own laws. All things considered, this was a very good beginning. In 1796, political parties nominated candidates for the highest offices for the first time. The Federalists chose John Adams of Massachusetts, and the Democratic-Republicans chose Thomas Jefferson of Virginia. The result was close; Adams received 71 electoral votes and Jefferson, 68. Thus, Adams became President. According to the law, Jefferson became Vice President. Adams's Presidency. John Adams had a long record of public service. During the 1770 s, this Massachusetts lawyer had been in the forefront of the struggle for independence. Later, he had been ambassador to Great Britain and had served as Vice President under Washington. One of Adams's greatest achievements as President was to keep the United States out of war with France. The French, bitter because America would not help them in their war with Britain, attacked American ships. Many in Adams's own party favored going to war, but the President refused to go along with them Adams's courageous stand brought him under sharp criticism. To curb it, he sup ported a series of laws known as the Alien and Sedition Acts. One of these laws was aimed at delaying foreigners it becoming American citizens—and voters. (Most new citizens had been siding with the Democratic-Republicans.) Another of the acts made it a crime to criticize the government, the President, or Congress. This law was used to silence newspapers that attacked Adams. Many people believed that the Alien and Sedition Acts violated the guarantees of free speech and free press provided under the Bill of Rights. The state legislatures of Virginia and Kentucky passed resolutions condemning these laws. Railroads would soon become the major carriers of both passengers and freight. Trains were swifter than canal- boats or horse-drawn coaches. Railw'ay tracks could be laid faster than canals could be dug and in places where canal building would be impractical. A Growing Population Improvements in ways of living led to a rapid growth of population in the United States, especially in the region between the Appalachians and the Mississippi. As more people moved into this area, life became easier than it had been for the first pioneers. On the other hand, as life | became easier, still more people wanted to move there. i nation of immigrants. Besides the people who moved west from the older states, many people came directly from Europe to the American frontier. Some of the list pioneers on the frontier were Germans. Three Moravian missions were built in Ohio during the 1770's. Two of these were near the present-day city of New Philadelphia. The French were already settled in the Northwest Territory when the United I States obtained it. During the turbulent years of the French Revolution, many refugees settled in Ohio. A big wave of European immigrants came in the 1830's and 1840's. Many | Irish came as laborers on the canals and roads. German pioneers took advantage of cheap transportation on cotton ships returning from Europe. From New Orleans they traveled up the Mississippi and Ohio rivers into Missouri, Illinois, Ohio, and Wisconsin. More people, more states. In 1790 the United States government conducted its first census, an official count of all the people. Every ten years since that time, another census has been made. In the brief span of fifty years, from 1790 to 1840, the population of the United States grew from about 4 million to about 17 Immigrants from Europe come ashore at New York. Many of them went west by way of the railroads and the Erie Canal. Why, do you suppose, did so many of them choose to settle in the West million. The table below gives the census figures for each ten years. By the end of the first century of independence, twenty-five states had joined the original thirteen to make a total of thirty-eight. The boundaries of the nation had advanced west from the Mississippi to the Pacific. Slavery was abolished. Though not yet a reality, equality of all citizens had been written into the Constitution. Occasionally a depression had hindered economic progress. A depression is a time when business is poor and many people arc out of work. In fact, a depression that began in 1873 had cast a shadow over plans for the Centennial. Still, Americans had great confidence in their country. They were sure that good times would come again. Millions of newcomers. People in other parts of the world had faith in America's economic progress. The proof lies in the number of immigrants who came here before and after the Civil War. In the 1840's, about million came. During the 1880's, another 5Va million newcomers entered the United States to live and to work. Add the number of immigrants in the 1840's to the number who came in the 1880's. You will find the total to be about twice the number of people who live in the state of Kentucky today! Among those who came to the United States in the 1840's was a young Scotsman named Andrew Carnegie. He never grew to be much larger than an average-size fourteen-year-old boy. And yet he became a giant of American industry. Andrew Carnegie's name is associated chiefly with the steel industry. But he had many interests and he was a keen observer. Moreover, he had strong opinions and he was far from bashful about expressing them. If anyone can show us how the United States became an industrialized nation, Andrew Carnegie can. Here is part of his story. From Immigrant to Steel King Andrew Carnegie first felt the effects of industrialization in 1848. In that year, at the age of twelve, he came with his parents and his brother Tom to the United States from Dunfermline, Scotland. In Dunfermline the Carnegies lived in a little two-storied stone house. Andrew's father worked at home as a weaver. His handloom nearly filled the ground floor of the tiny house. The Carnegie family lived in the one room that made up the second floor. The Carnegies were poor to begin with, but they grew poorer as industrialization spread throughout their part of Scotland Machines in factories were replacing handlooms. That is why the Carnegie family came to the United States. After landing in New York, the Carnegies made their way to Allegheny, a community later known as Pittsburgh, industries. In addition, railroads employed many people directly. How many people would you guess had jobs with the railroads in 1900? Well, the number was 1,018,000. Think of all the people living in the state of Maine today. Almost as many people worked for the railroads of the United States in 1900. Now think of this: In the twenty years following 1900, the number of people working for the railroads more than doubled! In 1920, there were 2,076,000 so employed. One of every 15 nonfarm workers in the United States had a job with a railroad. Today, the number of railroad workers is only about one third of what it was in 1920. Why, do you suppose, are there fewer people working for railroads today than in 1920? See the chart on the next page. It is headed "Immigration, Gainful Workers, and Labor Union Membership in the United States, 1870-1930 (in thou- sands)." It looks pretty complicated, doesn't it? Perhaps a few explanations will make it easier to read. And by reading it, you will discover some things about the number of workers in the United States. Remember, "labor" is one factor needed for industrialization. First, note that the figures on this chart are given in thousands. Therefore, the total number of "gainful workers" in 1870, for example, was about 12,925,000. We left off the zeros to save space. If you mentally add 000 to each figure in the chart, it may be easier to read. What is a "gainful worker"? It is someone who told the census taker that he or she was working for wages or salary, full or part time. The Census, you will recall, is taken every ten years in the United States. The top line of figures shows the number of immigrants who came to the United States during each decade. In the 1870's, 2,162,000 immigrants came; 5,247,000 entered in the 1880's; and so on. How many immigrants entered the United States during the decade of the 1890's? One more explanation of an item on the chart. Look at the line titled "Labor Union Members." There arc no reliable figures for labor union membership before 1897. That is why the chart says "No record" until 1897. How many union members were there in 1897? How many in 1900? Now for a few more questions—and some answers, too. In which two decades did the smallest number of immigrants come to the United States? Why were there fewer immigrants during these decades? You won't find the answer to the latter question on the chart. But one reason was that there were economic depressions in the United States during the early 1870's and the early 1930's. Why would there be fewer immigrants at those times? How many immigrants came to the United States between 1900 and 1910? What was the increase in total number of workers between 1900 and 1910? You will find that the answers to those two questions are nearly the same number. But how could that be true? Some immigrants were at first too young to work. Others were too old. Still others were unable to find permanent jobs and went back to their homeland. Moreover, among the immigrants there must have been mothers who would have had to stay home and take care of their small children. Where else, then, could industrial workers have come from? Look at the two lines in the chart that indicate the numbers of farm workers and non- farm workers. Which kind of workers increased more rapidly in number? Perhaps now you can guess where many industrial workers who were not immigrants came from. These workers were, of course, already inside the United States. Thousands of young men and women left American farms each year. Farm machinery was taking their place, just as machinery put Andrew Carnegie's father out of work in Scotland. These young American men and women were usually able to find jobs in nonfarm occupations. Those were the jobs that were increasing rapidly in number. Capital and Labor Industrialization requires not only workers but also capital—money to be invested in factories, tools, raw materials, and transportation facilities. Just as some workers for American industry came from abroad, so, too, did some of the necessary capital. It sounds surprising now, but until the time of World War I the United States was considered to be an underdeveloped country. Nevertheless, European investors had heard of the rich resources of the United States. Many foreign investors decided this was a profitable place to invest their money. Investors buy stocks and bonds. Wc have no charts to show how much foreign capital was invested in the United States each year. But wc know the amount was dose to $3.5 billion by the end of the nineteenth century. Moreover, another S3.5 billion in foreign capital was invested here between 1900 and 1914. Many Americans had made money during the Civil War. After the war, they had surplus capital, that is, more money than they needed at the time. They looked around for profitable places to invest their surplus capital, just as foreign investors did. And they came to the same conclusion. American investors, too, put their capital into American industries. People usually invest their surplus capital by purchasing stocks and bonds These entitle their owners to dividends or interest paid from the profits of the company issuing the stocks and bonds. The interest on each bond is always the same amount. It has to be paid, whether or not the company makes a profit. Dividends on stock, however, depend upon Immigrants to the United States For nearly a century after its beginning in 1789 the federal government flashed a green light to almost all people coming to the United States of America, The green light meant "Come—the way is clear" for millions of European peasants and workers; for hungry people in Ireland; for hundreds of thousands of English-speaking and French-speaking Canadians; for Spanish-speaking people from Latin America; and, until the 1880's, for people from China and Japan. All these and others came. America needed people to settle its empty acres. America needed brains and muscle, no matter where from. Until well after the Civil War, the United States Quota system begins barred no one who wished to enter the country. Nevertheless, an increasing number of Americans flashed the "caution" light, urging that immigration be restricted in certain ways. However, few thought the green light should be changed altogether to a red "stop" light. McCarran-Walter Act New quota system enacted - Vietnamese refugees arrive in the United States. The Statue of Liberty in Upper New York Bay American Policy Changes From time to time Congress studied ways to improve immigration policy. A few years after the Civil War, President Ulysses S. Grant pointed out the need for laws on the subject. Finally, in 1882, Congress passed the first general United States immigration law. Restrictions in 1082. This law began the practice of barring "undesirables" from the United States. What kinds of people would you say were undesirable? Should people with mental deficiencies be kept from entering the United States? How about convicts? or criminals? Were they undesirable immigrants? Or persons likely to become "public charges," diat is, likely to go on welfare; should they be barred? Do you think people with catching diseases, such as tuberculosis, should be kept out of the United States? In 1882 and by later laws, Congress barred all these kinds of unfortunate people. Also in 1882, through a separate law, Congress forbade any more Chinese to take up residence in the United States. This law, called the Chinese Exclusion Act, was backed mainly by white citizens of California and other western states. They complained that the Chinese immigrants would work for low wages and would therefore take the jobs held by whites. This law began the practice of barring, or restricting, the entry of people because of their national or racial background. Oddly enough, the first restrictions on immigration came at about the same time the Statue of Liberty was built in New York's harbor. This symbol of American liberty and freedom was dedicated in 1886. The statue was a gift from the French nation to the American people. Joseph Pulitzer led a campaign for funds to build a stone base on which the Statue of Liberty would stand. He was an immigrant from Hungary who became a famous newspaper publisher. Emma Lazarus, an American poet, wrote the words that now appear on a tablet inside the base of the Statue of Liberty. The poem's best-known lines go like this: Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free. The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the homeless, tempest- tossed, to me; I lift my lamp beside the golden door. Since the time that the Statue of Liberty was erected, some 20,000,000 newcomers have passed through "the golden door," the New York entrance- way for immigrants. For those from Europe, New York has been the main port of entry to the United States. A literacy test. In contrast to the invitation in this poem, demands for immigration restriction grew stronger. These demands centered on a literacy test. This would test all immigrants on their ability to read and write. Congress passed a literacy-test bill in 1897, but President Grover Cleveland vetoed it. It tested only immigrants' opportunities to learn to read and write in their own countries, he said. But, he went on, it did not test character or intelligence or whether im- i migrants would make good citizens of the United States. Later, Congress passed similar bills. President William Howard Taft vetoed a literacy-test bill in 1913. President Woodrow Wilson vetoed one in 1915 and another in 1917. Their reasons for vetoing the bills were much the same as those put forth by President Cleveland. However, in 1917 Congress passed the bill over President Wilson's veto. In this way, a literacy test became a part of American immigration law. The literacy test required immigrants to demonstrate their ability to read and write English or any other language. However, it provided exemptions for those under sixteen years of age and for those who were physically handicapped. An official at Ellis Island gives an intelligence test to a woman arriving in America in the early years of this century. Ellis Island is in New York harbor, near (he Statue of Liberty. From 1892 to 1954, Ellis Island was the principal receiving station for immigrants from Europe. Do you feel that immigrants should, or should not, be required to lake tests Jite this onet The test could not be used to break up families. That is, if one member of a family could pass the test, then other members might also be admitted, even though unable to read and write. The quota system. Many people believed the literacy lest would decrease the number of immigrants, particularly those from southern and eastern Europe. Such was not the case. Three years after World War I ended, 800,000 immigrants passed the test and entered the United States. It was easy for an alarmed Congress to believe the United States would soon be flooded with immigrants fleeing from war-torn Europe. Clearly the literacy test What thoughts do you think are going through the minds of these immigrants on board a ship bound for America about 1905? Express in your own words the feelings they might have at this moment. had failed to bring about the desired result. Some other method would have to be devised. Consequently, during the 1920's Congress passed a series of laws that brought about a quota system for restricting immigration. Under this system a quota, or specific number, of immigrants was assigned to certain countries. The quota system had two purposes. One was to lower the total number of immigrants coming to the United States Another was to restrict immigration from southern and eastern Europe. Thus the quota system had the same purposes as the literacy test, and it served these purposes somewhat better. The laws allowed an annual quota of about 153,000 immigrants to come from Europe. Within this number, the quotas were set so as to favor immigrants from northern and western Europe. Immigrants from northern and western Europe made up most of the number who had come to America in earlier years. Therefore—so the argument went—immigrants from the countries of northern and western Europe would fit into American life easier than would immigrants from other parts of the world. You can see how this system worked by looking at the quotas assigned to certain European countries. Compare Great Britain and Northern Ireland's quota with that of Poland, for example. Or the Netherlands' annual quota with Italy's. Or the quotas of Norway and Sweden with those of Greece and Rumania. Annual Quotas Assigned to Selected European Countries During the 1920's Northern and Western Europe Southern and Eastern Europe Belgium 1,304 Germany 25,957 Denmark 1,181 Great Britain & Northern Ireland 65,721 Ireland (Eire) 17,853 Netherlands 3,153 Norway 2,377 Sweden 3,314 Switzerland 1,707 Albania 100 Bulgaria 100 Czechoslovakia 2,874 Greece 310 Hungary 869 Italy 5.677 Poland 6,524 Rumania 291 Soviet Union 2,798 Yugoslavia 938 The quota system was also known as the national origins system. It was so called because the quotas depended largely on how many people from the different countries had come to America earlier. Many settlers of earlier times had come from Great Britain and Northern Ireland. So the quota from there was so large it was seldom filled. But quotas that were not used could not be given to other countries. They could not go to Italy or Poland or other lands from which large numbers of people wanted to come. But these countries were better off than [Asiatic countries. Asiatic countries had no quotas at all. Immigrants from China and Japan, for example, could not come [to the United States to live permanently. Best treated of all under the quota [system were native-born citizens of Western Hemisphere countries. They could [enter the United States without quota restrictions. This was the main reason that Canada and Mexico became leading sources of immigration to the United States during and after the 1920's. Criticisms bring slight changes. Can you find the faults that were severely criticized in the quota system of the 1920's? There were several. 'The total quota is too small," some critics said. "The United States is a big country and can absorb more European immigrants than the national origins system allows." Others criticized, "If countries do not fill their quotas, those quotas should be given to countries that can use them." But most of all the system was criticized because it was based on the number of immigrants that had come from each nation in the past. Some changes were made in American immigration law because of these criticisms. For example, during the decade following World War II, hundreds of Leading Sources of Immigration to the United States, 1821-1977 Date First Second Third 1821-1830 Ireland United Kingdom Germany 1831-1840 Ireland Germany United Kingdom 1841-1850 Ireland Germany United Kingdom 1851-1860 Germany Ireland United Kingdom 1861-1870 Germany United Kingdom Ireland 1871-1880 Germany United Kingdom Ireland 1881-1890 Germany United Kingdom Ireland 1891-1900 Austria-Hungary Italy Russia 1901-1910 Italy Austria-Hungary Russia 1911-1920 Italy Austria-Hungary Russia 1921-1930 Canada Mexico Italy 1931-1940 Germany Canada Mexico 1941-1950 Germany Canada Mexico 1951-1960 Germany Canada Mexico 1961-1970 Mexico Canada Italy 1971-1977 Mexico Philippines Korea thousands of European refugees were admitted to the United States outside the quota system. Nevertheless, the quotas remained on regular immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. The McCarran-Walter Act, passed in 1952, removed one feature of the national origins system that had been criticized as racist. It did away with the ban against immigration of Asiatic and Pacific peoples. Each country in that area was given a small annual quota, usually one hundred. But the restrictions on the entry of people from southern and eastern European countries were changed hardly at all. Largely for this reason, President Truman vetoed the McCarran-Walter bill. However, Congress passed it over his veto, so it became law. A new approach. Passage of the McCarran- Walter Act did little to halt criticism of the system that assigned quotas on a national origins basis. There continued to be many demands for change. Finally, in 1965, Congress took a new approach. Listed below arc the main features of the present law. 1. A limit of 170,000 persons may enter the United States each year from independent countries outside the Western Hemisphere. However, no country may send more than 20,000 annually, except for "immediate relatives" of United States citizens. 2. Independent nations of the Western hemisphere are, for the first time, given quota, totaling 120,000 yearly. Later the limit of 20,000 yearly for each country was applied to these nations, too. 3. Immediate relatives of United States citizens are permitted to enter on a non- quota basis; that is, they are not counted within the 170,000 or 120,000 limitations. mediate relatives" are defined as unied children less than 21 years old, bands, wives, and parents of United States citizens. Each year 30.000 "immediate relatives" may enter the United States. 4. This makes an overall limit of ,000 persons who may enter the United States annually: 170,000 from outside the Western Hemisphere; 120,000 from independent countries of the West- Hemisphere; and 30,000 immediate natives of United States citizens, who ycome from any country of the world. Though the 1965 immigration law did love certain objectionable features of old system, it, too, has come under r> "What Happened to the One We Used to Havei" —irom The Herblock Book (Beacon Press, 1952) criticism. Some Americans object to the limitations on immigration from Western Hemisphere nations. Some think that the United States should take in more than 320,000 immigrants a year. Still others declare that restrictions on all immigration should be tightened. The United States is only one of the nations to limit immigration in the twentieth century. Canada, Australia, Brazil, Argentina—in fact, all immi- grant-receiving countries—have placed restrictions on who may cross their borders as immigrants. No country today offers an unlimited green light to immigrants. Throughout most of its history, however, the United States has flashed the green light far more often than any other immigrant-receiving country. Between 1820 and the present, almost two thirds of all the people moving from Europe have come to the United States. The chart below sets forth the countries that supplied the most immigrants to the United States between 1820 and 1977. Consider these questions as you study the chart. Which country has furnished the most immigrants to the United States? Which country furnished the most during each of the three periods of time shown in the chart? Which country in the Western Hemisphere has sent the most? How many countries Immigration to the United States by Countries, Included with Austria-Hungary, Germany, and Russia until 1919 have sent more than one million immigrants to the United States? What differences do you note between the immigration before and the immigration after 1920? Why have there been more Polish immigrants than the chart indicates? Why isn't Puerto Rico listed as one of the countries sending immigrants to the United States? If you cannot answer these questions by studying the chart, perhaps you can answer them after reading the next section in this chapter. The People Who Came The chart tells us how many immigrants came to the United States. However, it fails to show why immigrants came. Some left their homelands because of religious or political persecution. The lure of economic improvement certainly played its part. But so also did a desire for adventure, a search for freedom, and perhaps a longing that cannot be put into words. Theirs was a mixture of reasons for coming, just as they were a mixture of peoples. The Germans. People from Germany have been coming to America since colonial times. They came in greatest numbers ring the nineteenth century, however. The decade of the 1880's was a period of wry heavy German immigration. In the 1880's nearly million immigrants were from Germany, a number about equal to Nebraska's population now. Many Germans were good farmers. This caused them to settle on the land, particularly in the midwestern United States. But other Germans were skilled craftworkers or well-educated professional people. They were able to find places for themselves in American cities and small towns. German immigration dropped off in the early twentieth century. In the late 1930's, however, it increased because of the oppression and persecution of Adolf Hitler's government. This persecution was directed mainly at Germany's Jews. The great scientist Albert Einstein takes the oath ol citizenship. Why did Einstein, a German lew, come to the United States in the 1930's? The desire to get out of war-tom Germany sent many immigrants to the United States in the late 1940's and 1950's. But since 1960, immigration to the United States from Germany has again declined as conditions there have improved. Italians. In the twentieth century Italy has furnished more immigrants to the United States than any other country has. In 1850 there were fewer than 4,000 Ital- What ethnic group has settled in this neighborhood! How can you tell! For an ethnic group, what are the advantages of living in the same neighborhood! What are the disadvantages! ians in a total American population of 23,000,000. It was not until 1880 that Italian immigrants started coming to the United States in large numbers. Most of the early Italian immigrants were craftworkcrs from the cities in northern Italy. But word of the opportunities in the United States soon spread into the southern provinces and Sicily. Edward Corsi, who was appointed United States Commissioner of Immigration in 1931, had come from Italy to the United States as a boy. Many years later he recalled the feeling about America that many Italians had at the time his family left Italy: During the years from 1903 to 1907, when immigration to America was at its height, many Italians returned to the little towns in Italy boasting of their success in the United States. We saw strangers proudly wearing heavy gold chains that we knew had been bought in the New World. Stories of the ease with which money could be earned in America flew through the whole peninsula. Thousands of people, from grandfathers down to small boys like myself, came to center their interests in the wonderful new country. •... after my father died, my mother married again. My new father... had resigned from the army [in which he had been an officer! To start life over at any work beneath his caste would have been embarrassing in Italy. America was different. There he could take any sort of employment at first, and no I one would think the worse of him. Two months later we were on our way. Corsi's reference to "caste"—that is, one's social class—points out one reason why many Europeans were attracted to America. In the United States, class lines were less rigid than in Europe. In America, what one ac| complishcd by ability and hard work I counted for more than the social class I to which he or she happened to be born. I Irish immigrants. Failure of the potato | aop in their homeland was largely snsible for sending hundreds of thou- nds of Irish immigrants to the United ates. Nearly two million Irish men and omen found new homes in America been 1820 and 1860. At least three urtlis of them came in the late 1840's and early 1850's, the worst years of the ato famine. Most of the Irish immigrants landed at ton, New York, or Philadelphia. Some entered politics. Others To what ethnic group do these two youngsters taking part in a parade belong? How do you know? Why was the parade held on March 17? joined the religious orders of the Roman Catholic Church, to which most of them belonged. New York City in the 1890's had twice as many Irish residents as Dublin, Ireland. Immigrants from the United Kingdom. Most of the Irish immigrants came to the United States in the nineteenth century, when Ireland was under the rule of England. In the twentieth century, immigrants from independent Ireland have been outnumbered by immigrants from the United Kingdom—that is, from England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. Since 1921, they have numbered only about 100,000 less than immigrants from Italy. People from the United Kingdom spoke and understood the English language. To them, the immigrant experience was not so difficult as it was to others. Immigrants from Austria-Hungary. The peace treaties that ended World War I divided the Austro-Hungarian empire among a number of countries in central Europe. Before that time, however, more than four million people came to the United States from areas within that sprawling empire of many nationalities. An Austrian, a German, a Hungarian, an Italian, or a Rumanian could have been counted as an immigrant from Austria-Hungary before 1920. Or an immigrant from the Austro-Hungarian empire might have come from what is today the country of Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, or Poland. A Slavic people called the Czechs came mainly from Bohemia, in the western part of Czechoslovakia. One Czech who came to America as a youth with his family was Augustin Haidusec. The Haidusecs settled in the wilderness of Austin County, Texas, in 1856. They cleared the land and built a log house. Augustin Haidusec grew up to become a lawyer, a county judge, and a member of the Texas legislature. Many years later he recalled the early pioneer years: The first year in Texas was a sad one as there was not a single family that was well. They all became ill at the same time with chills and fever. This sickness, I learned later, was caused by heavy work and impure drinking water. We all had shallow wells from which we got our water. We had other troubles, too. There was nothing to eat and no money to buy food with. The money that was brought from Europe had been spent. Meat was cheap, but everything else was very high.... The second year things were better. The young people could talk English. The Americans ... were polite and kind and taught us how to do things. We learned how to farm. The second year we made a good crop, both of corn and cotton, and every year after that. So we soon forgot the hard times we experienced in the beginning. When four years later new immigrants came, some of them expressed surprise at the buildings we were living in. Several families stopped with us, among them Valentin Gallia, a classmate of my father. After he looked at our building, which was fairly good, he said, "My dear Valento, you had a better pigsty at home." My father answered, "I had rather live in this hut as an American citizen than to live in a palace and be under the Austro-Hungarian oppression." The experience of the Haidusec family was quite typical. Life was not easy at first for immigrant families, but as time went on, most of them adjusted successfully. Slovaks, another Slavic people, lived in the eastern part of what is now Czechoslovakia. After coming to the United States, most Slovaks settled in the industrial areas, particularly in Pennsylvania. Immigrants from Poland. After World War I, Poland again became an independent nation. There had never been a country called Czechoslovakia or Yugoslavia before 1918. But there had been an independent Poland in central Europe until the late eighteenth century. At that time Poland disappeared from the map. It was divided among the Austro-Hungarian empire, Russia, and Prussia, which later became part of Germany. These facts make it difficult to learn the number of Polish immigrants to the United States. We know that some came in colonial times and at the time of the American Revolution. Others fled to the United States after unsuccessful revolutions in Europe in 1830 and 1848. But the greatest number came between 1899 and 1919, when immigrants of Polish ancestry were counted as coming from Austria-Hungary, Russia, or Germany. Polish immigrants came largely for economic reasons and were willing to work hard either in the mines and steel plants or on the farms in America. The great majority of Polish immigrants, like the Irish and Italian immigrants, followed the Roman Catholic religious faith. But there were also a large number of Jews from Poland who came to the United States. Russian immigration. Jews were prominent among the immigrants from Russia, too. About 40 percent of the 3!4 million immigrants leaving the old Russian empire before World War I were Jew's. They left in large part because of pogroms (po grams)—official acts of political and religious persecution directed against them. Lithuanians, Latvians, Poles, Finns, and Ukrainians, as well as Russians, were included among the millions of immigrants who came from Russia. Most of them were unskilled workers when they came to America. Moreover, since they had traveled a long way, they had very little money when they arrived. For these reasons, more than half of them took jobs in New York or Pennsylvania, rather than moving farther west. Scandinavian immigration. People from Sweden, Norway, and Denmark are called Scandinavians. Before 1850 there Russian immigrants come ashore at Ellis Island early in this century. Why might the persons shown here have come to America? were fewer than 20,000 Scandinavians in the United States. But the lure of cheap land and a scries of poor harvests in Sweden caused a growing interest in immigration. Those who led the way sent encouraging letters, advice, and prepaid tickets to friends and relatives back home. By the 1880's, the "American fever" had affected every village and nearly every family in Sweden and neighboring Norway. Swedes and Norwegians were particularly attracted to northwestern United States, parts of which resembled their homeland. It is claimed that Swedish immigrants cleared about 10,000,000 acres i4,000,000 ha) of American soil, mainly in Minnesota. A Swedish woman, Fred- rika Bremer, after traveling in the United States, wrote this: What a glorious new Scandinavia might not Minnesota become! Here the Swede would find his clear, romantic lakes, (and) plains .. . rich in grain. . . . Here the Norwegian would find his rapid rivers, his lofty mountains. The Danes might there pasture their flocks and herds and lay out their farms on richer and less misty coasts than those of Denmark. The total number of Scandinavian migrants may seem small when corned with other groups. Nevertheless, it was immense when compared with the pulation of Sweden in 1900— 5,000,000—and the population of Norway in the same year—only 2,000,000. No country except Ireland lost a greater per- ttage of its people to the United States than Norway. From north of the border. Immigration from Canada has reflected the two cultures of that immense country, the Eng- lish-speaking and the French-speaking. English-speaking Canadian immigrants mingle easily in the communities where they settle. Their culture is little different from that of the United States. A fairly large number of them have become farmers. Others are skilled workers, executives, and white-collar workers. About a third of all immigrants from north of the border have been French- speaking Canadians. They have retained their own ways for centuries in Canada, and they do not easily give them up in the United States. As a result, French Canadians remain a distinct group both in the United States and in Canada. As immigrants, they have settled largely in New England and New York, close to their native province of Quebec. Some French Canadians continue to farm in the United States, as they did in Quebec. Others, probably the majority, arc semiskilled workers. Regardless of the work they do, their lives generally revolve around their families and their parish, which usually has a French-speaking priest. Immigrants from Mexico. The first immigrants from Mexico reached what is now the United States when Coronado entered the American Southwest in 1540. Three centuries later, at the time of the annexation of Texas and the Mexican War, the whole region became part of the United States. With these events, the United States gained its first sizeable Spanish- speaking population. Between that time and the beginning of the twentieth century, there were not many immigrants from Mexico. Around 1900, however, railroad building and the growth of farms in the Southwest demanded a supply of cheap labor. Mexican immigrants answered that demand. Between 1900 and 1910, there were 49,000 immigrants from Mexico. In the next decade, 219,000 came and 459,000 came in the decade of the 1920's. No doubt these are less than the true numbers, because many Mexicans have entered the United States illegally. Often they are encouraged to do so by American labor contractors. In 1945 it was estimated that more than 2'/2 million Mexican-born people were living in the United States. Today the number is certainly greater than that. Furthermore, there are now millions of Spanish-speaking American citizens by birth who are descended from Mexican immigrants. This Spanish-speaking population is concentrated mainly in Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, California, and Colorado. Some have left this region, however, either as migrant farm workers or as permanent industrial workers in such cities as Chicago, Detroit, Toledo, and Buffalo. Like the descendants of French- speaking Canadians, these Spanish- speaking Americans have held on to many aspects of their own culture. West Indian immigrants. Immigrants from the West Indies to the United States consist of several different groups. Before 1945 immigration from the Caribbean region consisted chiefly of blacks from the British West Indies, with smaller groups from Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, and the French West Indies. Most immigrants from the West Indies settled in one of the big east-coast American cities, writh New York their favorite. Many of them were unskilled workers, as is true of nearly all immigrant groups. Some West Indian blacks, however, particularly those from the British West Indies, had excellent professional training. This, plug the fact they spoke English, opened doors of opportunity for them. By the 1930's black doctors, lawyers, and dentists in New York were, in many cases, immigrants from the British West Indies. Puerto Ricans. Following the end of World War II, immigration from the West Indies underwent a dramatic change. It became overwhelmingly Puerto Rican and the numbers involved increased tremendously. Actually, Puerto Ricans are American citizens with the right of free entry onto the mainland United States. So they are not counted as immigrants. For this reason, no one knows exactly how many Puerto Ricans have left their island homes to live on the mainland. Probably a million would be a reasonably accurate estimate, although many of these may have stayed only a short time. Puerto Ricans in New York eat many of the same they ale in Puerto Rico. Why are the foods nclive to their culture important to many ethnic groups in the United Stales? since then. Many of these Cuban refugees settled around Miami, Florida. This strained Miami's schools and other facilities for some time. However, the United States government gave financial aid to these refugees and helped in other ways. A number of problems remain. But as a group the Cubans have made a fine adjustment and contribution to life in this country. In 1975 the United States government again helped a large group of refugees. These people came from South Vietnam when the communist North Vietnamese overran the south. More than 100,000 of these refugees came to four relocation centers in the United States. From those centers they went to communities all over the United States. Only time will tell if the Vietnamese will be able to make the successful adjustment that the Cubans have. Government, church groups, employers, and schools are all prepared to help. At first most Puerto Ricans settled in New York, As time passed, however, Puerto Rican communities grew up in Philadelphia, Buffalo, Chicago, Detroit, land other industrial cities of the East and the Middle West. Refugees from Cuba and Vietnam. Fidel itro's revolution in Cuba at the end if the 1950's sent another wave of Span- ipeaking refugees to the United ites. Nearly 300,000 Cubans had fled from the island by 1966. More have come Immigrants from Asia. Because of the Exclusion Act, nearly all the Chinese in the United States by 1900 had come before 1882. Thousands of them had come to California at the time of the Gold Rush. By 1880, 100,000 Chinese lived there. Chinese immigrants worked hard. They worked in the gold fields, and they did much of the construction of the Central Pacific Railroad. They also worked as launderers, cooks, and tailors in the mining and railroad camps. They suffered a great deal of discrimination. But in Many big cities in the United States have a neighborhood where the Chinese have settled in large numbers. In the picture above, what evidence is there that this is such a neighborhood? spite of this the Chinese-Americans persisted. The achievements of Chinese-Amer- icans have always been significant. The many Chinese-Americans of distinction include such people as James Wong Howe, the famous movie photographer; I. M. Pei, a well-known architect; Constance Yu-IIwa Chung, a distinguished Washington correspondent for CBS News; and Samuel Chao Chung Ting, a Nobel Prize winning scientist. Immigrants came here from China, Japan, India, the Philippines, Korea— indeed every part of Asia. Our nation is richer in many ways because of the accomplishments of these people. The American people. There are many places not mentioned in this chapter from which immigrants have come to the United States. In fact, the American people have come from everywhere. The following poem, written by Carl Sandburg, expresses that idea. From six continents, seven seas, and several archipelagoes. From points of land moved to wind and water Out of where they used to be to where they are. The people of the earth marched and travelled To gather on a great plain. The great plain where they gathered is the United States of America. a White-Protestant-Anglo-Saxon civilization struggling to preserve itself against infiltration ... by other civilizations brought here by Negroes and hordes of "foreigners." The second is this: that the pattern of the United States is not essentially Anglo-Saxon although her language is English. Nor is the pattern Anglo-Saxon with ... darns and patches. The pattern of America is all of a piece; it is a blend of cultures from many lands, woven of threads from many corners of the world. Diversity itself is the pattern, is the stuff and color of the fabric. Or to put it another way: The United States is a new civilization, owing a great deal to the Anglo-Saxon strain, owing much to the other elements in its heritage and growth, owing much to unique qualities .. . which stem .. . from the sweep of its land between two oceans, the mixture and interplay of its peoples, the plentitude of its resources, and the skills which we all of us have brought here or developed here in the past three centuries. By the term Anglo-Saxon, Adamic was referring to the English, who, as you know, played such a big role in the settlement of what came to be the United States. Early in the twentieth century a drama by Israel Zangwill called "The Melting Pot" was produced in the United States. Is the melting pot metaphor closer to the ideas expressed by Crevccocur and Melville or to those expressed by Whitman and Adamic? Later in the twentieth century the historian Carl Deglcr suggested another metaphor to replace that of the melting pot. These are his words: .. . Some habits from the old country were not discarded.... The children of immigrants even into the third and fourth generations retained their differences. In view of such failure to melt and fuse, the metaphor of the melting pot is unfortunate and misleading. A more accurate analogy would be a salad bowl, for, though the salad is [one thing], the lettuce can still be distinguished from the chicory, the tomatoes from the cabbage. Contrary to the [idea] implied by the figure of the melting pot, American civilization is not... uniform; it is diverse and pluralistic. The evidence is all around us: in the varieties of languages, of foods, and restaurants of religions and festivals, of newspapers and books, of costumes and dances, of lit- eratures and theaters. Though some immigrant habits ... are undoubtedly lost in America, many others are not.. .. They remain ... as living remnants of many cultures, spicing and enlivening the broader stream of American life. These two paragraphs describe the concept of cultural plurality. Most historians, anthropologists, and sociologists accept the concept. They believe the United States is a land of many cultures, all equally worthy—or in Degler's figure of speech, a salad bowl rather than a melting pot. American Nativism From time to time certain groups in the United States have answered the question, What is an American? in quite narrow terms. Usually these groups begin as secret societies. One of these was prominent in the 1840's and 1850's. Its members supposedly answered "I know nothing" when questioned about the group's affairs. In this way they got the name of Know-Nothings. The Native American party. The Know-Nothings feared the rising tide of Irish immigration in the 1840's. They were suspicious of the Homan Catholic church, to which most of the Irish immigrants belonged. Many of the Know-Nothings believed one could not be both a good American and a Roman Catholic. In the middle of the 1840's the Know- Nothings organized the Native American party. This party lasted for about fifteen years. Its members generally opposed immigrants' influence in politics. They favored native-born Americans over what they regarded as foreign influences. We call this kind of feeling nativism, and it has come in waves in the United States. At some times it has been stronger than at other times. I The American Protective Association. A scc- I ond wave of nativism hit the United I States in the 1880's and 1890s. A group I called the American Protective Association, or A.P.A., led this nativist movement. It was first organized as a secret I society in Iowa in 1887. The American Protective Association I was particularly strong in the Middle I West. At its height it claimed nearly two I million members. They opposed the in- I flucnce of Roman Catholics in labor I organizations and in politics. The A.P.A. I stronglv recommended a literacy test for I all immigrants. Such a test would determine whether immigrants could read and I write. The A.P.A. members felt this would I keep out immigrants from Italy and I central Europe, and they were in favor of that. The Ku Klux Klan. A third wave of nativism swept across the nation in the 1920's. It was a revival of the old Ku Klux Klan, I asecrct society that was organized in the South soon after the Civil War. The old Klan had gone out of existence. However. a new secret society, using the same name, started operating in the state of Georgia in 1915. Members of the new Ku Klux Klan wore I hooded white robes at their meetings. I They burned wooden crosses on hillsides land elsewhere to frighten people they opposed. The Klan stood for a kind of 100 percent Americanism" that excluded Blacks. Roman Catholics, Jews, and im- I Bigrants in general. Members ol the Ku Klux Klan parade near the Capitol in Washington, D C., in 7926. Why did this organization flourish during the 1920's? What, do you think, caused its later decline? In the 1920's the Ku Klux Klan grew very rapidly in numbers. It claimed a membership of more than five million. While the old Klan had operated only in the South, the Ku Klux Klan of the 1920's was active throughout the whole country. It had a good deal of political influence in many states. Occasionally, groups of Klansmen whipped, tarred and feathered, and even lynched or otherwise murdered people they opposed. Mostly, however, they used less violent methods. They urged boycotts against Jewish and Roman Catholic merchants. A boycott is a refusal by many people to have any dealings with certain other people. The Klansmen spied on schoolteachers and censored school books as well as books in public libraries. They put political pressure on public officials. They tried to make sure that these officials lived up to the Klan's idea of 'TOO percent Americanism." A Roman Catholic for President? During this wave of nativism. the presidential election of 1928 was held. The Republicans nominated Herbert Hoover, who had made a fortune as a mining engineer and businessman in his younger days. At the time of World War I, Hoover had been in charge of relief programs that brought food to the hungry people of Europe. He had served as Secretary of Commerce in the Cabinets of Presidents Harding and Coolidge. The Democrats nominated Alfred E. Smith, a second-generation American, to run against Hoover. Smith had risen from city slums to become a state legislator and great reform governor of New York. He was the first Roman Catholic to receive the presidential nomination of a major party in the United States. Many people believed a Roman Catholic had little or no chance of being elected President. These people's views received some support from the results of the presidential election, for Hoover won over Smith by a wide margin. However, it is doubtful whether any Democrat, Roman Catholic or not, could have defeated Hoover in 1928. Hoover had a reputation for efficiency. The country had been prosperous under Harding and Coolidge, the preceding Republican Presidents. Most voters saw little reason to interrupt the series of Republican Presidents and Republican Congresses elected since 1920. John F. Kennedy. In 1960 the Democrats nominated another Roman Catholic, John F. Kennedy, for President. His great grandparents had come from Ireland in the 1840's and 1850's. Unlike Alfred E. Smith, Kennedy grew up in a wealthy family. He was educated at Harvard and had served as a naval officer in the Pacific during World War II. Voters in Massachusetts had elected John F. Kennedy to the House of Representatives and to the Senate before the Democrats chose him as their presidential candidate. Nevertheless, many Americans still felt that no Roman Catholic could be elected President of the United States. At a meeting with Protestant ministers in Houston, Texas, during his campaign, Kennedy faced this problem openly. "I believe in an America where religious intolerance will someday end." he said. The office of President "must be neither humbled by making it the instrument of any religious group, nor tarnished by [without reason] withholding it... from the members of any religious group," he declared. Whether John F. Kennedy's religious beliefs helped or hindered him in the presidential election is not entirely clear. Although he won. it was by only a nar- * row margin. Nevertheless, his was a land- I mark victory. It proved that a Roman Catholic could be elected President. And I it showed that most Americans believed I that candidates for office should be I judged on concerns other than religion. President Kennedy's official appoint| ments also reflected broadening attitudes about religion. Between 1906 and 1961. only three Jews had served in Cabinet positions: Oscar S. Straus. Secretary of Commerce under Theodore Roosevelt; Henry Morgenthau, Jr., Franklin D. Roosevelt's Secretary of the Treasury; and Lewis L. Strauss, who served as President Eisenhower's Secretary of Commerce although the Senate failed to confirm— that is, agree to—his appointment. But, along with Protestant and Roman Catholic Christians, President Kennedy chose two men of the Jewish faith as members of his official family. One was Arthur Goldberg, who served as Kennedy's Secretary of Labor and later uras appointed to the Supreme Court. Abraham A. Ribicoff was the other. A former governor of Connecticut, he was Kennedy's Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare for a year. Later he became a senator. Counteracting forces. Organized groups such as the A.P.A. and the Ku Klux Klan represented the forces of nativism. There also were organized groups that worked for tolerance and understanding and against prejudice and discrimination. Every immigrant group formed organizations to help its members find a secure place in their adopted land. Some of these organizations were purely social. Others devoted themselves in part to preserving the group's native culture in its new surroundings. Still others worked to feed the hungry, shelter the homeless, nurse the sick, and bury the dead among their members. These voters in Lubbock, Texas, greeted candidate John f. Kennedy in 1960. How did they leel jbouf Kennedy's religious beliefs? -ho IKdVr / Ol Zf .1 • Often, organized groups worked for tolerance and understanding through education and public information programs. B'nai B'rith, for example, started as a Jewish fraternity in New York in 1843. Its name, in Hebrew, means "sons of the covenant." Early in the twentieth century, B'nai B'rith extended its work through the Anti-Defamation League. The League opposed discrimination and anti-Semitism, that is, prejudice against Jews. As part of its work, the Anti-Defama- tion League tried to break down the stereotype of Jews held by many people. Its speakers and publications pointed out that Jews differ among themselves as much as any other group within the American population. They work at all sorts of occupations. There are rich Jews and poor Jews, just as there arc rich and poor non-Jews. There are Jews with conservative political ideas and Jews with liberal ideas. There are Republican Jews and Democratic Jews, and Jews who support minor political parties. Some Jews are employers; some are workers. Nor do all Jew-s look alike. Jews are not a race but rather members of a particular religious faith. And even within this religious faith there are differences in belief and practice, as there are differences in Christian belief and practice. B'nai B'rith is only one organization devoted to lessening religious prejudice in the United States. The National Conference of Christians and Jews is another. The Knights of Columbus have conducted a broad program to combat false beliefs about Roman Catholicism. At the end of World War I, the Common Council for American Unity was formed to promote unity and equal opportunity among Americans of all national origins, races, and faiths. A number of other national organizations arc devoted to programs of a similar nature. Minority Groups in the United States The United States has known more than religious prejudice as part of its history. It has known a great deal of racial intolerance, racial prejudice, and racial discrimination as well. If we are to deal intelligently w ith these matters, we must think about the term race. We speak of the "human race," for example, meaning that all people arc of one family. Usually, though, we use race to indicate divisions among people. How many races? In the fifteenth century Europeans began to explore every part of the world. All groups of people they met were new to them. Each of these new groups looked, acted, and talked in ways different from the others' and strange to Europeans. Consequently, Europeans at first thought there were many races. Since that time scientists of all kinds have studied race. Historians have studied the pasts of peoples and nations Sociologists have studied how people group together and how they act. Biologists have studied the way in which physical traits are passed from one human generation to another. Anthropologists have studied people's physical measurements and the development of people's varying cultures. Psychologists have studied human intelligence. Today most of these scientists agree there are three major races in the world: Caucasoid, Mongoloid, and Negroid. All of these include many examples of intermingling, so scientists arc certain there is no such thing as a "pure race." Under this classification. American Indians are considered members of the Mongoloid race, although they differ markedly from the Mongols of China. Scientists today base racial differences on certain biological characteristics: texture of head hair; shape of head and nose; amount of body hair; skin color; and color of eyes. In most biological characteristics, however, the human race is one. There are, for example, no racial differences in human blood. What other conclusions have scientists reached about race? The ability to learn is a trait that human beings of all races possess. There is no acceptable scientific proof that the races of humanity differ in temperament, intelligence, or other inborn mental characteristics. No particular personality or character trait can be iated with any one race. In every e, scientists say, "a rich variety of personality and character types will be found, and there is no reason for believing that any human group is any richer than any other in these respects." Aboard a United States destroyer, three naval officers plan the day's activities. What major races are represented here? In inborn mental characteristics, how do these races compare? Race in the United States. Here in the United States we frequently use colors rather than scientific names when we talk or write about race. Since we often call Indians "red," we refer to the red, black, yellow, and white races in our country. Still, the United States Census Bureau has considerable difficulty assigning people to one or the other of these races. As one reason, many Americans are mixtures of races. Many Americans of Mexican descent, for example, have Indians among their ancestors, yet they are not "red." Immigrants from the Philippine Islands have sometimes been counted as "yellow" Orientals and sometimes as members of the white race. Many newcomers to the United States from islands in the West Indies have difficulty deciding whether they arc "black" or "white." Sometimes they suffer from racial discrimination by both black and white Americans. The 1970 Census does say that 87.4 percent of all Americans arc "white," and 12.6 percent are "nonwhite." Because nonwhites arc in the minority, they make up one kind of "minority group" in the United States. It is against them that most race prejudice is directed. What is a minority group? All societies stratify their members—that is, arrange them in layers from top to bottom. The American social system is very complex, as you know, and includes a great variety of peoples. In America, race is only one way to put people in unequal layers, or categories. People may also have an unequal status as members of minority groups based on national origin or religion. Members of a minority group experience prejudice or discrimination on categorical grounds—that is, simply because they are in a certain category. In other words, no matter what the individuals are like or how they behave, they are treated solely on the basis of their minority group identity. Minority group members suffer from at least three conditions in their relationship with the majority. 1. Social exclusion. In the past, members of minority groups have been barred from places of public accommodation. such as restaurants, theaters, parks, swimming pools, and beaches. They are still barred from membership in some private clubs. 2. Economic oppression. Members of minority groups are denied equal educational and employment opportunities. Forced into unemployment or restricted to low-paying jobs, members of minority groups are usually poor. Often it is to the advantage of the majority group to keep them this way so their labor can be obtained at a low cost when needed. 3. Political poaerlcssncss is another condition from which members of minority groups suffer. They often have been formally barred from voting by means of poll taxes, literacy tests, and other legal or illegal devices. They have likewise been informally barred from using normal political channels because of their lack of experience, their indifference, their shyness, or their customs. Titus minority groups have had little or no influence on the political process. All minority groups arc not equal to one another. Some are treated more unequally than others. The most discriminated against of all racial minorities have been the American blacks. They have experienced discrimination and prejudice over a very long period of time and in all parts of the United States. American Indians, Mexican-Amerir cans, and Puerto Ricans have sometimes been called "partial minorities." They are not so visible as blacks. Outside the areas where they are concentrated, they are subjected to less prejudice and discrimination than black people are. In the areas where they arc most numerous, however, the status of American Indians and Mcxi- can-Americans approaches that of black people. I Indians as a minority group. Some Indians I insist they are not a minority group. Rather, these Indians say, they arc a separate people with treaty relationships to the United States, even though they live within the boundaries of this country. Also, they point out. the United States has broken a great many of these treaties. Whether or not American Indians are a "separate people," they certainly suffer These Indians living on a reservation in New Mexico bake their bread in an outdoor oven. Why do they prefer this method of baking to using I i stove inside their homes? from the typical conditions of a minority group. You have just read about these three conditions. Which one of the three does this paragraph describe? Of the nearly one million American Indians in the United States, 477.500 live on reservations. Family income on reservations averages about $1,500 a year. For Indians living off reservations, family income is about $3,000. At least 40 percent of all native Americans are unemployed. For Indians living on reservations the unemployment rate is much higher. Is it good for Indians to continue living on reservations to which they were confined in the nineteenth century? You can get answers on both sides of that question. For most of the nineteenth century it was governmental policy to keep Indians on reservations. But in 1887 Congress passed the Dawes Act, named for Senator Henry L. Dawes, a native of Massachusetts. The Dawes Act offered Indians a chance to become individual landowners. Indian tribal organizations were to be broken up. Indian families could receive at least 160 acres of land if they renounced their tribal membership. Under the Dawes Act, and, later, the Burke Act, the Indians receiving this land might become American citizens after twenty-five years. Many Indians were discouraged by the long waiting periods involved in these laws. Other Indians took advantage of the laws' provisions. Between 1906 and 1911, for example, 8,248 allotments of land were made to Indians under the provisions of these acts. • l In 1924 all Indians born in the United States were made American citizens. Actually, about two thirds of all Indians in the United States were already citizens by that time. They had become American citizens through treaty agreements, through provisions of the Dawes and Burke laws, through naturalization proceedings, or through military service in World War I. More than 8,000 Indians served in the Army or the Navy during that war. (About 25,000 Indian men and women served in the United States armed forces during the global struggle of World War II.) Congress made another shift in policy by passing the Indian Reorganization Act in 1934. The main purpose of this act was to allow Indians to use their own culture. Far from breaking up tribal organizations, it encouraged tribes to set up self-governing constitutions on their reservations. The Indian Reorganization Act made funds available for loans to the tribal governments and for Indians' education. Surplus government lands were returned to the tribes, to be used for conservation purposes. Finally, the Indian Reorganization Act guaranteed freedom of religion to the Indians. Under the Indian Reorganization Act, tribal governments were formed. Indian leaders gained confidence as they gained experience. Conditions for Indians on reservations gradually improved. Then, in the 1950's, Congress announced a policy of "termination," that is, ending government support for certain reservations. Termination caused hardships for some tribes. Among these were the Paiutes (pi' yiits) in Utah and the Menominees (ma nam' a nes) in Wisconsin. Indians today. Indians today are no longer "forgotten Americans," as they have been called in the past. Indeed, Indians are very much on the conscience of the rest of the American people. Most Americans are willing to admit that Indians have been poorly treated in the past. Many people, including the Indians themselves, have tried to do something about this. Among the national organizations concerned with Indians and their interests are the National Congress of American Indians; Arrow, Inc.; the Indian Rights Association; and the Association on American Indian Affairs. No one today is certain of how many Indians there are in the United States. Vine Deloria is a former executive director of the National Congress of American Indians. Me is an Indian himself. Mr. Deloria believes there arc now about one million Indians here. If so, this is close to the number that lived here when Columbus landed in America. For hundreds of years the number of Indians decreased. But now the Indian population is growing. Less than half the Indians in the United States live on reservations. Those who do may leave if they wish. Yet more than 400,000 Indians are still on reservations. In many cases, they stay there because of lack of economic opportunity elsewhere. More and more Indians are demanding "Indian Power." As far back as 1961, representatives from 67 tribes met in Chicago. They made a statement from which the following is taken: We believe in the inherent right of all people to retain spiritual and cultural values, and that the free exercise of these values is necessary to the normal development of any people. Indians exercised this inherent right to live their own lives for thousands of years before the white man came and took their lands---the Indian people ... built the great civilizations which only now are being dug out of the past__ ... the Indians ask for assistance, technical and financial, for the time needed, however long that may be, to regain in the America of the space age some measure of the adjustment they enjoyed as the original possessors of the native land. Do you think what the Indians were asking for is reasonable? Do Indians have more political power today than they had 15 or 20 years ago? Spanish-speaking minorities. In the United States there are three minority groups that speak Spanish as their first or second language. These are the Mexican- Amerieans, Puerto Ricans, and Cubans. The largest of these three groups are the Mexican-Americans. About 7,200,000 Mexiean-Amcricans arc today living in the United States. They form the second largest minority Among prominent Mexican-Americans is Craciela Olivarez (top), director ol the federal government's Community Services Administration. Vine Deloria (bottom), a Sioux from South Dakota, is a leader in the struggle for Indian rights. in the country. The roots of Mexican- Americans can be traced back to the great Indian civilizations of Mexico predating the arrival of Spanish explorers in the 1500's. By the mid-1800's, over 75,000 Spanish-speaking persons lived in the West before it became part of the United States. The gold rush in the late 1840's, however, brought so many Eng- lish-speaking white settlers to the West that Mexican-Americans were outnumbered. The Mexican-Americans shared their knowledge of farming, ranching, and Members ol the National Farm Workers Association led by Cesar Chavez (with red arm band) take part in a demonstration. Why are they striking? mining with the newcomers. They taught them methods of mining gold and silver. They also taught them how to tame wild horses, how to brand cattle, and how to irrigate the land. In spite of this kind of exchange, there was conflict between the two groups. Each had its own language, religion, and customs. Many English-speaking whites thought of the Mcxican-Americans as "foreign." Land ownership in the former Mexican regions was based on Spanish law, differing from the legal system to which the English-speaking whites were accustomed. Out of this difference stemmed disputes over land ownership. In time, most Mexican-Americans were reduced to tenants or workers on lands now owned by English-speaking Americans. Discrimination continued during the 1900's in jobs, wages, and housing. Mex- ican-Americans formed groups to combat these conditions. After World War II, many of the thousands of Mexican-Amer- ican veterans formed organizations to deal with the discrimination still facing them. In recent years, Mexican-Americans have organized to gain more opportunities for themselves. The more militant among them arc called Chiccmos (chi kii' nos). In 1965 Cesar Chavez (cha' vas) led a strike of Filipino and Mexican- American agricultural workers in California. The strike. La Httelqa (lawel'ga) as it was called, was long and bitter, but it had a number of significant results. For one, La Huelga became a unifying symbol for all Mexican-Amcrican agricultural workers. For another, it helped to draw attention to Mcxican-American grievances throughout the country. Also, it made Cesar Chavez one of the best- known Mexican-American leaders in the United States. Chicanos advocate "Brown Power." To them this means taking pride in one's history, one's appearance, one's self. Mexican-American culture emphasizes church and family relationships, as well as the virtues of courage, chivalry, and concern for others. Women as a Minority Group the It may seem odd to think of women as a minority group, since there are about four million more females than males in the United States. But, it is said, women workers suffer from economic discrimination similar to that experienced by other minority group workers. Many of lowest paid jobs in industry and the /ice occupations have historically been filled by women. Black, Puerto Rican. Mexican-American, and Indian women arc the most economically op- csscd. Theirs is a double-minority sta- and often they, like many other men, are forced to work because of home situations. Driven by economic need, women have taken whatever jobs they could find— ten jobs that were damaging to their alth and family life. They have labored at low pay as textile and needle-trade workers, as office girls and salesclerks, as laundresses and waitresses. And many women, furthermore, do housework for no pay at all. For many years, women working at the same jobs as men were usually paid less for their work. This situation began to change with the passage of the Equal Pay Act of 1963. However, well-educated and well-trained women continue to have difficulty in many instances in getting the kinds of jobs they are capable of filling. For these and various other reasons, women arc said by some to be economically oppressed. Women in politics and government. It might also be said that women, in spite of their numbers, suffer from political powerlessness. The Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution in 1920 gave American women the right to vote in national elections. From that time, women's political activities have grown in many directions. But womens full and equal participation in all functions of citizenship is not yet a fact. For example, women are less likely than men to hold positions of leadership in political parties. An even more striking example of women's political powerlessness is the small number of women holding public office. In the 96th Congress, which met in 1979, there was but one woman senator. And only 16 of the 435 members of the House of Representatives in the 96th Congress were women. Only five women have held positions in the President's Cabinet. Between 1925 and 1927, Wyoming had the first woman governor, Nellie Tayloc Ross. Since then only a very few women have served as state governors. In 1979, Connecticut's Ella Grasso and Washington's Dixy Lee Ray were the only woman governors. No President has ever appointed a woman to the Supreme Court. The United States has never had a woman President or Vice President. ERA proposal. The small number of women holding public office in the United States is surprising because we take pride in our democracy and in the freedom of American women. Perhaps the proposed Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) will change the situation. This proposed amendment reads "Equality of rights under the law shall not be abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex." By the end of 1975 the proposed amendment had not yet been approved by the necessary three fourths of the states. However, Congress extended the deadline for approval of the amendment from 1979 to 1982. If 38 states have approved the amendment by that time, it will become a part of the Constitution. Women made up about 2 percent oi the membership of the 96th Congress, which convened in 1979. The only woman senator was Nancy Kassebaitm flop) of Kansas. Members of the House of Representatives included Shirley Chisholm (middle! of New York and Margaret Heckler (bottom! oi Massachusetts. Why are there so few women in Congress? Should there be more? Women in other fields. Though women have not been prominent as public officials in the United States, their achievements in other fields are noteworthy. The chart on this page shows one way in which individual American women's achievements have been honored. In addition, American women have won more than fifty Pulitzer prizes in journalism, news photography, fiction, drama, history, biography, poetry, and other literary fields. Books by women have consistently placed high on bestseller lists. In theater, opera, and ballet, American women's performances have received international recognition. Women play in many of the country's outstanding symphony orchestras. Many women have earned places for themselves in the business world and the professions. Many women, of course, find their life's work in being good wives and mothers. Yet the capacities of even these The Hall of Fame for Great Americans was established in 1900 on the campus of New York University. Of the 95 persons so far honored for national achievement, 11 are women. To be elected to the Hall of Fame, an individual must have been dead more than 25 years, must have been a citizen of the United States, and must receive a majority vote by a College of Electors. The College of Electors consists of about 100 eminent men and women from all the states. The names, the areas of achievement, and dates of election of women chosen to the Hall of Fame for Great Americans are as follows: Name Achievement Elected in lane Addams Social worker 1965 Susan B. Anthony Reformer 1950 Clara Barton Nurse 1976 Charlotte S. Cushman Actress 1915 Mary Lyon Educator 1905 Maria Mitchell Astronomer 1905 Alice Freeman Palmer Educator 1920 Harriet Beecher Stowe Author 1910 Lillian D. Wald Social worker 1970 Emma Willard Educator 1905 Frances Elizabeth Willard Reformer 1910 women are often not developed or used to their full potential. This, too, is a characteristic of membership in a minority group. Can the United States afford to let intelligence, ability, education, and training go unused because some Americans possessing these qualities are the wrong sex? or the wrong race? or the wrong religion? or the wrong national background? What Then Is the American? What then is the American, this new man? Michel Guillaume Jean de Creve- coeur asked and tried to answer this question in 1782. Many other people have offered answers to the question since that time. Remember, the American may not be a "new man" at all—more than half of all Americans are women. Remember, also, the American may not be white— more than one in ten Americans are not. The American may be descended from persons who came from any one of more than a hundred countries—or from persons who came from a dozen countries. The American may be a Protestant, a Catholic, a Jew, a Moslem, or a Buddhist, or may have any one of several other religious beliefs—or he or she may have no religious belief at all. The American may be short or tall; dark or light; fat or lean or in between; young or old; rich or poor; city, suburban, or rural resident. Ours is a land of physical and cultural diversity. Perhaps we can define the American only in terms of beliefs that most Americans accept and try to live by. The next chapter explores this idea further. From what different countries might the ancestors of these Americans have come? Is any one of them more an American than the others? January 1977. Alex Haley, the author of Roots, was awarded the Spingam Medal, given annually by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People for the highest achievement by a black American. Iune 1978. In the Bakke decision, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of flexible programs designed to admit members of minority groups to colleges and universities, but it declared fixed numerical quotas to be unconstitutional. Civil Rights for Mexican-Americans Other minority groups were not far behind black Americans in claiming their civil rights in the years following World I War II. Mexican-Americans, for example, I also learned to organize and to work together to gain benefits for themselves. Viva Kennedy. Unlike black Americans, who have spread to all regions of the United States, Mexican-Americans have stayed mainly in the Southwest. For many years they were the least known and the least vocal among sizable mi- I nority groups in the nation. In the early 1950's, however, Mexican- Americans began to develop a new political awareness. During the 1960 presidential campaign, "Viva Kennedy" clubs sprang up in the Southwest. For the first time the Mexican-American vote figured prominently in a presidential election. Some political observers credit the organized Mexican-American vote with providing the margin of victory for the Kennedy-Johnson ticket in Texas in 1960. Whether this was true or not, President John F. Kennedy appointed Raymond Tellcs as United States Ambassador to Costa Rica as a sign of recognition. Telles had been mayor of El Paso, Texas, and Kennedy made him the first Mexican- American to become an Ambassador. National attention. During the 1960's a series of dramatic events brought the Mexican-American minority to the attention of the whole nation. Among these dramatic events were long, bitter strikes of migrant farm workers in Texas and California. (See the preceding chapter.) Since most of these farm workers were Mexican-Americans, the strikes publicized the economic problems of this minority group. In March 1966 the federal government's Equal Rights Opportunity Commission held a public hearing in Albuquerque, New Mexico. More than fifty Mexican-American delegates were there, but they walked out in protest. They considered the way in which the hearing was conducted to be careless and insulting. Mexican-Americans in the Southwest were proud of their representatives. The "walkout" was regarded as another sign to the government that Mexican-Ameri- cans were tired of being ignored. After this, national newsmagazines started to include stories about discrimination against Mexican-Americans and how their leaders hoped to combat it. Among these leaders were Cesar Chavez of California; Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales of Colorado; Reies Lopez Tijerina (Te ha re' na) of New Mexico; and Jose Angel Gutierrez (Gii tyair1 es) of Texas. These men were not politicians in the normal sense—that is, they did not hold offices in the government. However, other persons of Mexican descent did hold important offices in the federal government —Joseph M. Montoya, then a senator from New Mexico, and Manuel Lujan, Jr., a member of the House of Representatives from New Mexico. Eligio de la Garza and Henry B. Gonzalez of Texas and Edward R. Roybal of California also served as members of the House of Representatives. In spite of these achievements by individuals, most Mexican-Americans remained "outsiders" in their own land. They clung strongly to their own culture. As one of their leaders explained: We do not want to give up the Spanish language, pray to God in English, substitute mashed potatoes for frijoles (fre ho' les) or junk our pifiatas (penyat'as). Rather we want to bring all of these values to American society as our contribution to the diversity and wealth of our country. Rather than the melting pot, we believe in the heterogeneity [a mixture of unlike parts] of American society, including the give and take with other peoples and other cultures. The words frijoles and pifiatas suggest some of the ways in which Mexican- Amcrican culture is distinctive. Frijoles are beans, a food staple among Mexican- Americans. Pifiatas are hanging pottery containers filled with Christmas gifts. Blindfolded children try to break the pifiatas with sticks. Like many other Spanish words, frijoles and pifiatas have become part of our country's language and are found in most dictionaries. How does this Aztec medicine man painted on a Los Angeles drugstore wall show the artist's Mexican-American heritaget Investigations have shown widespread discrimination and violations of the civil rights of Mexican-Americans. Here arc some examples of testimony given at hearings held by the United States Commission on Civil Rights in San Antonio, Texas, in December 1968. As you read the testimony, pick out the principal grievance of each speaker. Testimony of Reynaldo De La Cruz, a worker and member of the Colorado Migrant Council. The reason for my going into the union was what every Mexican-Ameri- can worker faces, that they have been cheated too long. I decided that this was the only thing we could do—join a union so that we could fight for our rights and for the rights of other people who don't know how to defend themselves. The organization of farm workers is the only way to get better wages, better working conditions, and to have insurance in our work if we get hurt. Testimony of Dr. Manuel Ramirez, Department of Psychology, Rice University, Houston, Texas. The Mexican-American student is led to believe that he cannot be identified with two cultures at the same time. This is brought about as a result of two conflicting messages. One [of these messages) is given him by his parents, his relatives, other Mexican-American students, who tell him that if he rejects Mexican-American culture, he may be considered a traitor to his ethnic group. The other message comes from teachers, employers, Anglo friends, who tell him that if he doesn't reject the Mexi- can-American culture then he will be unable to reap the educational and economic benefits that are available in the Anglo society. Testimony of Dr. George I. Sanchez, Professor of Education, University of Texas, Austin. If I were to change the curriculum I would include more of the history of the Southwest, of New Spain, of Spain itself, of the various Indian cultures of the Southwest that have blended into the culture of the Mexican-American. I would devote much more time to the language arts. I would also teach part of the curriculum in the home language of the students, in Spanish, so that they would attain language development in the language that is easiest for them. Testimony of Homer Garcia, high school student, San Antonio, Texas. Question: Will you tell us briefly what the students were protesting about and what they were asking for? Homer Garcia: They were asking for democratic elections in which the student council officers would be elected by the students and not the faculty.... Mainly speaking Spanish and not being hit like Edgar was, and like hundreds of other kids were.... I would say that was the top issue, our curriculum. It was to our knowledge that it was not adequate, so it was worth fighting for more than anything else. Mexican-Americans in other parts of the United States have expressed the same kinds of grievances as those put forth in the San Antonio hearings. In spite of discrimination, several Mexican-Americans have become widely known in recent years. Among them are scholar-writer George Sanchez, golfers Lee Trevino and Nancy Lopez, actress Raquel Welch, actor Anthony Quinn, and rock guitarists Carlos Santana and Jerry Garcia. Though discrimination still exists, Mcxican-Americans today arc more aware of their civil rights and are more willing to protest unfair treatment. The Case of the Japanese-Americans In general, then, there was an expansion of civil rights for minority groups in the United States in the thirty years following World War II. Yet that war witnessed a massive violation of civil rights against a minority group. That group was the Japanese-Americans living near the West Coast. Many of these people had been born in the United States. The aftermath of Pearl Harbor. To understand what happened to these Japanese- Americans, we need to remember what happened at Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941. On that day Japanese air and naval forces attacked the great naval and air base in Hawaii, as well as other American bases in the Pacific. The Japanese struck without warning. These attacks caused a wave of hate to sweep across the United States. Feelings were especially bitter on the West Coast, where most of the Japa- ncse-Americans lived. Many people looked upon all Japanese-Americans with suspicion, solely because of their Japanese ancestry. In February 1942 President Franklin D. Roosevelt authorized military commanders to mark off "military areas" from which any or all civilians might be kept out. On March 2, General J. L. DeWitt, commanding general of the western region, designated the Pacific coast area as particularly subject to attack. There followed a series of orders, excluding Japanese aliens and American citizens of Japanese descent from these areas. A little later these people were gathered together and shipped out of the area to several camps called relocation centers. Japanese relocated. Ten relocation centers were established. They were located in California, Arizona, Arkansas, Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado, and Utah. More than 110,000 people of Japanese descent, 70,000 of them American citizens, were forced from their homes by the relocation program. They lost their jobs, their property, and their community standing. In the centers, they were detained for periods of time up to four years. When released, they were resettled outside the Pacific coast area. Yet these Japanese-Americans had been convicted of no offense whatsoever. Unlike German-Americans and Italian- Americans—with whose ancestral countries the United States was also at war— Japanese-Americans were being judged solely on their ethnic background. Congress tries to make amends. American- born children of Japanese immigrants are called Nisei (ne' sa). There were thousands of Nisei in Hawaii and on the mainland United States at the time of World War II. The young men among them begged for a chance to fight against Japan atld thus prove their loyalty to the United States. When enlistments were finally permitted, the 442nd Regimental Combat Team was formed, made up entirely of Nisei. Among the first Nisei to enlist in the 442nd Regimental Combat Team was Mike Masaoka. Four of his brothers also enlisted while their mother remained in a California relocation camp. In World War II one of the Masaoka brothers was killed, and the other four were wounded. For bravery in action the Masaoka brothers collected more than thirty medals. The 442nd Regimental Combat Team, which fought in Europe, was the most decorated military unit of World War II. Other military units, made up at least in part of Nisei, fought just as bravely in the Pacific war theater. Still other Nisei served the United States well in the intelligence service or as Japanese translators. At least in part because of this war record, Congress decided to do something to correct the great harm that was done by the forced relocation of 70,000 American citizens of Japanese ancestry during World War II. What Congress did was pass Public Law 886 on July 2, 1948. This law authorized payment of losses claimed by relocated Japanese-Americans, up to a limit How do you think these lapanese-Americans felt as they lined up at a relocation center in 7942? Put into your own words the thoughts that might have been in their minds at this moment. of $2500 for each person. By 1950 nearly 24,000 claims had been made for a total of about $132 million. Approximately 20.- 000 of these were settled under the 1948 law, for roughly $23 million. Later some larger claims were paid, but the relocated Japanese-Amcricans received less than one fifth of what they claimed to have lost. Probably dollars alone could never have paid for all they lost. Nevertheless, the Japanese-Americans seem not to have lost faith in the United States. Most appear to have forgiven the government for violating their rights during World War II. Some of them even say the whole affair was a "helpful catastro- phe." It permitted young men to prove their loyalty by going to war. Those Japanese-Americans remaining at home showed their willingness to go along with American concepts of law and order, even if this meant detainment in a relocation center. Summing up. The relocated Japanese- Americans seem willing to "forgive and forget." But the puzzle of civil rights during a war still remains. Can, or should, the rights of citizens be violated, or suspended, in order to protect the country's life? If so, who should decide what violations or suspensions are necessary? Who should decide when they should be carried out? In peacetime, however, it is clear that constitutional safeguards protect the rights of American citizens. Court decisions, acts of Congress, and presidential orders have operated within this constitutional framework to strengthen or expand the concepts of civil rights. If the constitutional framework is not enough, the Constitution is amended. The Nineteenth Amendment, for example, gave women the right to vote, certainly an important civil right. The Twenty-Sixth Amendment made it possible to expand this right to persons older than seventeen. Few would claim that the American record for protecting the rights of all citizens is perfect. And yet few would deny that the cultural diversity of our people makes such protection a vital necessity. Many observers of American history have felt that our record for protecting minority and majority rights has gotten much better over the past forty years. Yet changing conditions of life constantly call for the further strengthening of civil rights. The protection of Americans' civil rights will always be a major function of our government. On a college campus, students register to vote following passage of the Twenty-sixth Amendment. 