Here are no beggars to be seen (it is a shame and disgrace that there are so many in England). . . . What I have said about this province is indisputably true. I was an eyewitness to it all for I went in the first ship that was bound from England for that country since it received the name of Pennsylvania in the year 1681. it l.See pages 102-103. 2. Answers will vary. 3. See page 103. Answers will vary. 4. See page 104. 1. Why do you think Edward Winslow moved to America? 2. What impression do you think this letter had on his friend? 3. What reason does John Higginson give for settling in America? Would many other people be attracted by his letter? 4. What reasons does Gabriel Thomas give for settling in Pennsylvania? To whom do you think he is trying to appeal? Miserable conditions in Ireland and Scotland caused many people to move to the New World. The accounts you have just read gave some clues as to why the writers migrated to the New World. A look at the world they left behind may help you better understand their view of America. Conditions in Europe By 1600, the population in England was growing faster than the supply of food and other goods. Trade also increased, and with it the demand for raw materials. Wool was in especially great demand. Landowners who had long rented out land now discovered they could make a larger profit by using their land to graze sheep. Former tenant farmers flocked to the cities to find work. This sharp increase in laborers created much unemployment. Economic conditions were even worse in Scotland and Ireland. The people in these countries were at the mercy of English laws. These filled me with surprise, which was soon changed into terror. When I was carried on board I was immediately handled, and tossed up, to see if I were sound. I was soon put down under the decks, and there I received such a greeting in my nostrils as I had never known in my life. With the awful smell and crying together, I became so sick and low that I was not able to eat. But soon, to my sadness, two of the white men offered me food. On my refusing to eat, one of them held me fast by the hands, and tied my feet, while the other whipped me. In a little time after, among the poor chained men, I found some from my own country. I asked them what was to be done with us? They explained that we were to be carried to these white people's country to work for them. I then was a little relieved, and thought, if it were no worse than working, my situation was not so bad. Still I feared I should be put to death. The closeness of the place, and the heat, added to the number in the ship, which was so crowded that each had barely enough room to turn himself, almost suffocated us. Happily perhaps for myself I was reduced so low that it was thought necessary to keep me almost always on deck; and because of my youth I was not put in chains. Some of my fellow passengers were almost daily brought upon deck at the point of death, which I began to hope would soon put an end to my miseries. One day when we had a smooth sea and a gentle breeze, two men, who were chained together, chose to die rather than live in such misery. Somehow they made it through the nettings, and jumped into the sea. Right away another sad fellow, who, on account of his illness, was allowed to be out of chains, followed their example. There was such a noise and confusion among the people of the ship as I never heard before to go after the slaves. However, two of the poor souls were drowned. They got the other, and afterwards whipped him unmercifully, for preferring death to slavery. In this manner we faced more hardships than I can now tell; hardships which cannot be separated from this hateful trade. Discuss: Why would Vasa be so fearful for his life? Some students may wish to draw their own version of Vasa's journey based on the description. The Crossing to Pennsylvania In this reading, Gottfried Mittelberger describes his trip from one of the German states to Pennsylvania. Compare his experiences to those described in the last reading. This journey lasts a whole six months. The people are packed into the big boats as closely as herring, so to speak. The bedstead of Discuss: Would you expect the journey to be the same or different? In what ways? Why? Godfrey Meynell, a British naval officer on anti-slavery patrol, made this drawing of a slave ship seized off the coast of West Africa in 1846. one person is hardly two feet across and six feet long. During the journey the ship is full of pitiful signs of distress— smells, fumes, horrors, vomiting, many different kinds of sea sickness, fever, dysentery, headaches, heat, constipation, boils, scurvy, cancer, mouth-rot, and other afflictions. Add to all that very little food, hunger, thirst, frost, heat, damp air, fear, misery, anger, and sorrow as well as other troubles. Thus, for example, there are so many lice, mostly on the sick people, that they have to be scraped off the bodies. Along with everything else one must also suffer through two to three days and nights of storm, with everyone believing that the ship with all aboard is bound to sink. Among those in good health impatience sometimes grows so great and bitter that one person begins to curse the other, or himself and the day of his birth, and people sometimes come close to murdering one another. Many groan and exclaim: "Oh! If only I were back at home, even lying in my pig-sty!" It is not surprising that many passengers fall ill, because warm food is served only three times a week, and at that is very bad, very small in quantity, and so dirty as to be hardly edible at all. And the water is often very black, thick with dirt, and full of worms. Even when very thirsty, one is almost unable to drink it without feeling disgust. Toward the end of the voyage we had to eat the ship's biscuit, even though in no single piece was there more than the size of a thaler [thimble] that was not full of red worms and spiders' nests. True, great hunger and thirst teach one to eat and drink everything. When at last the ships finally approach land, everyone crawls from below to the deck, in order to look at the land from afar. And people cry for joy, pray, and sing praises and thanks to God. 1. Why do you think Vasa was relieved to find people from his own country? Why hadn't he already asked someone what was going to happen? 2. Why do you think Vasa felt the hardships he suffered were inseparable from the slave trade? Explain why you agree or disagree with his view. 3. How do you think you would have felt if you had been with Mittelberger on his voyage to Pennsylvania? 4. How were Mittelberger's and Vasa's trips to America alike? How were they different? Discuss: Would the people on this ship face the same uncertainties about the future that Vasa did? Why or why not? Students should think about the free choice versus the forced choice. Summary From Africa and Europe came thousands of immigrants to the English colonies in America. Some were fleeing conditions back home. In the seventeenth century poverty and unemployment in Europe were widespread. In addition, wars and religious persecution drove many people to seek refuge outside Europe. The voyages across the Atlantic Ocean were long and difficult. Usually some lives were lost through disease and accidents. Still Europeans continued to migrate to America, hoping to improve their lives. Those who survived often wrote back home urging friends and relatives to join them in America. In their letters, writers often ignored the experiences of the trip and told only of the opportunities offered by the colonies. Some people who wanted to try their luck in America could not save or borrow enough money for the trip. Many of these poor people became indentured servants, agreeing to work for a number of years for someone who would pay their fare. Not all indentured servants migrated willingly. Sometimes very poor men, women, and children in England were seized and sold to ship captains to sell as indentured servants in America. Immigrants from Africa also came unwillingly. At first they were captured in their homeland and sold to Americans as indentured servants. Eventually, however, African captives were sold as permanent slaves. Who, What, Where? Identify the following terms as they are used in this chapter. immigrant p. tot Songhay p-i()6 migration p. 101 Gustavus Vasa New Amsterdam Gottfried Mittelbereer p. 109 P. 102 b Check Yourself 1. What point was President Franklin Roosevelt making when he addressed an audience with the phrase "my fellow immigrants"? P- 1Q1 2. What seem to be the most common reasons people migrated from Europe to America? p- H2 3. Why were some people (both Europeans and Africans) forced to migrate? p-106 Test Your Skill Imagine that you and your family moved to the colonies during the seventeeth century. You left many friends behind. Write a letter to someone back home telling them about what you thought colonial life would be like before you arrived and whether or not it has lived up to your expectations. What Do You Think? Many immigrants to America gradually lost a lot of their old cultures as time went on. Now the trend is toward encouraging people to be conscious of their heritage in terms of culture, language, etc. What might be some reasons for this difference? "In [New York], a city of countless boardinghouses, large hotels, and elegant mansions of the elite, servants were in constant demand. Ddmestic service, in most instances, required few if any previously gained skills and admirably met the needs of transplanted peasant women and girls. . . . "Of the ten thousand to twelve thousand [servants] estimated to be in New York City in 1846, between seven thousand and eight thousand were said to be Irish, another two thousand Germans, and the rest French, Americans, and a sprinkling of other nationalities. . . . "Once in the Empire City, Irish women were far better off in wealthier private households than as miserable seamstresses living singly in the slums or as laborers' wives forced to sew in order to make ends meet. German families remained together, often using skills such as tailoring which women and children had shared in Europe. Other immigrant women followed the German pattern. . . . "An initial handicap of the Catholic Irish servant girls was the prejudice they [met].. .. The Irish boiled with indignation upon reading the hated words, "No Irish need apply". . . as in this advertisement: "WOMEN WANTED—To do general housework . . . English, Scotch, Welsh, German, or any country or color except Irish.. . . "Catholic immigrants from other lands met with religious discrimination in New York, [although somewhat less than did the Irish]. Advertisements for Protestant governesses, cooks, and maids ruled out many French, Germans, and Swiss." Some 5 million immigrants came to the United States between 1815 and 1860. Some of them came with little or no money and looked for jobs in the cities. They faced prejudice and the difficulties of adjusting to a new life in a new country. Somehow they survived and eventually prospered. Wave of Gold discovered Texas German in California declares and Irish 1848 independence immigration from Mexico 1840-1850 1836 298 Pawtucket Nantucket Island Coastal New England loucester Massachusetts Hay Discuss: Why did the Northeast develop industrially? What advantages did it have that other sections did not? Discuss: How do you think the word manufacture was changed to mean the opposite? Discuss: How do interchangeable parts help the factory system? The nineteenth century was a time of rapid development of industry in the Northeast. There were several reasons for industrial growth in this section of the United States. First, enough wealth had already been accumulated through trade to make possible the opening of many banks and other business services in northeastern cities. Also the Northeast had a large supply of unskilled workers, both immigrants and the children of poor farm families. And finally, adequate water power was supplied by the rivers of New England and Pennsylvania. These advantages led groups of wealthy merchants to invest heavily in opening up new factories. The factories were equipped with expensive machinery and run by steam or water power. In Pennsylvania, blast furnaces and rolling mills were replacing the local blacksmith and small forge in the iron industry. Factories in New England replaced small home shops in the spinning and weaving of cloth and in the making of shoes. By 1840, twelve hundred factories were producing textiles (cloth goods) in the United States, and two-thirds of them were in New England. What Is a Factory? Basically, a factory is the place where things are manufactured. The word manufacture originally meant to make by hand. As we use the word today, it usually means to make things in large quantities by machine. The key to the modern factory system is the principle of interchangeable parts. Eli Whitney is given credit for the first use of interchangeable parts. In 1798, he set up a factory to produce a large number of guns in a short time. Before that time each gun was made by a skilled gunsmith. And each gun was a little different from any other gun. Whitney designed separate machines to make the different parts. This meant that the parts were interchangeable, and could be used in any one of the guns being made. He then taught workers how to run the machines and how to put the parts together to make the guns. The Factory System An example of the operation of the factory system and its effect on American life is in the early textile mills of Lowell, Massachusetts. This community, formerly a part of the colonial farm town of Chelmsford, was established in 1826 by a group of Boston investors. The Merrimack River provided power and water for the mills. The Discuss: Do you think this tale is true? Why or why not? What values of the people seeking gold does it show? Do you think this is accurate? Why or why not? states, was called upon to officiate [at a funeral]; and he [agreed] to do so. . . . [The] party proceeded with becoming gravity to the grave, which had been dug at a distance of about a hundred yards from the camp. When the spot was reached and the body lowered, the minister [began a prayer], while the crowd reverently fell upon their knees. For a while, all went well; but the prayer was unnecessarily long and at last some of the congregation began ... to finger the loose earth that had been thrown up from the grave. It proved to be thick with gold, and an excitement was immediately apparent in the kneeling crowd. Upon this the preacher stopped and . . . asked, "Boys, what's that?" took a view of the ground for himself and, as he did so, shouted "Cold! Cold!—and the richest kind of diggings! The congregation is dismissed!" The dead miner was taken from his . . . grave to be buried elsewhere, while the funeral party, with the minister at their head, lost no time in prospecting and staking out new diggings! Chinese Forty-niners News of the instant wealth of some miners spread from the United States to other countries in North America and Europe. In 1845 Un§ 1818 1818 1842 "c OPtG'N*1- states v 1803 es,T Of Q l8."g £*/Cq Hid. al90) Paris) -SSfiP* United States, 1853 'Claimed by United States 1810-1813 the spring of 1848 the Chinese learned of the need for ready-made clothing, home building materials, and other goods. These could be shipped more quickly from Hong Kong than from the eastern part of the United States. News of the high wages being paid to laborers also spread among the Chinese, and peasants flocked to the coast to seek passage to California. Cold fever was not the only reason for the interest in journeying to the United States. War had brought poverty and ruin to southeastern China. As a result, 500 people left Hong Kong for California in 1850. By the end of 1851 there were 25,000 Chinese immigrants mining gold or working as carpenters, cooks, or general laborers in California. Some also established restaurants in San Francisco and around the mines. Americans considered them honest and hard working. A few years later, they were subjected to bitter discrimination and greeted with cries of "California for Americans." A miner's license was required of them, but not of other miners. The governor even issued messages objecting to Chinese immigration. Forty-niners around a sluice. Grooves in the bottom of the sluice caught gold particles when stream water was passed through it. Discuss: What does the illustration above show about this period? 1. How did the discovery of gold affect life in California? 2. What were some of the reasons people in China were interested in the gold rush in California? 3. How was Chinese immigration at this time similar to European migration to the colonies (see Chapter 7)? How was it different? WwA If 1. See page 343. 2. See pages 344-345. 3. See pages 344-345. Irish Scandinavians and for all. The four most important parts of Clay's bill were: 1. California would be admitted as a free state. 2. The people actually living in the New Mexico and Utah territories could decide for themselves whether they would be slave or free. Congress would not decide for them. This led the South to believe that new slave states might be formed from these territories to balance California. Where Foreign-born People Lived in 1860 Percent of each national group living in each state. The slave trade, the buying and selling of slaves, would end in the District of Columbia. But people who lived there could still own slaves. 4. A Fugitive Slave Law would be passed to make it easier for slaveholders to capture runaway slaves. Clay was himself a slaveholder from Kentucky. He argued in favor of the bill. Senator John C. Calhoun, a slaveholder from South Carolina, opposed it. He felt that the interests of the South were not protected. Calhoun made a new proposal. He suggested an amendment to the Constitution that would provide for two presidents, one from each section. The presidents from the North and from the South would each have a veto. That is, each president would be able to reject any law that did not serve the interests of that section. At first, Clay's proposal was defeated. He was old and he became too sick to fight for it. Stephen Douglas, a young senator from Illinois, took up the fight for Clay. The compromise passed. | | 2% to 8% Less than 2% Geographically Speaking: Compare these maps to the map on page 362. Which immigrants were most likely to become farmers? In what part of the country. North or South, did most immigrants settle? Slavery affected where many immigrants decided to settle. Foreign born people usually wanted to avoid having to compete with slaves for jobs. A large percentage of the immigrants who settled in the Northeast became city dwellers. Discuss: Why do you think children were allowed to work? Have students consider what they know- about the role of children at this time. At the Bottom of the Wage Scale Immigrants recently arrived in the United States were generally paid less than most American-born workers. Black workers, however, especially those who worked in the mines and mills of the South, received even lower wages than the immigrants. Blacks were usually the "last hired and the first fired" in every industry. Some businesses refused to hire them at all. Children received the lowest wages of all. Thomas O'Donnell told about the use of child labor in the textile industry. Many other businesses also hired children. Ten-year-olds worked in the coal mines of West Virginia. Eight-year-olds worked in the clothing industry in New York. The following reading describes conditions in a Chicago factory. As you read it, think about the dangers faced by child workers. What other disadvantages do you think there might be to child labor? Discuss: Why might the factory owners prefer children to adults? Would they be better workers? Why or why not? The largest number of children to be found in any one factory in Chicago is in a caramel works in this ward, where there are from one hundred and ten to two hundred little girls, four to twelve boys, and seventy to one hundred adults, according to the season of the year. The building is a six-story brick, well lighted, with good plumbing and fair ventilation. It has, however, no fire escape, and a single wooden stair leading from floor to floor. In case of fire the inevitable fate of the children working on the two upper floors is too [terrible] to [think about]. The box factory is on the fifth floor. . . . 1. Why were machine-harvested goods cheaper? 2. How could machines increase farm production? 3. Why did the writer of the letter to the Defender want to move north? Immigrants from foreign lands flooded into American cities in the years between the end of the Civil War in 1865 and the beginning of World War I in Europe in 1914. Twenty-five million people came from countries in Europe, Asia, and the Americas to the United States in those years. They came in two big waves. The first, between 1865 and 1890, was made up of people from the countries of northern and western Europe, mostly Great Britain, Ireland, Germany, and Scandinavia. About 300,000 Chinese immigrants also arrived. The Chinese formed only a small percentage of the total immigration of about 9.5 million for this period. But they settled in large numbers in one state— California. A second wave of immigration came between 1890 and 1914. Most of these immigrants were from southern and eastern Europe, including such countries as Austria-Hungary, Italy, Russia, Greece, Romania, and Turkey. In 1882, people from southern and eastern Europe had made up only 13 percent of the total number of immigrants. But, by 1907, they were over 80 percent of the total. This change in the national origin of most of the immigrants led some Americans to call this wave the new immigration. The so-called old immigration came from northern and western Europe. Most of the "new" immigrants were Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, or Jewish. Most of the "old" immigrants were Protestants. In addition to the immigrants from southern and eastern Europe, about 70,000 Japanese arrived in the second wave of immigration. Most of them, like the Chinese, settled in California. Between 1900 and 1920, more than 200,000 immigrants from Mexico also entered the United States. They tended to settle in Texas, California, New Mexico, and Arizona. Adjusting to America The immigrants who crowded into American cities in the late 1800s shared many of the same hopes, fears, and hardships as immigrants before and since. They had been through what was *#J if 1. See page 452 by inference. 2. See page 452 by inference. 3. See page 452. Discuss: How might new floods of immigrants affect the jobs of the people already here? How might these people compete with the blacks moving up from the South? Why? An immigrant family arriving on Ellis Island. Many immigrants who came to this country hoped to return to their homeland someday. A Greek immigrant in Chicago told of his dreams for the future in a composition he wrote for his English class on the topic, "The Home I Would Like to Have." "If I had enough money (a few thousand dollars would be sufficient) I would go to a farm in the United States and I would . . . [learn] farming. Then I would go directly to my native country. ... I would make some repairs on my old house . . . then I would buy more land, connect it with that I have already and make a big farm. Then I would have some people work at it, and I would teach them to treat the land like American people do." Discuss: Why is it difficult for the new immigrants to adjust to America? How does the development of an ethnic neighborhood help the new immigrants? How does it hinder them? Students should see that it provides the security of familiar things but does not encourage the development of the ways of the new country. probably the hardest part of the immigrant experience: leaving their homes and saying good-by to family, friends, everything that was familiar. Once here, they were faced with the task of adjusting to America. For most immigrants of the late 1800s, this meant learning a new language, following new customs, eating strange foods, learning new jobs, and trying to understand American values. Many of them came from rural backgrounds, so they had the added problem of adjusting to city life. Moving to a city in their own country would have been a difficult adjustment. Imagine the shock of coming to the teeming American cities of the late 1800s. Some immigrants made the adjustment to American life quickly; others never completely made it at all. They returned home or moved elsewhere. Some clung all their lives to ethnic, or nationality, neighborhoods in American cities as a sort of halfway house between their old country and new. Others became commuters between their homelands and the United States. They worked as construction workers in America during the building season, for example, and then spent the rest of the year in Europe. The Wong Family Jade Snow Wong, the daughter of immigrant parents, described how her family came to the United States and how they adjusted to American life. The experience of the Wong family was fairly typical for immigrants in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. From the village of Fragrant Mountains in southern Canton, [China], my father had immigrated as a young man in 1903 to San Francisco. Many years later when I was a grown woman, he told me with sadness that when he had asked his mother, whom he adored, for permission to come to the United States, she had expressed her reluctance. When this only son had insisted that he must leave her, she had cursed him, "Go! Co! You will have the life to go, but not the life to return!" . . . It was the ambition of most of these men to work and save in the United States and return to China to marry or rejoin a waiting wife, buy property in their village, and enjoy rent for lifelong income. . . . To support the family in America, Daddy tried various occupations . . . but finally settled upon manufacturing men's and children's denim garments. He leased sewing equipment, installed machines in a basement where rent was cheapest, and there he and his family lived and worked. There was no thought that dim and airless quarters were terrible conditions for living and working, or that child labor was unhealthful. The only goal was for all in the family to work, to save, and to become educated. It was possible, so it would be done. . . . I observed from birth that living and working were inseparable. My mother was short, sturdy, young looking, and took pride in her appearance. She was at her machine the minute housework was done, and she was the hardest working seamstress, seldom pausing, working after I went to bed. The hum of sewing machines continued day and night, seven days a week. She knew that to have more than the . . . necessities, she must work and save. We knew that to overcome poverty, there were only two methods: working and education. It was our personal responsibility. Being poor did not entitle us to benefits. . . . At the age of seventy plus, after years of attending night classes in citizenship, he (my father) became naturalized. He embraced this status wholeheartedly. One day when we were discussing plans for his birthday celebration ... he announced, "Now that I have become a United States citizen, I am going to change my birthday. Henceforth, it will be on the Fourth of July." A butcher shop on Dupont Street (now Grant Avenue), San Francisco, about 1900. Discuss: What kind of values were being taught in this immigrant family? How might these be similar to those of the settled inhabitants? How might they be different? Discuss: Why do you think the father wanted to change his birthday? What does that say about his feelings about the new country? Torch of the Statue of Liberty on display at the Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia, 1876. Closing the "Golden Door" The name Frederic Auguste Bartholdi isn't exactly a household word in the United States. But maybe it should be. Bartholdi was a French sculptor who created one of America's most famous land- marks—the Statue of Liberty. It was a gift from the French people to the United States on the occasion of the nation's centennial in 1876. The figure holds a book of laws in one hand and a torch in another. Bartholdi entitled it "Liberty Enlightening the World.'' He thought of it as America showing the rest of the world the blessings of liberty. The base for the statue, built on a small island in New York harbor, wasn't completed until 1886. A poem was inscribed on it. It reads in part: "A mighty woman with a torch, whose flame Is imprisoned lightning, and her name Mother of Exiles, From her beacon-hand Clows world-wide welcome . . . cries she With silent lips. 'Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden door.'" Emma Lazarus, the author of the poem, was not an immigrant herself; she was born in New York City. But she did devote much of her life to helping Jewish immigrants who came to the United States. Emma Lazarus shared the view of many Americans that the United States always had and always would welcome newcomers. So, when she saw the Bartholdi statue, she didn't think of it as "Liberty Enlightening the World," but as the "Mother of Exiles [people who are forced to leave their homeland]." She imagined the statue as a beacon, guiding the homeless from around the world to the United States to make new lives for themselves. Lazarus' view of America's feeling about immigrants wasn't entirely accurate. Every immigrant group has met some Americans who have not welcomed them. The official welcome hasn't always been warm either. As early as 1798, Congress passed laws making it difficult for immigrants to obtain citizenship. These laws were soon repealed, but in the 1850s anti-immigrant feelings led to the formation of a political party, the Know-Nothings. They pledged to protect the rights of "native" Americans against the "invasion" of foreigners. In 1882, Congress passed a Chinese Exclusion Act which prevented Chinese people from coming to the United States or becoming American citizens for ten years. This policy was continued in several later laws and lasted until 1943. The Wong family entered the United States during a brief lapse in this policy in 1903. But, Mr. Wong, as you might have noticed, didn't become an American citizen until after 1943. By 1890, more and more "old" immigrants began to worry about what was going to happen to the country with all the "new" immigrants coming in. Fearful for their jobs and their ways of life, they demanded that immigration be limited to "desirable" people. They defined "desirable" as people like themselves. From time to time between 1897 and 1917, Congress passed laws that would limit immigration. Some of these laws required immigrants to take a literacy test to show that they were able to read and write. Presidents Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson vetoed these measures. President Cleveland pointed out that many of "our best citizens" arrived in this country not knowing howto read or write. But, in 1917, a literacy test law passed over President Wilson's veto. In 1921, Congress passed a law which put a limit on the number of immigrants who could be admitted to the United States each year. The law provided that each European nation would receive an immigration quota equal to 3 percent of the number of people from that country in the United States in 1910. This discriminated against the "new" immigrants because there were few of them in this Immigrants looking at New York City from Ellis Island pier, about 1912. Discuss: How does the picture above convey the feelings of the immigrants? Note: Be sure students understand the meaning of literacy. WimA 4&u? if- 1. Answers will vary but some data on page 457. 2. Answers will vary but some data on page 457. Students should explain why. 3. Some data on page 455 but answers will vary and students should give reasons. 4. Some data on page 458 but answers will vary. 5. Answers will vary. 6. Answers will vary but some data on page 458. For these questions, you might ask the students to work in pairs or small groups. After they have compiled their answers, ask each pair or group to make three general statements that summarize what their data show. Then discuss these statements as a total class, examining the effects of urbanization on the nation. country in 1910. The law favored the people of northern and western European ancestry. No limit was placed on immigrations from the Americas, but a later version of this law completely excluded Asian immigrants. The quota system was abolished in 1968, but immigration is still restricted to a certain number of people each year. One American Type or Many? There are many different views about the place of immigrant cultures in American life. Some have viewed the United States as a "melting pot" where the best parts of America's many cultures would come together to form a whole new culture. Others have felt that immigrants should be "Americanized" which means they should adopt the culture of Anglo-Americans. Others believed that people could be good Americans and still keep their old cultural heritage. Today many people believe that America should be a "multi-cultural" society, a "nation of nations." 1. Do you think that Americans of northern and western European ancestry were right in trying to limit immigration to people like themselves? Why or why not? 2. Why do you think some Americans called immigrants from southern and eastern Europe "new" immigrants? Do you think the term was meant in a complimentary way or not? 3. Do you think that trying to keep some of their own customs made immigrants less attached to the U.S.? 4. Should the United States put a limit on the number of immigrants who can enter the country each year? Why or why not? 5. Do you think of yourself as an immigrant or the descendant of immigrants? What customs does your family follow that are different from those of your friends? 6. Do you think the United States is a melting pot? Why or why not? Do you think all racial and ethnic groups have been included in the melting pot? The tremendous urban growth of the late 1800s didn't affect all parts of the country at the same time. Some sections became urbanized, or developed cities, before others. Look at the chart on the next page which gives the percentage of urban dwellers in each state from 1880 to 1900. See if you can answer the following questions about this chart. What was it like living in American cities about 1890? A lot depended on where you lived. Each section had its own personality. The street life of a neighborhood gave a good clue to its character. In the older and poorer districts in the inner city, the streets were very important for living space. The houses were built close to the street and close to each other. People escaped from the crowded conditions in their apartment buildings to the open space of the street. Children played there; women visited with one another; men sat on the front steps and talked. People came by, pushing carts loaded with fruits and vegetables, clothing, hardware, books, kitchen utensils, and almost anything else people in the neighborhood needed. The streets of immigrant neighborhoods in the inner city had special qualities all their own. The following is a description of an immigrant neighborhood in New York in the early 1900s. (ffi) I strolled over Third Avenue into Mulberry Street. I was in Sicily [an island off the southwestern coast of Italy] at one end of the street and in Piedmont [in northern Italy] at the other end. . . . From one end of the street to the other not a word of English. . . . The signs over the doors in Italian. The clothes of the people, the litter on the streets, the colored shawls tied under the chins of the [dark] wrinkled faces of the women [who looked old before their time]! It was all Italian. . . . I walked out of Mulberry Street and fell into the Creek quarter. It looked more like some side street of [Istanbul, Turkey]. Cafes every ten feet. Long-mustached, sleek fellows were playing cards and drinking coffee from small cups. I soon came into the Jewish quarter. Here and there a sign in another language than Hebrew. I wandered into the Syrian quarter on Washington Street. Beautiful laces and [fancy cloth] in the store windows. Goldsmiths working on the door sills with their legs crossed under them, and the little anvil between the knees. ... It was Smyrna [a city in Turkey] or Jaffa [a city in present-day Israel] or the Port of Athens. A young barefooted boy sold a newspaper printed in the Arabic language which was eagerly bought by every one. . . . For days and days I searched for Americans but the only thing American I saw was the dollar. . . . Discuss: How does this account confirm what you learned before about the life lived by the new immigrants? Discuss: If you were to wander through New York City today, would you still find ethnic neighborhoods? Why or why not? Which ones might you expect to find? Many of the Jewish immigrants who came to the United States in the late 1800s settled on New York's lower East Side. Opposite is a view of Hester Street, one of the main streets in this neighborhood. Inset: A pretzel peddler, New York, 1910. "From all parts of the United States [they came], some bumping along hundreds of miles [by horse and carriage], others using their last folding money for train fare." Fifteen hundred delegates representing Farmers Alliances, Knights of Labor, and other farm and labor groups, gathered in Omaha, Nebraska, in July 1892. They were prepared to launch an all-out attack on the economic and political forces of America. These people were called Populists. They felt that reform in government had not gone far enough and that there were many problems that had not been taken care of. By the time the group had finished meeting, it had formed its own political party. They nominated James B. Weaver of Iowa as their candidate for President, and adopted a strong platform. They demanded unlimited coinage of silver and gold to increase the amount of money in circulation. Populists asked for a graduated income tax, by which the rich pay higher taxes than the poor. They also asked that savings banks be set up where people could safely deposit their money, or borrow money at low interest rates. The Populist party platform said that government should own and operate the railroads, telegraph, and telephone in the interests of the people. They demanded a free and secret ballot system, and a fair count in all elections. They wanted to keep immigrants whom they felt were undesirable out of the country. They sympathized with workers and wanted strict enforcement of the eight-hour law on government work. Populists favored election of United States senators by popular vote of the people rather than by those in state government. The Populists and Political Campaigns One of the major concerns of Populists was that more money be put in circulation. They favored the minting of more silver coins in addition to the gold which had become scarce. Farmers felt that if more silver and dollars were in circulation, the price of farm products would go up and they could pay off their debts. Miners and mine owners supported the coinage of silver. Bankers and other business people disagreed. They knew that if more money were available, the actual value of the dollar would drop, and the debts owed to them would be worth less. Political debate in a rural post office, 1880s. Discuss: Populism is a word derived from popular. What indications are there here that this was indeed a popular idea? Why? Note: Some students may wish to look into the campaign of 1976 when "populism" was a word that re-emerged and was attached to a number of the candidates. ready-made, to buy a vacuum cleaner and imitate the lovely carefree girls in the magazine advertisements who banished dust with such delicate fingers. Women were slowly becoming emancipated from routine to live their own lives. And what were these own lives of theirs to be like? Well, for one thing, they could take jobs. Up to this time, girls of the middle classes who had wanted to "do something" had been largely restricted to teaching, social work, nursing, and clerical work. But now they poured out of the schools and colleges into all kinds of new jobs. They entered the offices of publishers and advertisers. They went into tea-room management. They sold antiques, sold real estate, opened smart little shops, and finally invaded the department stores. Intolerance Restrictions were placed by the federal government on immigration during the Twenties. Quota systems were set up that severely limited the number of southern and eastern Europeans who could come to the United States. They almost entirely excluded immigration from African or Asian countries. This nativism or lack of tolerance that many Americans showed people who were not Protestant, white, or of British or northern European background became quite widespread during the Twenties. Intolerance took on many forms. But it was always directed at minority groups. Some of the intolerance was spurred by extremist groups such as the Ku Klux Klan. This organization used some of the techniques that the old Klan had used during the Reconstruction period. But besides blacks, the Klan's attacks now included Catholics, Jews, political radicals, and almost all foreigners. Discuss: How does the material in this section demonstrate changes in values? How did tech- "Dozens of new words and expressions sprang into existence during the twenties. ... A partial list of terms that were coined or popularized in the decade appears below.Black Americans $4,437 Puerto Ricans 3,811 White 5.0% Black 6.9% Puerto Rican 9.9% Note: Students should be aware that these problems are shared by all migrant workers—many of whom are not Mexican Americans. Ricans. Most Mexican Americans, who live in cities, face the same problems as do Puerto Ricans. Others are migrant workers, who follow the crop harvests, picking lettuce in California in the spring, strawberries in Oregon or Illinois in the summer, and apples and tomatoes in Indiana and Michigan in the fall. Their migrant life-style means that they have little opportunity in American society to educate their children or to improve their economic position. The category "white" in the statistics is often misleading too. Not all white Americans shared equally in the postwar prosperity as the pictures on this page clearly show. Rural whites in Appalachia, a region including eastern Kentucky, east Tennessee, and West Virginia, were one of the chief white groups who were left out. Appalachia is coal-mining country. As more and more Americans began to heat with oil and gas and as the mining companies began to use huge machines to mine coal, many Appalachian whites were put out of work. Some left Appalachia for the cities. But, because they had little education and few job skills, they simply went from being rural poor to being urban poor. Other white groups were left out of the American dream. Many of these groups enjoyed prosperity, but some, like many Jewish Americans, were barred from certain neighborhoods, clubs, and schools. Others were Roman Catholics of southern and eastern European ancestry who found that the houses in the "best'' neighborhoods were mysteriously unavailable to them—no matter how much money they earned. Finally, American women of every racial and ethnic, or nationality, group often suffered unequal treatment. From what you've studied so far, describe some examples of discrimination against blacks, Indians, Asian Americans, southern and eastern Europeans, Jewish people, and women. As the postwar prosperity grew, the gap between those who were enjoying the "good life" and those who weren't became even more apparent. Some of those who were left out began to demand their share of the dream and a bigger voice in deciding how the nation was run. Blacks spearheaded the protest of the "left-out" groups. And so the story begins with them. Gains of the War Years Blacks had begun to organize to gain their rights long before 1945. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People had been founded in 1909. But the movement for black equality really began to pick up steam in the war years. There are several reasons why. 1. More than one million black soldiers fought in World War II. The United States government and the newspapers said that the war was being fought to end tyranny and inequality in Europe and Asia. Yet inequality and prejudice were facts of life for black Americans back home in the United States. Blacks even were placed in segregated, or separate, fighting units in the army. Many blacks felt that their contribution in winning the war should at least be rewarded with equal opportunity at home. One black soldier said that if he died in the war he wanted the following inscription on his tombstone: Note: Students might investigate their own community to check ethnic patterns within it. if See pages 650-651 for some data, but answers will vary. Discuss: Does the fact that certain groups make less than others or have less education mean that there is inequality? Why or why not? If everyone had the same number of years of education and had the opportunity to take any job they were qualified for without discrimination (because of protection from it by law), would everyone still make the same money? Why or why not? Students should see that even if total equality of opportunity occurred, some people would do better than others. The question now confronting the nation is: should everyone be equal regardless of what he or she does or should everyone have the same opportunities to become equal? This is one question that the students should discuss. "Here lies a black man, Killed fighting a yellow man. For the protection of a white man." 