The southern colonies—Maryland. Virginia, the Carolinas, and Georgia— had their cities: Baltimore. Norfolk, Charleston, and Savannah. But these colonies' distinctive character came from their agriculture. The climate permitted an unusual assortment of crops—tobacco, rice, cotton, and indigo, a plant grown for its precious blue dye. Throughout the colonial period, ever increasing numbers of black slaves were used to work the crops, for it was considered more economical to own slaves than to hire servants. Most southern farmers had small parcels of land and no slaves, but prosperous planters might have dozens of slaves and large, lovely mansions. The middle colonies of Pennsylvania. New York. New Jersey, and Delaware were known as the "bread colonies." Here huge grain crops were harvested, providing a source of trade for finished goods produced overseas. Large expanses of fertile land, dotted by stone and brick houses, made up the landscape. Most of the colonists were small prosperous farmers, though there were large landholders in New York. In the growing cities of Philadelphia and New York, shopkeepers and artisans used their shops both as places of business and as homes. The middle colonies attracted increasing numbers of non-British settlers. Dutch, German. Scotch. Irish, Swedish, and French colonists began to be absorbed into the population, and a new ethnic group began to emerge—Americans. Only black people—free or slave—were barred from this ethnic mix. Despite the prejudice against blacks, the middle colonies tended to be tolerant of religious and ethnic minority groups, and the Quakers of Pennsylvania were among the first to speak out against slavery. Like the residents of the other colonies. New Englanders were primarily farmers. But farming in New England usually meant tilling rocky, infertile sail. Average farm size was quite small—50 to 200 acres. Large numbers of settlers became skilled workers. Many earned their living in a seaport, catching fish, producing rum. building ships, or importing slaves. Boston was the center of trade and manufacturing, though for many years Newport, Rhode Island, was the center of the slave trade. The large Puritan immigration stamped New England with a distinctive culture. Public education was encouraged so that children would be able to read the Bible (although education for girls was kept to a minimum for fear they would lose their health and make poor wives). The emphasis on public education would make this area known for its literacy and its centers of higher learning, such as Harvard and Yale. And then, for every colony, there was the frontier, the edge of colonial settlement. Some travelers saw the frontier as barbaric and crude. Others saw it as peaceful and pastoral. When the colonists first began coming to the eastern coast of North America, they encountered a forest that covered the land from the Atlantic coast to the Mississippi River. Settling the frontier was largely a process of turning this forest into farmland. Gradually the interior of the continent began to resemble life near the coast. Where once had stood a rough lean-to, there was ' View of Bethlehem. Pennsylvania. 1757 built a comfortable farm house. Where once a pioneer family had tilled a farm in the forest, there came settlers who established permanent communities— farmers, merchants, lawyers, preachers, land speculators. Land seemed limitless. The climate, the land, and the economies of the colonies created a variety of colonial lifestyles. And within each colony was a class structure imported from Europe. At the top of the social ladder were the large landowners and wealthy merchants. In the middle were the shopkeepers, artisans, and smaller farmers. At the bottom were the indentured servants, unskilled workers, and slaves. If you were a black or a woman, your rights and opportunities were few. But if you were a white male, you could dream of better things, for the social ladder could be climbed more easily than in Europe. Even indentured servants could work off their contracts, save money, and become wealthy landowners. This was, of course, more true for men than for women. Women's status was almost always judged by the occupation of their husbands or their fathers. Unlike men, no women—rich or poor—were allowed to vote. Unless a woman was a widow, she could usually not own property or work outside the family farm or business. Existing outside the colonists' social structure were the Indians. Occasionally, British colonists married Indians, although intermarriage was much more common in the French and Spanish colonies. Colonists learned many survival techniques and agricultural practices from the Indians. They also employed In- in January 1941. Roosevelt was calling for military aid to nations resisting German and Japanese attack. In the future days, which we seek to make secure, we look forward to a world founded upon four essential human freedoms. The first is freedom of speech and expression—everywhere in the world. The second is freedom of every person to worship God in his own way—everywhere in the world. The third is freedom from want—which, translated into world terms, means economic understandings which will secure to every nation a healthy peacetime life for its inhabitants— everywhere in the world. The fourth is freedom from fear—which, translated into world terms, means a world-wide reduction of armaments to such a point and in such a thorough fashion that no nation will be in a position to commit an act of physical aggression against a neighbor—anywhere in the world.... Freedom means the supremacy of human rights everywhere. Our support goes to those who struggle to gain those rights or keep them. From a speech delivered in 1944 by Chief Judge Learned Hand of the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, Second Circuit: A society In which men recognize no check upon their freedom soon becomes a society where freedom is the possession of only a savage few— The spirit of liberty is the spirit which Is not too sure that it is right; the spirit of liberty Is the spirit which seeks to understand the minds of other men and women; the spirit of liberty is the spirit which weighs their interests alongside its own without bias. 11. This selection is from The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) by Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona. Goldwater was the Republican candidate for President in 1964. The Conservative looks upon politics as the art of achieving the maximum amount of freedom for individuals that is consistent with the maintenance of the social order. The Conservative is the first to understand that the practice of freedom requires the establishment of order: it is impossible for one man to be free if another is able to deny him the exercise of his freedom. But the Conservative also recognizes that the political power on which order is based is a self- aggrandizing force; that its appetite grows with eating. He knows that the utmost vigilance and care are required to keep political power within its proper bounds. 12. Here Is part of a famous speech by civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr., delivered in 1963 on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. With this faith we will be able to work together, to pray together, to struggle together, to go to jail together, to stand up for freedom together, knowing that we will be free one day. Martin Luther King. Jr. Summing Up 1. What is your personal definition of liberty? 2. In your opinion, has the dream of liberty been realized in the United States? If not, do you think it can ever be realized? 3. Keeping your own definition of liberty in mind, explain what you think should be done about the following situations and why: (a) The police tap your aunt's phone because they think she is a criminal, (b) Police anest a man addressing a crowd because they fear he will cause a riot 5. In a speech made on September 4, 1912, Woodrow Wilson, soon to be elected President, said: I believe in democracy because it releases the energies of every human being. boty figure of an eagle by an unknown artist, 19th century M and M Karolik Collection. Courtesy Museum of Fine Arts. Boston 6. In 1942, Constantine Panunzio, an grant from Italy, described the love of racy among Italian immigrants to the United Slates: Residence in the United States had strengthened the original democratic leanings of early Italian Americans. ... Here in democratic America, they had bettered their condition: They had improved their economic situation, en- |oyed greater educational advantages for themselves and their children; and many had risen in the social scale. 7. Still another view—that of British writer Aldous Huxley, 1944: Democracy is being able to say no to the boss. 8. Some Americans think that democracy means having the right to vote. Others disagree that voting and democracy are the same thing. Here, for example, is an excerpt from an article in Akwesasne Notes (Early Summer, 1975), a Mohawk newspaper. Many natural peoples, including traditional Hopis. have a strong aversion to (dislike of| the whole concept of "voting," a sacred cow of U.S.-style democracy. Voting creates winners and losers, majorities and minorities, while people like the Hopi believe in remaining of one ind and one heart, counselling until a decision can be reached. As a result, when voting along the lines of Roberts Rules of Order ,.. was introduced to the Hopi in 1935, only 755 Hopi out of 4500 cast ballots. The majority of villages refused to involve themselves in what they considered to be white man's politics. 9. A Yuma Indian explained how leaders were traditionally selected in his tribe: You know how some men are quick and strong and know the things to do, how people like to do things for them, and how they have a gift for getting everybody cheerful? Well, those men were kwoxot—tribal leaders. During the 1830's and 1840's, the population of the United States continued to expand westward. At the same time. Mexico, independent since 1821, was struggling to maintain its national unity. Mexico's struggle was made harder because its territories in what is now California. Arizona. New Mexico, and Texas were located far to the north of Mexico City, its capital. These lands were only sparsely populated. The territorial population consisted primarily of Indians and Mexicans of mixed Indian and Spanish descent. Among the Mexican inhabitants were farmers, ranchers, and miners. Many were still loyal to the old Spanish rule. The discovery of copper and gold in New Mexico in the late 1820's had also led to the influx of Mexican settlers. In addition, a small number of missionaries had settled in the territories, hoping to Christianize the Indians. By 1850. about 80.000 Mexicans lived in these territories. They were not particularly interested in the struggles of the Mexican government to consolidate power. The Mexican settlers were content to live their lives without any interference from the outside, including rule by their own government. In the Texas territory the Mexican government's problems were complicated by the presence of many Anglo-Americans. Few Mexicans lived in the area, so the Mexican government had been encouraging American immigrants to settle in Texas. The government believed that these settlers would help strengthen its control over the area. But the Mexicans found that they could not count on the loyalty of the Anglo-Americans when centralized rule was attempted. In 1824. Mexico attempted to organize a loose, federal form of government. The plan suited the territories well because it left them free to run their own affairs. When the government attempted to decrease the power of the Catholic Church, the University of Mexico, and the Mexican army, however, social and political unrest erupted. As a result, in 1834, Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna seized power and set up a strong, centralist government, an action that irritated the people in the territories. Reaction was particularly strong in Texas where the Anglo-American presence was dominant. There the Anglo-American population of 25,000 far outnumbered the 4,000 Spanish-speaking Mexican inhabitants. In 1836, Texas declared itself independent. An independent Texas was more than the Mexican government could swallow. Troops were sent to restore order and loyalty to the central government Santa Anna himself took command of the army. In March 1836. 5.000 Mexican troops won a major battle at the Alamo misson in San Antonio, killing a force of 200 brave Texans, including Davy Crockett. The Mexican victory outraged many Americans, and they demanded that Texas become a part of the United States. After the Battle of San Jacinto in April, Santa Anna lost control of Texas. Texas became an independent republic, with Sam Houston as its president. The United States, Great Britain, and France quickly recognized Texan independence. Nine years later, after the inauguration in 1845 of President James K. Polk, who had run on a platform supporting expansion, the United States invited Texas to join the Union. It did so in December 1845. Poor strategy and inadequate supplies had doomed Santa Anna and a Mexican-controlled Texas. But the Americans were not satisfied with their new acquisition. In the mid-1840's, many Americans believed in manifest destiny, a term describing the view that God wanted the United States to expand. Immense Mexican territories lay to the west of Texas, stretching to the Pacific Ocean. Upon becoming President. Polk attempted to buy California from Mexico. The Mexican government refused to sell. It had spurned such offers from nearly every President since John Quincy Adams in the 1820's. Mexico had never accepted the loss of Texas, and was outraged when the United States annexed (took over) this vast land. In addition, when Texas officially became a state in December 1845. Mexicans and Americans quarreled over the location of Texas' southern border. About 150 miles lay between the border at the Nueces River that the Mexicans claimed and the Rio Grande border claimed by Texas and the American government. Polk sent troops into the disputed area, rushed an emissary to negotiate with Mexico, and waited for an incident. The Mexicans refused to negotiate and sent troops to attack American forces waiting north of the Rio Grande. Polk cried that "Mexico has invaded our territory and shed American blood upon the American soil." He called upon Congress to declare war, which it did on May 13, 1846. With its victory the United States gained the future states of Arizona. California, New Mexico. Utah. Nevada, and parts of Colorado. Mexican claims over Texas ended. The new area was larger than the Louisiana Purchase—nearly a million square miles. Thus, the United States gained control of the Pacific coast and the Southwest, incorporating a sizeable Spanish-speaking population and several hundred Indian tribes into its ethnic mix. Though for the Anglo-Americans the dream had expanded, the newly added Mexican Americans were not so pleased. Having resisted central rule from their own government, they now found themselves controlled, yet not accepted, by an alien culture. Commenting on the provisions of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which guaranteed Mexicans in the conquered lands "the enjoyment of all the rights of citizens of the United States according to the principles of the Constitution," Mexican diplomat Manuel Cresencio Rejon said, "Our race, our unfortunate people will have to wander in search of hospitality in a strange land, only to be ejected later. Descendants of the Indians that we are. the North Americans hate us. their spokesmen depreciate us fsay we are inferior], even if they recognize the justice of our cause, and they consider us unworthy to form with them one nation and one society, they clearly manifest that their future expansion begins with the territory that they take from us and pushing aside our citizens who inhabit the land." who went west? . . . The American West—the area between the Mississippi River and the Pacific Ocean—was settled by a great variety of people from all parts of the world. First to settle the western lands were the Indians, who controlled the land for twenty or thirty thousand years before the Europeans came The next people to come were the Spanish, who gained control of the Southwest and California in the 1600's and 1700's. Meanwhile, French trappers and traders moved into the vast region between the Rocky Mountains and the Mississippi After about 1800, these westerners were joined by settlers of British and North Furopcan ancestry moving west from the United States. Some of the Americans were slaveholders who brought with them people of African ancestry to the West. Runaway slaves—and later thousands of free blacks—also joined the American move westward. Beginning about 1850, immigrants from China, Japan, and the Philippines left Asia to seek their fortunes in the vast lands of the American continent. California gold prospectors 185? conquering the Indians... "They made us many promises, more than I remember, but they never kept hut one; they promised to take our land, and they took it." In this brief way. Red Cloud, a leader of the Oglala Sioux, summarized the main thrust of Indian-white relationships. From the earliest days of British settlement. Indians and colonists fought over possession of the land. Superior weaponry. betteT organization, and greater numbers gave the whites victory. By 1890. the Europeans and their descendants had won control of all the land in the present-day United States. At first, the effect of European settlement was not just one of warfare and land taking. Europeans also had an important influence on Indian tribal cultures. For example, horses, originally brought to the New World by Spanish settlers in the Southwest, led Indians in the Great Plains area to change their u'ays of life. The Cheyenne. Sioux, Assiniboine. and other Plains Indians were originally mainly farmers. When they gained horses, they could more efficiently kill the buffalo, and they abandoned farming altogether. The Nez Perce, a northwestern tribe, originally made its living by fishing, digging for roots, and hunting small animals. It. too, became a nomadic tribe with a culture dependent on the buffalo. The Shoshone and Comanche, also, went from an economy based on hunting and gathering to a Plains culture. East of the Mississippi, where lands were heavily forested, the tribes made great use of European tools, especially firearms and metal knives, hatchets, and needles. To pay for these goods. Indians became fur traders, for North American furs were greatly prized in Europe. Eventually the Indians' use of these tools made them dependent on trade with the colonists, even when the Indians lived hundreds of miles from the thirteen colonies. As one writer described the cultural I change that had taken place, "To return to the old way of life would be as easy for I them as it would be for the average twentieth-century Manhattanite to convert to I dirt farming." The three major colonizers of the United States tended to treat Indians quite I differently. The French, who were the first European colonizers of the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys, were mainly fur trappers and traders. Since few French I women came to the New World, the men often married Indian women and had | children who remained Indian. The Spanish in California tended to use Indians as slaves and, at the same time, make a great effort to convert them to Christianity. In New Mexico and Arizona, the Indians were greatly influenced by the Spanish culture, but the Pueblo peoples and other groups also managed to keep alive thw own religions and customs. The Mexican American culture of the Southwest is the product of the mixing of the two peoples. Indians and Spaniards. It was in the thirteen Enqlish colonies that the Indians faced the greatest threat to their existence. Here the Indians had what British. Dutch, and other A number of factors were responsible for the industrial boom. The United States was rich in natural resources, transportation was improved, and the government was friendly to business. Money for investment came from savings that had been accumulated before the Civil War and from European investors. In addition, labor was plentiful and cheap. A steady stream of immigrants entered the nation, mainly from Europe. Between 1860 and 1900, almost 14 million immigrants came to the United States, most of whom settled in cities and became industrial workers. Blructlon ol railroads across the United States promoted industrial expansion. The growth of industry would not have been possible without the tremendous upansion of the railroad systems. After the Civil War most of the short lines were oiidated into a few large systems, and new tracks were built. Between 1860 and 1900, the total railroad mileage increased from 30.000 to more than 190,000. Even more important than railroad building in the older sections of the I country was the construction of the transcontinental railroads. In addition to Baking it easier to move goods, the railroads consumed huge quantities of iron and steel, coal, lumber, and other products and provided work for hundreds of thousands of workers. 7. After General Robert E. Lee surrendered to General Ulysses S. Grant, he wrote to the defeated Confederate troops: General Orders No. 9 Hd. Qrs. Army of N. Va. April 10. 1865 After four years of arduous [difficult] service marked by unsurpassed courage and fortitude, the Army of North Virginia has been compelled to yield to overwhelming numbers and resources. I need not tell the brave survivors of so many hard fought battles, who have remained steadfast to the last, that I have consented to this result from no distrust of them: but feeling that valor and devotion could accomplish nothing that could compensate for the loss that must have attended the continuance of the contest. I determined to avoid the useless sacrifice of those whose past services have endeared them to their countrymen. By the terms of the agreement, officers and men can return to their homes.. .. You will take with you the satisfaction that proceeds from the consciousness of duty faithfully performed. 8. A popular guidebook for immigrants offered the following advice to the many East European Jews who came to New York City around 1900: Hold fast, this is most necessary in America Forget your past, your customs, and your ideals. Select a goal and pursue it with all your might No matter what happens to you, hold on. You will experience a bad time but sooner or later you will achieve your goal. If you are neglectful, beware, for the wheel of fortune turns quickly. You will lose your grip and be lost. ... Do not take a moment's rest. Run. do. work and keep your own good in mind. Do not say, "I cannot; I do not know." 9. Booker T. Washington, black leader and educator, addressed the alumni of Harvard University in 1896: This country demands that every race measure itself by the American standard. By it a race must rise or fall, succeed or fail, and in the last analysis mere sentiment counts for little. During the next half century or more my race reading 9 Other approaches to reform In the 1890's and early 1900's, many reformers argued that the American dream could be achieved by one and all, if only . .. As you read the next four selections, list specific problems that reformers saw in the system. What methods did they suggest or use to correct those faults? 1. Community organizing: Jane Addams tried to do something about the problems of the new industrial system. In 1889, she founded Hull House, the first settlement house in the United States. The following excerpt from a book written in 1970 describes some of the work of this neighborhood organization. According to its charter. Hull House set out "to provide a center for a higher civic and social life; to institute and maintain educational and philanthropic enterprises, and to investigate and improve the conditions in the industrial districts of Chicago." . . . When Hull House opened its doors on September 18, 1889, the neighborhood IHalsted and Polk streets in Chicago] was a conglomerate [cluster] of immigrant colonies of Italians. Germans—including German Jews—Polish and Russian Jews, Bohemians. Irish, and first-generation Americans. Immediately surrounding Hull House were mostly frame houses originally built as one-family units but now occupied by several families. . . . ... At first some of the neighboring women came just to see, but they came back with others, again and again, for at Hull House they found warmth and friendship; people who cared and understood one's problems, who were ready to listen and to help. Here adults and children could play and learn, as there were classes in English, music, painting, drama, crafts.... From the start, Hull House was prepared to perform a variety of services. Many hours were spent to get "support for deserted women, insurance for bewildered widows, damages for injured operators, furniture from the clutches of the installment Ijtae.".,. A major problem in the Hull House neighborhood was poor sanitary conditions in the alleys. The | infrequent! garbage collections made the area particularly unhealthy and dangerous because of the large amounts of decayed fruit and vegetables thrown out by the .. . peddlers who lived there. Added to this were the disease-ridden piles of filthy rags which the rag pickers would pull out of the city dumps and bring home for hither sorting and washing. Sickening odors came from the wooden boxes in the aleys. These conditions led to many deaths each year. II i To help relieve the situation, talks on sanitation were arranged for the immigrants. The housewife was told she must keep not only her own house clean but also the sheets. Though in her native village she might sweep the refuse into the street and toilet it decay in the open air. this was not healthy in the crowded quarters in which Senow lived. . .. Among the activities at Hull House were the meetings held by the fledgling [ new] labor unions. Jane Addams encouraged labor organizations in their struggles against long hours, unsafe working conditions, and the sweatshops of the garment industry, Since Chicago was a center of the garment trades and many of the workers in the industry lived around Hull House, the cloakmakers and the shirtmakers organized their unions at the settlement . . . In their investigation of the poverty of the neighborhood, Hull House residents found sweatshops where women sewed for twelve to fourteen hours a day. They had little or no time to care for their children, who in many instances were left with neighbors already overburdened with the care of their own children. Sometimes youngsters were left alone, locked in a room in their tenement apartment. To fill the need for child care for working mothers, Hull House opened a day nursery. Young children themselves worked long hours in factories. The tragedy of child labor was emphasized to Jane Addams and her co-workers at the settlement's carefully planned first Christmas party in 1889 when some of the very young children refused candy. .. . Upon further inquiry, the social workers learned that for six weeks prior to the holiday many of the children had been working in a candy factory from seven in the morning to nine at night. That same winter Jane Addams became acquainted with the pledges signed by parents of children working in factories, which promised that the parents would make no claim for damages resulting from "carelessness" at work. Three boys from a Hull House club were injured at a machine in a neighboring factory. One of the boys died The machine needed only an inexpensive protective guard to avoid such accidents, but the manufacturer refused to provide this.. .. In an effort to abolish some of these problems, Hull House lobbied for labor legislation, including an eight-hour workday law for women. Out of the experiences and activities of the Hull House residents, the first juvenile court was set up in Chicago, the city's first public playground was built, and public baths were opened because such facilities were missing in most tenement apartments in the area. Much of the Hull House activity was centered around clubs such as the Boys Club, Girls' Club, Plato Club, Dante Club, Woman's Club, Eight-Hour Club, Jane Club, and the Working People's Social Science Club. The Social Science Club, particularly, was responsible for Hull House's early reputation as a haven for radicalism, for it sponsored an open and free discussion forum where there was no censoring of ideas. Jane Addams encouraged such free-spirited discussion. She was a defender of civil liberties even before there was any organized movement to protect them Despite violent press opposition and misrepresentation, she remained firm in her belief that even the "despised" must be permitted free speech and press. Such sentiments were dangerous, particularly in Chicago at that time as the city still had not recovered from the tumult of the Haymarket bornb. The Immigrant Experience The United States is made up almost entirely of immigrants and their descendants. Millions of people—Latin Americans. Europeans, Africans. Asians— chose or were forced by circumstances to travel to a country whose culture would support an incredible variety of customs and habits. The same peoples whose home countries were at war with each other could live together in the United States—Poles and Germans, Russians and Austrians, Irish and English, Turks and Greeks. The possibilities were endless. Between 1815 and 1914. more than 33 million people migrated to the United States. More than three-quarters of this number arrived in the period between 1860 and 1914. In 1910, over 14 percent of the population was foreign born. The causes for this great movement were complex: the Industrial Revolution, political upheavals, crop failures, the belief that life in the United States offered a fresh start. The cities were most affected by the waves of immigrants. New York, Boston, Chicago, Cincinnati, Detroit, and San Francisco attracted the greatest numbers. In each city ghettos (areas where the immigrants concentrated) and "machine" governments sprang up together. To a great degree, machine government ran on favors extended to the immigrants in exchange for their loyalty to the party in power. Characteristically, descendants of immigrants grew resentful of the new immigrants and developed the same fears and hostilities that may have driven their ancestors to the United States in the first place. Their fears resulted in the passage of laws that severely restricted immigration from the end of World War I until the passage of more liberal laws in 1965. Studies of the immigrants sometimes begin by quoting American historian Oscar Handlin: "Once I thought to write a history of the immigrant in America. Then I discovered that the immigrants were American history." The immigrant is the basis for the United States. And the American dream is one of the forces that attracted and captured the immigrant. always coming ... Reading 1 Why they came Reading 2 The idea of the melting pot Reading 3 Americanistic: Humanltarianlsm Reading 4 Reactions to immigrants Reading 5 Problems in the new land Reading 6 Political machines and immigrants Reading 7 Americanization Reading 8 The idea of ethnicity always coming . The first non-Indian immigrants to the United States came in groups of a hundred or two at a time in the early 1600's. They were called "colonists" simply because they were the first non-Indians to settle in the British colonies. The population of the thirteen British colonies doubled every twenty-five years, due mainly to the slow, steady flow of immigrants from Europe and captives from Africa who were forced to become slaves. After 1830, the flow began to increase. In Europe, industrial and agricultural revolutions began to upset people's lives. Factories began mass producing goods, causing thousands of home businesses to fail. Many who were put out of work went to the United States, attracted by the promise of jobs. Similarly. European landowners began to consolidate farms, uprooting thousands of families. The promise of plentiful land in the United States attracted these displaced rural families. Likewise, in China economic upheavals led thousands to seek a better life in the United States. Between 1820 and 1860, 5 million emigrated. Most were from northern and western Europe, and of these, 750,000 were from Great Britain. 1.5 million from Germany, and 2 million from Ireland, where the failure of the potato crop in the 1840's had caused widespread starvation. Between 1860 and 1890, the number of immigrants doubled. Ten million more people emigrated to the United States, generally from the same areas— Ireland. Britain, Scandinavia, Germany, Switzerland, and Holland. Western states such as Minnesota, Nebraska, and Iowa advertised the availability of cheap land. Many immigrants, especially from Sweden and Norway, began to fill the great open prairies and plains. Others, like the Irish, were attracted to the cities in the East. The numbers increased not only because of the availability of cheap land, but also because of the development of steamships. Sailing across the Atlantic was dangerous. The journey took about three months, time sufficient for the spread of disease in cramped, crowded holds. A steamship, however, made the trip in ten days. The development of steamships not only reduced the dangers of illness, but also the price of the Journey. During the mld-1890's the origins of the immigrants began to shift to southern and eastern Europe. Emigration laws were liberalized in Austria-Hungary and the Balkan countries where the agricultural and industrial revolutions were beginning to be felt. In Russia, the assassination of Tsar Alexander II in 1881 led to the persecution of the Jews. After several highly organized massacres (pogroms), Russian Jews began to flee their country for the United States. Between 1880 and 1920, over 23 million people arrived in the United States, most from southern and eastern Europe and Russia. This last wave brought the most pressure for passage of laws that would reduce immigration. Norwegian settlers in Blue Mounds. Wisconsin, around 1875 1975 1820-1975 Number Country ol origin 6.954,960 Germany 5.269,992 Italy 4.851.806 Great Britain 4.720,427 Ireland 4,312.252 Austria-Hungary 4,048.329 Canada 1.911.951 Mexico 1.269,969 Sweden 857,337 Norway 742,442 France 632,950 Other America 47,098.919* 'Includes 8.172.478 immigrants (17 3 percent) from other countries not shown on chart PEAK YEARS OF IMMIGRATION 1870-1920 Number Country of origin 9.799 Greece 10,966 Italy 11,215 Canada 12,224 Great Britain 14.040 Dominican Republic 14.336 India 15.775 Other Asian countries 22,319 West Indies 25,611 Cuba 28.100 Korea 31,323 Philippines 62,552 Mexico 386.194 includes 127.934 immigrants (33 2 percent) from other countries not shown on chart Percent Hostility to immigrants began when large numbers of non-English newcomers began to arrive. In the 1840's, groups like the Order of United Americans and the Know-Nothing political party organized campaigns against immigrants. These "nativists" feared and distrusted Catholics because they thought they could be controlled by a foreign government, the Vatican. Nativists believed that the large numbers of German and Irish Catholics could take over the country. The Civil War led to the dissolution of the nativist groups before they could press for laws that would reduce the numbers of immigrants entering the United States. The laws would come anyway. The first restrictive law came in 1882. It came as a result of pressure by groups in California who resented the Chinese immigrants' working for low wages. Spreading hate propaganda against what they called the "yellow peril." they succeeded in winning the passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act. In 1902, Congress passed a law that prevented the entrance of "lunatics, convicts, and idiots," and in 1908 an unofficial "Gentlemen's Agreement" excluded immigrants from Japan. In 1917, a law was passed that denied entrance to anyone over the age of sixteen who could not read in any language. Finally, in 1924 and 1929. the National Origins Acts were passed. Both laws favored immigrants from northern Europe. The 1929 law restricted the number of immigrants to 150,000 annually, excluding all from China and Japan. Reflecting the prejudice of the time, the law set up quotas that were based on the numbers of immigrants entering in 1890 when most were from northern and western Europe. About 70 percent were allowed to come from Britain, Ireland, Scandinavia, and Germany, the rest from Austria-Hungary, Italy, Russia, and other countries in southern and eastern Europe. These quotas remained until 1965, when a more liberal law was passed. The 1965 law allows the entry each year of 170,000 immigrants from Africa, Asia, Australia, and Europe; and 120,000 immigrants from North and South America. Relatives can enter on a nonquota basis, and preference is given for those who have skills in heavy demand in the United States. President Lyndon Johnson said about the 1965 law: "It does repair a very deep and painful flaw in the fabric of American justice. It corrects a cruel and enduring wrong in the conduct of the American nation., . . The days of unlimited immigration are past. .., But those who come will come because of what they are, and not because of the land from which they sprung." Why they came The immigrants' motives for coming to the United States varied according to conditions at home and personal visions of what life in the new land would be like. For some, like the Irish in the 1840's, the United States was a refuge from starvation. For others, like the Hungarians, Cubans, and Vietnamese in recent decades, the United States was a refuge from political oppression. Despite the varying motives, nearly all immigrants saw the United States as a country that offered a second chance. As you read the selections below, write down each person's motives for coming to the United States. How would you categorize these motives? 1. John Downe emigrated from England in 1830. Following is part of o letter he wrote to his family : America is not like England, for here no man thinks himself your superior. There is no improper or disgusting equality, for Character has its weight and influence, and the man which is really your superior does not plume himself on being so. An American, however low his station, never feels himself abashed [ashamed] when entering the presence of the highest. This is a country where a man can stand as a man, and where he can enjoy the fruits of his own exertions [work], with rational liberty to its fullest extent. 2. Between 1850 and 1882, about 300,000 Chinese came to the United States. Most came because of the Taiping Rebellion which disrupted the economy, making it very difficult to find work. Stories of the California gold rush attracted many Chinese. Printed circulars like the following also lured job-seeking Chinese to the United States. All Chinamen make much money in New Orleans, if they work. Chinamen have become richer than mandarins [government officials] there. Pay, first year, $300, but afterwards make more than double. One can do as he likes in that country. Nobody better not get more pay than does he. Nice rice, vegetables, and wheat, all very cheap. Three years there will make poor workmen very rich, and he can come home at any time. On the ships that go there, passengers will find nice rooms and very fine food. They can play all sorts of games and have no work. Everything nice to make man happy. It is nice country. Better than this. No sickness there and no danger of death. Come! Go at once. You cannot afford to wait. Don't heed any wife's counsel or the threats of enemies. Be Chinamen, but go. 3. Many Russian Jews emigrated to America in the 1880's and 1890's because of anti-Semitism and organized massacres in their native country. Mary Antin's father was the first of her family to emigrate to the United States after a wave of pogroms. In The Promised Land (1912) she wrote of her family's experiences. Just at this time occurred one of the periodic anti-Semitic movements whereby government officials were wont to clear the forbidden cities of Jews, whom, in the intervals of slack administration of the law, they allowed to maintain an illegal residence in places outside the Pale [the region where Jews were allowed to live], on payment of enormous bribes and at the cost of nameless risks and indignities.... .. , The wholesale expulsion of Jews from Moscow and its surrounding district at cruelly short notice was the name of this latest disaster. Where would the doom strike next? The Jews who lived illegally without the Pale turned their possessions into cash and slept in their clothes, ready for immediate flight. . . . The open cities becoming thus suddenly crowded, every man's chance of making a living was diminished in proportion to the number of additional competitors. Hardship, acute distress, ruin for many. . . . ... "Next year—in America!" So there was our promised land, and many faces were turned towards the West. . .. My father was carried away by the westward movement, glad of his own deliverance but sore at heart for us whom he left behind. I heard something, as we read [his] letter together in the darkened room, that was more than the words seemed to say. There was an elation, a hint of triumph, such as had never been in my father's letters before. I cannot tell how I knew it I felt a stirring, a straining in my father's letter. ... My father was inspired by a vision. He saw something—he promised us something. It was this "America." And "America" became my dream. .. . With the children, he argued, every year in Russia was a year lost. They should be spending the precious years in school, in learning English, in becoming Americans. United in America, there were ten chances of our getting to our feet again to one chance in our scattered, aimless state. So at last I was going to America! Really, really going, at last! The boundaries burst. The arch of heaven soared. A million suns shone out for every star. The winds rushed in from outer space, roaring in my ears, "America! America!" Italian district in New York City, about 1900 4. Whcrt drew Italian laborer and poet Pascal d'Angelo to America around 1910 also kept him here, despite hardships: Our people have to emigrate. It is a matter of too much boundless life and too little space. We feel tied up there. Every bit of cultivable soil is owned by those fortunate few who lord over us. .. . And what is it that saves the man and keeps him from being ground under the hard power of necessity?—The New World!... Something had grown in me during my stay in America. Something was keeping me in this wonderful perilous [dangerous] land where I had suffered so much and where 1 had so much more to suffer. Should I quit this great America without a chance to really know it? Again 1 shook my head. There was a lingering suspicion that somewhere in this vast country an opening existed, that somewhere I would strike the light I could not remain in the darkness perpetually. . .. ... I had learned to have faith in the future. ... No matter how bad things were, a turn would inevitably come—as long as I did not give up I was sure of it But how much I had to suffer until the change came! 5. Some immigrants came because they had an unrealistic, idealized view of the United States. This view was encouraged by some steamship agents who profited by the transportation of the immigrants. In the following letter, written in 1914, a Polish immigrant warns his relatives in Poland that life in the United States is not rosy. My dear Brother and Sister-in-law: ... It is now so difficult to earn a little money—God forbid [help us]. It is already the second year since everyone is trying only to save his own life and there are many people who die from hunger. I feel so ill myself that I don't know what to do. If I had money enough I would return to my country, but for the time being it is difficult to gather so much money, and therefore I must suffer poverty for some time. God only knows how long this will last. We know only that when this man [Woodrow Wilson] .who now ... is on the throne, became president, we all were glad that there would be work enough. Meanwhile it turns out otherwise, because for poor people the times are getting worse than before. All the prices increase and work is paid less than formerly, and moreover this work cannot be got. And then in our papers it is written that there in our country [Poland] some mean agents are going around and claiming that in America now work is better than ever before. These agents persuade the people to go and everybody leaves his last possibility of earning his life, sometimes even robs his family and comes here, but why, he does not know himself. Perhaps he seeks his own hunger-death, as many cases happen where in the morning corpses are found lying in the streets and after cutting them open [physicians] come to the conclusion that they died from hunger. So don't listen to these "catch-people." They are sent by the ship-companies, and are well paid to gather passengers who will pay such high rates for the tickets. You must know that a ticket now costs about $60, i.e., 120 roubles. . . . Let nobody listen to anybody but only to his relatives whom he has here, in this golden America. Now I request you to inform me what is the news in your country. How is the winter there? . . . And what about the young men and girls who got married? Who is dead, who lives? When I receive a letter from you I will send you my photograph. Now we say goodbye to you, dear brother and sister-in-law, and we embrace and kiss millions of times yourselves and your children. Your brother, loving to the grave, T. Wolski 6. Rene Dubos, a biologist, emigrated from France to the United States in 1924: 1 have often been asked why I settled in the United States after having spent the first twenty-five years of my life in France where I was born. It was not to escape from Europe, because I loved the physical and human environment of France, Italy and England, the three countries I knew when I decided to emigrate. I came without any precise plan, not with a job in view, not even with a student fellowship, simply as an old-fashioned emigrant in search of adventure. In the small village where I was brought up, I read with passion, until the age of fourteen, stories about Buffalo Bill and the Wild West.. .. Then, while a student in Paris, I read everything available about American life and became intoxicated with the phrase "America, the land of unlimited possibilities." I had no clear vision of what these possibilities were, but I wanted to experience them nevertheless. 7. In 1915, a major land reform decree was ordered by the Mexican government. It broke up the feudal order of the haciendas, the large estates. Land was to be redistributed among the Mexican peasants. In reality, however, most peasants had to fight to get their land. Those who failed were forced to migrate, many to California. The song that follows, translated from Spanish, was popular among the immigrants. The Virgin of Guadalupe referred to in the song is the patron saint of Mexico. An Emigrant's Farewell Goodbye, my beloved mother, the Virgin of Guadalupe; goodbye, my beloved land, my Mexican Republic. I go sad and heavy-hearted to suffer and endure; my Mother Guadalupe, grant my safe return. I go to the United States to seek to earn a living. Goodbye, my beloved land; 1 bear you in my heart. For I am not to blame that 1 leave my country thus; the fault is that of poverty, which keeps us all in want 8 Meletais Dagres migrated from Greece to the United States in 1974. His reasons for coming echo those of immigrants who came much earlier. . . 1 am a carpenter. And I am not ashamed of this—it is good work. But my father was also a carpenter. My wife has no education. I don't want this life for my children. In Greece 1 made it my business to inquire about the possibilities for the education of my children. Did you know that last year [1973] 54.000 Greek students passed the examinations to qualify for the university, but there are places for only 10 percent of them? When you get your high-school diploma in Greece, it is written right down on the paper that your father is a carpenter. Why should that be? A diploma should tell what kind of a student you are, not what your father does. With places for only 10 percent of the students, who do you think gets into a university—the son of a government official, a doctor, or a carpenter? 9. Domenica Banco and her family emigrated from Italy in 1972. She was interviewed while a student in a New York City high school. At school in Italy you were always made to feel a sense of inferiority if you came from a poor family. I sensed this—I knew that 1 would have to work hard for a good grade, but the son of a doctor would get the same grade even if he was stupid. When we came to America, I didn't know what to expect I was afraid at first, but then I saw my teachers cared about my work, not about my family's social position. I began to change inside—1 became more self-confident, more sure that 1 could do things in life. Summing Up 1. In Unit 1 you found reasons why the colonists came to America. Compare those reasons to the reasons of these immigrants. 2. Judging from the selections, what factors seem to have determined whether or not an immigrant found life better in America? READING 2 The idea of the melting pot In the 1770's, Michel Guillaume Jean de Crevecoeur raised the startling possibility that a new ethnic group had come into being—Americans. In his Letters from an American Farmer, Crevecoeur spoke of a peculiar "melting" process that would combine "individuals of all nations" and yield a new race. Israel Zangwill, a British playwright, was inspired in 1909 to write a play on this theme. He called his play The Melting Pot. Despite its sentimental tone and exaggerated language, its message is clear: the United States is a country that will absorb any immigrant from anywhere in the world and allow him or her the privilege of becoming an American. As you read the following excerpt, ask yourself how effectively the melting pot has actually worked. VERA: Look! How beautiful the sunset is after the storm! (David turns. The sunset, which has begun to grow beautiful just after Vera's entrance, has now reached its most magnificent moment. . . the whole sky is one glory of burning flame.) DAVID: (Prophetically exalted by the spectacle.) It is the fires of God round His Crucible. (He drops her hand and points downward.) There she lies, the great Melting-Pot—listen! Can't you hear the roaring and the bubbling? There gapes her mouth (He points east.)—the harbour where a thousand mammoth feeders come from the ends of the world to pour in their human freight. Ah, what a stirring and a seething! Celt and Latin, Slav and Teuton, Greek and Syrian,—black and yellow— VERA: Jew and Gentile— DAVID: Yes, East and West, and North and South, the palm and the pine, the pole and the equator, the crescent and the cross—how the great Alchemist melts and fuses them with his purging flame! Here shall they all unite to build the Republic of Man and the Kingdom of God. Ah, Vera, what is the glory of Rome and Jerusalem where all nations and races come to worship and look back, compared with the glory of America, where all races and nations come to labour and look forward! (He raises his hands in benediction over the shining city.) Peace, peace, to all ye unborn millions, fated to fill this giant continent—the God of our children give you Peace. (An instant's solemn pause. The sunset is swiftly fading, and the vast panorama is suffused with a more restful twilight. . . . Far back, like a lonely guiding star, twinkles over the darkening water the torch of the Statue of Liberty. From below comes up the softened sound of voices and instruments joining in "My Country 'tis of thee." The curtain falls slowly.) I Summing Up 1. Which immigrant groups seem to have successfully "melted" into the general American population? Which groups have not? What do you think accounts for the difference? 2. How do you think most Americans feel about the idea of the melting pot today? 3. The term "melting pot" suggests a society in which everyone has similar cus- | toms, beliefs, and lifestyles. In contrast is the concept of the "pluralistic society" where j groups coexist despite strong differences. In what ways do your school and community represent a melting pot? a pluralistic society? Collecting for Christmas seals in the 1920's modern Americans are generous mainly be* cause they are allowed a federal income tax deduction for charitable contributions, the experts have other statistics. Bryce Whalen, who researched income tax deductions for his estimates on philanthropy, points out that "the average American family gives away much more than it takes credit for on its income tax." Most authorities believe that American philanthropy is a tradition as old as the nation—that it goes back to the seventeenth century when neighbors (depended on] each other for security, for raising orphaned children, for building barns. 4. Private foundations give away millions each year—fo individuals and to organizations. In the 1970's, Henry Ford II, whose family endowed the Ford Foundation, made this comment about Americans: [Our] continued response to human suffering is the measure of how well our national character is holding up in an age of rapid and universal change... .Voluntary giving is more than an expression of compassion or a demonstration of democracy's ideals. It is a frame of mind that is essential to democracy itself. A people who are willing to turn their problems over to the government have lost the will to govern themselves. 5. Italian writer Luigi Barzini interprets the reasoning behind America's foreign aid programs as follows: It is still called "The Great American Dream" by contemporary writers, this noble ... hope ... that human intelligence and industry are sufficient to improve man's lot on earth and that no problem exists which cannot be solved. It justifies every contemporary American political decision, like the Marshall Plan and the Point Four Program [foreign aid programs after World War II]... There is nothing wrong with the Great American Dream and American civic ideals except the easy diagnosis of the world's ills and the excessive claims. ... It is. .. a dangerous illusion to think the devil can be conquered by mere scientists, by well-financed foundations or by research teams. 6. Probably the most famous American humanitarian words are the lines from the poem on the base of the Statue of Liberty:"Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free. "... After South Vietnam lost the war with North Vietnam in May 1975, 130,000 refugees came to settle in the United States. At the time, unemployment in the United States exceeded 8 percent. Following are some opinions about the resettlement of the refugees in the United States. Do these opinions suggest limits to American humanitarianism? They are out of their environment. They can't speak English, and they will be on welfare before they get off the airplane. And who pays for that? We do. A carpenter from Los Angeles Should they |the South Vietnamese] be permitted to live in the United States or not? George Meany, president of the AFL-CIO, has pledged the labor movement's help—even in this time of economic adversity— to assist the Vietnamese refugees to find jobs. "The United States has an inescapable moral responsibility," Mr. Meany observed. "We are a nation of immigrants. Rejecting them would be denying our heritage and the history of this country as a haven for the oppressed." No matter what one may have thought about the rights and wrongs of the Vietnam war, those words express the true American tradition. New York Times editorial, May 7, 1975 It s absolutely ridiculous for any white American to sit around and say we shouldn't allow any refugees to come in when we re all descendants of refugees. A lawyer from Los Angeles Summing Up 1. List reasons suggested in the items for humanitarian impulses in the American people. 2. What, if any, seem to be the limits of American humanitarianism? 3. Would you consider Americans to be, on the whole, a humanitarian people? Explain. Reactions to immigrants Despite the good intentions, the optimism of the meiting-pot theory, and the humanitarian impulses of Americans, there were many hostile reactions to immigrants. Some Americans—often immigrants themselves—saw their jobs threatened by newcomers who worked for lower wages. Other Americans felt threatened by the existence of large numbers of people with unfamiliar customs and habits. The hostilities and fears led to political parties and laws aimed at stopping the flow of immigration to the United States. Here are some examples of the reactions to immigrants, both positive and negative. As you read, do the following: (1) List the words or phrases each author uses to describe immigrants. (2) List the reasons given for each author's views. 1. In his poem "Unguarded Gates," published around 1900, Thomas Bailey Aldrich questioned the policy oj allowing unrestricted immigration. Wide open and unguarded stand our gates, And through them presses a wild motley throng— Men from the Volga and the Tartar steppes. Featureless figures of the Hoang-Ho, Malayan, Scythian, Teuton, Kelt, and Slav, Flying the Old World's poverty and scorn; These bringing with them unknown gods and rites, Those, tiger passions, here to stretch their claws. In street and alley what strange tongues are loud, Accents of menace alien to our air. Voices that once the Tower of Babel knew! 2. In the 1890's, the move was strong to restrict immigration, especially from southern and eastern Europe. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge led the campaign to require immigrants to take a literacy test. Mr. President, this bill is intended ... to restrict still further immigration to the United States. Paupers, diseased persons, convicts, and contract laborers are now excluded. By this bill it is proposed to make a new class of excluded immigrants. .. The illiteracy test will bear most heavily upon the Italians, Russians, Poles, Hungarians, Greeks, and Asiatics, and very lightly, or not at all, upon English-speaking emigrants or Germans, Scandinavians, and French. In other words, the races most affected by the illiteracy test are those whose emigration to this country has begun within the last twenty years and swelled rapidly to enormous proportions, races with which the English-speaking people have never hitherto assimilated, and who are most alien to the great body of the people of the United States. On the other hand, immigrants from the United Kingdom and of those races which are most closely related to the English-speaking people, and who with the English-speaking people themselves founded the American colonies and built up the United States, are affected but tittle by the proposed test. . . . The statistics prepared by the committee show further that the immigrants excluded by the illiteracy test are those who remain for the most part in congested masses in our great cities. They furnish, as other tables show, a large proportion of the population of the slums. . .. .. . [There] is an appalling danger to the American wage earner from the flood of low. unskilled, ignorant, foreign labor which has poured into the country for some 3. President Grover Cleveland disagreed with Lodge's arguments and vetoed the 1897 immigration bill. A radical departure from our national policy relating to immigration is here presented. ... It is said . . . that the quality of recent immigration is undesirable. The time In his 1B93 cartoon Looking Backwards Joseph Keppler mocks successful Americans who call tar immigration restriction and forget their own humble origins. years past, and which not only takes lower wages, but accepts a standard of life and living so low that the American workingman can not compete with it. . . . The injury of unrestricted immigration to American wages and American standards of living is sufficiently plain and is bad enough, but the danger which this immigration threatens to the quality of our citizenship is far worse. is quite within recent memory when the same thing was said of immigrants who, with their descendants, are now numbered among our best citizens. It is said that too many immigrants settle in our cities, thus dangerously increasing their idle and vicious population. This is certainly a disadvantage. It can not be shown, however, that it affects all our cities, nor that it is permanent; nor does it appear that this condition, where it exists, demands as its remedy the reversal of our present immigration policy. The claim is also made that the influx of foreign laborers deprives of the opportunity to work those who are better entitled than they to the privilege of earning their livelihood by daily toil. An unfortunate condition is certainly presented when any who are willing to labor are unemployed. But so far as this condition now exists among our people, it must be conceded to be a result of . . . business depression and the stagnation [lack of growth] of all enterprises in which labor is a factor. 4. The immigrant would sane, not destroy, American ideals, argued Percy S. Grant, a minister, in 1912: After all, what are these American ideals we boast so much about? Shall we say public schools, the ballot, freedom? The American stock use private schools when they can afford them; they too often leave town on election day; as for freedom, competent observers believe it is disappearing. The conservators and believers in American ideals seem to be our immigrants. To the Russian Jew, Abraham Lincoln is a god. If American ideals are such as pay honor to the intellectual and to the spiritual, or foster human brotherhood or love culture and promote liberty, then they are safe with our new citizens who are eager for these things. . . . Every act of religious or civil tyranny, every economic wrong done to races in all the world, becomes the burden of the nation to which the oppressed flee for relief and opportunity. . . . Let us be careful not to put America into the class of the oppressors. Let us rise ... to a new Americanism which is not afraid of the blending in the western world of races seeking freedom. Summing Up 1. Compare the arguments in the AMERICANIST1C for and against the settlement in the 1970's of the Vietnamese refugees with the arguments given in this Reading for and against immigrants from southeast Europe and Asia. Can you draw any conclusions from your answer? 2. Suppose you were assigned the task of writing a law that would restrict immigration. What criteria would you use to select immigrants? 3. Today some communities are trying to limit the growth of their populations What is your opinion of this practice? Give reasons. 4. If you favor limiting the growth of your own community, what criteria would you use to determine who could live in your community? In 1910. 13.5 million Americans were foreign born, out of a total population of 92 million. Like most industrial cities, Chicago attracted large numbers of immigrants. By 1690. almost 80 percent of Chicago residents were foreign born or the children of immigrants. The map shows the location of the largest ethnic groups in Chicago in 1910, A wide variety of other groups also settled In the city, including Greeks. Lithuanians, Czechs. Croatians, French Canadians. Mexicans, and Chinese. Most Immigrants from the Orient and Mexico settled on the West Coast. The largest influx of Japanese and Chinese immigrants came before 1900. while the bulk of Mexican immigration began after 1900. Filipinos began their major immigration to the West Coast after 1920 Ethnic Neighborhoods in Chicago, 1910 Problems in the new land What was it like to be a newly arrived immigrant? Most immigrants arrived in New York City, many settling in one of New York's ethnic neighborhoods. The Lower East Side, in downtown Manhattan, became the refuge for generations of varied immigrants: Poles, Chinese, Puerto Ricans, Dominicans, and most predominantly, Jews. The following section is composed of letters sent by Jewish immigrants to a local newspaper, the Jewish Dail\> Forward. In these letters, written between 1906 and 1910, are detailed the problems of adjusting to a new culture. Divide a piece of paper into three columns: problems described, solutions suggested, and solutions you would have proposed in answer to the letters. 1. Worthy Editor, Allow me a little space in your newspaper and, I beg you, give me some advice as to what to do. There are seven people in our family—parents and five children. 1 am the oldest child, a fourteen-year-old girl We have been in the country two years and my father, who is a frail man, is the only one working to support the whole family. 1 go to school, where I do very well. But since times are hard now and my father earned only five dollars this week, l began to talk about giving up my studies and going to work in order to help my father as much as possible. But my mother didn't even want to hear of it. She wants me to continue my education. I have already worked at many places, and I either have to leave, voluntarily, or they fire me because l am a Jew.... Lately I've been working on one job for three months and I would be satisfied, but the worm of anti-Semitism is beginning to eat at my bones again. Your reader, Answer: In the answer, the Jewish machinist is advised to appeal to the United Hebrew Trades and ask them to intercede |act in his behalf for him and bring up charges before the Machinist Union about this persecution. His attention is also drawn to the fact that there are Gentile factories where Jews and Gentiles work together and get along well with each other. 3. Dear Editor, Since I do not want my conscience to bother me, I ask you to decide whether a married woman has the right to go to school two evenings a week. My husband thinks I have no right to do this. I admit that I cannot be satisfied to be just a wife and mother. I am still young and I want to learn and enjoy life. My children and my house are not neglected, but I go to evening high school twice a week. My husband is not pleased and when I come home at night and ring the bell, he lets me stand outside a long time intentionally, and doesn't hurry to open the door. . . . When I am alone with my thoughts, I feel I may not be right. Perhaps I should not go to school. 1 want to say that my husband is an intelligent man and he wanted to marry a woman who was educated. The fact that he is intelligent makes me more annoyed with him. He is in favor of the emancipation of women, yet in real life he acts contrary to his beliefs. Awaiting your opinion on this. I remain. Your reader, The Discontented Wife Answer: Since this man is intelligent and an adherent of the women's emancipation movement, he is scolded severely in the answer for wanting to keep his wife so enslaved. Also the opinion is expressed that the wife absolutely has the right to go to school two evenings a week. 4. Worthy Editor, My husband . . . deserted me and our three small children, leaving us in desperate need. I was left without a bit of bread for the children, with debts in the grocery store and the butcher's, and last month's rent unpaid. I am not complaining so much about his abandoning me as about the grief and suffering of our little children, who beg for food, which 1 cannot give them. I am young and healthy, I am able and willing to work in order to support my children, but Pushcart peddler Garter makers at work In their home, around 1910 unfortunately I am tied down because my baby is only six months old. . . . It breaks my heart but I have come to the conclusion that in order to save my innocent children from hunger and cold I have to give them away. I will sell my beautiful children to people who will give them a home. I will sell them, not for money, but for bread, for a secure home where they will have enough food and warm clothing for the winter. 1, the unhappy young mother, am willing to sign a contract, with my heart's blood, stating that the children belong to the good people who will treat them tenderly. Those who are willing and able to give my children a good home can apply to me. Respectfully, Mrs. P. Chicago Answer: What kind of society are we living in that forces a mother to such desperate straits that there is no other way out than to sell her three children for a piece of bread? Isn't this enough to kindle a_fire of hatred in every human heart for such a system? ... We also ask our friends and readers to take an interest in this unfortunate woman and to help her so that she herself can be a mother to her children. 5. Worthy Editor. I am sure that the problem I'm writing about affects many Jewish homes. It deals with immigrant parents and their American-born children. . . . We, the five brothers, always speak English to each other. Our parents know English too, but they speak only Yiddish [a Germanic language spoken by East European Jews], not just among themselves but to us too, and even to our American tends who come to visit us. We beg them not to speak Yiddish in the presence of our friends, since they can speak English, but they don't want to. It's a sort of stubbornness on their part, and a great deal of quarreling goes on between our parents and our selves because of it Their answer is: ''Children, we ask you not to try to teach us how to talk to people. We are older than you." . . . They want to keep only to their old ways and don't want to take up our new ways. We beg you. friend Editor, to express your opinion. . . . Accept our thanks for your answer, which we expect soon, Respectfully, I. and the Four Brothers Answer: We see absolutely no crime in the parents' speaking Yiddish to their sons. The Yiddish language is dear to them and they want to speak in that language to their children and all who understand it. It may also be that they are ashamed to speak their imperfect English among strangers so they prefer to use their mother tongue.... But it would certainly not be wrong if the parents were to speak English too. to the children. People should and must learn the language of their country. Summing Up 1. Which of the problems shown in these letters do you think would have created the most long-range difficulties for the writer and his or her immediate family? 2. Which of the problems do you think would have been, on the whole, easiest for the letter writer to solve? hardest for the writer to solve? 3. Do you agree or disagree with the answer given to each letter writer by the newspaper? Explain. The arrival of thousands of immigrants in cities resulted in the invention of the political machine. Here is how it worked. As groups of immigrants arrived in cities such as Chicago, New York, and Boston, they would be in need of jobs, housing, and money. Before the 1930's, there were few organized agencies to help smooth the immigrant's transition. But there were politicians who would help immigrants obtain jobs, housing, and money, in return for the immigrant's vote in the next election Thus politicians organized a "machine" that could dispense favors and generate huge numbers of votes for the favored political party. Because the Irish were among the first to arrive in American cities and because they already spoke English, they were able to gain political power in many city governments. Colorful politicians like Chicago's "Hinky-Dink" Kenna and New York's Richard Croker were brought to power because of the machine. In the 1970's, Chicago's Mayor Richard J. Daley presided over a machine that had been organized nearly a century earlier. As you read the following selections, keep this question in mind: Was the relationship between political bosses and immigrants harmful or beneficial for the immigrants? 1. One of the most famous and outspoken political bosses was George Washington Plunkitt of the New York machine, named Tammany Hall after Its meeting place. William Riordon, Plunkitt's biographer, records part of his routine: 2 A.M.: Aroused from sleep by the ringing of his doorbell; went to the door and found a bartender, who asked him to go to the police station and bail out a saloon- keeper. . . . Furnished bail and returned to bed at three o'clock. 6 A.M.: Awakened by fire engines passing his house. Hastened to the scene of the fire , .. to give assistance to the fire sufferers.... Found several tenants who had been burned out, took them to a hotel, supplied them with clothes, fed them, and arranged temporary quarters for them until they could rent and furnish new apartments. 8:30 A.M.: Went to the police court to look after his constituents. Found six "drunks." Secured the discharge of four by a timely word with the judge, and paid the fines of two. 9 A.M.: Appeared In the Municipal District Court . .. Paid the rent of a poor family about to be dispossessed and gave them a dollar for food. 11 A.M.: At home again. Found four men waiting for him. One had been discharged by the Metropolitan Railway Company for neglect of duty. . . . Another wanted a job on the road. The third sought a place on the Subway and the fourth, a plumber, was looking for work. . .. The district leader spent nearly three hours fixing things for the four men, and succeeded in each case. 3 P.M.: Attended the funeral of an Italian as far as the ferry. Hurried back to make his appearance at the funeral of a Hebrew constituent. . . . Later attended the Hebrew confirmation ceremonies in the synagogue. ... 8 P.M.: Went to a church fair. Took chances on everything, bought ice cream for the young girls and the children. Kissed the little ones, flattered their mothers and took their fathers out for something down at the comer. 9 P.M.: At the clubhouse again. Spent $10 on tickets for a church excursion and promised a subscription for a new church bell ,,. 10:30 P.M.: Attended a Hebrew wedding reception and dance. Had previously sent a handsome wedding present to the bride. 12 P.M.: In bed. 2. Having firm control of cities like New York, Chicago, and Boston, the political bosses generally used public funds as they saw fit. Some even stole millions. In 1904, muckraker Lincoln Steffens attacked the widespread corruption in his book. The Shame of the Cities, including the following description of Tammany Hall: Tammany is bad government; not inefficient but dishonest; . . . Tammany is Tammany, the embodiment of corruption. All the world knows and all the world may know what it is and what it is after. For hypocrisy is not a Tammany vice. Tammany is for Tammany, and the Tammany men say so. . . . Tammany is honestly dishonest Time and time again, in private and in public, the leaders, big and little, have said they are out for themselves and their own; not for the public but for "me and my friends"; not for New York, but for Tammany. Richard Croker said under oath once that he worked for his own pockets all the time. .. . Tammany leaders are usually the natural leaders of the people in these districts, and they are originally good-natured, kindly men. No one has a more sincere liking than I for some of those common but generous fellows; their charity is real, at first. But they sell out their own people. They do give them coal and help them in their private troubles, but, as they grow rich and powerful, the kindness goes out of the charity and they not only collect at their saloons or in rents—cash for their "goodness"; they not only ruin fathers and sons and cause the troubles they relieve; they sacrifice the children in the schools; let the Health Department neglect the tenements, and, worst of all, plant vice in the neighborhood and in the homes of the poor. * 3. One of the most powerful bosses, especially during the 1890's, was Richard '"Squire" Croker of blew York. It was he that G. W. Plunkitt worked for and Lincoln Steffens attacked. Here Croker s machine is defended by Alfred Henry Lewis. Tammany from the first has stood for the rights of man rather than the privileges of money. The rights of property are second to the rights of humanity in the teachings of Tammany Hall. This is and was as it should be. Tammany Hall was and is made up, in the grand aggregate [sum] of its membership, of poor folk—those whose craft is of the hands. . . . Tammany is a political organization one day in the year; it is a charitable- benevolent-fraternal organization three hundred and sixty-five. Does a bricklayer, or carpenter, or laborer, or even such as a clerk or a bookkeeper find himself minus work, he goes to his "leader." One may meet from fifty to three hundred of these out-of-work folk waiting in front of every "leader's" house each morning. And the "leader," and his "election captains" under him, make utmost effort to find places for these applicants. . . . Again, go into one of the numberless police courts of the town. "Ten dollars or twenty days on the island [Riker's Island, the site of a prisonl," mumbles the magistrate, and the poor wretch is shoved aside without two bits in the present, and the workhouse filling the future dead-ahead. Just as you feel your sympathies at work for the puny malefactor who for want of ten dollars must serve in capacity for twenty days, a cool person, well clad and business-like pushes up to the clerk. He doesn't give the prisoner a look; often he doesn't know him, save by work of his undercaptains, "Figure up that man's fine and costs," he observes to the clerk. It is done; it is then paid by the cool man, who walks away with no more of notice to the liberated one than mayhap a nod of short indifference. It is all coid and Tammany Hall barbecue, New York City, around 1910 I1 commonplace as a brief piece of political business. The cool person who pays feels no glow as one who does a charity, for he I performs the ceremony on an average, full two hundred times a month. Nor does the beneficiary of his interference boil with any turbulence of obligation. It is what he looked for. The "leader" pays the fine with the thought that our soiled and broken gentleman, in present peril of the Island, will vote "right" next time. And the soiled I one does, when the time arrives. And why should he not? Summing Up How might you account for the continued existence of political machines despite the end of large-scale immigration? Americanization "But she herself had given her half-sister the name Aileen. After long consideration Lucia Santa had consented. It was time to be American." Novelist Mario Puzo, in The Fortunate Pilgrim describes part of the "Americanization" process. How might the writer of each selection below define the ideal American? 1. In 1915, former President Theodore Roosevelt urged that immigrants be thoroughly "Americanized": The one absolutely certain way of bringing this nation to ruin . . . would be to permit it to become a tangle of squabbling nationalities, an intricate knot of German- Americans, Irish-Americans, English-Americans, French-Americans, Scandinavian- Americans or Italian-Americans. . . each at heart feeling more sympathy with Europeans of that nationality, than with the other citizens of the American Republic. The men who do not become Americans and nothing else are hyphenated Americans; and there ought to be no room for them in this country. . . . ... No man can be a good citizen if he is not at least in process of learning to speak the language of his fellow-citizens. And an alien who remains here without learning to speak English .. . should ... be treated as having refused to take the preliminary steps necessary to complete Americanization and should be deported. 2. /n 1906. Professor Grouer G. Huebner described the role that public schools should perform in Americanizing immigrant children. What Does the School Do to Americanize the Immigrant? . .. 1. It at once throws the children of different nationalities into mutual relationship. This inevitably breaks up the habits of any one of the foreign nationalities. ... [The] immigrant child necessarily loses its foreign ideas and unconsciously adopts the thoughts and activities of the American companions. . .. 2. The public school teaches the children the English language. . .. 3. The public school tends to break up hostility between nationalities. , . . 4. It teaches American traditions and the history of our institutions. .. . 5. The public school is the first and chief trainer of the immigrant child's mind to fit it for originality and inventiveness. . . . 6. ... The public school, in training the minds of the children, fits them to meet this versatility in American industry. 7. The American characteristic of aspiration [ambition] to reach a higher plane of production is transmitted to the immigrant child. This Americanizes the thoughts of the immigrant. 3. How did immigrants feel about 'Americanization"? Here is an excerpt from An American in the Making (1917) by journalist Marcus E. Ravage. It seems to be assumed by the self-complacent [smug] native that we immigrants are at once and overwhelmingly captivated by America and all things Ameri- can... Why should we not be happy? Have we not left our own country because we were in one way or another discontented there?... If the alien were dissatisfied with America, would he not be taking back the first steamer instead of inviting his friends and family to follow him?.,. ... To begin with, the alien who comes here from Europe is not the raw material that Americans suppose him to be. He is not a blank sheet to be written on as you see fit. He has not sprung out of nowhere. Quite the contrary. He brings with him a deep-rooted tradition, a system of culture and tastes and habits—a point of view which is as ancient as his national experience and which has been engendered in him by his race and his environment. And it is this thing—this entire Old World soul of his—that comes in conflict with America as soon as he has landed. ... ... My good friends are unwilling to see that the alien has as much to teach as to learn, that the readjustment is inevitably a matter of give and take, and that he only begins to feel at home in this new country when he has succeeded in blending his own culture and ideas and mode of life with those of the people that came here before him. Your self-complacent native takes stock of the Americanized alien and cries, delightedly: "See how America has changed him." But I suppose he would be greatly astonished if the immigrant were to answer, with equal truth: "Look how I have changed America!" Excerpt from Puritans From The Orient by Jade Snow Wong From the book The Immigrant Experience edited by Thomas Wheeler Copyright ,c 1971 by The Dial Press Used with the permission of The Dial Press. 4. Some immigrants attempted to resist Americanization, on/y to have their children change as a result of education. Jade Snow Wong was born in San Francisco of Chinese parents who had immigrated in 1903. She was raised according to "nineteenth century ideals of Chinese womanhood." Nonetheless, her American education broke the influence of her parents: One afternoon on a Saturday, which was normally occupied with my housework job, I was unexpectedly released by my employer. ... It was a rare joy to have free time and I wanted to enjoy myself for a change. There had been a Chinese-American boy who shared some classes with me. Sometimes we had found each other walking to the same 8:00 A.M. class. He was not a special boyfriend, but 1 had enjoyed talking to him and had confided in him some of my problems. Impulsively, 1 telephoned him. I knew I must be breaking rules, and I felt shy and scared. At the same time. 1 was excited at this newly found forwardness, with nothing more purposeful than to suggest another walk together, . . . My clothes were limited but 1 changed to look more graceful in silk stockings and found a bright ribbon for my long black hair. Daddy watched, catching my mood, observing the dashing preparations. He asked me where I was going without his permission and with whom. I refused to answer him. I thought of my rights! . . . Daddy thundered his displeasure and forbade my departure. I found a new courage as I heard my voice announce calmly that I was no longer a child, and if 1 could work my way through college, I would choose my own friends. It was my right as a person. My mother heard the commotion and joined my father to face me; both appeared shocked and incredulous [unbelieving]. Daddy at once demanded the source of this unfilial [disrespectful!, non-Chinese theory. And when I quoted my college professor, reminding him that he had always felt teachers should be revered, my father denounced that professor as a foreigner who was disregarding the superiority of our Chinese culture, with its sound family strength. When Confucius had already established his ethics for civilized behavior, the Westerners were bloodthirstily persecuting Christ. My father did not spare me, I was condemned as an ingrate [ ungrateful person| for echoing dishonorable opinions. . . . I would not give in. I reminded them that they and I were not in China, that I wasn't going out with just anybody but someone 1 trusted! Daddy gave a roar that no man could be trusted but I devastated them in declaring that I wished the freedom to find my own answers. Both parents were thoroughly angered, scolded me for being shameless, and predicted I would some day tell them I was wrong. But 1 dimly perceived that they were conceding defeat and were perplexed at this breakdown of their training. 1 was too old to beat and too bold to intimidate. American flags fly in New York City's Chinatown, around 1912 5. Genevieve De Leo, whose parents emigrated to Chicago from Italy in 1903, remembers the Americanization process: When my father came to Chicago, he found many, many other Italian men looking for work. The word got out that the men that were being hired knew some English. The bosses didn't want men who couldn't speak the language. He and my mother learned English fast. It was the only way that they would survive. If you wanted to be successful, you had to become American. Both my parents knew Italian, but they wanted my sisters and me to speak to them in English. It's funny. Whenever there was gossip about other Italians in the neighborhood, the older people would speak Italian. But otherwise they would try to speak English. That's why we never learned Italian from our folks. Summing Up 1. What were native Americans' motives for trying to change the immigrant? 2. What were the practical advantages of Americanization for the immigrant? 3. How might each writer define the ideal American? Do you agree or disagree with the implied definition? 4. Should special efforts be made to Americanize immigrants? Explain. In the 1960's and 1970's, "ethnicity" became popular. Magazine writers wrote: "Suddenly the Irish were back in town. . . . Two years ago, you only saw the Irish at weddings and funerals; now they seemed to be everywhere." "Sometime within the last two years New York's Italians, after 75 years of benign residence in their own neighborhoods have become restive." "What we are watching now is the rise of an authentic new subculture which may prove as essential to this town as any in its past... the Latin look." Thus was described the growth of ethnicity, that is, ethnic pride, ethnic organizations, and ethnic political and economic power. Although the term stems from "ethnic" or cultural groups, in recent years many blacks and women have promoted the idea that there is a "black" or "women's" culture that should be respected and preserved. All these movements toward expressing group pride stem from the idea that the United States is really a pluralistic society, a society composed of people of many cultures and traditions. As you read the two selections below, consider why "ethnicity'' recently became popular. 1. The following article, written by Philip Perlmutter in 1974, supports increased ethnic education: To some teachers the word "ethnicity" connotes [suggests] something strange, foreign, alien, and even un-American. To them, American education should ignore Mexican Americans celebrate the Blessing of the Animals, an Easter season event. the country in which students or their parents were born, if it was outside the U.S.A. Any non-American traditions, languages, customs, or even history are regarded as being un-American. To growing numbers of teachers—and students—ethnicity is the very essence of America, both as a nation and as a nation of nations, ... To them, America means pluralism, diversity, difference, contrast, creativity. The responsibility of the school is to understand the various ethnic backgrounds of students and to help them become sure-footed individuals, who further enrich American society because of—and not in spite of—their ethnic backgrounds.. . . In the 20th century, many educators and philosophers began to see that new or old immigrants are not readily meltable, nor should they be. . . . It was not until the race revolution of the 1950's and 1960's that the racial and ethnic pieces [of the American population] began demanding more attention and care In handling. ... .... [Demands] have escalated [increased] to add minority group courses and curricula in schools and universities... . It is when an individual feels relatively secure in his relationship with others—both within his own group and among the other groups about him—that he will experience the need for ego-satisfaction, which is often associated with ambition and a desire to excel. 2. In 1976. a Japanese American woman described her new sense of self- awareness: 1 think Japanese Americans have always stressed self-betterment and the importance of self-worth. In Japanese culture a person does not necessarily verbalize this self-worth. It is expressed and recognized in the way one lives. Western culture requires one to be very verbal about one's own self-worth and positive traits. I learned that in order to be recognized and heard, 1 often had to shout things that could be left unsaid within the Japanese American community. 1 sensed this duality early in life and adopted two sets of behavior. The problem was that I was neither mainstream American nor the Japanese stereotype thrown at me by films, magazines, and newspapers. I realized that the creation of a new identity was needed. In order to be an effective person I had to take concepts from both, reject concepts from both, and add new elements. Of course this process is continuous, and I learn more about myself and others every day. The important thing is that I am defining myself and not accepting other peoples' views of me as myself. This process of self-awareness was a slow and gradual one. The Black movement of the 1960's greatly aided this process. It called attention to legitimate problems and took positive steps towards solutions. "Maybe something can be done" changed to "something has to be done.'' The movement also helped lessen the isolation felt by many minorities by publicly focusing upon common problems. My parents, both born in the United States, were put into American concentration camps during World War II. This dehumanizing experience stunted and influenced a great deal of their behavior patterns. My mother sees her children's changed outlooks as a natural and healthy thing. But she still worries about drawing attention to our problems. In doing so, we draw attention to ourselves. The concentration camp experience reminds her that to be recognized is to be suspect and vulnerable. I don't feel that 1 have to prove myself to people because I am Asian American and different. Different no longer suggests inferior or negative. When younger. I had the feeling that in order to be recognized as equal to others, 1 had to be ten times better. I no longer feel that I have to prove my self-worth for that reason and on that basis. Racism still exists in employment situations, educational systems, and living conditions in general. I still get angry, but this anger is no longer directed inward in desperation. It is channeled out in constructive ways and becomes energy. I have learned to assert myself as part of a group and as an individual. Summing Up 1. The concept of ethnicity seems to be a rejection of the idea of the melting pot Which dream, in your opinion, is better for the United States? Why? 2. What importance, if any, do you think the concept of ethnicity will have for Americans in the year 2050? Explain your answer. 3. Which term, "melting pot" or "pluralistic society," best describes the United States today? Explain. The majority of people were hit and hit hard. They were mentally disturbed you're bound to know, 'cause they didn't know when the end of all this was cornin'. There was a lot of suicides that I know of. From nothin' else but just they couldn't see any hope for a better tomorrow. I absolutely know some who did. Part of 'em were farmers and part of 'em were businessmen, even. They went flat broke and they committed suicide on the strength of it, nothing else. A lot of times one family would have some food. They would divide. And everyone would share. Even the people that were quite well to do, they was ashamed. 'Cause they was eatin', and other people wasn't. My husband was very bitter. That's just puttin' it mild. He was an intelligent man. He couldn't see why as wealthy a country as this is, that there was any sense in so many people starving to death, when so much of it, wheat and everything else, was being poured into the ocean. 3. Cesar Chavez, president of the United Farm Workers of America, was a young child during the depression. Interviewed by Terkel, he recalls: Oh, 1 remember having to move out of our house. .. . That must have been around 1934. I was about six years old. It's known as the North Gila Valley, about fifty miles north of Yuma [Arizona]. My dad was being turned out of his small plot of land. He had inherited this from his father, who had homesteaded it. i saw my two, three other uncles also moving out. And for the same reason. The bank had foreclosed on the loan. ... It so happened the president of the bank was the guy who most wanted our land. We were surrounded by him: he owned all the land around us. Of course, he wouldn't pass the loan. . . . We all of us climbed into an old Chevy that my dad had. And then we were in California, and migratory workers. There were five kids—a small family by those standards. It must have been around '36.1 was about eight. Well, it was a strange life. We had been poor, but we knew every night there was a bed there, and that this was our room. There was a kitchen. It was sort of a settled life, and we had chickens and hogs, eggs and all those things. But that all of a sudden changed. When you're small, you can't figure these things out. You know something's not right and you don't like it but you don't question it and you don't let that get you down. You sort of just continue to move. But this had quite an impact on my father. He had been used to owning the land and all of a sudden there was no more land. What 1 heard . .. what I made out of conversations between my mother and my father—things like, we'll work this season and then we ll get enough money and we'll go and buy a piece of land in Arizona. Things like that. Became like a habit. He never gave up hope that some day he would come back and get a little piece of land. . . . When we moved to California, we would work after school. Sometimes we wouldn't go. "Following the crops," we missed much school. Trying to get enough Migrant field hands in the 1930 s money to stay alive the following winter, the whole family picking apricots, walnuts, prunes. We were pretty new, we had never been migratory workers. We were taken advantage of quite a bit by the labor contractor and the crew pusher. In some pretty silly ways. (Laughs.) Sometimes we can't help but laugh about it We trusted everybody that came around. You're traveling in California with all your belongings in your car: it's obvious. ... This is bait for the labor contractor. Anywhere we stopped, there was a labor contractor offering all kinds of jobs and good wages, and we were always deceived by them and we always went. Trust them. 4. Between one million and two million unemployed simply wandered across the United States, riding freight trains, looking for work. Louis Banks came from a cotton jam in Arkansas. He describes to Terkel some of his experiences during the early years of the depression as he wandered around the country: 1 got to be fourteen years old. 1 went to work on the Great Lakes at $41.50 a month. I thought Someday I'm gonna be a great chef Rough times, though. It was the year 1929. I would work from five in the morning till seven at night Washing dishes, peeling potatoes, carrying heavy garbage . . . I'd get paid off, I'd draw $21 every two weeks and then cornin' back I'd have to see where 1 was goin*. 'Cause I would get robbed. One fella named Scotty, he worked down there, he was firin' a boiler. He was tryin' to send some money home. He d work so hard and sweat, the hot fire was cookin' his stomach. I felt sorry for him. They killed 'im and throwed 'im in the river, trying to get the $ 15 or $20 from him. They'd steal and kill each other for fifty cents. The Japanese American internment The attack on Pearl Harbor unleashed fear and hatred toward Japanese people in the United States. The West Coast was now the last line of defense on the Pacific and was declared a theater of war by nervous generals. Stories were circulated that mysterious signal lights could be seen flashing from coastal homes. The hatreds and suspicions generated toward Japan were turned on the 112,000 Japanese Americans living on the West Coast. Bowing to public pressure, on February 19, 1942, President Roosevelt signed an executive order that gave the military the power to remove any persons it felt posed a threat to security. General John DeWitt, commander of the Western Defense Command, ordered all persons of Japanese ancestry to evacuate the western half of Washington, Oregon, and California and the southern quarter of Arizona. Ignored in the order were 700,000 Italian Americans, 300,000 German Americans, and the 35,000 Japanese aliens in Hawaii. The evacuation was chaotic. The Japanese Americans, who had become refugees in their own country, were met by hostility as they moved into the interior of the United States. The army hastily built military stockades to provide shelter for the refugees while their loyalty was being examined. Ten barrack dries were later constructed in western deserts and the swamplands of Alabama and Arkansas to provide permanent housing. Although it was soon demonstrated that most Japanese Americans were loyal, they were not allowed to return to their homes. They were given the options of moving to the interior of the country, joining the army, or remaining in the internment camps. About 36,000 chose to resettle or join the army. The majority stayed in the camps until the final year of the war. Forced to sell their homes, businesses, and farms, many Japanese Americans lost huge amounts of money. After the war, the federal government paid 35 million dollars in compensation to the Japanese Americans, an amount far short of their actual losses. The matter of Japanese internment poses sensitive problems. Which is more important, the preservation of civil rights for all Americans or the preservation of military security during war? As you read the selections that follow, note the arguments that are given for each position. 1. What mas it like for a Japanese American when war finally broke out? Jeanne Wakatusi was only seven at the time. She recorded her memories of those days, in Farewell to Manzanar (1973). Manzanar was a relocation camp located in thedesertof eastern California. That night [of Pearl Harborj Papa burned the flag he had brought with him from Hiroshima thirty-five years earlier. It was such a beautiful piece of material I couldn't believe he was doing that. He burned a lot of papers too, documents, anything that? The first thing I saw [of Manzanar] was a yellow swirl across a blurred, reddish setting sun. The bus was being pelted by what sounded like splattering rain. It wasn't rain. This was my first look at something I would soon know very well, a billowing flurry of dust and sand churned up by the wind through Owens Valley. We drove past a barbed-wire fence, through a gate, and into an open space where trunks and sacks and packages had been dumped from the baggage trucks that drove out ahead of us. I could see a few tents set up, the first rows of black barracks, and beyond them, blurred by sand, rows of barracks that seemed to spread for miles across this plain. People were sitting on cartons or milling around, with their backs to the wind, waiting to see which friends or relatives might be on this bus. As we approached, they turned or stood up, and some moved toward us expectantly. But inside the bus no one stirred. No one waved or spoke. They just stared out the windows. 2. Sumio Nichi was in the food business in California in the 1930's. A second- generation Japanese American, he was ordered in 1942 to leave for an internment camp. Years later, he was asked how this order affected his activities. He explained. We had a big farm near Salinas, California. Lettuce, celery, cauliflower, broccoli. . . . We had our own packinghouse. . .. We had an inventory of $80,000 worth of equipment. The people around, the whites, knew we had to leave. They were just standing around, waiting. I was thinking of storing it, but they told us we couldn't do it. It would be hampering the war effort, So they set up appraisers. I got $6,000 for it. After the war ... I took a trip back to Salinas. I couldn't lease one acre of land. Nothing available. The people who took over our place, they're doing quite well. 3. Public opinion toward the Japanese internment was mixed, as these magazine and newspaper items reveal: "We're charged with wanting to get rid of the Japs for selfish reasons," Anson told me. "We might as well be honest. We do. It's a question of whether the white man lives on the Pacific Coast or the brown men. They came into this valley to work, and they stayed to take over. . . . If all the Japs were removed tomorrow, we'd never miss them in two weeks, because the white farmers can take over and produce everything the Jap grows. And we don't want them back when the war ends, either.' Saturday Evening Post, May 9,1942 The chances of a Japanese committing sabotage are few and far between; his color, build, face, and mannerisms would betray him, long before he might do any harm. The same could not be said of potential spies from European nations. And yet, the Japanese were all given a few days' notice to evacuate their homes and take up residence in government prepared "relocation centers'' where entrance and exit were governed by strict rules! The boundaries were drawn with barbed wire—illumined by powerful searchlights at night and guarded twenty-four hours a day by other American citizens in military uniform! We can glibly proclaim to a war-harassed world that we are fighting for the Four Freedoms but does not our treatment of some ninety thousands of our own citizens of Japanese descent belie our words? The Commonweal, October 1, 1943 By continuing to keep American citizens in "protective custody," the U.S. is holding to a policy as ominous [threatening] as it is new. The American custom in the past has been to lock up the citizen who commits violence, not the victim of his threats and blows. The doctrine of "protective custody" could prove altogether too convenient a weapon in many other situations. In California .. . antagonism is already building against the Negroes who have come in for war jobs. What is to prevent their removal to jails, to "protect them" from riots? Or Negroes in Detroit, Jews in Boston, Mexicans In Texas? The possibilities of "protective custody" are endless, as the Nazis have amply proved. Fortune, April 1944 Awaiting relocation from Hayward. California, 1943 4. In 1941. Mine Okubo was a graduate student in art In 1942, she was interned in Camp Topaz in central Utah Drawings from her 1946 book show aspects of the relocation experience: Posting of the Evacuation Order April 24 1942 We tagged our baggage with the family number 13660 and pinned the personal lags on ourselves Enclosed by barbed wire and armed guards at a racetrack near San Francisco fW Departing for the Camp Topaz relocation center Those who wished privacy went out into the wide open spaces Celebrating Christmas around the potbellied stove 5 Fred Korematsu was a resident of Oakland. Californio, when the evacuation order came Kurematsu refused to leaue Oakland because his non-Japanese girlfriend could not go with him He was arrested and then decided to test the government's right to maintain internment camps In Korematsu v United States (1944), the Supreme Court decided six to three in the government's favor. Excerpts from majority and minority opinions follow li is said that wc are dealing here with the case of imprisonment of a citizen in a concentration camp solely because of his ancestry, without evidence or inquiry concerning his loyalty and good disposition towards the United States. Our task would be simple, our duty clear, were this a case involving the imprisonment of a loyal citizen in a concentration camp because of racial prejudice.. .. We are dealing specifically with nothing but an exclusion order. To cast this case into outlines of racial prejudice, without reference to the real military dangers which were presented, merely confuses the issue. Korematsu was not excluded from the Military Area because of hostility to him or his race He was excluded because we are at war with the Japanese Empire, because the properly constituted military authorities feared an invasion of our West Coast and felt constrained [obliged | to take proper security measures, because they decided that the military urgency of the situation demanded that all citizens of Japanese ancestry be segregated from the West Coast temporarily, . . There was evidence of disloyalty on the part of some, the military authorities considered that the need for action was great, and time was short. We cannot—by availing ourselves of the calm perspective of hindsight—now say that at that time these actions were unjustified. Majority opinion by Justice Hugo Black This exclusion of "all persons of Japanese ancestry, both alien and non-alien." from the Pacific Coast area on a plea of military necessity in the absence of martial law ought not be approved. Such exclusion goes over "the very brink of constitutional power' and fails into the ugly abyss of racism. . . . It must be conceded that the militaiy and naval situation in the spring of 1942 was such as to generate a very real fear of invasion of the Pacific Coast, accompanied by fears of sabotage and espionage in that area. The military command was therefore justified in adopting all reasonable means necessary to combat these dangers. In adjudging the military action taken in light of the then apparent dangers, we must not erect too high or too meticulous standards; it is necessary only that the action have some reasonable lelation to the removal of the dangers of invasion, sabotage and espionage. But the exclusion either temporarily or permanently, of all persons with Japanese blood in theii veins has no such reasonable relation And that telation is lacking because che exclusion order necessarily must rely for its reasonableness upon the assumption that all persons of Japanese ancestry may have a dangerous tendency to commit sabotage and espionage. . .. No adequate reason Is given for the failure to treat these Japanese Americans on an individual basis by holding investigations and hearings to separate the loyal from the disloyal, as was done in the case of persons of German and Italian ancestry, ... It is asserted merely that the loyalties of this group "were unknown and time was of the essence." Yet nearly four months elapsed after Pearl Harbor before the first exclusion order was issued; nearly eight months went by until the last order was issued; and the last of these "subversive" persons was not actually removed until almost eleven months had elapsed. Leisure and deliberation seem to have been more of the essence than speed. .., Moreover, there was no adequate proof that the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the military and naval intelligence services did not have the espionage and sabotage situation well in hand during this long period.. .. It seems incredible that under these circumstances it would have been impossible to hold loyalty hearings for the mere 112,000 persons involved—or at least for the 70,000 American citizens—especially when a large part of this number represented children and elderly men and women. Any inconvenience that may have accompanied an attempt to conform to procedural due process cannot be said to justify violations of constitutional rights of individuals. Minority opinion by Justice Frank Murphy Summing Up 1. Some Americans argued that the camps were really not that bad and certainly did not deserve the label of "concentration camps." In your opinion, does it matter what the actual camp conditions were like? Explain. 2. What arguments did Justice Black use to defend the internment of Japanese Americans? Whai arguments did Justice Murphy give in criticism of the policy? Whose position do you most agree with? Why? winning the war . . . Despite the frantic buildups of 1941, the United States was at first poorly equipped to fight the mightiest military powers on earth. The army and navy were undersized, under-equipped, and under-trained. The nation's industrial capacity was yet untested for the mighty task ahead. Arms and food had to be supplied the world over not only to American troops, but to the forces of allies as widely separated as Australia and the Soviet Union, Britain and China. New weapons had to be developed to compete with those designed by Nazi scientists. Materials had to be devised to replace scarce raw materials, the most important of which was rubber, that were now under enemy control. On New Year's Day 1942, representatives of twenty-six Allied nations in Plymouths are the "best buys," then Plymouths are what they all have. ... Within the group, pressure to "keep up with the Joneses" is felt most strongly, for these young couples, anxious for "success," look for material signs of it. , . . Generally .. . [in] interviews with men and women who live in the new suburbs, the drive to conformity was acknowledged, sometimes laughed at and often defended. Typical comments and offhand remarks were these: "This place has the best educated people in America in it, but nobody wants to think." "If you have any brains, you keep them in your back pocket around here." "It's more fun to have a group. You all do things together." "It's natural. Nobody wants people around who criticize and sit off by themselves and don't take part." . , . "I'll admit it's silly. But everybody wants and needs friends." No other question arouses so much heat, guilt, and 1 disagreement] as racial discrimination against Negroes, a pattern the residents did not create but which they now sustain. What has been created here is therefore something abnormal and atypical of American life, that is, in deep conflict with democratic American ideals: large cities and towns without Negroes, something that cannot be found in either North or South. .., ,.. Generally the community divides in three groups: (1) a minority who force the issue by calling for an end to discrimination; (2) a defensive, guilt-ridden majority who say, "I think it's wrong; if a fellow was in the Army, he shouldn't be discriminated against, but what will it do to property values?"; and (3) a tiny fraction which insists it will move out if Negroes are permitted ownership. 3. Historian Robert C. Wood had mixed reactions to report in his 1958 study, Suburbia. Its People and Their Politics. The most fashionable definition of suburbia today is that it is a looking glass in which the character, behavior, and culture of middle class America is displayed. When we look at suburbs we see our homes; when we look at suburbanites we see ourselves. Many of the specialists who have looked carefully into the mirror find a man who is not appealing. The old images of national life seem to them to have disappeared; the stem Puritan, the sturdy [farmer], the hard-working capitalist are gone. In their places a prototype [new model] whom it is difficult to idealize: a man without direction or ambition except for his desire for a certain portion of material security, a man so conscious of his fellows that he has no convictions of his own. [The] suburbanite seeks direction from a passing parade of "experts" who, in the rapid succession of changing fashions, dictate the design of his house, the education of his children, the choice of his friends, and the use of his income. ... In the suburbs, in the opinion of its prominent investigators, the modem American exchanges individuality, privacy, the certain satisfactions of pride of craftsmanship and work well done, for Marine recruits after the first haircut Summing Up 1. In what ways do common experiences of- 3. In your opinion, is it possible to avoid fered by television to millions at a time tend to being a conformist in American society? In unify peoples' attitudes? Give examples. answering this, consider what makes people con- 2. Is the fact that the United States is the form. home of people from many different nations and 4. What arguments can be made in favor of a traditions an influence toward conformity or certain amount of conformity? Give specific nonconformity? Why? examples. Shopping for a Chrysler, 1957 ubtil oklege imo "GOUT 0E f6C\KWt mnie TooJ a FfiM LIKE EVSRYOtfE 401 PIP "Jt> £ POOoHTAPlPe- BiMZ IW6- AUt? COOiDWT TBU- £V£RV0lO£ tifpB- 40 lOHFU 1 GOT 001 IJOUep M*P16Of0 April 1962. After obtaining union cooperation to prevent a rise in steel prices, Kennedy is angered when United States Steel and a few other companies raise the price anyway. The President uses strong legal measures to stop the steel companies, and they return the prices to the earlier level. October 1962. Federal officers are called out to protect James Meredith, a black veteran, in his attempt to begin study at the University of Mississippi. After a meeting of the Organization of American States, Kennedy presents evidence of recently built Soviet missile and bornber bases in Cuba. With the approval of the OAS Cuba is blockaded by the United States. Planes, ships, aircraft carriers, and submarines form a ring around the island. After several days, tense with the threat of nuclear war, the Soviets agree to dismantle the bases and take their missiles away. By late November, the blockade of Cuba is lifted, and the Soviet premier agrees to remove Soviet bornbers within a month. November 1962. Kennedy bans discriminatory racial and religious restrictions on all housing made possible by federal loan or federal insurance programs. December 1962. By the end of 1962, Kennedy has made nearly three hundred requests for legislation. Congress approves less than half of them, rejecting bills for medical care for the aged, federal aid to education and to cities, and foreign aid February 1963. Kennedy submits a plan for hospital and medical care for the elderly under the social security system. No congressional action is taken. April 1963. The United States and the Soviet Union announce the establishment of a ' hot line between Washington and Moscow to help avoid the risk of accidental war. May 1963. After violent riots in Birmingham, Alabama, during the previous months, the President reveals that a truce has been achieved between demonstrators and other members of the community by the Justice Department. Two bornbings soon cause more rioting, and Kennedy stations 3,000 riot control troops to keep the peace. July 1963. Kennedy asks Congress for the strongest civil rights legislation ever presented to that body. No action is taken. The United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union sign a treaty banning atomic testing in the oceans, the atmosphere, and outer space. By the end of the year. 113 other nations also sign the treaty. November 1963. A military coup overthrows the South Vietnam government of Ngo Dinh Diem. Sixteen thousand American advisers are in the country by the end of the year. Summing Up 1. In your opinion, did Kennedy's actions match his image? Explain. 2. There are many today who have an idealized view of John F. Kennedy. For many, he is a hero, no matter what happened during his term of office. How can this be explained? followed Kennedy's death was more than enough to speed legislation through Congress. By late February, Kennedy's proposal for a tax cut had been approved. By June, the highly controversial civil rights bill was signed by the President, after fifty-seven days of filibuster (delaying speeches) in the Senate. That same year Johnson proved his persuasive abilities by settling a bitter dispute between the railroads and the unions about personnel on diesel engines. On April 22. 1964. at 6:20 P.M. Johnson leaped into a presidential limousine with two railroad officials and sped to the CBS-TV Washington studios. There, in a prime-time national newscast, Johnson read a letter from "Little Cathy," a seven-year-old from Park Forest, Illinois, who had written the President asking him to prevent a strike so that her grandmother could come from New York to visit. President Johnson spoke softly: "Cathy's grandmother can now go to see her." In a deft stroke, the President had increased his growing popularity by his image as a leader and his powers of persuasion. That year the Republicans nominated a conservative for President, Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona. He was nominated despite years of Republican tradition of drawing nominees from the liberal wing of their party. Goldwater based his campaign on reduced taxes, an end to government deficit spending, opposition to the 1964 Civil Rights Act, and a "dynamic foreign policy." His record on civil rights and his foreign policy position proved to be his downfall. Johnson portrayed Goldwater as a trigger-happy man, capable of starting a nuclear war with the Soviet Union. Goldwater's tough stand on the worsening situation in Vietnam made him an easy target of Johnson and the Democrats, who campaigned on a peace platform. Moreover, the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 above Goldwater's "no" vote made Johnson extremely popular among blacks. In the November election, Johnson got 95 percent of the black vote: in some northern cities he drew 99 percent! The election was a disaster for Goldwater and the Republicans. Johnson polled 15 million more popular votes than Goldwater, and he captured 486 electoral votes to Goldwater's 52. Many Republicans simply refused to vote, finding both Goldwater's "extremist" policies and Johnson's style and politics hard to swallow. Johnson interpreted his landslide victory as a vote of confidence for his legislative program, which he called the "Great Society." With thirty-eight additional Democratic votes in the House and two additional Democratic votes in the Senate, Johnson had the necessary political base for a remarkable legislative record. In 1965, there were 115 presidential legislative recommendations, and over 90 were approved. Among the most notable was the Appalachia Development Act in which one billion dollars was allocated to Appalachian regions for development of highways and other improvement projects. In April Johnson signed the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. which allotted over one billion The next selections look at a few of the many ideas supported by minority-group activists during the 1960's. As you read, look for the goals of each individual and the methods he or she supports to win those goals. 1. The Young Lords, a Puerto Rican street gang in New York City, turned to social activism in 1969. They cleaned up the streets of their neighborhood, organized free breakfast programs for schoolchildren, and began health-care drives. This passage is from Palante. a 1971 book by the Young Lords party. At the same time that the cultural values of America are exalted, the cultural values of Puerto Rico are downgraded. People begin to feel ashamed of speaking Spanish. Language becomes a reward and punishment system. If you speak English and adapt to the cultural values of America, you're rewarded; if you speak Spanish and stick to the old traditional ways, you're punished. In the school system here, if you don't quickly begin to speak English and shed your Puerto Rican values, you're put back a grade—so you may be in the sixth grade in Puerto Rico but when you come here, you go back to the fourth or fifth. You're treated as if you're retarded, as if you're backward—and your own cultural values therefore are shown to be of less value than the cultural values of this country and the language of this country.. . . . . . We see a need to create our own school system, a school system based on developing each person to the fullest potential that they have, and bringing out the beaufy that we know is inside our people, that's being buried in the American school system. . . . Many of our people see that our culture has been destroyed by this country, and they react in an extreme way. and become cultural nationalists—whose sole purpose in life is to revive the culture of the Puerto Rican nation and to keep it alive, to speak only Spanish, to relate only to our music, to dress the way we dressed when we lived on the island. Now. our feeling is that nationalism is important—that we have to be proud of our nation, our history and our culture—but that pride alone is not gonna free us, the ability to play congas is not gonna free us, the ability to speak Spanish fluently is not gonna stop landlords. . . , We know that just going back to our culture is not gonna make it in and of itself. We have to use our culture as a revolutionary weapon to make ourselves stronger, to understand who we are. to understand where we came from, and therefore to be able to analyze correctly what we have to do in order to survive in this country. 2. Why did seme activists become radicals? Pat Sumi. an American of Japanese ancestry, explains in this 1971 interview why she moved from nonviolent protest to radical politics. If you keep pushing yourself to find answers to problems you see, you wind up having a radical perspective In high school. I was the model Asian 1 got good grades A member ot the Young Lords and ran for student body offices and had good citizenship marks ... 1 grew up in a mostly white, upper middle class neighborhood. ... 1 had to ask myself, was I white? Was I middle class? Was 1 Japanese, was I not Japanese? What was I? For the four years I was in college. I went through a series of experiences that really sharpened those questions. ... 1 found out that it doesn't really matter if you're quiet and non-violent, and petitioned peacefully and discussed things in a reasonable way with people, because as long as they had the power, you could be as reasonable as you wanted to, but they weren't going to give you control over anything that really affected your life—especially not minority students. . . . Ultimately, our goal in organizing is to be able to build that Third World [Asian. African, and Latin American] solidarity within the United States. . . . Third World people have always been oppressed people in this country. To fight means we must fight together One million Asians combined with thirty million Blacks, combined with fifteen million Browns is a whole lot of people. ... 1 think Asian people need to take a greater leadership position in opposing the [Vietnam | war. We are in fact the visible reminder in this country of what is going on over there. And that has to be brought up to the American people over and over again. . . Our own brothers continue to go into the military, willingly, without questions asked. Draft counseling has to be stepped up. Parents have to be educated to keep their sons out of the military by any means necessary. There already are surprising numbers of Japanese and Chinese draft resisters and A W O L 's in Canada. And that's a big step . .. How are we going to fight this? First of all, we have to understand we're not by ourselves. Our people have fought back as long as we've been here. That's one of the whole things about institutional racism in the first place. They never tell you that we ever fought back. You just begin to read the history of some of the things our people have done and it blows your mind. . . People organized and became parts of unions and other radical organizations. They tried to organize Japanese into Gardeners' Federations, housemaid-houseboy organizations. That unity once existed amongst our people. Right now, we're trying to give our people their courage just for them to tell us what their life was like. . . . ... As Asian people, if we seek to explain the problems of ourselves, our community and all poor and oppressed peoples in the United States, we come to the conclusion that revolution is the only answer. We must cease being Japanese frogs at the bottom of the white American well seeing only what that defines for us We must make our own definitions by seeing the totality of who we are and where that puts us. 3. The following article, from the November 12. 1968. San Francisco Chronicle, tells of efforts of Nevada Shoshones to win back some of their rights The medicine man of the Shoshones, whose historic hunting grounds stretch from the skyscrapers of Los Angeles to the mountains of Nevada, declared solemnly yesterday: Demanding water rights. San Diego. 1969 "We're standing up for our rights for the first time in a hundred years. The white man is not going to push us any further." John "Rolling Thunder" Pope, most of whose people still depend on wild deer and pine nuts for their food, was in San Francisco to testify today for an Indian objecting to being drafted into the army. . . . "Why should we go fight over there when we've got things to fight for here?" he asked. Rolling Thunder's legal I fight | was prompted by two recent incidents: The Federal government has ordered a tax of 5 cents a pound on all pine nuts over 25 pounds harvested by Indian families. The levying of a $100 fine on a Shoshone brave who shot a deer out of season to get food for his wife and nine children. The Indians are in court over these—they claim their treaty gives them unfettered (unrestrained 1 hunting rights over their extensive tribal lands—and they also took the law into their own hands over a third case. That time they mounted a war party which surrounded a troop of 25 white hunters camped on one of their seven reservations and drove them off the land. Rolling Thunder would not say how many Shoshones there are: "We will not allow a census. Then they know who to draft and who to tax. But there's a lot more than they think there are and they're increasing fast. Our people are going to take back our original hereditary rights as handed down by the Great Spirit We're going to fight in every legal way we can. This gives the white man every chance he can to correct himself. If he has justice in his courts." Cdsar Chavez leading the United Farm Workers in a strike 4. One of the most prominent Mexican Americans in the 1960's was Cesar Chavez. He tried to organize migrant farm workers and pressed for better wages and working conditions. One of the techniques used was a national boycott of grapes. Americans were urged not to buy grapes from growers who refused to recognize the farm workers' union. The following excerpt is taken from a 1970 interview. The first question I'd like to ask is ''Why boycott?" You know, when you consider everything, we don't have any options. Most of the other things that would have been options depended entirely on the good will of the government and we know enough to know that they're not going to move. Especially, they're not going to move in a conflict situation like ours. Personally, the big reason was this: I thought the American public would respond [favorably], . . . What's the realistic basis for optimism about a public response to the boycott? Well, first of all, I contend that not only the American public but people in general throughout the world will respond to a cause that involves injustice. It's just natural to want to be with the underdog.... Has the boycott worked? We figure that we are cutting back the sales now by about 33 per cent But all that means is that we are forcing them to cold-storage the grape. The grape hasn't been lost yet. And in order to be 33 per cent effective we would have to keep up the same kind of pressure or increase it in the coming weeks. What is the main issue of the strike? The central issue is the whole question of recognition. Do, or will, workers have the right to have a union and have it recognized by their employers? .,. Who supports you? Number one, the public. They were given something to respond with. That's important Then labor, for money and technical assistance—and from just being around them you learn ,. a lot, you know. . . . Why are you an advocate of nonviolence? Well, you see. it started before the union. The first day we took a vote to strike I asked for a nonviolent vote. I have been asked this question many times and I have really had to dig back and find out. I think it goes back to my family, particularly my mother.... I remember that she would talk constantly about nonviolence —constantly. Summing Up 1. Which of these activists seem to have had the most faith in the willingness of the general American public to support his or her program? 2. What similarities do you see between the goals of the activists? What major differences do you see? 3. You are a member of a minority group. You cannot buy a house in certain neighborhoods because of your skin color. You cannot get certain jobs because of your racial background. You are tired of being treated as a second-class citizen. Which of the selections in this Reading would most appeal to you? Why? 4. You are the mayor of a small town which has a racially mixed population. Suppose each speaker represented in this Reading asks to speak to a large rally in your I town Which of them would you, as mayor, allow to hold such a rally? Which would I you try to discourage? Give reasons for your choices. 4> My father believed that knowledge was the most powerful weapon a man could possess and that education was a principal path to the gateway of freedom. He believed—and it is this belief which has served my life and work—that the most important step in moving toward any goal was to be prepared for opportunity when it presented itself. this freedom of education meant. A little girl from across the alley came and offered to conduct us to school. . . . This child, who had never seen us till yesterday . . . was able to offer us the freedom of the schools of Boston!... The doors stood open for every one of us. The smallest child could show us the way. Taking a correspondence course 6. Mary Antin, an immigrant from Russia, also believed that education was the most valuable thing one could possess. The following passage from her book The Promised Land (1912) describes her view of American education: Education was free. That subject my father had written about repeatedly, as comprising his chief hope for us children, the essence of American opportunity, the treasure that no thief could touch, not even misfortune or poverty. It was the one thing that he was able to promise us when he sent for us: surer, safer than bread or shelter. On our second day [of our arrival in the United States] I was thrilled with the realization of what 7. With the great influx of immigrants to the United States around 1900, demands were made on the public schools to "Americanize" immigrant children. John J. Mahoney was in charge of this process for the state of Massachusetts. He said: Americanization ... is the business of making good American citizens, the business of acquainting everyone who inhabits American soil with both physical and spiritual America to the end that this acquaintance may result in a sturdy loyalty to American institutions and American ideals and the habit of living the life of the good American citizen. 8. In contrast to the Americanization effort. Summing Up 1. Which song makes the most pointed comment about contemporary life? 2. Choose one song for each of the following categories. Be able to give reasons for your choices. (a) the most optimistic song (b) the most pessimistic song (c) the song that deals with the greatest obstacle to human potential (d) the song that most people you know would probably find significant ''1 hope you have learned. I hope that you have learned that people cannot ask politely for their own human rights anymore. I hope you have learned that people who are different still hold the rights of whole personhood." Bitterly, James Lee West, a Cheyenne, wrote in 1974 of his reflections on Thanksgiving. He wrote of the irony of American Indians being excluded from the traditional American celebration. In a sense, James Lee West was asking that his potential be recognized and encouraged. His cry was not a new one. Almost every group in America has felt the sting of discrimination—Dutch. Irish. Italians, Jews, Puerto Ricans, Mexican Americans, Asian Americans, black Americans, American Indians, and women of all ethnic and racial backgrounds. All have protested their conditions. Their writings, demonstrations, boycotts, and legal battles have repeated the message many times over Allow every American, no matter what race, what national origin, what language, what sex, to pursue his or her dream. It has not been an easy problem for Americans to deal with. Consider the words that must be defined: stereotypes are pictures in our heads, usually negative ones, of other people. They are a form of prejudice, or a pre-judging of what others are like. When such feelings are translated into actions, discrimination takes place. To discriminate is to act on the basis of a prejudice. American psychologist Gordon Allport examined the roots of prejudicial attitudes in The Nature of Prejudice (1954). In a chapter entitled "Prejudice and the Individu- al," Allport described the manner, conscious and unconscious, in which people leam negative attitudes toward other groups in society. As you read the excerpts that follow, keep these three questions in mind: (1) What specific causes of prejudice can you list? (2) Which, in your opinion, is the best explanation of prejudice? (3) Which best describes the origin of any prejudicial attitudes you might have? 1. There are two ingredients in any prejudiced state of mind: (a) a feeling of favorableness or unfavorableness which in turn is (b) based on unsupported judgment. . .. . . . IThere] is always an element of inadequate knowledge or false judgment in Americans. If you are white, you and I aren't the same. There are differences, for example, in the meanings we put to certain words. But the similarities between us as human beings completely overwhelm the differences. Take people for what they are, not for what you think they are. And. on the other hand, be honest with yourself. When you don't like someone, black or white, admit it. If it bothers you, try and find out more about the person until you find what makes him or her tick. 3. Daniel l. Okimoto, in a book called American in Disguise, describes the experience of going to school in Pasadena, California, in 1954, After registering as one of only two Japanese Americans in the whole school, I made my way with the help of a map to my first-period class, English Composition. Although I lost my way once, I was finally able to locate the room. . . . The teacher, who had been lecturing in front, turned my way and stopped talking; the thirty-five students in the classroom turned their heads in my direction. Suddenly silence. For five or six seconds the awful silence persisted. It was deafening. . . . I did not know what to do. I just stood there dumbly. Then, from the front of the room rose one horselike whinny that suddenly soared into a terrible roar that ricocheted around the ceiling. . . . Others in the room held their stomachs or pointed at me and looked at each other while riding the momentum of the guffaw. Never in my life had I felt so humiliated. I quickly looked down at the floor, afraid of bursting into tears. .,. ... I felt helpless Stripped of all dignity I stood there like a dumb, sad-faced down, dutching with all my might at my scratched lunch pail. ... [Whyl did we ever move to Pasadena? I thought. Why didn't someone warn me about this? . .. When the room quieted down the teacher spoke up: "What's your name, young man?" "Daniel Okimoto," I replied, almost whispering. . . . "Hey, kid," said one of the class tough boys. "Is that a Chinaman's name or a Jap's name?" ... . . . Then began the whispered barbs: "I wonder if the Jap boy can speak Eng- lish," sneered one boy, thinning his eyes out grotesquely to caricature Orientals. "Honorable Jap boy, you speak English?" . . . [The next day] At that moment I hated whites more than 1 ever imagined 1 could. Through these experiences I was rapidly becoming toughened to prejudice and hardened in my capadty for hatred. That day as I walked home from school, two boys ' tried to provoke me with the usual name calling and insults. Brooding about the even!Svof the past two days, I grew angrier and angrier at the two white boys tagging after me. ^ When name calling failed, they started to pinch and shove me. Then they squee^d me between them. I threw down my books and put up my fists, ready to fight.' Although I had never once fought with anyone, I was half out of mind with fury "Come on you cowards." I yelled. "Come on and fight." Overcoming racial discrimination Moving up the economic and social ladders in America has often been difficult for members of minority groups. In this Reading three people describe the efforts they have made to combat racial discrimination. Which activities do you think would be the most successful in helping end discrimination? 1. In 1968 Shirley Chisholm became the first black woman to be elected to Congress In 1972. she campaigned for the Democratic party 's presidential nomination. In the next selection Congresswoman Chisholm sums up her plan of action It is obvious to me that black Americans can no longer look upon our struggle for full participation within the American society as one which is isolated from that of other second-class groups. Discrimination against blacks because of the color of our skin is no more—or less—[destructive of| basic civil rights than is discrimination against groups because of their religion, creed, sex, or sexual orientation. When discrimination is at work, it is an instance of those who hold power drawing up petty and [un- reasonable] barriers for the purpose of denying equal participation to those who, if allowed to compete freely within the system, would threaten the status of the power holders. ... Yet there is hope for oppressed groups if we unite and challenge the forces which now hold the power in our country This is an effort which requires that these groups—minorities, women, consumers—come together and demand representation in the high councils of the establishment: and it also requires that we forget about role-playing, and seek to allow persons to engage in work which is suited to their intellectual and physical abilities. It means that blacks must realize that there are other groups who face discrimination. and who, for reasons of their own self-interest, are willing to join forces in breaking down petty and [unreasonable] barriers against fully productive careers within the mainstream of American life. This is why I have long spoken out in favor of coalition |a temporary union of various groups] politics; and it is why l have been disturbed that some persons do not understand the wisdom of joint political action. . .. Neither do I look upon the struggle for equal rights as an all black thing. Every American who believes in liberty and justice for all must join the struggle for equality of rights for blacks and Indians. Puerto Ricans and Chicanos, and women. Progressive-minded Americans should join in the struggle to end all forms of discrimination in America, and to end the narrow instinct of assigning sterotypic roles to particular groups. Human beings cannot so easily be assigned since we are unique in our individual abilities and characters. For this reason, liberation in America must (go beyond] ending discrimination against a particular race. It must [involve] ending discrimination because of sex, origin, and religion as well. Mural on a wall In San Francisco by a group called Mujeres Muratisla9 depicts scenes from prehistoric life Walls in many Latino communities display this form of art 2. Anibal Molina recalls childhood experiences and discusses his hopes for himself and the Puerto Rican community. The trip was set. My stepfather, Ramon, had made all the necessary arrangements. selling the store, the farm and the house. And on May 10, 1959, our family left our home in Lares, Puerto Rico and moved to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The first thing my parents did after we arrived was to put all of us children— Maria, Carmen, Olga, Marita, Hector and me—into a neighborhood parochial school. It was a horrible experience, I remember, because everyone spoke English and 1 knew only Spanish. I was a very scared fifth grader. But 1 learned quickly. . .. Just as I was getting adjusted, we ran into financial difficulties; the money we had managed to save ran out My mother started working, but had to quit her job because she could barely see. My stepfather couldn't work because the doctor told him he wasn't in any condition to do so—he was a sick man. .. . Because of the financial situation, I couldn't go to a Catholic high school, so 1 went to a public one. Since it was a predominantly black school, I encountered something new—discrimination. Being a light-skinned Puerto Rican, 1 was treated with hostility. Some of the guys would push me around . . and call me "white boy." Sometimes they'd swing at me. and 1 learned to be cool to avoid being killed. Puerto Ricans are the in-betweens in America. They are not accepted by the white man or the black man. I handled this situation by minding my own business and studying harder than everyone else. . .. But there comes a time when a person must stop looking inward and start reaching out toward his fellow man. The time, for me, came last summer when I became involved in a project called Potentials. It all began when a large pharmaceutical firm. Smith, Kline & French, awarded rne a $250 scholarship. The company's community relations manager, Carver Portlock, mentioned that he was setting up a program aimed at getting young people involved in their own community. The project was to be centered in my neighborhood. Would 1 be interested? I became an area coordinator for the Potentials program, supervising the work of ten teen-age guys who were chosen on the basis of leadership potential. (The other requirements: they had to live in the community and have a total family income of less than $5,000 annually.) Unlike many antipoverty programs that get their direction from "outside experts," Potentials was set up so that "we the people" could do the planning and work ourselves. And we did! With the money Smith, Kline & French gave us, we bought equipment and went from door to door in the community asking people: "Can we clean your yard? Paint your curbstone? Exterminate?" This is important in our community because a lot of the landlords who own the buildings don't live in them and don't take care of them. The houses are old and terribly run-down. ... I remember going to sleep at night and hearing that awful noise—whoosh. It was a rat, and there was nothing we could do about it at the time. . . . Potentials was great in other ways. It brought black and Puerto Rican kids together. And maybe best of all, it encouraged a few of the boys who were dropouts to return to school.. . . Now I'm working to help the members of my community to make it, to face the world, not be beaten down by it 3. Mani; people favor bilingual education, training in both English and the native language. The following article by Joe J. Bernal gives some idea why. The Mexican-American has maintained his mother tongue longer than has any other minority group. Whereas most immigrants largely replaced their mother tongues with English in one or two generations, the Mexican-American has clung to Spanish for three, four, and five generations. This is due primarily to the [nearness] of the Mexican border. Spanish language TV, newspapers, radio, and movies are commonplace in the barrios [neighborhoods inhabited by Spanish-speaking people]. Many unfortunate classroom situations have arisen because schools and teachers have refused to recognize that Spanish is the social language of their Mexican- American students. "^Traes un lapiz?" Ector had leaned over to Juan for a pencil. "I've warned you about speaking Spanish in my class," the teacher said sharply. "Go see the vice-principal right now, Ector. 1 can't have any more of that murmuring in Spanish." Mrs. Jones was irritated. . . . There was a school policy against the use of Spanish. ... The school district has now changed its policy and Spanish can be used whenever it [is useful in] a teaching situation. High schools there offer courses in sociology, chemistry, and many other college preparatory subjects formerly considered too difficult for "Mexican" children. The high school where the incidents took place has had a change of administration and the new principal, a Mexican-American, is well aware that frequently schools have not been able to work successfully with Mexican- American students. It is important for schools to recognize the advantages of being truly bilingual. The so-called language-educated person is skilled in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Generally, the Mexican-American's Spanish language skill is limited to listening and speaking, sometimes to listening only. And yet the skill he has developed in speaking and/or understanding Spanish [weakens] his ability to become skilled in speaking and/or understanding English. Much of this can be traced to conflicting Bcrina^n la htrra del rdeV . La gje al cantor el am Oauilci: ' 'omo' la per la de tas rnares .artf of bugles, a ruffle color be nea ffi ! is passing by/ attitudes on the part of school people. His two languages are placed in constant conflict and it is difficult for him to achieve true proficiency in either. In the classroom, much can be done to help Mexican-American students overcome this language conflict. The use of Spanish in the education process will help. In some cases Spanish can be used as the teaching language. For instance, bilinguists can be taught mathematics in Spanish. Admittedly, this will not improve their abilities in English, but at least their mathematical learning will not be held back because of their deficiency in English. Summing Up 1. List the steps recommended in these selections to overcome discrimination. k2. What, if any, are the advantages of bilingual education? List all the ways in which 659 