None of them, however, could withstand the onslaught of the Europeans. Not all Indian states fell as quickly or as painfully as Montezuma's, and some would not have to contend with the whites for many years. But the Indians' control of the continents they had discovered had passed. Within two centuries of the first landing, the newcomers had divided up nearly fifteen million square miles among themselves. Since the Aztecs were perhaps as highly organized as any society the Europeans encountered, the building of their civilization deserves examination. The Aztecs borrowed freely from earlier cultures in the area. First came the people of Teotihuacan, who constructed a great city near the later site of Tenochtitlan. Teotihuacan flourished during the fourth and fifth centuries a.d. Here the Indians built pyramids, palaces, and temples. A later people in the Valley of Mexico, the Toltecs, built another great city, Tula, just north of Teotihuacan. Under the leadership of a strong king named Quetzalcoatl, the Toltecs conquered a sizable territory, built beautiful palaces, and erected huge stone sculptures. Although Toltec rule collapsed, Indians in the Valley of Mexico retained Toltec cultural patterns. For example, they began worshiping Quetzalcoatl as a god. They believed that he had departed to the East, abandoning his people, but that one day he would return by ship from the other end of the world. This legend was the basis for Montezuma's initial fear that Cortez and his men were returning deities. The Aztecs, initially bands of warriors, came into the Valley of Mexico from the north around 1215. Neighboring peoples helped to educate them in the fine arts and skills that had been handed down from the Toltecs. The Aztecs needed little training in the art of warfare, however. Within decades of their arrival in the valley, they had conquered every major city-state in the area. The new overlords built upon the achievements not only of local peoples, but also of those in nearby regions, notably the Mayas. Mayan culture surpassed that of both the Aztecs and the Toltecs. Mayan civilization in Central America reached its height between a.d. 200 and 700. The people were not united under one government, but they lived clustered around such ceremonial cities as Tikal and Palenque. Exploring and Conquering the Americas 19 Because of their cultural achievements, the Mayas have sometimes been thought of as the Creeks of pre-Columbian America. Similarly, the Incas have been compared to the Romans because of their imperial political and administrative organization. The Inca Empire sprawled over the western part of South America. It covered large portions of modern Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, and Chile—in other words, most of the land available for cultivation on the Andean Plateau In the eleventh century, at roughly the same time the Toltecs were invading the Mayan region the Incas began extending their control along the Pacific slope of the southern continent. At its peak in the sixteenth century, the Inca Empire stretched 1500 miles down the coast and 300 miles inland. It surpassed the Aztec state in communications and organization, as well as in size. The Incas considered their emperor, known himself as "the Inca," to be divine. He ruled from the capital city of Cuzco, high in the Andes Mountains, An excellent system of roads and runners connected Cuzco to every part of the empire. Superb Inca roads made it easy to move troops. "Not an insurrectionary movement could occur, not an invasion on the remotest frontier," wrote an American historian, "before the tidings were conveyed to the capital, and the imperial armies were on the march along the magnificent roads of the country to suppress it." Although the Incas had a more efficient war machine than the Aztecs, they too were unsuccessful in resisting the Europeans. An adventurer named Francisco Pizarro had first heard of a rich inland kingdom while voyaging along the Pacific coast during the 1520s. In 1531 he led a group of Spaniards into the Inca domain. They found the empire in the throes of a civil war between two sons of the previous emperor. The more successful imperial contender, Atahualpa, had recently won control. Because of this civil war, Inca forces were weakened and divided. They could not muster effective resistance when Pizarro attacked. The climax of Pizarro's campaign came in a scene resembling the episode in Tenochtitlan, when the Spaniards slaughtered the Aztecs at worship. Pizarro lured Atahualpa to a meeting, where he ordered Spanish troops to cut down thousands of poorly armed, unsuspecting Inca soldiers. Pizarro promised to release the Inca emperor after payment of a fantastic ransom in gold and silver worth an estimated ten million dollars. Once the Indians had delivered the ransom, Pizarro had Atahualpa executed, and the Incas (like the Aztecs) fell under Spanish rule. The complex societies developed by the Aztecs, Mayas, and Incas contrasted with the simpler cultures of most North American Indians at the time of the European influx. On the one hand, the Indian population in Latin America was large; there were probably over fifteen million Indians south of the Rio Grande when the whites came. Societies were stable; people built cities and made a living by farming settled areas. Com, the staple crop for almost all American Indians, was probably first cultivated in Mexico. Probably no more than a million Indians, on the other hand, lived in what eventually became the United States and Canada. Instead of large civilizations like the Aztecs or the Incas, North American Indians formed small tribal groupings. Tribal societies in North America reflected the wide variety of climates and geographic features of the world's third largest continent. Alaska, Florida, the Great Plains, and the Rockies produced a striking diversity of lifestyles. Remnants of some relatively advanced Indian cultures still exist in several regions of North America. One such culture flourished in southern Arizona, where an Indian-built complex of irrigation canals dating to the eighth century suggests highly sophisticated farming techniques. The Pueblos, the oldest inhabitants of the Southwest, lived in adobe villages built on high mesas. More warlike and nomadic tribes like the Navajos and the Apaches moved into the region later. In the Mississippi Valley, early Indians known as Mound Builders heaped earth and rubble into pyramids and other structures used as temples 20 UNIT I Colonial America or burial mounds; these have yielded many beautiful works of art. In the large area to the north between the Rockies and the Mississippi River lived the Plains Indians: the Cheyenne, the Pawnee, and the Sioux. Although these tribes did some fanning, hunting was the main source of their livelihood and the basis ol their social organization After the coming of the whites —and with them the horse —the Plains Indians happily gave up (arming altogether and lived entirely by hunting the buffalo, which filled the plains in vast numbers. Small tribes like the Shoshoni and the Ute roamed the bleak lands between the Rockies and the Pacific Ocean They made a poor living gathering wild plants and eating small animals such as rabbits and snakes. In California-home of the Pomos, Hupas, and others —acorns were a staple food. Life was easier there, and people had time to make some of the finest hasketwork in the world. Tribes such as the Kwakiutl, Nootka and Tlingit lived in what is now Oregon, Washington and British Columbia. They based their economy on salmon and other fish available in the rivers. 22 UNIT 1 Colonial America Una," an enormous grant that included the area between Virginia and Spanish Florida, extending theoretically to the Pacific Ocean * Some of these men had made fortunes in sugar plantations on the Caribbean colony of Barbados, and they now needed more land to expand their American ventures. Early Carolina, therefore, has been aptly described as the colony of a colony. Even before Barbadians established the first permanent settlements along the Atlantic coast, the northern area of the colony, in the region of Albemarle Sound, had already been partially settled Iwithout any land tenure rights] by poor Virginia farmers, criminals, and runaway slaves. They grew some tobacco but mainly dealt in subsistence farming. The new Carolina proprietors gave them a separate governor in 1664, and a popularly elected assembly sat for the first time in 1665. The region contained only about four or five thousand small farmers by 1700, but in 1729, King George II took control from the proprietors. The area became the royal colony of North Carolina. The first expedition sponsored by the eight proprietors was undertaken in 1670 when English colonists from the Barbados as well as from the mother country established themselves at Charles Town i later Charleston! near the confluence of the Ashley and Cooper rivers on the Atlantic coast. There, the new settlers engaged in a thiving trade with local Indian tribes, acquiring furs and hides, as well as Indians captured from other tribes, which they sold as slaves to the Caribbean. By the early eighteenth century, there were over a thousand Indian slaves in the Carolina colony. In Barhados, wealthy planters had created a society in which the vast maiority of the population were Negro slaves, and by the early 1700s, blacks outnumbered whites in Carolina as well. In that colony, neither Barbados sugar nor Chesapeake tobacco became the colony's staple and primary source of wealth; that place was reserved for rice plantations. As in Virginia, high initial costs had kept down the number of slaves in the beginning. but Carolina's close tics with Barhados reinforced the idea of slave ownership as a source of 'Carolina was named for King Charles, whose name in Latin is "Carolus." The Caruhna proprietors included Sir William Berkeley, Governor of Virginia during Bacon's Rebellion. social prestige With the length of the white indentured servants' terms declining by the 1680s, black slaves became increasingly involved in all facets of the colony's economy: guiding ships through the river marshes, herding cattle, trading with the Indians, and serving as blacksmiths. African slaves helped to teach the English colonists how to plant, tend, and harvest rice - the key to Carolina's survival The ruling whites of South Carolina faced challenges from both red and black, Indians and Africans. as they expanded their economy during the first half of the eighteenth century Whites insisted that the Yamasces, a tribe with whom they frequently traded, had fallen into debt to them, and therefore began seizing Indian women and children to be sold as slaves as partial repayment. The Yamasces were then able to forge alliances with other tribes and mount an impressive attack in 1715 against the whites, who survived, first, because they had taken the risk of arming their black slaves against the Indians and second, because they persuaded the Cherokces to fight with them against the Yamasces and the latter's allies, the Greeks lancient enemies of the Cherokees). By the 1730s, the colony's elite took steps to encourage the immigration of more whites, while passing laws that took skilled jobs away from blacks and assigned them to more menial duties. Fear of a black uprising remained when expansion of rice cultivation required the importation of large numbers of West African slaves. In 1739, a rebellion near Charleston of newly arrived blacks brought death to twenty-five whites in a region where rice cultivation was intensive and the black population highly concentrated. As a result, white South Carolinians passed a Comprehensive Negro Act reducing slave importations and outlawing private manumissions |freeing| of slaves. As in Virginia, the labor force needed to be secure and reliable for South Carolina's white planters, whatever the human cost to African slaves and local Indians. Georgia In 1732 George II made a grant of land that became the last colony founded on the North American mainland under English royal auspices. The Plantation Colonies 77 era's anti-Catholicism, began to spread During the 1830s, small but insistent "nativist" movements sprang up in Eastern cities. The groups denounced Catholicism as un American, criticized unrestricted immigration from Catholic countries, and were particularly angered by the ease with which immigrant Americans could gain the vote. Samuel F. B. Morse, better known as the inventor of the telegraph than as a nativist. led one such group in New York City. For the most pan, anti-Catholicism during the 1830s remained nonviolent, with one notable exception: in 1834, the good citizens of the Boston area burned down a Catholic convent in Charles- town. No lives were lost, but the crowd's murderous fury demonstrated once again that religious passion can sometimes lose all restraint. The Charlestown outrage foreshadowed the much more vigorous nativist movement that afflicted America in the 1850s, following the massive Irish and German Catholic immigration of 1847-56. A relatively minor Catholic population in the United States of slightly over 300,000 in 1830 had grown to more than 3 million by I860, most of the newcomers impoverished and uneducated Irish and Germans who settled in the cities. Conflicts between the largely working-class Catholic population of the urban North during the 1830-60 period and the Protestant native-born majority focused often on the question of public school education. In state after state, Protestant nativists fought successfully to deny public funding to Catholic denominational schools. These victories had the effect of leaving the public schools nominally 'nonsectarian but, in fact, strongly Protestant (often evangelical) in moral orientation. Such practices as regular study of and readings from the King fames Bible, for example, were common in the nominally "secular" public schools. Catholics proved less successful in gaining a share of tax revenues for schools in which their doctrines would be taught with public funds Instead, a number of states during the 1840s embarked on a program of developing a privately financed system of parochial school education (based on tuition payments and the contributions of the faithful). This program would provide religious training along with secular teaching —but within schools run by the Catholic church, so that American-born Catholic youths could be shielded in their formative years from the educational influences of the predominately Protestant culture. Background and Motivation of Reformers What brought the "delegates," men and women alike, to Seneca Falls' What led people to try to change so many of their society's customs and institutions? One important factor was the widespread belief in progress. Many Americans during the antebellum decades came to feel that progress was apparent in all areas of national life. They believed that rapid economic growth could be matched by steady improvement in society and values. The belief in a divine mission for America had been understood in religious terms by the seventeenth-century Puritans. Eighteenth-century American leaders had thought of it largely in political terms. Now it was seen in social terms by nineteenth-century antebellum reformers. They wanted to liberate Americans by correcting personal defects and eliminating social wrongs. They aimed at achieving worldly perfection within the nation itself (not the celestial perfection of evangelical Protestants) and in their lifetimes. Most reformers believed that, in the struggle to perfect American life, they would also achieve their own moral perfection. This utopian dream was certainly not confined to the United States at this time. American reformers borrowed ideas from (and corresponded regularly with) their counterparts in Europe. For example, American abolitionists learned much from the British movement to abolish slavery. Many American reformers, especially the Utopians, were influenced by French socialist-communitarian thinkers. Generally, though, the American reformers resembled religious crusaders more than their European counterparts did. American reform was closely connected to the evangelical Religion and Reform in Antebellum America 315 Protestant movements of the day. Nevertheless, although religion and reform were indeed linked, antebellum reform had a distinctly this worldly tone in its concentration on altering existing human institutions or creating new and improved models. Many Americans lent part-time support to one or another reform activity, but a small number of people devoted their entire lives to the task of achieving social perfection. The dedicated reformer emerged during the 1830s and 1840s as a distinct social type in the United States. Men and women pursued reform as a vocation, especially in New England Ino longer Puritan but still puritanical] and to a lesser extent in the Middle Atlantic and Middle Western states. The novelist Nathaniel Hawthorne was once such a reformer. He wrote: We were of all creeds and opinions, and generally tolerant of all, on every imaginable subiect. Our bond, it seems to me, was not affirmative, but negative. We had individually found one thing or another to quarrel with in our past life, and were pretty well agreed on the futility of lumbering along with the old system any further. As for what should be substituted, there was much less agreement. Hawthorne raised a question that many have asked about American reformers: Why did some people try to change society while a majority of their countrymen remained content to tolerate existing conditions? What were the reformers' motives? The answers have been as varied as the reform activities themselves. Unfriendly observers and skeptical historians have identified antebellum reform with the personal frustrations or unfulfilled ambitions of the reformers, with psychological or emotional disturbance, even with derangement Enthusiasts have responded that intense commitment, even fanaticism, is a praiseworthy reaction in the face of evil or in response to obvious social problems. Although the motivation of each individual reformer can be judged only on its own merits, it is helpful to remember that the antebellum American reform movements occurred during an unsettled period. The economy was undergoing rapid change. A new transportation network of roads, canals, and, later, railroads was opening up the American West to mass settlement. This meant that Western farmers could have access to Eastern or even overseas markets—markets that offered tremendous opportunities for both economic growth and crises, as when the economy plummeted downward in the panics of 1837 and 1857. At the same time industry grew. That growth, in turn, created demands for cheap, reliable labor in the new factories. At first, Americans naively thought that industrialism could be fostered in a happy, benign atmosphere, free from the horrors of the Industrial Revolution in Britain: the New World would, in this regard as in all others, instruct the Old. The capitalists who owned the textile mills in Lowell, Massachusetts, thought (Like Voltaire's Dr. Panglossl that theirs could be the "best of all possible worlds," with happy young female workers making cotton cloth and happy factory owners making money. It worked for a while, from the 1820s to about the mid-1830s. But economic downturn, wage cuts, strikes, and the replacement of Yankee mill hands with more easily bossed Irish immigrants put an end to the Lowell dream —though not to the growth of industry or profit making. Antebellum America was a society in motion. Thousands of people were moving westward. Many hundreds of thousands were moving into the fast-growing cities, where social problems, being more concentrated, were also becoming more visible. Boatloads of immigrants, expectant and exploitable, arrived daily during the 1840s and 1850s. Whatever the personal factors involved, whatever the motivation—philanthropy or arrogance—no reforming spirit could remain unaffected by at least some of these developments. The Cold Water Army On the night of April 2, 1840, six friends met at a Baltimore tavern, as was their custom, and prepared for a night of hard drinking. Nearby, at a local church, a temperance advocate prepared to deliver a sermon on the evils of alcohol. As a lark, the six decided to attend the lecture-and these sinners who came to scolf remained to pray. 