The first Americans were immigrants from Asia. They came, probably, in search of game, somewhere between 15,000 and 40,000 years ago. They traveled on foot in small groups at times when lower sea levels exposed an ancient land bridge between Asia and North America at what is now the Bering Strait. As thousands of years went by, they fanned out over North, Central, and South America; this geographic dispersion resulted in the development of hundreds of different languages and a wide variety of physical characteristics, social organizations, and levels of technology. For thousands of years they remained in isolation as melting icecaps put the ancient land bridge under three hundred feet of water. Then, five hundred years ago, came a remarkably sudden burst of immigration by sea from Western Europe and Western Africa. At first that immigration was largely Spanish, but then other Atlantic nations began to take an interest in what Europeans called a ''New World." People from Portugal, France, the Netherlands, and the British Isles began to arrive. They brought with them—against their will—many different peoples from Africa. From about 1500, therefore, the history of North America was no longer isolated from developments in the Old World. At that time Western Europe was developing a new, dynamic economic system: commercial capitalism. The Atlantic nations of Western Europe were becoming more centralized than before, usually under powerful new monarchs. They developed strong international rivalries that greatly affected events in America as well as Europe. At the same time, the great Western Christian church was split by the Reformation, and enmity between Roman Catholics and Protestants helped shape the rivalries among nations. When Europeans moved into the New World, they had a profound and usually disastrous impact on the descendants of the original settlers, the "Indians" as the Europeans called them. Some of the impact was cultural and technological, but Migrants to the World the most important result was that European diseases took an appalling toll among the Indians. In its early phases, European migration to America resulted in one of the most drastic depopulations of a large area that humankind has ever experienced. In turn, however, the Indians influenced the course of European and African settlement in various ways. They did a great deal to shape the immigrants' agricultural practices, patterns of settlement, and military tactics. So did the New World environment, both the climate and natural resources such as precious metals, timber, fish, fur, and plants. Historians have used a good many terms to describe this sudden burst of migration from the Old World to the New. It Little is known about the long history of the original American immigrants. Much of the available evidence is archaeological and has literally been dug up. Some is geological; it is known, for example, that at a time when Indians were spearing mammoths in New Mexico, northern New England was covered with ice. There are written materials from a few Indian cultures, including the famous calendar of the Aztecs in Mexico, but most used oral tradition rather than writing. Much of what is known about these people comes from tire early reports of European explorers and conquerors, reports which have to be treated with great caution in order to screen out the prejudices and lack ol comprehension of the observer. Five hundred years ago, the peoples of the New World were as various as those of the Old. They spoke some twelve hundred different dialects and languages and they varied enormously in appearance, dress, customs, technology, and political organization. Some went about nearly naked, clad only around the waist with animal skin, and used stones and shells as tools. Some produced stunning works of art in gold or silver, constructed highways, and built enormous stepped pyramids of stone. Some lived on nuts was called a "discovery" by Europeans, despite the fact that Christopher Colombo died in the stubborn conviction that the lands he had seen on his voyages lay just off the coasts of China and Japan, and despite the fact that other Europeans had touched American shores five hundred years earlier. Recent writers have referred to the "invention " of America, on the ground that Europeans needed to find a different sort of world in order to understand their own. The coming of the Europeans has also been called an "invasion" of the Indians' lands. Finally, it should be borne in mind that Indian America was settled not just by Europeans, but by Africans as well. and berries, others cooked total in baskets of reeds or bark, or in clay pots. Some dwelt in cities comparable in size to those in Europe; others roamed as nomadic hunters. Some were governed by "divine" kings; others knew no greater authority than their own family. Traditionally, historians have concentrated on the "high civilizations" of Mexico and Peru—the Aztecs, Mayas, and Incas—but for the history of the early United States, it seems more appropriate to concentrate on the peoples who lived along the North Atlantic coast. In Overseas Empire colonies, and the only one to depart from the mode of the two Houses of Parliament in England. The Charter of Liberties also provided for a separate assembly for the three southern counties along Delaware Bay. Delaware gamed a somewhat separate existence, but it continued to have the same governors Penn and his heirs appointed for Pennsylvania. The colony proved to be a great success. Its liberal government and its policy of religious freedom attracted large numbers of settlers. At first, most of the colonists were English anti Welsh Quakers, and they continued to dominate the government of the colony. No other European settlements in the New World grew as fast. Though this increase was remarkable, we still need to bear in mind that 250,000 is about the population of a medium-sized city in the United States today. Put another way, the town that Roger Williams founded—Providence, Rhode Island—today has nearly as many people as lived in all the colonies in 1700. There were several reasons for the rapid increase. One, of course, was the founding of new colonies; each new colony offered more land, and more land attracted more settlers. Another was the continued migration from England to the older colonies. Some of these people returned to England, but most stayed in America. In addition, the birth rate in the colonies was considerably higher (ban that in England. Probably this was largely because of the relative ease of obtaining land, which enabled couples to marry younger than in Europe and therefore to have more children. Parents on farms found children useful, since they could be put to work at air early age. Most parents assumed that their children would get land of their own when they grew up, so a large family—five or six children was the average—seemed to have advantages rather than disadvantages. Rapid population growth also reflected a relatively low death rate. After the early years of settlement, the death rate in the American colonies was far lower than in England. This difference was caused partly by settlement in large cities like London. Two and three hundred years ago, large cities killed off people much faster than they produced them. Crowding encouraged the spread of disease, especially because the drinking water in almost all cities was badly polluted by garbage and sewage. In 1700 London was the largest city in the world. By comparison, Boston, New' York, and Philadelphia were tiny towns. And because they were so much smaller, they had far fewer urban problems. Even though the death rate in the colonies was lower than in Europe, it was far higher than it is today, especially among babies and young children. There were no effective cures for disease; no one knew that germs even existed, let alone how to kill them. The American colonists had a higher death rate in the early years of settlement than later on. Virginia remained an especially unhealthy place for fifty years. Overwork, malnutrition, and ill-treatment made the typical Virginia laborer's life a short one; but two diseases took the greatest toll: malaria (from mosquitoes) and typhoid fever (from polluted drinking water). After about 1650 the health of the Virginia colonists improved considerably. The reasons are not entirely clear, but the death rate dropped and the population began to increase rapidly. By contrast, the New England colonies where more healthy from the beginning. It was largely for this reason that early Massachusetts had a far larger population than Virginia. New England, and later the Middle Colonies of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, had one of the lowest death rates in the entire world. Another brake on population growth in the colonies was the proportion of women and men. In early Virginia, most settlers were male. Since the number of children in any society' depends upon the number of young women, not the number of men, Virginia's early growth was far slow'er than New' England's. The English migration to all the northern colonies was usually by entire families. Single settlers were more common in the southern colonies than in the North. As the years went by, children born in America became a larger and huger part of tire population. Because males and females w'ere born in about equal numbers, the proportion of men and women in the population gradually evened out, and fewer men remained unmarried. This was an important development, for married men tend to settle down and to think The Colonial People more about security and less about adventure. The American colonies were becoming "settled" in more ways than one. Specialization of Labor The population explosion in the American colonies had several important effects. It stimulated economic growth and helped raise the standard of living, since a growing population meant more mouths to feed and a growing market for farmers. A small settlement could not afford to undertake activities other than growing food and making clothes and shelter. A larger one could support a greater variety of jobs. As an example, let us take John, a young shoemaker who arrived in Massachusetts as part of the Great Migration of the 1630s. He hail little money, but was a skilled bootmaker. He settled iri the little town of Hingham outside Boston. With the help of his neighbors, he built a glorified hut which he called a house. In turn he helped his neighbors at the same task, and together they constructed a meetinghouse to serve as a church and as a meeting place for the voters of the town. But John had to eat; so he had to farm. His neighbors, including the minister, did the same. Yet John remained a shoe- A shoemaker prospers by his trade. (American Antiquarian Society) maker at heart, for he was better at his craft than at raising squash and com. He used his little remaining cash to buy some leather. In his spare time, our shoemaker lovingly made some boots, which he sold to his neighbors. There were The Exploitation of the land Peter Kahn, a Swedish naturalist who traveled extensively in the colonies, was one of tire few commentators of that time who even glimpsed the connections between rapid population growth, the availability of land, and wasteful exploitation of natural resources. As for population, Kalm wrote: It does not seem difficult to find out the reasons, u:hy the people multiply more here than in Europe. \.v soon as a person is old enough, he marry in these provinces, without any fear of pot • etiy; for there is such a tract of good ground yet uncultivated, that a new-married man cun, without difficulty, get a spot of ground, where he may sufficiently subsist with his wife and children. The taxes are very low, and he need not he under any concern on their account. The liberties lie enjoys are so great, that he considers himself as a prince in his possessions. Yet these "possessions" were exploited with little eye to their future v alue: The Europeans coming to America fourid a rich and fine soil before them, lying as loose between the trees as the best bed in a garden. They had nothing to do but to cut down the wood. init it up in heaps, and to clear the dead leaves away. They could then immediately proceed to ploughing, which in such loose gnmnd is eery easy; and having sown their corn, they got a most plentiful harvest. This easy method of getting a rich crop has spoiled the English ana other European inhabitants, and induced them to atlopt the. same method of agriculture ichirh the l ndians make use of; that is, to sow uncultivated grim nr/s, os long as they will produce a crop without manuring, but to turn them into pastures as soon as they ran bear no more, and to take in hand new spots of ground. covered since lime immemorial with woods, which have been spared by the fire or the hatchet ever .virtue the creation. This is likewise- the reason why agriculture, and the knowledge of this useful branch, is so imperfect here. . . . Tin- C.nloniol People more and more of them as time went by. They paid him in food and firewood more often than in cash, but eventually he was able to stop fanning, sell his land, and move to Boston. There he bought a small house and hung out his sign—a piece of wood in the shape of a boot. One room in his two-room house was his place of work and his retail store. Boston was growing from a village into a real town, and could no longer leed itself. Nearby farmers drove their wagons into town with food and firewood for sale, and they were happy for the chance to buy John's boots. There were more and more of them every year. John found it hard to get enough leather for all the boots he was making and selling, so he. . . . But tire point is clear. He died at his workbench of a heart attack, reasonably secure in the knowledge that he had labored hard at his calling. That, at least, is the way he would have looked at it. We would call it increasing specialization of labor, fueled by population growth. The Young and the Old The high birth rate also shaped early American society by making it very youthful. Today, half the people of the United States are under the age of thirty. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, hall the people were under the age of sixteen. This youth fulness hail several important effects. Obviously, only a relatively small number of men could take part in politics and government. It also meant that the military power of the colonies was relatively small. The colonists did their best to meet the situation by- setting the age for service in the colonial militias between sixteen and sixty. People often referred to the "men and boys" of colonial annies, as did the song "Yankee Doodle" during the American Revolution. The youthfulness of the colonial population had an even more important result: the absence of a large group of people who were too old to work. Some people lived to be seventy or eights7, hut not many. Elderly people assumed they should work until they died or became too feeble. The age of sixty-five had no particular meaning, and no one thought about "retire- ment." Most people did a full day's work from about age twelve on, unless they were disabled. This situation contrasts sharply with today, when the United States has a very large group of old people who either do not or cannot work. They are supported partly by savings from their working years and by the social security and welfare systems. But as a group they are not self-supporting; they are supported by younger people who can and do work. The colonists did have large numbers of dependent children. But we also have such a large group today, despite a lower birth rate. This is because people today- do not do much productive work until they are eighteen or even thirty, and the law at least supposedly prevents them from working before the A young lady preparing for her bath, as painted by an unknown American artist in the early part of the eighteenth century. (National Gallery of Art) The Colonial People age of sixteen. In the colonies, a much higher proportion of the population engaged in productive work, and the group of nonworking dependents was relatively small. So many people working made for economic growth and a rising standard of living. In the early years of the eighteenth century, social conditions in western Germany and northern Ireland created a large pool of discontented people who were willing to migrate overseas. The Palatines (as Americans called most Germans) and (he Seotch-Irish (as those from the province of Ulster in northern Ireland were called) made up by far the largest groups of European newcomers. However, the largest group of immigrants came not from Europe but from West Africa, and of course they came against their will. The Germans Continuous German immigration began in 1683, when small groups of Mennonites and Quakers established Germantown, near Philadelphia. During the next three decades other radical German Protestants founded Pennsylvania towns such as Bethlehem, Lititz, and Nazareth. These early immigrants were mainly well- educated people who paid their own passage, brought property from the Old World, and bought land on their arrival. They Imilt substantial communities where many original buildings still stand. All the radical sects were opposed to domination of the church by (he state, a position that took its most extreme form in their refusal to bear anus. They also refused to swear oaths, a fact that annoyed and concerned British administrators of the navigation acts and other officials. Along with the sects, many German Lutherans and German Reformed Calvinists also settled in Pennsylvania early in the eighteenth century. These denominations, with Lutherans predominant, were by far the most numerous of the German-speaking immigrants to America. They were usually called "church people." Most of them, too poor to pay their way to America, came as redemptioners, one of the many forms of white servitude. The indentured servants who were first shipped to Virginia anti Maryland early in the seventeenth century had made contracts with the joint stock companies or proprietary agents abroad. They agreed to work in the colonies in exchange for passage across the Atlantic. Redemptioners of the eighteenth century sold themselves to ship captains or "soul brokers" in European ports. In 17.50, Gottlieb Mittelherger warned Germans about the voyage to America: "There is on board these ships terrible misery . . . stench, fumes, horror, vomiting . . . fever, dysentery . . . heat, constipation, boils, scurvy, cancer, mouth rot . . . from old and sharply salted food arid . . . foul water, so that many die mis- erably." On one ship arriving in Philadelphia in 1745, only 40 of 400 passengers survived. As many as a third of the redemptioners may have died at sea. Sometimes the survivors were forced into extra years of servitude to pay back tlie cost of the passage of their dead relatives. Once in America, the redemptioners' contracts were sold to the highest bidders. Since the healthiest were sold first, ship captains kept tlie sick and old on board for weeks, until their contract was sold or they died. Parents were often forced to sell their children into serv ice. Tlie usual term was from four to seven years, at the end of which the servant was to receive "freedom dues," usually .50 acres of land, tools, and clothing, and perhaps a bit of cash. The ev i- dence suggests that these dues were often withheld or, when granted, that the servant sold off the land for a small amount of cash. Not surprisingly, runaways were frequent. German immigration reached its high point between 1749 and 1754, when over 5000 Germans arrived in American ports each year, most of them in Philadelphia. Although many of the church people tried to take on English ways, others held on to their own language and traditions. The Pennsylvania Germans became celebrated throughout the country for their rich gardens and orchards, their sturdy hams and well-tended livestock. German artisans developed the famous long rifie, first manufactured in Lancaster and later adopted and improved by frontiersmen everywhere. Yet many English Pennsylvanians became concerned about the fact that about one-third of tlie colony was German and that the colony might be becoming a New Germany. The Scotch-lrish The Colonial People The large number of German immigrants in the eighteenth century was exceeded by the so- called Scotch-lrish. Their ancestors were the lowland Scottish Calvinists who moved to Ulster early in the seventeenth century. James I deliberately encouraged this migration in order to strengthen Protestantism in Ireland. At first they prospered as farmers and artisans. After 1696, however, new navigation acts hurt the economy of Ireland. Then, in the early years of the eighteenth century, British absentee landlords began doubling rents. The people of Ulster began leaving in thousands. Poverty in Ireland, as in England, helped fill the prisons with debtors. In time of war, male prisoners were often thrown into tire army. But when poverty and unemployment spread during periods of peace, as it did after the Peace of Utrecht in 1713, something was needed to empty the jails. The common penalties of "burning in the hand and whipping" were inadequate. As a substitute, thousands of English and Scotch-lrish debtors were shipped to Maryland and Virginia to work in the tobacco fields. A Treasury decision in 1716 to pay merchants for transporting them overseas created a powerful special interest in the practice. Paying passengers probably accounted for no more than one in ten of the Scotch-lrish immigrants. The rest, like most of the Germans, obtained their passage by signing indentures. Many landed in Philadelphia or in nearby Newcastle, Delaware. As they continued to arrive by the thousands each year and indentures expired, they moved beyond the Germans on Philadelphia's western frontier, across the Susquehanna to the Cumlrerland Valley. Here mountain passes led southwest to Maryland, western Virginia, and North Carolina. This course took them along the outer rim ol a smaller number of Germans who had earlier moved in the same direction. The West Africans The first Africans brought to the English colonies were sold by a Dutch shipmaster at Virginia in 1619, the same year the first legislative body met in America. Whether these early arrivals were treated as slaves for life or servants for term is uncertain, but they were never regarded as just another kind of settler. After 1640 in Virginia and Maryland, some of the Africans and their children were being enslaved for life. By 1660, a pattern had clearly emerged: "Negroes" (a term borrowed from the Portuguese-Spanish word for "black") customarily were lifetime, hereditary slaves. They were forbidden to bear anus, and—a crucial, enduring, and often overlooked distinction — Negro women were routinely put to work "in the fields." White women generally were not, nor would they ever be. At the same time, about 1660, the legislatures of Virginia and Maryland began to enact laws to permit, and even require, the status of slavery for Africans, and Africans only. The irony was that tlve English, who prided themselves on being the freest people of all Europe, hammered out in the New World the legal framework for slavery. By the early 1700s, complex slave codes had been enacted in the southern colonies. Yet the system was not watertight. At least a few Negroes were "free," no matter how much they might otherwise be degraded. From the beginning, race and slavery never matched completely. The general pattern, however, rapidly became clear. There were not a great many blacks in the Chesapeake colonies until about 1700. From then until the Revolution, they were imported in huge numbers into the tobacco colonies and South Carolina. A relative trickle reached the middle and northern colonies. From 1720 to the American Revolution, Afri- African Origins of the Slave Trade The Colonial People nies, and the rice barons of South Carolina became the wealthiest of American planters. By midcentury, they were encouraged to grow indigo, heavily in demand as tire source ol a dye for the booming English textile industry. Indigo and rice were less subject than tobacco to price fluctuations and other market hazards, so the Carolina planters, unlike the Chesapeake gentry, had stable incomes and few problems with debt. Carolina rivers were not deep enough lor seagoing vessels to sail directly to the plantations, as they did in the Chesapeake region, so the colony's produce was brought to Charleston for shipment abroad. Although the Chesapeake region remained virtually without towns for generations. Charleston by tire 1750s had become die fourth largest colonial city. Tts mid- centurv population of 10,000 was almost equally divided by color, with a sizable proportion of the blacks serving as household and personal slaves to planters who maintained homes diere. The masters, living much ol die year far from die heat and disease of die rice fields, left overseers and blacks to produce the crops. Back Parts of the South By the time of the American Revolution, about 250,000 migrants had swept aside most of the Indians of the Chesapeake back country and much of the "hack parts" of the Carolinas and Georgia. Although die entire back country at first was a paradise for hunters and trappers, a mixed subsistence agriculture producing cereals, potatoes, fruits, meat, flax, and hemp gradually developed. In the Chesapeake, small market centers grew up along the main routes and at ferry crossings. Even before midcentury diere were such tiny tiiriving crossroads communities as Fredericksburg and Hagerstown in Maryland (dominated by German newcomers), Martinsburg and Winchester in Virginia, and Charlotte in North Carolina (where the Scotch- Irish prevailed). Yet rough conditions continued to breed rough manners. The back parts of the Carolina country were more isolated than those of the Chesapeake region. Settlers fresh from Ulster or German villages found it hard to spend lonely years in such a wtid, disease- ridden country. But the major difficulty was the unending labor of clearing the land. Many settlers soon fell into a seminomadic life. Some became herdsmen of wild swine and cattle often stolen from die Indians. Itinerant clergymen reported with dismay how the people in the back country dwelt together in "Concubi- nage, swapping their wives as Cattel, and living in a State of Nature, more irregularly and un- chastely than the Indians." A few' made fortunes out of meat, skins, and tallow, forming a back- country gentry living on great cattie ranges. Gradually, tidewater institutions, both legal and political, were imposed on die Maryland and Virginia back country, although not without resistance. Antagonism to Charleston's domination in Soudi Carolina was even stronger. Throughout the eighteenth century, fanners in die interior complained frequently about die lack of courts and the "parasites" who came from Charleston to collect taxes. The Middle Colonies During die eighteenth century, the Middle Colonies formed the most culturally varied part of British North America. Pennsylvania, die newest, quickly became the largest and most diversified of diese colonies. By 1755, Philadelphia was the largest city in the colonies, u'idi about 18,000 people. Though Quakers no longer were a majority, Quaker merchants made up Philadelphia's wealtiriest group and dominated die entire colony. The Quakers' religious beliefs, like those of the Puritans, inspired the thrift, industry, and reliability essential to business success. Persecution in Europe and America had scattered them all over die Atiantic world, a situation they used to advantage by establishing business contacts with Friends in other colonies. The industrious fanners Penn brought to the back country of his colony supplied Philadelphia merchants with excellent grain and other staples for export and a thriving market for imported goods. Philadelphia shipyards turned out vessels the equal of any in die world. Travelers passing tiirougb New Jersey in the eighteendi century sometimes stopped long enough to comment on its natural beauty', its prosperity, or its wonderful oysters, but there was little more to detain the curious. Jerseyites often felt the same way about their settiement. In the 1750s many of them looked upon dieir colony as a "keg tapped at both ends," transporting its surplus hemp, grain, flax, hay, and Wir Ways of Thought taut colonists, in a real sense children of the Reformation, differed among themselves in creed and doctrine, yet stood united in their opposition to Rome. Catholics were not physically molested in eighteenth-century America, but they were the targets of propaganda spread by- Protestant ministers, educators, editors, and publishers of popular almanacs. England's wars with Catholic France partly explain this anti- Catliolic feeling, but the hostility went far deeper. Second, American Protestantism was strongly colored by the Calvinist heritage. That is, the great majority of churches shared, in varying degree, certain common emphases; they tended to favor simple ceremony that was grounded in biblical theology', and they emphasized individual piety rather than control by a strong clergy. Third, the doctrine and organization ol American churches reflected, in a very rough way, the social background of their members. The wealthiest denominations in the colonies were the New England Congregationalists, the Presbyterians, and the Anglicans. These churches numbered among their members many poorer people in addition to most of the merchant and landed families. A higher proportion of persons of modest means was found in tire Baptist churches, among the Methodists who emerged in the late 1760s, and in various small sects. By their frankly evangelical appeals, these two denominations reached elements in the colonial population neglected by the elite churches. Especially because of their successes in the South and on the frontier, these two groups eventually emerged as the two largest Protestant denominations. Fourth, although the churches of the non- English-speaking settlers in the eighteenth century had little influence on the main currents of colonial religion, they serv ed as vital social organizations. It took some time for European immigrants to adjust to American way's, and they often looked to religious leaders for guidance. The German churches survived best, though they faced a continual problem about whether English should be substituted for their native tongue. Fifth, the tendency' throughout the eighteenth century was toward greater religious freedom. Even in orthodox New England, the persecution of Quakers and Baptists had ceased by 1700. A minister like John Wise of Ipswich could almost singlehandedly stop an organized group of ministers from centralizing church government and destroying the independence of its congregations. In defending the congregational principle and church democracy. Wise into iduced arguments that were later adopted in defense of political democracy. All men are born free, he said; "Democracy is Christ's government in Church and State." As eighteenth-century Americans became more humanitarian, secular, and liberal, and turned their attention away from God in heaven toward people on earth, their God also grew more tractable, less demanding, more involved with die happiness of His children. By 1755, John Adams could speak of "the frigid John Calvin" anrl turn elsewhere for peace of mind. Religious belief continued to be of great importance to many Americans of the eighteenth century; yet new ideas were in the air. These ideas were closely connected with the beginnings of modem science. Since we have inherited these ideas, they now seem normal and reasonable. At the time, however, they were revolutionary. The End of Witchcraft A dramatic example of this kind of change can be found in the witchcraft crisis in Salem, Massachusetts, in 1692. Several girls accused certain townspeople of bewitching them. There were official trials and more accusations. Before the crisis was over, 20 people had been executed for witchcraft and another 100 had been jailed on the same charge. The excitement began to die down when prominent people were accused. Some ministers finally convinced the court not to accept evidence from the supposed victims of witchcraft. But the entire episode has fascinated Americans ev er since. Historians have recently discovered that personal hostility between two groups of townspeople had a good deal to do with what happened. But it is impossible to understand the episode without recognizing one important fact. Every one Involved, including the ministers, believed that witches and witchcraft really existed. In Europe thousands of people were exe- Ill The Federalist Era known as the Alien and Sedition Acts. The first was a Naturalization Act that raised the residence requirement for American citizenship from five to fourteen years. The second, the Alien Act, empowered the president to order any alien from the country and to imprison any who refused to go in peacetime. The third, the Alien Enemies Act, permitted the president to jail enemy aliens in wartime. No arrests were made under either alien act, but they did frighten hundreds of foreigners from the country. The fourth measure was tire Sedition Act. Its key clause provided severe fines and jail penalties for anyone speaking, writing, or publishing "with intent to defame ... or bring into contempt or disrepute" the president or other members of the government. That its purpose was to gag the Republican opposition until after the next presidential election was evident in the provision continuing tire act "in force until March 3, 1801, and no longer." A number of Republican editors were actually jailed, and some Republican papers had to shut down. The trials were travesties of justice dominated by judges who saw treason everywhere. Juries were hand-picked by Federalist United States marshals in defiance of statutes prescribing orderly procedures. The presiding judges often ridiculed the defendants' lawyers and interrupted their presentations so much that many walked out and left their clients to the mercy of the courts. Madison called the Sedition Act "a monster that must forever disgrace its parents." He and Jefferson both recognized it as the beginning of the Federalist campaign for the election of 1800. They moved quickly to a broad attack on the whole Federalist philosophy. Their offensive took the form of a series of resolutions for which their allies won the approval of the legislatures of Kentucky and Virginia in 1798. The resolutions were then circulated among the other states. Jefferson wrote the Kentucky Resolutions; Madison wrote those adopted in Virginia. Both sets attacked the "broad interpretation" of the Constitution and developed the state-rights position later used to justify nullification and secession. In Jefferson's words, "the several states composing the United States of America, are not united on the principle of unlimited submission to their general government." That government. in Madison's tenns, is but a "compact to which the states are parties." The Kentucky Resolutions held that, as parties to the "com- pact," the states had the right to declare what measures went beyond their agreement and were "unauthoritative, void, and of no force," and to decide what remedies were appropriate. Madison, in the Virginia Resolutions, said that the states together might "interpose" to check the exercise of unauthorized federal powers. Jefferson went further; he held that the legislature of each individual state had this right. No interpretation of the intent or action of the Great Convention of 1787 coidd have been more far-fetched than that expressed in these resolutions. But in pressing their argument this far, Madison and Jefferson at least had a liberalizing goal that was not part of later state-rights movements. In the Kentucky Resolutions, Jefferson said that tire Alien and Sedition Acts, by employing the loosest construction of the Constitution to impose the tightest tyranny, soured "the mild spirit of our country and its laws." In both states the resolutions asked other state legislatures to adopt the same position. None did so, and Federalists in several northern states passed resolutions denouncing Virginia and Kentucky for misinterpreting the nature of the Constitution. They argued that the Constitution was much more than an agreement among independent states and that only the federal courts could decide whether actions of the other two branches violated it. So the Virginia and Kentucky' Resolutions had little effect at the time, except to remind Americans that the relationship of the states to the national government was not a settled one. No one at the time realized how often the question would arise again. The Election of 1800 While the XYZ affair and other actions by France had cost the Republicans some strength in tlie country, their prospects for the presidential campaign of 1800 were brightened by the sharp split in Federalist ranks between the Adams men and the Hamiltonians. For the campaign of 1800, the Republican caucus named Jefferson and Aaron Burr of New The Jeffersanian Era nental destiny." He used that phrase despite the fact that the rest of the continent was still claimed by European powers and occupied by Indians. As things turned out, Jefferson doubled the size of the United States. But then James Madison allowed the country to drift into involvement in European wars. Only after those wars were over was the United States free to concentrate on internal expansion. The new president immediately set out to correct what he regarded as the injustices of the previous administration. I Ic also cut the federal budget. He struggled against Federalists in die judiciary, but with very little success. His greatest interest, however, was more positive. Most of the North American continent, he was convinced, was destined to fall into the hands of the young republic. lie gave destiny a helping hand by sending out explorers and by approving the purchase of a territory so large that it doubled the size of the United States. Cleaning House Jefferson's inaugural address extended the hand of peace to his opponents. "We are all Republicans; we are all Federalists," he declared in a statement that was more hopeful than accurate. Jefferson also announced his faith that enemies of die republic should be allowed to "stand undisturbed as monuments of the safety with which error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat it." When he spoke these words, John Adams was already rattling along in a coach headed back to Massachusetts. The new administration did seem much different from die old Federalist ones. Jefferson's inauguration was the first to take place in the new "federal city" on the Potomac. Grand plans had been made for the city. A French architect, Pierre L'Enfant, had been hired to draw up an imposing plan of streets. In 1801, however, the "city" was anything but imposing. The streets were nits of dust and mud, except when they were frozen. Pennsylvania Avenue ran from the Capitol through a swamp. Most public buildings were still under construction. The rest of die city consisted of one stationer)' shop, one grocer, one shoemaker, one printer, one washerwoman's, one tailor shop, one dry goods shop, and one oyster house. Elected and appointed officials lived in seven or eight crammed boarding houses, seeing too much of each other in quarters far too close for privacy or comfort. Members of Congress spent as litde time as possible in Washington. Philadelphia had been far more attractive, a real city with paved and lighted streets and established taverns and even a theater. Upon taking office, Jefferson and the Republicans immediately set about to nullify the Alien and Sedition Acts. Since these laws were due to expire within a few months, the only positive action needed was Congress's changing die period of naturalization back from fourteen to five years. As a matter of personal and symbolic justice, the men convicted under the Sedition Act were pardoned and tiieir fines returned with interest. Jefferson's first appointments to his cabinet indirectly showed how important Washington's example had been. He appointed Republicans, men who basically agreed with him. but kept a careful eye on geographical balance. His most influential appointees were trusted comrades from the days when the Republicans had been a minority in Congress. James Madison was named secretary of state and Albert Gallatin secretary' of the treasury. Gallatin agreed with Jefferson's instructions to cut the cost of government. He supervised one of the few reductions ol the federal bureaucracy which has ever taken place. The new administration reduced the size of the army, stopped the scheduled expansion of the navy, shrank the diplomatic corps, and cut expenses on government social functions. Such reductions were easier then than they would be today, for the federal bureaucracy was The Spirit of Antebellum America everywhere, and the competition for ihe souls of immigrants pouring into the Mississippi Valley was often uncharitable. Doctrinal differences created a good deal of friction, and different denominations catered to different social classes. Presbyterians, Congregationalists. Episcopalians, and Unitarians differed in theology and in church organization, but drew their membership especially from the well-to-do. Baptists, Methodists, Campbellites, and Uni- versalists were held to be socially a cut lower. Immigrant Catholic and Free Negro churches stood, so people thought, at the bottom. Most Protestants shared a common hatred of the Roman Catholic Church. Even to sophisticated ministers like Evman Beecher, the father of Harriet Beecher Stowe and president of Lane Seminary in Cincinnati, Catholicism still meant the Inquisition and political autocracy. Gullible Americans swallowed stories about Catholic atrocities and sensational "exposes" of Catholic depravity. Anti-Catholic prejudice deepened after 1830, when immigration began to rise. In the following twenty years, 2.5 million newcomers arrived, many of them Catholics from Ireland and Germany. In 1830, there were .500 priests in the United States and about 500,000 Catholics. Twenty' years later, 15(H) priests served 1,750,000 of their faith. In addition, the Roman Catholic Church had established seminaries, schools, colleges, monasteries, convents, hospitals, and other institutions. A Catholic- press, starting with the United States Catholic Miscellany in 1822, had come into being, along with a Catholic Tract Society, founded in Philadelphia in 1827 to combat Protestantism and to propagate the religion of Rome. Yet the general acceptance of democracy, private property', and Christian faith seemed somehow to give a national character to American society. Even in religion, powerful clergymen like the great revivalist Charles Grandison Fin- ney had begun in the 1820s to preach a "social gospel." The idea was to redeem entire communities, not just individuals. Many clergy equated sin with social selfishness. Indifference toward enterprises like Sunday schools, home missions, and temperance crusades was a sign of a "backslidden heart." Not all religious leaders went along with Finney's ideas, but his social Christianity gave religion a relevance that helped rescue it from self-destruction in sectarian battles. In the four decades before the Civil War, the United States experienced an intellectual flowering. In 1802, when Washington Irving began to write, America had no literature and hardly a reading public. When Irving died, a year before the Civil War began, Emerson, Thoreuu, Haw- thome, Poe, Melville, and Whitman had already written masterpieces. The achievements of diese writers seem all the more remarkable when we consider the environment from which they came. Besides the prevailing hostility to intellectual activity in general, there was specific hostility to literature, and particularly to American literature. After the Revolution, some people had called for a national literature that would reflect the greatness of the new nation. But American poets such as Timothy Dwight and Joel Barlow, who planned mighty epics, turned out only pale and unreadable imitations of English literary forms. Among the writers of this period, only the poet Philip Freneau and the Philadelphia novelist Charles Brockden Brown had more than minor talent. Most American readers found the works of British authors such as Sir Walter Scott and Charles Dickens much more interesting. There was to be no new patriotic literature. American writers in turn also looked toward Europe. Washington Irving was only one of a long line of Americans who felt the need to go to Europe to find the necessary romantic background for writing. Besides being conscious of living in a materialistic, unromantic society, American writers had to contend with religiously inspired distrust of literature; some Protestant sects regarded fiction as softening to the mind and dangerous to morals. New York and New England Writers The better-known American writers overcame or ignored these cultural handicaps and managed to attract a following of their own. Washington Irving, an urbane New Y'orker, was the first professional man of letters (o win wide popularity at home and applause abroad. Irving spent a good deal ol time in Europe and wrote his best books about it. When still in his twenties, however, he wrote and published in .4 Southern Motion Unlike the wealthy aristocrats. the majority of southern white farmers lived in humble homes, like this one drawn in 1838 by the French naturalist Francis Comte de Castelnau in his travels through the back country. (Library of Congress) kind, there was no limit to the ready service" they rendered one another. Among the white population there was also considerable cultural diversity. There were the French Creoles in Louisiana, fiercely independent mountaineers in the O/.arks and Appalachia, and Irish and German wage laborers. Though it was overwhelmingly rural, the South also hail business and professional men—doc- tors, lawyers, editors, ministers, and industrial and commercial entrepreneurs—as well as artisans and industrial laborers. In many parts of the South the growing season was too short for cotton, too cold for rice and sugar, it snowed every winter, and even animals needed sheltering barns. Yet the characteristic and distinguishing feature of the southern climate was the prevailing heat. If the weather drew the southerner outdoors, the terrain and what it held helped keep him there. All across the Cotton Kingdom stood dense forests that rewarded the hunter with game. As late as 1860, a large part of the slave's labor was clearing new land for cultivation. The region was also well endowed with navigable streams to earn' cotton and other staples to export centers. Thousands of smaller creeks and ponds provided a choice of fish. Despite the popularity of hunting, trapping, and fishing in the South, the region also had men who strove just as hard as any Jacksonian businessman to make their way up in the world. The Cotton Kingdom was not extended in a single generation from South Carolina to Texas by men content to loaf and dream at home. A ty pi- cal Red River planter, asked to buy a "Bible De- fence of Slavery," shouted: "Now you go to hell! I've told you three times I didn't want your book. ... I own niggers; and I calculate to own more of 'em, if I can get 'em, but I don't want any damn'd preachin' about it." The violence of white southern life has perhaps been exaggerated, but the "Arkansas toothpick" (as tire Bowie knife was sometimes called) became one of the principal instruments for settling differences in the rougher sections. Even in the older and more settled regions, the dueling code prevailed. The Planter Class In 1860, three-fourths of southern whites owned no slaves at all. Almost half the slave- holding families owned fewer than six slaves, and only 12 percent of all slaveowners possessed twenty or more. The real "planting class" was actually a very small minority'. A mere 8000 planters owned fifty or more slaves. There were, in addition, important regional differences in slaveholdings. In the six states of :t06 The Expansive North sas and Nebraska. Even more than the southern coastal plains, this Hat and lush terrain invited the large-scale farming that characterizes the twentieth century. At the outset, however, most of its settlers were independent small farmers from the British Isles and continental Europe or from neighboring states to the east. For ten years beginning in 1854 there was a massive influx of immigrants from Ireland and Germany. The Germans, especially, moved directly into the Middle West. Technical innovations helped the development of large-scale farming. Soon fann- ers found themselves dealing with the profits and problems of producing for distant markets. In the East, the continued rapid growth of the urban population affected agricultural practices. Tens of thousands of farm families in tlx1 Ohio Valley and on the borders of Lake Erie and Lake Michigan had been struck by the worldwide depression of the early 1840s. Debts forced them to sell their cleared and cultivated homesteads to newcomers. The government's liberal land policy encouraged them to try again farther west. They migrated iti such numbers that Iowa became a shite in 1846, Wisconsin in 1848, and Minnesota in 1858. Admission of Kansas was delayed until 1861 for political reasons. Immigration During the 1840s, developments in Europe contributed to westward expansion within the northern United States. Economic distress, accompanied by political repression and religious persecution, spread across Europe. Irish Catholics were especially hard hit by the potato crop failure and the famine that followed in 1845 and 1846. In the decade that ended with the business panic of 1854, about 1.3 million Irish fled to the United States. They were usually too poor to move inland from the coastal cities where they landed, though some traveled west as laborers with canal- and railroad-building crews. Second in numbers to the Catholic Irish were some 940,000 Germans, many of whom settled in such Midwestern cities as Cincinnati, St. Louis, and Milwaukee. During the same decade, immigrant Englishmen, Welshmen, and Scots numbered about 375,000. A few thousand Scandinavians also came, along with smaller groups of Dutch, Swiss, Belgians, French, and Czechs. All tolil, between 1844 and 18.54 almost 3 million immigrants braved the Atlantic crossing to America. Most of the newcomers deliberately avoided the South. A majority were young, unmarried adults. Others came in family groups, among them independent, outspoken middle- class businessmen, lawyers, doctors, scientists, and journalists. They brought new skills, new learning, and new styles of leadership. More numerous than these urban settlers were peasant families. Irish Roman Catholics usually remained in eastern cities. The Germans, often led by their old-country pastors, tent led to settle in the Midwest. By 1860, 30 percent of the population of Wisconsin and Minnesota was for- eign-born. So determined were these newcomers to preserve their old way of life in the Immigration, 1840-60 The Expansive Worth wilderness that they sometimes segregated themselves in a "New Germany," a "New Nor- way," or a "New Bohemia." But many found that their commitment to the homeland and to the past grew less with the passing years. As long as the cotton planters kept their labor system to themselves, away from free soil, these western pioneers had no interest in slavers'. They had enough labor in their own large families. They kept their sons and daughters on the land, and they invested in machines. The New Frontier For most of the fifteen years before the Civil War, settlement of the free West ran well ahead of the railroads. Pioneer families traveled on foot, in wagons, and in boats on the rivers and the Great Lakes. Groups of families sometimes settled a particular region. But even here, the whole territory being so vast, farms often were a day's travel or more apart. One reason for choosing isolated sites was the settler's suspicion of intruders. More important was the hope of adding more land to the quarter section with which they usually started. Having picked the land and registered it at the nearest land office, a farmer would build a one-room log cabin or, in treeless country, a hut made of slabs of sod and a barn of the same material. Meanwhile, he would turn his few sheep, cows, and oxen out to graze on the wild buffalo grass, and fence them off as best he could from his wife's vegetable garden. Once he had fenced in his main fields, at a cash outlay of $1 or S1.25 an acre, he began cultivation. His first discovery was that his eastern plow could hardly scratch the heavily matted virgin soil. So at a further cost of $1.75 to $2.50 per acre, he hired professional "breakers," teams of men with huge iron plows drawn by oxen, to cut the first shallow furrows on the prairies. In following seasons, tire farmer and his family would be able to plow and plant the land first broken by professionals. But tire pioneers could hope to cultivate no more than an acre and a half a day; there was no possibility of one family fully cultivating an entire 160-acre section. Men who had moved their families with the idea of reestablishing an independent way of life based on self-help and Christian zeal were quite satisfied. Yet the sheer fertility of the Middle Border's soil soon inundated the pioneers with surplus Settlement of the Middle West crops. Many of them welcomed the opportunity to market their produce for cash and to buy more land. Every farming family seemed to want to move on from the crude log cabin or musty sod hut to a neat frame house with proper furniture and a touch of color in a table covering, a window curtain, or a picture on the wall. Expanding Markets and Production These pioneer farmers were in fact the vanguard and support of a worldwide business surge. The increasingly industrial nations of Europe, no longer able to feed their growing urban populations, were beginning to lower tariffs on agricultural produce and to simplify procedures of international monetary exchange. It began to dawn upon observ ers on both sides of the Atlantic that the United States could serve as Europe's granary, with profit for everyone. Nor was the business ferment restricted to Europe. After 1844, American ships and the vessels of other nations enjoyed new concessions in the treaty ports of China. The tin can, an English invention for packaging perishables, became widely used by American fruit and vegetable merchants in the late 1840s, greatly enlarging their markets. A revival of scientific farming in the East furthered the agricultural revolution in that section. With success depending more and more on special knowledge and the latest processes, eastern farmers took a keen interest in information about climate, soils, fertilizers, methods of cultivation, and the differences among crops. Agricultural associations, fairs, magazines, books, courses, and schools multiplied. Thus the Northeast joined the Northwest in a spurt of agricultural innovation that placed the United States in a position of world leadership in the production of food. The agricultural revolution helped the nation's position in the international marketplace; it also contributed to the growth of domestic trade. The huge territory of the United States was turning into a giant common market, its development free of the customs duties the various nations of Europe used to protect their own markets and products. Foreign Trade One of the most important commercial developments of the 1840s and 1850s was the revitalization of America's overseas trade. During the depression that followed the crash of 1837, foreign trade had fallen to a point well below the level of the early years of the republic. In 1843, combined imports and exports were only $125 million. Then began an almost continuous rise to a record $687 million in 1860. In almost every year during this period, imports exceeded exports. Eighty percent of the half-billion dollars in gold taken from the California mines before 1857 was sent abroad to make up the difference. The increasing export of western wheat and Hour helped keep the imbalance within reasonable limits. The revival of foreign trade greatly affected the pace of immigration. Without the vast fleets The lixpunsire ,\orth that sailed the Atlantic between Europe and America, millions of newcomers to the United States in those years could never have found passage to the New World. Seventy-five percent of American commerce and an even greater proportion of the immigrant traffic was carried in American sailing ships. The average westward crossing by sail from Liverpool, England, to New York took about thirty-five days. Steamships. which had been used since 1838, could make this crossing in the 1850s in ten to fifteen days. But they remained undependable and excessively costly to operate. As late as 1899, ocean steamships carried sails for auxiliary or emergency power. Domestic Commerce In the fifteen years before the Civ il War, American domestic commerce outdid even the record foreign trade in volume anti rate of growth. The vitality of foreign trading contributed to this development. The mere collection at American ports of commodities for export generated business for home carriers. Similarly, the need to distribute imports added to the demand for domestic transportation. But domestic commerce was far more than a part ol foreign trade. As the American population grew, the home market expanded. .As different regions began to special i/e in particular commodities, the need for exchange increased. Exchange' was made easier by the gold being mined in California and by the improved credit facilities of the expanding hanking system. Between 1851 and 1860, money in circulation in the United States, ineluding specie and banknotes, rose 9 percent per capita. But the importance of this increase was even greater than this figure indicates, for the telegraph and the railroads were now speeding up transactions and the collection of bills. Money in circulation could he used many more times in a single year than before. And since the amount of money itself was rising, the whole pace of domestic commerce quickened. Between 1843 and 1860, while American foreign trade grew 5.5 times, domestic trade grew 10 times. The Clipper Ship Era Before the railroad boom of the 1850s, domestic commerce was almost monopolized by water carriers. Of these, the oldest—and for a long time the most successful — were the coastal sailing ships. In 1852, the value of goods carried by American coastal vessels was three times the combined value of goods hauled by die railroads and on canals. The most glamorous period of ocean commerce was the era of the clipper ship, the boldest commercial sailing vessel ever built. Designers of the clippers, among whom Donald McKay in East Boston, Massachusetts, was the master, lengthened the ordinary three-masted packet ships and drastically narrowed the ratio ofheam to length. The result was the fastest and most graceful hull that ever took to the sea. The tallest masts available, spread with an enormous amount of canvas, challenged the courage of both seamen and shipmasters. The first clippers were built early in the 1840s, in an attempt It) shorten die voyage to the Orient. But they really came into their own with California gold mining. Since the clippers' designers had sacrificed cargo space for speed, their owners had to charge higher rates for their limited cargoes than most shippers could afford. To the California adventurers, however, speed was all-impor- tant. Conventional sailing ships arriving at San Francisco in the summer of 1850 from Boston and New York averaged 159 days for the journey around the Horn. The next summer, the clipper T'li/infi Cloud arrived from New York after a voyage of 89 days, 21 hours. The c lippers were beaten at their own game, however, just when they seemed to have perfected it. Even before the gold rush. New York steamship operators had organized an alternate route to the West Coast that took five weeks or less. This route involved an Atlantic run to Panama, land portage of the cargo across the Isthmus, and dien a Pacific run north again in another steamship. The Great Lakes versus the Great Rivers When the canals between East and West first were built, river men hoped that the artificial waterways would serve as feeders to river craft, just as the rivers fed the coastal carriers. In many eastern states, the canals did perform this function. None, of course, performed it better than the Erie Canal in New York. Yet in the long run, the Erie, along with the Ohio Canal and others completed in the West before 1837, took trade awav from the westem rivers. Apart news from Kansas, came as preparations were being made for the presidential campaign of 18,56. A New Party Alignment The breakup of the Whig party, obvious before the election of L852, was hastened by defeat in that campaign. The sectional strife of Pierce's administration, in turn, undermined the other great national party, the Democrats, and sent politicians looking for new homes. The first of the new parties, the American party, raised its Standard in 1852. It took its name from its opposition to Catholic immigrants. Politicians in both sections were drawn to it because they drought the issue of immigration might deflect attention from slavery. They were soon proved wrong. The American party was so concerned over its "Americanist" purity that it had secret regulations requiring members to pretend they "knew nothing" when asked for information. They soon became the "Know-Nothings." Secret handclasps and passwords attracted many people to the party, but enemies also emerged. When in 1854 die American parts 's national convention voted to support the Kansas-Ne- braska Act, most of its southern following joined the Democrats. Many northeastern Know- Nothings moved to the new Republican parts7. The Republican party came into being almost spontaneously in 18,54. No single leader or group can claim credit for its organization. One firm principle brought its members togedier: the determination to keep slavery out of the territories and the conviction that Congress had the right to do so. Besides northern Know- Nothings, Free Soilers flocked to the Republicans. So did "conscience Whigs"—those svhose dislike of slavery svas so strong they had refused to join their party's condemnation of the Wilmot Proviso. Northern Democrats who rejected all further compromise with the South also joined, as did abolitionists, and a considerable number of German immigrants. Although the Republicans opposed the extension of slavery, no more than a small minority had any interest in the well-being of blacks. North or South, blacks remained outside the land of opportunity. Most Republicans wanted free soil—not freed slaves—and the advancement of the common white man, rather than the welfare of the black. It VC II WAVS ORDEAL Franklin Pierce's support of southern interests in Kansas cost him renomination in 1856. The Democrats won that election, but the most important political development was the surprisingly strong showing oftthe Republican party in the North. The new president, James Buchanan, hoped that the Supreme Court would settle the question of slavery in the territories once and for all. The Court tackled the matter and decided that the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional, that Congress could not keep slavery out of the territories. Northerners were infuriated. The entire question was publicly aired in the extraordinary debates between Stephen A. Douglas and Abraham Lincoln, which first brought Lincoln to national attention. Not long afterward, the country was thrown into an uproar by one old man who decided to attack slavery directly where it already existed. The Election of 1856 National Democratic leaders did not dare back Douglas for the presidency. His successes, as in the adoption of the Kansas-Nebraska Act, proved even more damaging to the party than Pierce's failures. Instead, they turned to a veteran of forty7 years in politics, the conservative Pennsylvanian James Buchanan. As minister to Britain, Buchanan had the advantage of having been out of the country during Pierce's administration and thus out of party squabbles. For their first presidential campaign. Republicans, in the Whig tradition, placet! their hopes upon a The l. nil'll Comett Apart An Anli-lrisli Itiol Nativist sentiment resulted in a short-lived political party in the 1850s, hut hostility toward foreign Catholics was considerably older. In Boston in 1837 a group of firemen pushed some mourners in an Irish funeral procession. The results were described by u man whose sympathies were with the Yankee firemen. The ranks of the Irish were gradually thinned by the arrest of tome of their more prominent members, who were carried off to jail amid loud shouts. . . . Finally the Irish gore up the contest just in time to save themselves from the bayonets of the [militia |, several companies of which were ordered to the scene. , . . During the conflict the firemen demolished several tenements, throwing furniture, tirocisions and children into the street. Featherbeds were ripped open. . . . The east wind u afted the feathers all over the city, causing suejt a shower as might have heeu taken, at a little distance, for a snow-storm. .A large number of persons were badly injured on both sides, hut the Irish suffered most severely. . , . There, is not the least doubt that the riot originated in the assault upon the firemen. . . . Much prejudice and ill blood had, for several years, existed between the fire department and the Irish. . . . It cannot be expected tlwt the members of the fire dtffmrtmcnt will look passively on and see their brethren assaulted. or their "machines" overturned. military Item—General John C. Fremont, the glamorous Georgia-horn son-in-law of the Jacksonian Democrat Thomas Hart Benton. The American party named ex-President Millard Fillmore. Although "Old Buck" Buchanan soon came to be despised as a "northern man with southern principles," this combination of characteristics helped the efficient Democratic machine put him across with 174 votes in the electoral college to Fremont's 114 and Fillmore's 8. Buchanan's popular vote came to only 45 percent of the ballots cast. Nor was the sectional character of the vote a good omen. New England, stung by the Kansas-Nebraska Act and hostile to slavery, voted overwhelmingly for Fremont, who also won New York, Had he taken Pennsylvania and Illinois, the Republicans would have The L nian ( tunes Afmrt The Deep South Moves Out After Lincoln's nomination, southern leaders had repeatedly warned that a Republican victory would mean secession. Tin? governor of South Carolina forecast that the election of a sectional northern candidate would "ultimately reduce the southern states to mere provinces of a consolidated despotism." Such expectations perhaps best answer the question: Why did the South move out? To understand secession, it must also be realized that few people in the South anticipated the results. It was by no means certain that the North would go to war to keep the South in the Union. And if war came, why should not tile South win, and quickly? Many southerners imagined that the will to fight was weak in the North. They also looked to the sympathy of foreign aristocrats, the commercial power of King Cotton, arid the help of the many prosouthemers in the North. Secession also had a positive side. No longer would the South be drained of its resources by northern banking and shipping interests and by taxes and tariffs that chiefly benefited the North. Perhaps the slave trade would lx- reopened. Cuba, Santo Domingo, Mexico, and even territories in Central America might become available to enterprising planters. On December 20, I860, South Carolina took the initiative. A special convention formally repealed tire state s ratification of the Constitution and withdrew from tire Union. By February 1, 1861, six other commonwealths—Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas—had followed its example. But the urge to secede proved far from universal even in the cotton South. In almost every case, the momentous step was taken over opposition. There were people ready to give Lincoln a chance to show whether he would really enforce the Fugitive Slave Act and meet other southern demands. But the tactics of the extremists overwhelmed the "cooperationists," as southern moderates were called. Pockets of unionism persisted in the lower South. Texas Germans, Alabama and Georgia mountaineers, and small farmers in Lousiana parishes clung to their federal loyalties. Yet the majority of southerners of all classes were ready to leave. On February 4, 1861, with seven states having seceded, but with Texas absent, delegates from six states met at Montgomery, Alabama, to form anew government. They called it the Confederate States of America, adopted a new flag, the "Stars and Bars," and wrote a new constitution. A Federal Vacuum Secession, having begun with Lincoln's victory, took place while Buchanan still occupied the White House. Thus, at such a moment the country hail a "lame-duck" president, one without the will or the power to make commitments. Although Buchanan declared that secession was unconstitutional, lie also argued that Congress had no power under the Constitution to prevent it. While Buchanan delayed, border-state leaders in particular, aware that if secession meant war their land would become a battleground, tried to avert disaster. The most seriously considered proposals were those put forward by Senator John J. Crittenden of Kentucky, two days before South Carolina's formal withdrawal from the Union. Crittenden offered these constitutional amendments: (1) Slavery was to he barred in the territories north of tire Missouri Compromise line, 36° 30'. (2) It was to be permitted and protected south of that line. (3) Future states were to enter as they wished, slave or free. (4) The Fugitive Slave Law was to be enforced and compensation paid by the federal government when enforcement failed because of the action of northerners. (5) The Constitution was never to be amended to authorize Congress to interfere with slavery in any state or the District of Columbia. Crittenden's compromise failed to win su[>- port from either side. Southern leaders would not accept it unless it was endorsed by the Republican party. Lincoln favored enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Law and would accept an amendment protecting slavery where it then existed. But he opposed any compromise on excluding slavery from the territories. To a friend in Congress he wrote: "Entertain no proposition for a compromise in regard to the extension of slavery. The instant you do they have us under again: all our labor is lost, and sooner or later must be done over." 35 8 Civil War national banking system agreeable to northern capitalists. Nor did Republican leaders neglect their free soil supporters. The Homestead Act of 1862 made available to adult "citizens of the United States" (meaning whites), and to those who declared their intention of becoming citizens, 160 acres of the public domain. The land itself was free, but "settlement and cultivation' was required by the act. Only men who had borne arms against the United States were ex- plieity excluded. Fanners also benefited from the Morrill Land Grant Act of 1862. This act donated public lands to the states and territories to support colleges where agriculture, mechanical arts, and military science became the core of the curriculum. After a short depression in 1861-1862, caused by the loss of $300 million in uncollec- tible southern debts and uncertainty about the war, the northern economy enjoyed a substantial boom. The splurge of government war buying helped the expansion and mechanization of agriculture, the production of shoes and other apparel, and the manufacture of munitions. Some profiteers made fortunes by selling the government huge amounts of cheap and nearly useless material, such as uniforms that fell apart in the rain. Other millionaires of the future— Rockefeller, Carnegie, Mellon, Morgan—laid the foundations of their huge fortunes in wartime activity. But wartime prosperity hurt some people very badly. Industrial wages, for example, rose far more slowly than living costs, causing great hardship in cities where food speculators flourished. Families on fixed incomes were especially hard hit. Yet few northerners suffered the deprivation that became all but universal in the Confederacy. Despite the boom, Lincoln's government had a difficult time financing the war, partly because it failed to realize how' long the war would last. Secretary of the Treasury Chase's monetary policies did not help. Chase distrusted debt and paper money. He got Congress to approve excise taxes and even a new experiment, an income tax, but they failed to pros ide the needed revenue. Before long he had to use deficit financing, After a shaky start, he sold bonds to a million persons. In 1862 he was forced to begin printing paper money. That year and the next, the Treasury issued certificates, soon known as "greenbacks," to the amount of $450 million. Unsupported by gold, greenbacks were legal tender for domestic debts. By the summer of 1864, they had fallen to their low of 39 cents on the gold dollar. Despite its much greater population, shortages of manpower hurt the Union military effort at certain points. Large numbers of European immigrants arrived during the war, and many of them served in the northern army. So did a growing number of blacks. Yet eventually, in 1863, Congress was forced to vote the first Union draft, almost a full year after the Confederacy did so. Far from helping the situation, the wording of the act added to social discontent. One of its provisions permitted a man to escape service simply by paying $300 to the authorities, leaving them with the responsibility of finding substitutes. Clearly the poor were to he saddled with the rich man's duty in a struggle that would benefit black workers. Minor riots protesting this law occurred in many towns. In Boston, several would-be rioters were shot dead after stoning troops. Democratic Governor Horatio Seymour of New York helped turn the protest in New York City into a violent disturbance of major proportions. On the eve of the first drawing of names, he publicly questioned the wisdom and constitutionality of the draft. For three days, huge mobs terrorized the city. Federal troops had to be withdrawal from the battlefield to stop the violence. The outburst of anger was aimed as much against blacks as against the draft. The leaders of the mobs were poor Irish-American workingmen, themselves discriminated against. Some were striking longshoremen whose jobs the city's free blacks had filled. Black homes and churches became the principal targets of the rioters. Fires roared out of control, and at least a dozen people were killed and hundreds wounded. The Emancipation Proclamation While Lee tried to end the slaughter by breaking the North's morale through invasion, Lincoln attempted to end the stalemate through political action. From the day he took office, Lincoln had "struggled," as he said, against every kind of pressure—religious, journalistic, political, per- sonal—to declare the slaves free without compensating their owners and without undertak- The Taxi American ITexf long before the three years were over. The Desert Land Act was really a way for cattle ranchers to get title to grazing range. They registered thousands of acres in cowboys* names. Then, to prove they had irrigated the land, they got cowboys to testify that they had seen water on the claim. Nor did settlers gain anything from the Timber and Stone Act of 1878, which operated to benefit lumber companies seeking a share of public lands. This act offered a maximum of 160 acres of rich timherland—land "unfit for culti- vation"—in California, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington, at $2.50 an acre. Since even aliens who had done no more than file their first citizenship papers were eligible for these grants, offices were set up right in the waterfront courthouses. In return lor on-the-spot bonuses ranging from $10 to $50, thousands of alien seamen registered claims and then signed them over to lumber company agents. Between 1862 and 1900, under the Homestead Act, 80 million acres were registered, a figure that includes many dummy registrations used by speculators to accumulate large holdings. During the same period, railroads, land companies, and states receiving grants of federal land for educational purposes under the Morrill Act of 1862 sold at least five or six times as much land. These sellers charged from $2 to $10 an acre, a fair enough price for the best sites near transportation and markets. Railroads and land companies often gave mortgages on the land and extended credit lor equipment to develop it. By 1868, when the Union Pacific Railroad was nearly ready for passengers, it advertised its land in Kansas and other states on the edge of the frontier. Every' land grant railroad opened a land department and a bureau ol immigration. In the 1870s, the Union Pacific and the Burlington railroads each spent over $1 million for advertising abroad. Other railroads and land companies opened London offices with agents who searched the Continent for settlers. Western states with land to sell and steamship companies carrying immigrants to the New World also looked lor settlers abroad. These campaigns were remarkably successful. According to the 1880 census, 73 percent ol Wisconsin's population was of foreign parentage, 71 percent of Minnesota's, 66 percent of the Dakotas', and 44 percent of Nebraska's. In the following two years. "American fever" swept western and central Europe. In 1882 alone, the record year for immigration to the United States in the nineteenth century', almost 650,000 foreigners arrived in American ports. Large numbers remained in the coastal cities, and many others got no farther west than Pittsburgh and Cleveland. But hundreds of thousands w ent to the farmlands of the plains. After the war, "cotton belt'' blacks from northern Louisiana and neighboring southern states joined the move to the plains areas. Under the leadership of Henry Adams of Shreveport, tire movement was substantial enough to be called the "great exodus." Nearly 50,000 blacks left for Kansas in 1879; another 5,000 or so left for Iowa and Nebraska. At first they were welcome (they would be Republican voters). But as more and more came, Kansas officials began to send agents south to stop the How. Most of those who did complete the journey failed to get land. Lacking the money to set up farms, some eventually found jobs as laborers, building railroads or mining coal; women took in washing or became domestics. Others joined the westward drift. The obstacles confronting those who came to the plains were immense. To make a living was a family enterprise in which men and women worked equally hard. For the women, in addition to helping with the crops and feeding the livestock, there were household tasks made even more difficult on the prairie: keeping a dirt house clean, washing clothes with water that defied attempts to soften it, making soap and candles, undergoing childbirth with no help, and raising the children. For most women, as for most men, the loneliness of prairie life was the worst problem. On the Texas panhandle, this sign was found on an empty cabin in 1886: "250 miles to the nearest post office; 100 miles to wood; 20 miles to water; 6 inches to hell. God bless our home! Gone to live with wife's folks." Before the new settlers could transform the country into farmland, they had to deal with the problems of shelter and water. Not even log cabins could be built on the treeless plains; the first shelters were sod huts. Lack of wood made them difficult to heat in a region that covered some of the coldest parts of the United States. The first settlers burned dried buffalo dung. They next turned to hay, burned in special stoves designed to consume it slowly. But The Netc Industrial Society it the work of Civil War veterans and Irish immigrants. The Central Pacific, its construction crews made up largely of Chinese, laid 689 miles. With both companies competing for government subsidies (granted according to each mile ol track laid), speed outweighed all other considerations. In the spring of 1869 the two lines approached each other, and on May 10 they were joined by golden spikes at Promon- ton Point, near Ogden, Utah. In the fanfare that greeted the linkage by rail of the Atlantic and Pacific coasts, few people looked at the quality of the construction or the debt that resulted. Transatlantic fever was by no means over. Before the Panic of 1873, three other transconti- nentals were chartered by the federal govern- ment—The Northern Pacific in 1864, the Atlantic and Pacific in 1866, and the Texas and Pacific in 1871. Of the three, only the Northern Pacific eventually reached the coast The other two, along with their land grants, were controlled by the Central Pacific's "Big Four"— Charles Crocker, Lei and Stanford, Collis P. Huntington, and Mark Hopkins. In an effort to dominate all California railroading, this group also acquired the Southern Pacific Railroad, a company that luul been chartered in California in 1865 to connect the ports of San Francisco and San Diego. After 1876, they began pushing the Southern Pacific eastward through the two best mountain passes, at Needles, California, and Yuma, Arizona. But tin1 Big Four were not alone. Enriched by his dealings in the stock market and in railroad financing. Jay Gould plunged into the struggle for control of the West. The Battle for the West After selling out his Erie securities for millions in cash just before the Panic of 1873, Gould began buying up the securities of die Union Pacific. Having won virtual control by 1878, he proceeded to buy up other western roads, including the shaky Kansas Pacific, which paralleled the Union Pacific from Denver east to Kansas Gity. By threatening to extend the Kansas Pacific west from Denver to Salt Lake City, where it would find the Central Pacific ready to carry its cars all the way to California, Gould early in 1880 forced the directors of the Union Pacific to buy the Kansas Pacific from him. lie had bought into the Kansas Pacific at under $10 a share; he sold out at over $90. Gould also sold the Union Pacific many of his other western roads. While lie was milking the Union Pacific, Gould began selling off his own stock in the The Union Pacific Railroad joins with the Central Pacific, May 10, 1869, at Promontory Point. Utah. (Culver Pictures, Inc.) 43" The New Indimtrinl Society been so disorganized as it was in the United States during the first half of 1894; uever was human life held so cheap; never did the constituted authorities appear so incompetent to enforce respect for the law." At the same time, just as the Panic of 1873 had given Carnegie and Rockefeller opportunities for expansion at bargain rates, the Panic of 1893 gave Morgan and a few other investment bankers their opportunity. Their first objective was to bring order out of chaos in railroad finance. liv 1904, they had consolidated 1040 railroad lines into six huge combinations with an aggregate capital of $10 billion. Each in turn was allied to either the Morgan or the Kuhn, Loci) interests. After this success, they moved into manufacturing and public utilities. The return of prosperity in 1898 made it even easier to market the securities of new combines. Many of them were formed, in fact, just to make banking profits from new stocks and bonds. The strong movement toward consolidation following the Panic of 1873 had produced in twenty years only twelve great industrial trusts, with an aggregate capital under $1 billion. By contrast, Morgan's United States Steel Corporation alone had a capitalization of almost $1.5 billion. In 1904, John Moody, in his classic study The Truth about the Trusts, listed no less than 318 new industrial combinations with an aggregate capital of $7.25 billion. They controlled 5288 separate plants. Moody also listed 111 public utility' combinations, all but 14 of them organized after 1893. They controlled 1336 plants, with an aggregate capital of $3.7 billion. The power of the investment bankers came from their ability' to supply the capital for growing companies. Having gotten the money from investors who gav e it largely because of confidence in the hankers themselves, the bankers felt it necessary to place their own men on the companies' boards of directors and take a hand in management. In this way, the bankers' economic power, and Morgan's especially, spread from the financial community to the heart of tire big-business system. By 1913 the Morgan- Rockefeller interests alone held 34! directorships in 112 corporations whose worth was estimated at more than $22 billion. A second feature of the Morgan method was the bankers' control of, or close alliance with, other sources ol capital, such as commercial hanks, trust companies that administered large estates and other properties, ;uid huge life insurance companies that collected payments from millions of small policyholders. The bankers' influence tints eventually extended over almost the entire population. With the control it exercised over railroad lines, banks, and life insurance, steel, electrical, anti shipping companies, the Morgan empire was an awesome concentration of economic power—in many ways the supreme monopoly, or conglomerate. Although the public might appreciate the order and efficiency Morgan and others introduced into the companies they controlled or influenced, it still had reason to feel uneasy. The sheer size and impersonality of the economic structure invited suspicion. It was as though Americans were losing control over . their lives and destiny. For hundreds of thousands of workers, that realization had already' become a reality. It was reflected in the changing nature of their work, hopes, and organizations. THE UOItKI ItS The impact of industrialization on American life in the decades after the Civil War is clearly shown in a 300 percent rise in nonagricultural employment, as compared with a rise of only 50 percent in the number of persons working on the farms. By 1890, more than 4.6 million Americans worked in factories, and another 3 million were divided equally between construction industries and transportation. The working class was by no means an exclusively male domain; by 1900, nearly 1 out of every 5 workers was female. In such industries as textiles, shoes, and clothing, women might make up as much as 40 to 60 percent of the work force. The 10 milliou immigrants who poured into the United States between 1870 and 19(H) added to the rapidly growing labor force. But these statistics only begin to suggest what industrialization meant. Even though many workers still aspired to mid- dle-class status and managerial positions, the facts of industrial capitalism resulted in a loss of personal autonomy, new work patterns, and a new lile-style to fit the new surroundings and conditions of labor. The tension between the demands of nidus- >li£lity l'w >1ii Have Sloml U lull I Have Fifteen years after the Homestead Strike, John Griswold, a Scotch-lrish worker at a Pittsburgh blast furnace, assessed the conditions in his plant and his future prospects: "Mighty few men have stood what I have, I can tell you. I've been twenty years at the furnaces and been workin' a twelve-hour day all that time, seven days in the week. We go to work at seven in the mornin' and we get through at night at six. We work that way for two weeks and then we work the long turn and change to the night shift of thirteen hours. The long turn is when we go on at seven Sunday mornin' and work through the whole twenty-four hours up to Monday mornin.' That puts us onto the night turn for the next two weeks, and the other crew onto the day. The next time they get the long turn and we get twenty-four hours off, but it don't do us much good. I get home at about half past seven Sunday mornin' and go to bed as soon as I ve had breakfast. I get up about noon so as to get a bit o' Sunday to enjoy, but I'm tired and sleepy all the afternoon. . . ." "Everybody says I'm a fool to stay here. I dunno, mebbe I am. It don't make so much difference though. I'm gettin' along, but I don't want the kids ever to work this way. I'm goin' to educate them so they won't have to work twelve hours.'' (John A. Fitch, The Steel Workers. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1911, pp. 11-12.) ITi<' Work Primer "1 hear the whistle. I must hurry. It is time to go into the shop. I take my check from the gate board and hang it on the department board. The starting whistle blows." "I eat my lunch. It is forbidden to eat until then. I work until the whistle blows to quit. I leave my place nice and clean. I put all my clothes in the locker." ''I must go home." (From a brochure published in the early 1900s by the International Harvester Corporation to teach its Polish laborers the English language.) S(ee/ workers. [Photograph by Lewis Hine, Library of Congress) The ir /ndustriul Society There is Power in a I n ion Joe Hill, songwriter for the IWW. explainer! that he wanted to reach the great mass of workers "who are tear unintelligent and too indifferent to read a pamphlet or an editorial on economic sci- ence." To the tune of a popular revival song. "The Hli mri of the Lamb," he composed the I WAV's principal organizing song. "There is Power in a Union." Would yew hur c freedom from wane slavery, Then jam in the gram/ Industrial hand; Would you from misnj and hunger he free, Then conic, rla your share, like a man. chorus There U pow'r, there is pow'r in a hand of workingmen, When they stand hand in hand. That's a inne r that's a inne r Thut must nde in every land— One Industrial Union Grand. Would you hat e mansions of gold in flic sky. And live in a shark, way in the back? Would you have icings up in lieuven to Jhj? And starve here with rags on your hack? If yoti te had "nuff" of the blood of the lamb Then join in the grand Industrial hand. If. for a change, you would hat e eggs and hum, Then come, do your share, like a man. If you like sluggers to heat off your head. Thru don't organize, all unions despise. If you want nothing before yon arc dead. Shake hands with your boss and look wise. Come, all ye ivorkcrs. from even/ land. Come, join in the grand Industrial bund. Then ice our share of this earth shall demand. Come on! Po your share, like a man. Sourer. Joe Hill, Sungv of the Workers: IWW Songs To Fan The h'lnmes of Discontent, 2901 ed. (Chicago: Industrial Workers of the World, 1956), p. 8. strike victories and to build stable local organizations. Under the growing pressure of patriotism and conformity after the entry of the United States into World War I in 1917, the IWW came under vigilante attack, federal prosecution, and harassment. The Wobblies bad promised to form the new society within the shell of the old. With the conviction of its principal leaders in 1918 for undermining the war effort, however, the IWW, as Dan Wakefield later wrote, had "to form the new society within the jails of the old.' What survived were the songs, the legends, and the memory that the IWW had managed to give a new sense of power and dignity to some depressed and alienated workers, even if only for a short time. "They have learned more than class consciousness," otic ohserver noted; "they have learned consciousness of self." It is we who plowed the prairies; built the cities where they trade; Pug the mines and built the workshops; endless miles of railroad laid. Sow we stand outcasts and starring, 'mid the wonders toe have made: But the f!nion makes us strong. In our hands is placed a power greater than their hoarded gold; Greater than the might of armies, magnified a thousand-fold. We can bring to birth the new world from the ashes of the old. For the Union makes us strong. For the immediate future, at least, the AFL clearly dominated the portion of labor that was organized. The workers it ignored would have to wait for the emergence of the CIO in the 1930s. Aspirations and Accommodations In the decades after the Civil War, with new industrial giants like Rockefeller and Carnegie as their models, American farm boys swarmed into the cities with the expectation of working their way to the top. In Europe a similar movement from rural to urban life was under way. Each new influx of immigrants—first the Irish, then die Germans, then the Italians, Poles, Hungarians, and others from central and southeastern Europe—tended to start at the bottom of the economic ladder, only to be pushed upward as less experienced newcomers arrived. The belief in individual opportunity, shared by both native American workers and newly arrived immigrants, no doubt accounted for much ol their indifference to unionization. Organized 45" Parties. Polities, anil Reform dieting regional, class, ethnic, and cultural interests. The Republican party was the party of high tariffs and sound money, but included some who were sympathetic to free trade and monetary reform. The Democratic party favored reduced tariffs and an expanded currency, but attracted some who favored the protection of domestic industry and sound money policies. Both parties included spokesmen for the dominant economic interests. They, too, sometimes differed among themselves, depending on the kind of business enterprise they represented. Politicians who represented agrarian areas might disagree on government policies, depending on whether they spoke for small or large farmers, for a single-crop economy or diversified agriculture. Both Republicans and Democrats looked to their political machines to get out the voters on election day, and their efforts were marked with unusual success. The rate of voter turnout in the Gilded Age exceeded the earlier period and the succeeding Progressive Era. What voters responded to was not necessarily the ballyhoo or the machine; the outcome of many elections was determined by issues and tensions important on the state and precinct level. Republicans: Stalwarts, Halfbreeds, and Mugwumps For a long time, the Republicans lived off the issues of the past. They waved the "bloody shirt" of the Civil War with success for another quarter of a century. They reinforced party loyalty by attacking the Democrats as "traitors" and by providing liberal pensions for former Union soldiers and their dependents. By identifying Democrats with secession and the Confederate cause, the Republicans were able to avoid the problem of "hard times"—the economic and social issues of industrialization and the growth of the cities. As (lie party of high tariffs for industry, liberal aid to railroads, and conservative monetary policies, die Republicans had the support of much of die business community—especially manufacturers, bankers, and the holders of government bonds. There were internal clashes over economic issues, but before the party confronted the voters in national elections, these had usually been resolved. Factionalism, however, continued to work against party unity throughout this period. The Stalwarts, led by Roscoe Conkling of New York, remained die hard-core machine politicians who put party success and the distribution of offices above any issue or principle. The Halfbreeds, led by James G. Blaine of Maine, gave the appearance of trying to balance party' needs against the cries for reform. Essentially, however, the Stalwarts and Halfbreeds differed not over principles and policies, but rather over which group would inherit the spoils of an election victory. Neither cared to he associated with the Independents (later called the Mugwumps), who had deserted the party in 1872 and were prepared to do so again to advance the crusade tor good government. On economic questions like the tariff and sound money, there was little disagreement among the factions. They divided sharply, however, over their commitment to civil service reform and occasionally over die quality of the presidential candidate. Democrats: Southern Conservatives and City Bosses The Democrats, despite the treason label, were strong contenders in national elections. After the overthrow of Radical Reconstruction and the defeat of black political aspirations, the South became solidly Democratic. White politicians w'aved their own kind of "bloody shirt," reminding constituents of the "horrors" of "black rule" during Reconstruction and of die need to maintain party' unity in the name of "white supremacy." In northern industrial cities, where Irish bosses organized die immigrant population, the Democrats developed powerful political machines. They had less support from northern industry' than the Republicans, but did have some business backers, mosdy northern merchants in the import trade and commercial bankers who had southern business des. Conservative southern Democrats sometimes joined with western Republicans to support laws favorable to farm constituents. But they sided with the representatives of eastern commercial and financial interests against the more independent Democrats of the West and movements of economic radicalism. For a share of the spoils, they also voted in Congress with The Emergence of Urban America 2(X),(XX) blacks left the South between 1890 and 1910. But the crest of what came to be called the Great Migration would not be reached until World War I (see Chapter 27). A similar movement from rural to urban life was under way in Europe. Millions would cross tire Atlantic in the belief that they could realize a better life for themselves and their children in die cities of the United States. The migration was in such numbers that it overwhelmed the native-born families. By 1900, more than one- third of Chicago's population was foreign-born, and die proportion in New York City was higher. It had more foreign-born residents than any city in the world. New York's Italian population in the 1890s equaled that of Naples; its German population, diat of Hamburg. Twice as many Irish lived in New York as in Dublin. And yet the real surge of die "new" immigration had hardly begun. Between 1866 and 1915, some 25 million immigrants came to the United States. "We are the Romans of the modem world," Oliver Wendell Holmes had said back in 1858, "the great assimilating people." Toward die end of the century, however, many people no longer shared this faith. Part of the problem was that the new immigrants—Italians, Slavs, Magyars, Croats, Serbs, Slovaks, Greeks, and Jews —came from cultures strikingly different from those of the "natives" who had preceded them. Of the 15 million newcomers to the United States between 1890 and 1920, 80 percent were from eastern and southern Europe. Between 1900 and 1914, for example, more than 3,1 million Austro-Hungarians entered the United States, more than 3 million Italians, more than 2.5 million from Russia, and nearly 900,000 from the Balkan countries of Europe and die Middle East. At the start of the twentieth century, approximately 9.5 million immigrants engulfed the North Atlantic ports of the United States; four out of five chose to settle in die industrial cities of the Northeast and Midwest, where economic opportunities were the best. Northern and western Europeans had been the main source of immigration until 1896. Very soon the great numbers of different immigrant groups aroused "native" anxiety about Protestant and Anglo-Saxon supremacy, die survival of republican institutions, and competition over jobs. Actually, "native American stock," whatever was understood by diat phrase, was in no danger of disappearing. Studies of the nation's population in the 1920s revealed that, despite the entry' of more than 35 million immigrants since die Revolution (a figure approximately ten times larger than the American population in (text continues on p. 433) Immigrants crossing the Atlantic. December 1906. Hold fast, this is most necessary in America. Forget your past, your customs, and your ideals. Select a goal and pursue it with all your might. No matter what happens to you, hold on. You will experience a bad time, but sooner or later you will achieve your goal. If you are neglectful, beware for the wheel of fortune turns quickly. You will lose your grip and be lost. A bit of advice for you: Do not take a moment's rest. Run, do, work and keep your own good in mind. ... A final virtue is needed in America—called cheek. Naturally I believed most of them to he robbers. "If the city is index across, how am l to get from the railway station to my hotel without being assaultedJ Had it not been for the fear of ridicule, I think l should luive turned back at thr next stop. The shining lands beyond seemed hardly u'orrfi a struggle uguinsl the dragon's brood with which the dreadful city was a-swann. Nevertheless l kept my seal and was carried swiftly on. Simrce: Hamlin Garland, A Son of the Middle Border (New York: Macmillan Paperbacks edition, 1962) © The Macmillan Company, 1962. copyright by Hamlin Garland 1917: copyright renewed 1945 by Mary L Lord and Constance C. Williams. 1783), 51 percent of the American people were descended from colonial families, and only 49 percent were foreign-born or descended from all the post-Revolntionary newcomers, including those from Great Britain. In 1880, about 12 percent of the American population was for- eign-born. Between 1890 and 1910, this figure rose to 15 percent, but by 1930 it was back to 12 percent, and it declined thereafter. Nevertheless, at the turn of the century the spectacle of cities congested with newcomers whose languages, religions, and cultures differed from their own caused considerable debate among "natives" about unrestricted immigration. Race prejudice in the West had already resulted in agitation directed at Chinese immigrants, who first came in large numbers in the 1800s to help build the Central Pacific Railroad. The earliest federal law to restrict immigration was passed in May 1882. It forbade Chinese to enter the United States for a decade; in 1902, another act made this exclusion permanent. In An Immigrant Writes Home Whatever the optimism with which many immigrants came to the United States, the need to adapt tn the realities of day-to-day urban living could produce both cynicism and a reevaluation of expectations, as shown in this letter from Helena Brylska-Dabrowska, in the United States, to her sister Teofila Wolska. in Poland: January 10 [7.9U9. 19/0, or 1911) Dear Sister: l received the letter with the wafer and / thank you for thinking of me. dear sister. Now, dear sister and brother-in-law, don't hr angry if I don t write to you very often, hut I don'I knou hon> to write myself and before I ask somebody to write time passes away, but l try to answer you sometimes at least. You ask me how much my boys and my man earn. My man works in an Iron-foundry, he earns 9.10, 12 roubles [dol- lars | sometimes, and the boys earn 4 or ,5 roubles. My dear, in America it is no better than in our country: whoever does well, he does, and whoever does poorly, suffers misery eeenjwhere. I do not suffer misery, thanks to Cod, hut I do not have much pleasure either. Many peopli in our country think that in America everybody has much pleasure. No, it is just as in our country, and the churches are like ours, and in general everything is alike. I wish to know with which son grandmother is. Wri/d me. And who is farming on that land after Rykaczewski? Perhaps we shall yet meet some day or other, dear sister. . . . Source: William I. Thomas and Florian Znaniecki, The Polish Peasant in Europe and America, vol. II (Boston: Richard G. Badger, The Gorham Press, 1918-20), p. 220. The Emergence of Urban America 1885 die Knights of Labor, reflecting concern over job competition, persuaded Congress to forbid die importation of contract laborers (die previous year Hungarians and Italians had been brought in under contract to be used as strike- breakers). How to respond to the growing tide of "new" immigrants remained a source of agitation until the Immigration Restriction Act of 1921 (see Chapter 27) finally resolved the issue. The full impact of urban growth was not felt in America until early in the twentieth century. Yet even in the nineteenth century, American cities, for all their wealth, accumulated ills and evils. In the nineteenth century, hardships were made worse by ignorance and inexperience. But a major part of die blame goes to the indifference to otiiers that die idea of "success" encouraged. Most city dwellers took only a halfhearted interest in civic projects that did not immediately affect tiieir own pocketbooks or pleasure. Leaders of older nineteenth-century cities looked with satisfaction on the rising value of the urban land they owned or managed, and left those who were less well off to look after themselves. The industrialists who dominated the newer cities viewed them simply as sites for factories and tenements for die factory workers. Certain areas might be reserved for the industrialists, general managers, superintendents, and other ranking officials. The rest of the populace got miserable housing and almost no public facilities. To accommodate the surge in population, real-estate operators cut up city land into blocks of rectangular lots divided by a grid of roads. The lots themselves were divided simply by lines on a layout. With few restrictions on their operations, builders and landlords made maximum use of die available lots, wiping out all open space. Urban congestion fed upon itself. As sections of a city became thickly populated, more and more transportation was directed there. Water, gas, and electrical utilities might be brought in. Factories, most of diem noisy and dirty, dien moved in. Eventually, neighboring residential areas were overrun, land values soared, and more and more construction was undertaken to pay for higher taxes. Under such pressures, private dwellings that had housed single families were remodeled into tenements that housed eight or twelve families or else were torn down to make room for business structures. As living conditions deteriorated, families that could afford to do so moved away. The richer ones went to nearby suburban towns. As strong as the movement of population to the suburbs was, the flood of newcomers into the cities greatly exceeded it. Nineteenth-cen- tury growth had a decentralizing tendency, but congestion continued to increase. The result was that land values grew higher every year. To offset its rising cost, land utilization became more intensive and hostile to human life. The cities also had to respond to demands for expanded services: water, gas, sewage disposal, transportation, and electrical power were now' the responsibility of municipal departments that had access to large sums of tax money. Municipal debt, in lact, rose from $200 million in 1860 to $1.4 billion in 1902. The problems created by the fast pace of urban growth w ere enormous. The existing and often antiquated city governments, some of them still controlled by state legislatures, were simply not equipped to undertake such imposing tasks. Without any developed science of public administration, political "machines" run by "bosses" accepted the challenge and reaped the financial benefits. Political Corruption When a prominent educator called America's cities in 1890 "the worst governed in Christen- dom—the most expensive, the most inefficient, and the most corrupt." he was underscoring the degree to which the metropolises had fallen under "boss" or "machine" nde. Designed to keep themselves and their party in office, the political machine had at its command an impressive army of county, ward, and precinct captains and workers. Few were more impressive in this era than the bosses who headed up the machines, men like William Marcy Tw'eed and Richard Croker of New York City, The Emergence of Urban America "Czar" Martin Lomasney of Boston, "King" James McManes of Philadelphia, Christopher Magee of Pittsburgh, Ed Butler of St. Louis, and "Blind Boss" Buckley of San Francisco. Of course, they charged a price for their presence —and for the essential services they rendered. Somehow, despite the absence of professional managers, the machines made the cities work. They may not have done it efficiently or inexpensively, but there was some order and service. The corruption was sometimes so obvious as to arouse upper- and middle-class residents. But it was their usual indifference to the needs of city dwellers that had given the bosses their electoral base. In most American cities, power resided in the mayor, in the single- or double-chambered city council, and in independent boards. These agencies determined how municipal funds should be raised and spent. They granted the franchises for street railways, awarded contracts for sewers and paving streets, constructed public buildings, bought fire fighting equipment, and contracted for other services and supplies. Since most of these activities were entrusted to committees drawn from elected aldermen or council members with no training in city management, political bosses found it easy to place their people in positions where they could dip into city treasuries anti enter into profitable alliances with local businessmen. Boss Tweed's career in New York City became the model for all later political swindlers. As head of Tammany Hall, the New York Democratic machine, Tweed exercised considerable power, including control of patronage. In 1868, Tweed and his Tammany friends installed John M. Hoffman as governor. The following year, by spending enormous sums to bribe state legislators (some senators were given as much as $40,000), Tweed got the legislature to pass and the governor to sign a new charter for New York City. With it, Tweed made himself a virtual dictator. Tweed's technique was simple. Everyone wlio worked for the city was required to pad his hill—at first only by 10 percent, later 66 percent, and finally 85 percent. The padding was turned over to Tweed's gang. When Tweed built his famous courthouse, whose final cost r.m to many times the original estimate of $3 million, an item charged to the "repair" of fixtures ran over $1,149,000 before the building was even completed. Forty chairs and three tables cost $179,000; thermometers, $7,500 each. The carpenter who got $360,000 was surpassed by "The Prince of Plasterers," as the Times called him, who drew over $2,870,000 for nine months' work. The criticism mounted, particularly in editorials in the Times and in Thomas Nast's cartoons in that paper and in Harficrs Weekly. When the corruption and bonded debt reached such proportions that bankers feared the city's credit might be in jeopardy, Tweed was thrown out. Five years later, in 1876, he died in jail. If older Americans put the blame for corruption on ignorant immigrant hordes, the immigrants themselves were wise enough to back the bosses who helped them survive in harsh new surroundings. While civic reformers talked about honest government, staged periodic "cleanup" crusades, and showed their contempt for the immigrants and lower classes, the boss provided services and earned the loyalty of constituents. His lieutenants welcomed new arrivals at the docks, hastened their naturalization proceedings (to speed them to the polls), gave them gifts at Christmas, found city jobs for them and their sons, encouraged their ethnic customs, and mediated with the police and the courts when immigrants or their children got into trouble. The precinct captain (like the illustrious George Washington Plunkitt of Tammany Hall) worked a full day and often into the night. Everyone in the neighborhood knew him, and many were indebted to him for some favor. On election day, the voters recalled these services, not the empty promises of do-gooding reformers. Reform programs to reduce taxes hardly touched the average immigrant's life, for he had no property to tax. Reforms to improve the efficiency of city administration only aroused suspicion, for "efficiency" in government might well mean that he and his relatives would be dropped from the city payroll. Fearful of change, foe immigrant disliked the very sound of "reform." And why not, since the typical upper-class reformer seemed to be attacking the very men to whom the immigrant felt most loyal —the bosses. Reformers also had trouble with the well-educated American v oter whose parts' The Emergence of Urban America toms and practices subjected blacks to discrimination, police harassment, and a two-faced judicial system. "To the American white man," a northern black lawyer remarked in 1888, "a 'nigger' is a 'nigger' whether he be a Sixth Avenue dude or a Georgia mule-driver." Although the ghetto—the district marked off for black housing and thus for black life—had not yet taken on the rigidity of later decades, the outlines were already clear in the North. Tightly knit ethnic neighborhoods were typical of large cities at the turn of the century. But when white immigrants accumulated some money, they could move. That option was closed to blacks; white hostility, often violent, shaped the pattern and quality of black settlement and housing. As the black migration northward gained momentum, the sections of the cities into which blacks could move did not expand. The congestion in the black enclaves increased. Such housing bred its own misfortunes, which more prosperous white citizens blamed on the blacks themselves. As early as 1885, a black newspaper in New York claimed that house rent consumed at least one-third, and sometimes one-half, the earnings of most black residents, and for dwellings that hardly justified such an expenditure. To meet rent payments, which were higher than for comparable white dwellings, blacks were forced to take in lodgers and convert brownstones into rooming houses. With the rising tide erf foreign immigrants, blacks found that the few jobs to which they could aspire were now threatened. The Irish had already moved them off the docks. Hotels now replaced black employees with immigrants. Even the barbershops, which blacks had once dominated, fell to the Italians in tire 1880s and 1890s. Except as members of the "marginal labor reserve," black men—prepared only for menial tasks and kept from apprenticeship training—were bypassed as factory workers. It was once a mark of standing among the city rich to have black servants. But as time passed, the glamour of such attendants wore off, and male black employment declined. Black nursemaids, housemaids, and other female domestic workers remained in demand, at least until the new immigrants learned enough English to compete. Many black women became the major, if not the only, breadwinners of their families, which further undermined male morale anti multiplied broken homes. Recent scholars have suggested that urban conditions disoriented the black family in ways that even slavery had not succeeded in doing. Deepening urban segregation did encourage blacks to develop or expand their own social institutions. Black business enterprises, churches, political clubs, charitable organizations, fraternal and athletic clubs, insurance companies, and similar units grew in number. To serve the expanding ghettos, a black business class emerged, made up largely of self-made men who depended on black patronage and helped to promote community and racial consciousness. But segregation also heightened the likelihood of racial strife with other segregated groups, especially the white population, which deliberately segregated itself. Race riots in New York in 1900 and in Springfield, Illinois, in 1908 caused much property damage and loss of life. Although the number of victims in no way compared to those killed by lynching in the South, the outbreaks of violence reflected growing urban tensions that would erupt again after World War 1. The Elite The spread of u rban decay depressed many observers, as did sometimes the astonishing growth in numbers and wealth of the urban middle and upper classes. Prosperous merchants and planters of earlier generations had set modest standards of elegance and public virtue on incomes of $10,000 to $20,000 a year. Now, industrial magnates and railroad barons boasted incomes in the millions. So rapid was their rise to power and privilege that few received any training in the social responsibilities of great wealth. Some millionaires, like Rockefeller and Carnegie, eventually followed the paternalistic pattern by building libraries, universities, and research foundations. But the great majority of the new rich kept their money for business, except for expenditures for "conspic- uous consumption." "Conspicuous consumption" reached absurd heights in the cities during the 1890s, even while the business system was sunk in a deep depression. The follies of the rich made newspaper copy that later returned to haunt them. At one party the guests, all on horseback, r<xle Intellectual Life in the Gilded Age Contrasting school scenes at the turn of the century: (top) a class of immigrant children in the condemned Essex Market School in New York City, and (bottom) Milton Academy, a boys school in New England. (Top photograph by Jacob A. Riis, the Jacob A. Riis Collection, Museum of the City of New York; bottom photograph by Charles Currier, Library of Congress) The American Empire at the chance and negotiated a purchase treaty. Despite opposition to what the press soon called "Seward's Folly," the opportunity to expand America's frontier was enough to win congressional approval. The purchase price was $7.2 million. Canada On completing the negotiations with Russia, Seward expressed the hope that Alaska would form the northern arm of a giant pincer movement to bring Canada into the American fold. "I know that Nature," he said, "designs that this whole continent, not merely these thirty-six states, shall be sooner or later, within the magic circle of the American Union." During the Civil War, Confederate agents and escaping Confederate prisoners of war found sanctuary in Canada, where they could mount attacks on the northern frontier. Soon after the war ended, northerners were again reminded of the potential of British control over Canada. In 1866, the Fenians, an organization of Irish-Americans in New York, began a series of assaults on Canada with the bizarre hope of capturing the country and holding it hostage until the British gave Ireland independence. The Irish vote iiad become an important factor in northern politics, and how to keep it while discouraging adventures of this sort presented a ticklish problem. Rather than yield to the temptation of supporting or even approving Irish violence, the Johnson administration chose to give Great Britain a lesson in neutral conduct by taking stem measures against anyone who used American bases for foreign intrigues. British leaders chose to ignore the example. They at first refused to receive Seward's claims against Britain for wartime actions by sea raiders such as the Alabama, a ship built in England for the Confederacy and used to prey on Union shipping. Resentful Americans began to see the Fenians as worth joining if only to make Britain see the light. By 1869, however, Europe was in turmoil over Bismarck's expansionist policies on the Continent. Britain, like others, wanted American friendship if these policies led to war. By the Treaty of Washington, ratified in 1871, the two nations agreed to arbitrate their differences. The next year, an arbitration tribunal awarded the United States $15.5 million for its Alabama claims. But the United States continued to cast a hungry eye on Canada. In 1886, Theodore Roosevelt, bursting upon the American political stage, told a Fourth of July audience that he looked forward to the "day when not a foot of American soil will be held by any European power." In 1891, Secretary of State James G. Blaine said he expected that Canada would "ul- timately seek . . . admission to the union." Both Roosevelt and Blaine easily qualified as early American jingoes—the term applied to those who saw a warlike and expansionist foreign policy as in the national interest. nil: PACIFIC: American ambitions did not end with North America or at the water's edge. In the 1850s Commodore Matthew C. Perry thought it "self- evident" that the United States would have to "extend its jurisdiction beyond the limits of the western continent." Cuba had attracted many southern expansionists, and in 1869 President Grant's cronies hungered for the annexation of Santo Domingo. Large numbers of Americans, however, still believed that the nation should concentrate its energies on internal development and avoid foreign entanglements. But internal development would, in fact, make foreign entanglements increasingly desirable, if not absolutely essential. The construction of the transcontinental railroads after the Civil War, along with rapid industrialization, sharpened appetites for Pacific outlets and islands. If the United States was to establish its influence in the Far East and be in a position to exploit the rich economic possibilities of that region, it would need naval bases and coaling and repair stations for its ships in the mid-Pa- cific. Both Hawaii and Samoa had already served as stopover stations for American ships in the Pacific trade, and after the Civil War attention focused on them as permanent American outposts. With the prospect of annexation of the Philippii"es after the Spanish-American War, this matter was quickly resolved. Samoa Ev en before the Civil War, American interest in the Pacific islands and the Far East had taken on economic and religious significance. Mer- The American Empire country. The Chinese called themselves the Order of Literary Patriotic Harmonious Fists; Westerners called them Boxers. Before they were put down hy an international force to which the United States contributed 2,500 men, they had killed hundreds of persons and destroyed much property. Only swift action by Britain and the United States now prevented die other powers from retaliating by taking more Chinese territory. Hay advised the imperial rivals that American policy was to work to "preserve Chinese territorial and administrative entity" and to "safeguard for the world the principle of equal and impartial trade with all parts of the Chinese Empire." This announcement went further than the Open Door notes and had more effect. Eventually, the nations accepted a money indemnity from China rather than new grants of territory. The United States share of almost S25 million was larger than necessary to meet the losses it suffered. The balance was later returned to China, where it was used to help educate Chinese students in America. Most important though, the Open Door policy had laid the basis for greater American influence in the affairs of China and Asia. At the same time, it created an impression of disinterested neutrality. Few explained the American position as clearly as did Hay himself. "The ideal policy," he wrote to Henry Adams, "is, as you .justly observe, to do nothing, and yet be around when the watermelon is cut. Not that we want any watermelon, but it is always pleasant to be seen in smart colored circles on occasions of festivity." Japan: The Russo-Japanese War Theodore Roosevelt's preaching about the importance ol what he called "the soldierly virtues frightened many people when he became president at the age of forty-three in September 1901. Four years earlier he hud said at the Naval War College: "The men who have dared greatly in war... are those who deserve best of their country." But his first major international venture did not come until his second term, and then he was a peacemaker. Having beaten the Russians in Manchuria in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904— 1905, the Japanese in the spriug of 1905, temporarily exhausted by their efforts, secretly asked the American president to mediate. Fearful of the growing unrest at home that ended in the Revolution of October 1905, the Russians were easily persuaded to agree. But Roosevelt wrould take no steps until Japan consented to respect the principles of the Open-Door policy. When this happened, the president invited the Japanese and the Russians to meet at Portsmouth, New Hampshire, in August. Here, among other claims, the Japanese demanded a huge money indemnity' to offset their war costs. When the Russians balked, Roosevelt warned the Japanese against pressing their demand. They accepted some small territorial grants instead, along with Russia's promise to leave Manchuria, The Japanese people had counted on the Russian indemnity for tax relief and did not quickly forget America's role in cheating them of it. Meanwhile, Japan's emergence as a great power increased anxiety on the West coast about the "yellow peril." In October 1906 the San Francisco Board of Education ordered that the ninety-three Japanese children in the city he segregated in a separate school. Roosevelt's anger over California's action was not lessened by his realization that he had no jurisdiction over California public schools. Only after bringing a great deal of pressure on local authorities did the president succeed in getting the action reversed. At the same time, he promised Californians that Japanese immigration would be curbed. A series of notes in 1907 and 1908 made up the Gentlemen's Agreement hy which Japan promised to issue no more passports to workers seeking to emigrate to the United States. Having pacified the Japanese, Roosevelt was anxious, as he wrote to a friend, "that they should realize that 1 am not afraid of them." In 1907, as a demonstration of strength, lie decided to send the American fleet around the world on a practice cruise. Japan welcomed the visit of the fleet as a friendly gesture, and for a time Japanese-American relations improved. The Root-Takahira Agreement of November 1908 reflected the better feeling. An executive agreement, not a treaty, the terms bound only Roosevelt's administration and its counterpart in Japan. Both powers agreed to maintain the status quo in the Pacific area, to uphold the Open Door in China, and to support that country's "independence and integrity." Roosevelt's Far Eastern policy was upset by his successor as president, William Howard The Twenties: Business anil Culture chists, the bornbs lent support to tears of a massive conspiracy to overthrow the government. Wilson's attorney general, A. Mitchell Palmer, who had presidential ambitions of his own, did nothing to discourage fears of revolution. He claimed to see Reds almost everywhere he looked, and the end of the war provided him with the opportunity to hunt them down. "Like a prairie fire." he explained, "the blaze of revolution was sweeping over every American institution." On New Year s Day 1920, Palmer ordered simultaneous raids on every suspected Bolshevik cell in the country. In about a week, more than 6000 persons were arrester! and their property confiscated. Friends who visited them were jailed on grounds of "solicitude for rev- olutionaries." Though supposedly armed to the teeth, the captives yielded the imposing total of three pistols and no explosives. The Palmer raids were followed by the eventual deportation of .556 aliens convicted of no crime. Vigilantism spread across the nation. Students, professors, editors, writers, actors, and others suspected of subversive ideas or of engaging in un-American activities were the victims. In January 1920, five Socialist members of the New York State Assembly were expelled simply because of their party affiliation. A few months after the Palmer raids, two Italian anarchists, Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, were arrested for a murder that had been committed in connection with a payroll robbery in South Braintree, Massachusetts. On the jury 's finding them guilty. Judge Webster Thayer sentenced the two defendants to death. 'Hie actual evidence against them was not conclusive. and the suspicion grew that they had been convicted not because they had committed the crime, bnt because of their political beliefs. Judge Thayers conduct of the trial, in which he made little secret of his feelings about anarchists, only deepened suspicion of the verdict. Responding to protest in this country and abroad. Governor Alvan T. Fuller of Massachusetts appointed an advisory commission that included the president of Harvard to review the evidence. It concluded that the trial judge had been guilty of a "grave breach of official deco- rum," hut that justice had been done. Motions for appealing the verdict delayed the execution of the two men for years. Vanzetti's dignity and both men's quiet persistence Nicola Sacco and Bartolo- meo Vanzetti, convicted anarchists who were electrocuted on August 23, 1927 Never in our full life could we hope to do such work for tolerance, for justice, for man's understanding of man, as now we do by accident. . . . That last moment belongs to us— that agony is our triumph." m The Tirenties: It twines* untl Culture President Warren G. Harding (left) and Vice-President Calvin Coolidge (right). Their traditional Americanism and optimistic faith in business set the political tone of the decade. {Culver Pictures) it) their anarchist beliefs, while their lives hung in the balance, won them additional sympathy. When they were electrocuted in 1927, in the middle of a new wave of worldwide protest, millions were convinced they were innocent. Millions more were convinced that, guilty or innocent, they had not been given a fair trial. "What more can the immigrants from Italy ex- pect?" asked columnist Ileywood Broun. "It is not every prisoner who has a president of Harvard throw on the switch for him." Although the Red Scare had quieted down after the Palmer raids, the atmosphere was hardly promising for radical activity and expression in the twenties. And the linking of radicals and immigrants added to the growing pressure for restrictions on their admission to the United States. The "Race Suicide" Alarm: Immigration Xenophobia, or antiforeign feeling, after die war brought to a head the anti-immigration sentiment that had been growing in the United States since die 1880s. The Immigration Restriction League had been organized by a group of New bn gland intellectuals in 1894. It reflected fears that the "new" immigrants from southern and eastern Europe would destroy the "American character." This group had pushed for a literacy test for immigrants. During the Progressive era, xenophobes and labor and business leaders who shared hostility' to newcomers were joined by liberals who feared that immigration was threatening the American way of life. The flood of "new" immigrants in the fifteen years before World War I brought some Americans to die verge of panic over "race suicide." In the pages of the widely read Saturday Evening Post, Kenneth Roberts cautioned against the admission of so many Polish Jews, who were "human para- sites." He argued that the mixture of Nordic with Alpine, Mediterranean, and Semitic stocks would result in "a hybrid race of people as worthless and futile as the good-for-nothing mongrels of Central America and Southeastern Europe." Such arguments, given wide national exposure, helped to pave the way for a complete reversal of die old, easygoing terms of admission to the United States. The Immigration Restriction Act of 1921 established a quota system based on "national ori- gins." Each European nation was assigned a quota based on 3 percent of the manlier of its <il I The Twenties: Huxiness unit Culture nationals resident in the United States in 1910. Most Asians were already barred. This law was expected to limit immigration to about 350,000 persons, largely from the United Kingdom and northwestern Europe. The National Origins Act of 1924 cut quotas to 2 percent and made the base year 1890, when the proportion of "Nor- dics" in the American population had been much higher than in 1910. The National Origins Act also shut the door completely on Japanese immigrants. It was a national humiliation for Japan, which warned that it would have "grave consequences." The act of 1924 was to last only until 1927. Afterward, no more than 150,000 immigrants were to be admitted annually, according to quotas based on the ratio of each country's nationals to the whole American population in 1920. In fact, the desire to restore the "Nordic" balance in the American population was frustrated because these laws did not apply to immigrants from Western Hemisphere countries. During the 1920s, almost a million Canadians, many of them French-speaking Catholics, and at least half a million Mexicans crossed their respective borders to work in the factories of New England and the fields of the South, the Southw'est, and the West, But nothing would ever again approach the earlier waves of European immigrants. With the restrictive legislation enacted in the 1920s, the idea of America as the promised land for the "huddled masses yearning to breathe free" came to an abrupt end. Only in the 1960s and 1970s—when the doors were opened to thousands of political refugees from Southeast Asia, Cuba, and Haiti—would that idea be momentarily revived. The Great Black Migration Although restrictions on immigrants affected the ethnic makeup of the nation, the movement of southern blacks to northern cities during and after World War I altered the racial map of the United States and introduced new tensions. Between 1910 and 1940, more than 1,750,000 black people left the South, nearly 5(X),000 during the war and another 800,000 in the twenties. By 1940, the black population outside the South had more than doubled. In cities such as New York, Chicago, Detroit, Cleveland, and Buffalo, the percentage of blacks in the population grew by 100 to 250 percent. Within only a few decades, a largely rural black population had become more urban than the white population. The Jim Crow restrictions, the alarming rate of lynchings and beatings, the absence of adequate educational facilities, and the impossible tenantry and credit systems led large numbers of southern blacks to look for a better life elsewhere. Until 1915, the North had offered the southern black migrant very' little. The labor demands created by World War 1 and the decline in European immigration changed that situation and opened up opportunities in northern industry at wages unknown in the South. When in 1914 Henry Ford promised to pay none of his workers less than $5 a day—a sensational announcement in itself—he agreed at the same time to hire black workers for his assembly line. Before then, blacks had been barred from industrial work. Now self-interest won out over racial considerations. "These same factories, mills, and workshops that have been closed to us," said the Chicago Defender, "through necessity are being opened to us. We are being given a chance, not through choice but because it is expedient. Prejudice vanishes when the almighty dollar is on the wrong side of the balance sheet." Encouraged at first by labor agents, black newspapers, and the letters of friends, the Great Migration soon had a momentum all its own. It was not uncommon for entire communities to transplant themselves. Although all classes of blacks made up the movement, many in the early waves were young, unskilled, and unmarried, the sons and daughters of sharecroppers and tenants. The chances for a rewarding life in the South had seemed increasingly dismal to these migrants, and they hoped for something beyond what their parents and grandparents had been forced to accept. If their expectations W'ere often disappointed, the hope still lived that somehow they could improve the quality of their daily life. After nineteen years spent in Mississippi, Arkansas, and Tennessee, young Richard Wright headed in 1927 for Chicago, having concluded that life in a "hostile and forbidding" South made it impossible to maintain self-respect. Missouri migrant farm laborer in California, 1936: "What bothers us travellin' people most is we cain't get no place lo stay still" (Photograph by Dorothea Lange, Library of Congress) The Great Depression Migratory worker, 1940: "When they need us they call us migrants. When we've picked their crops we re bums and we've got to get out." (Photograph by Dorothea Lange. Library of Congress) Well, I went down home 'bout a year ago, Things so bad, Lord, my heart was sore. Folks had nothin', it was a sin and a shame. Evrybody said hard times was to blame. I (CHORUS) Great God a-mighty, folks feelin' bad Lost ev'rything they ever had. Great God a-mighty, folks feelin' bad Lost ev'rything they ever had. Now the sun was a-shinin' fourteen days and no rain, Hoein' and plantin' was all in vain. They had hard, hard times. Lord, all around. Meal barrels empty, crops burnt to the ground. They had skinny lookin' children, bellies pokin' out. That old pellagra without a doubt, pdfolks hangin* 'round the cabin door [Ain'tseen times so hard before. Well. I went to the boss at the commissary store. Folks all starvin', please don't close your door. flewant more food and a little more time to pay. Boss man laughed and walked away. tew your landlord comes around when your rent is due. ted if you ain't got his money, he'll take your home from w He'll take your mules and horse, even take your cow. Says, "Get off my land, you're no-good, no-how!" (This Land Is Your Land: Songs of Social Justice. Music I tyJosft White; lyrics by William Waring Cuney. Copyright !J57 Charles Street Publishing Company.) Migratory worker's wife: 'It you die. you're dead—that's all." (Photograph by Dorothea Lange, Library of Congress) Seven cent cotton and forty cent meat. How in the world can a poor man eat? Flour up high and cotton down low, How in the world can we raise the dough? Clothes worn out, shoes run down, Old slouch hat with a hole in the crown. Back nearly broken and fingers all sore. Cotton gone down to rise no more. Seven cent cotton and eight dollar pants, Who in the world has got a chance? We can't buy clothes, we can t buy meat, Too much cotton, and not enough to eat. Can t help each other, what'll we do? I can t explain it, so it's up to you. Seven cent cotton and two dollar hose. Guess we ll have to do without any clothes. Seven cent cotton and forty cent meat. How in the world can a poor man eat? Mules in the barn, no crop laid by. Corn crib empty and the cow's gone dry; Well water low, nearly out of sight, Can't take a bath on a Saturday night. No use talking, any man is beat, With seven cent cotton and forty cent meat. Seven cent cotton and forty cent meat. How in the world can a poor man eat? Poor getting poorer all around here. Kids coming regular every year. Fatten our hogs, take them to town. All we get is six cents a pound. Very next day we have to buy it back. Forty cents a pound in a paper sack. (American Industrial Ballads, Pete Seeger (ed.). Words and music by Bob Miller and Emma Dermer. New York: Folkways Records, 7929.) Tractors are against the black man. Every time you kill a mule you kill a black man. You've heard about the machine picker? That's against the black man, too. " (Photograph by Arthur Rothstein, Library of Congress) Victim ol the drought, 1937: "I want to go back to where we can live happy, live decent, and grow what we eat." (Photograph by Dorothea Lange, Library of Congress) Evicted Arkansas sharecropper. 1936: "The whole works otusis in it right now. The people ain 't got no say a'comin. " (Photograph by Dorothea Lange. Library of Congress) I'm goin' down the road feelin' bad, I'm goin' down the road feelin' bad, I'm goin' down the road feelin' bad. Lord And I ain't gonna be treated this-a-way. Lord I can't live on cornbread and beans, . . . Lord I'm goin' where the water tastes like wine, . . . Lord I'm goin'where the climate fits my clothes, . . . Lord where I go nobody knows, . . . I'm not goin' to be treated this-a-way. An old Oklahoma folk song [Dorothea Lange and Paul S Taylor, An American Exodus, 57. and John Greenway, American Folk Songs of Protest, 206-7.) Harvest hand in Ohio, 1928: "We must make enough for beans, and when we have to buy gas it comes out of the beans." (Photograph by Ben Shahn, Library of Congress) The Age of Violence: World War II China and Indochina and its signature to a nonaggression pact witli other nations that Iiad interests in the Far East. Japan obviously would not accept such terms. "I have washed my hands of it," sail! Hull to Secretary of War Stimson that day, "and it is now in the hands of you and Knox, the Army and Navy." Hull did not realize how right he was. Unknown to the American negotiators, a Japanese carrier force had just set out. On December 1, dismissing the American demands as "fantas- tic," Kunisu nevertheless asked that discussions continue. Washington already knew of Japanese troop movements, which Roosevelt thought meant only an attack in the Southwest Pacific on Thailand, Malaya, and the Dutch East Indies—which were, in fact, the main Japanese objectives. On December 6 he sent the Japanese emperor a hasty peace appeal. The next day Japan made its move. Early in die morning of Sunday, December 7, 1941, a strong carrier-borne force of Japanese planes swooped down on die American naval base at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii. Although American naval and military commanders had been alerted to the possibility of a Japanese attack, they had failed to prepare and were caught by surprise. Most American aircraft were destroyed on die ground, and the unprotected naval vessels suffered terrible damage. In this one assault, 2355 American servicemen and 58 civilians died; 1178 were wounded. The next day a shocked Congress voted to declare war on Japan. Roosevelt's critics later accused him of having provoked Japan to attack in order to bring the United States into the war in Europe and of having deliberately exposed the navy at Pearl Harbor in order to create a situation that would unite Americans behind his war. That Roosevelt wanted to enter the war by November and that he knew a firm stand against Japan might bring drastic action seem beyond doubt. However, had the United States stood quietly by while Japan conquered an immensely rich empire in China and Asia, Roosevelt would have been criticized for inaction. The notion that Roosevelt conspired to defeat and destroy a substantial part of the navy he had served and built up and that his administration and high military authorities were involved in the plot does not seem likely. No doubt there was fault both in Washington and Pearl Harbor. But to the very end it was thought the Japanese would strike elsewhere. On December 11, four days after Pearl Harbor, Japan's Axis partners, Germany and Italy, declared war on the United States. Congress responded immediately with declarations of war against them. The United States was now engaged in global warfare. Two weeks after the attack on Pearl Harbor, Jonathan Daniels, a newspaper editor who would soon become Roosevelt's administrative assistant, wrote that the war had brought a new era in American history: "The twenties are gone with self-indulgence. The thirties have disappeared with self-pity. The forties are here in which Americans stand on a continent as men— men again fighting in the crudest man terms." Unlike World War I. there was little discussion about the need to fight. The American people— men and women—were asked to mobilize their human and physical resources for total war. It was die men who would ultimately take die war into the enemy's terrain; it was the women who built most of the bornbers and fighters that pounded die enemy's cities. To mobilize a people for war, to generate the kind of enthusiasm that will lead diem to make sacrifices, it is almost always necessary to portray the enemy as an inhuman force. World War II was no exception. The Germans were die very incarnation of evil, prepared to invade the homes of American families. The Japanese were subhuman and treacherous. Time, the popular newsmagazine, caught the proper tone when it entitled die article on the Battle of Iwo Jima "Rodent Exterminators." "The ordinary unreasoning Jap is ignorant," Time observed. "Perhaps he is human. Nothing . . . indicates it." Near the close of the war, when Time featured on its cover Admiral William F. (Bull) Halsey, it also used his motto; "Kill Japs, kill Japs, and dien kill more Japs." Japanese-Americans To unleash such hatred against a foreign enemy could be expected of any nation engaged in war. Less understandable was the decision in early The of Violence: Worhl War II American industrial might mobilized rapidly to supply the war effort. It makes no difference whether lie is an American citizen, he is still a Japanese. American citizenship docs not necessarily determine loyalty, H. HATES: You draw a distinction then between Japanese and Italians and Germans? We have a great number of Italians and Germans and we think they are fine citizens. There may be exceptions. GENFM.U. PE WITT: You needn't worry about the Italians at all except in certain cases. Also, the same for the Germans except in individual cases. Bui we must worry about the Japanese alt the time until lie is wiped off the map. Sabotage and espionage will make problems as long as he is allowed in this area—problems which I don't want to have to worry about." Source: Hearings before Subcommittee of House Committee on Suial Affairs on It H. 30, 78lh Congress First Session (1943), pp. 739—40. The Age of Violence: World If nr II Japanese-Americans awaiting evacuation from the Pacific Coast. (National Archives, War Relocation Authority) 1942 to single out 110,000 Japanese-Americans, two-thirds of them citizens of the United States, remove them from their homes on the West Coast, and confine them in inland relocation centers. Except for President Jackson's removal of the Indians from Georgia, the action was without precedent in tire nation's history. What caused the decision was race prejudice rather than military security. Tt was the result of more than forty years of anti-Japanese sentiment and racial tension on the West Coast. No removal was ordered in Hawaii, where 32 percent of tire population was of Japanese descent. Nor did anyone ever seriously consider doing the same to Gennan-Americans or I tali an-Americans. Earl Warren, then the California attorney general, tried to explain: W<> believe that when we ore dealing with the Caucasian race we have methods that will test the loyalty of them, and we believe that we can, in dealing with the Germans and the Italians, arrive at some fairly sound conclusions because of our knowledge of the way they live in the community and have lived for many years. But when we deal with the Japanese we are in an entirely different field and we cannot form any opinion that we believe to be sound. Although there was no evidence of Japanese sabotage on the West Coast after Pearl Harbor, that only confirmed the suspicions of those who advocated removal. Lieutenant General J. L. DeWitt, head of the Western Defense Command, in recommending removal to the Secretary of War, concluded: "The very fact that no sabotage has taken pi act' to date is a disturbing and confirming indication that such action will be taken." Despite such hysterical racial repression, many units of Nisei (Americans of Japanese descent) performed heroically in the United States The Age of Violence: War 1:1 ff ur II armed forces. Their work, along with the realization of how unfairly Japanese-American families had been treated, finally induced the federal government to pay more than $35 million to the evacuees for property losses. But this was very little compensation for the immense damage that had been done. Near the end of the war, the Supreme Court, in a series of decisions, upheld the essential features of the removal program. If Justice Frank Murphy found in that program "a melancholy resemblance" to the Nazi treatment of the Jews, Justice Hugo Black expressed the more popular opinion: "Hard- ships are a part of war, and war is an aggregation of hardships." Black Americans Black America had responded with some uncertainty to the outbreak of war in Europe. "Our war," said one black newspaper, "is not against Hitler in Europe but against the Hitlers in America." After the attack on Pearl Harbor, a black sharecropper reportedly told his landlord, "By the way. Captain, I hear the Japs done declared war on you white folks." What these reactions reflected was not only skepticism about a "white man's war," but die contrast between wartime democratic slogans and die realities of black-white relations. The vast majority of blacks no doubt reached the same conclusion as did one of their contemporary heroes, heavyweight champion Joe Louis: "America's got lots of problems, but Hiller won't fix them." Unlike World War I, when W. E. B. DuBois had urged his people to set aside their grievances and rally to the war effort, the black press and leadership vowed that World War II would be fought on two fronts: "victory over our enemies at home and victory over our enemies on the battlefields abroad." The outlook for winning die war at home was often very bleak. While more dian one million blacks entered the armed forces, over half of whom served overseas, discrimination and segregation continued in the army, navy, and marines, in USO and service clubs, even in Red Cross blood banks and entertainment centers. Nor did the war change traditional restrictions and practices. Under a "V for Victory" sign, for example, bus riders in Charleston, South Carolina, were advised: "Victory demands your cooperation. . . . Avoid friction. Be patriotic. White passengers will be seated from front to rear; colored passengers from rear to front." Between 1940 and 19-43, seventeen blacks were lynched. In 1943, race riots broke out in Los Angeles, Beaumont, Mobile, New York, and worst of all, Detroit, where twenty-five blacks and nine whites died. "There ain't no North any more," a Detroit black woman observed. "Everything now is South." Still, World War II marked a significant turning point in race relations. Even before Pearl Harbor, in early 1941, a threatened march of 100,000 blacks on Washington, D.C., forced Roosevelt to prohibit racial discrimination in defense industries and to establish a Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC) to protect minorities from job discrimination. During the war, blacks shared in employment opportunities. Migration of southern blacks to northern and western cities continued to change the nation's racial map. Overseas experience made black servicemen less willing to accept racial restrictions at home. Nor was the lesson of what had happened to 6 million Jews in Europe lost on black Americans. And World War II generated revolutionary ferment in Africa and Asia that would eventually force the United States to reassess its own racial policies. "The thesis of white supremacy," a State Department official remarked in 1944, "could only exist so long as tlie white race actually proved to be supreme." Mobilization and Politics At the time of Pearl Harbor, an American army of 1.6 million men already existed, most of them recruited through the first peacetime draft. Eventually, all men between eighteen and forty-five were subject to military service, and for the first time women were permitted to volunteer for the armed forces. By the war's end, 15 million men and more than 200,000 women had served in the army, navy, marines, and coast guard. Behind these men and women stood American industry, agriculture, labor, and science. Critics of tlie president had dismissed as wishful thinking his call for 50,000 planes a year in 1940. In 1942, over 47,000 aircraft were built. For 1944, the figure rose above 96,000. By 1945 no less than 55 million tons of merchant ship- The Search for Security to be such conspiracies and required to register with tire attorney general. In case of an "inter- nal security emergency," the act authorized the president to arrest and detain any individuals lor whom there was "reasonable ground" to suspect that they would "probably" engage in acts of espionage or sabotage. Any alien, moreover, with the slightest "subversive" taint was to be excluded from admission to the United States. Even Senator McCarran denounced the Internal Security Emergency amendment to his bill as "a concentration-camp measure pure and simple." In his veto message, Truman characterized parts of the Internal Security Act as "the greatest danger to freedom of speech, press, and assembly since the alien and sedition laws of 1798." Far from protecting the nation from dictatorship, he added, the McCarran Act took the United States "a long step toward totalitari- anism." On June 30, 1952, Congress supplemented the Internal Security Act with the MeCarran- Walter Immigration Act, passed again over Truman's veto. This act updated but hardly liberalized the widely attacked quota system, which imposed exceptional hardship on displaced persons and refugees from Communist countries. More to the point, it required the attorney general to screen out "subversives" within the permitted quotas and empowered him to deport such persons even after they had become naturalized American citizens. "Seldom," said Truman, "has a bill exhibited the distrust evidenced here for citizens and aliens alike—at a time when we need unity at home and the confidence ol our friends abroad." Despite Truman's vetoes, the McCarran acts might be viewed as the logical result of earlier attacks on individual liberties, beginning with the president's federal loyalty directive. What he had already done, Truman insisted, was enough to deal with the problem. The McCarran acts, like Truman's loyalty program and the actions of the FBI, intensified the preoccupation with internal security. McCarthy had effectively used the issue in the congressional elections of 1950 to defeat a Maryland Senator, Millard F. Tydings, who had been bold enough to oppose his reckless charges. With equal effectiveness, McCarthy capitalized on fears of communism to win reelection in 1952, and the Republican party employed such fears that same year to return to the White House. The Election of 1952: Eisenhower Once recovered from the shock of losing the 1948 election. Republican leaders who had opposed the nomination of Thomas E. Dewey and had favored Taft blamed the defeat on bipartisanship in foreign policy and led the attack on it. The decision in 1951 to constrain MacArthur and "contain" the Korean conflict gave weight to their charge of betrayal. At the same time, they made a calculated attempt to win the votes of millions of "ethnics"—those who had roots in countries behind the Iron Curtain—by endorsing a policy of "liberation." The platform adopted by the Republican party in 1952 thus promised to "repudiate all commitments . . . such as those of Yalta which aid Communist enslavement" and attacked the containment policy that "abandoned" so many millions to it. Yet many Republicans remained committed to bipartisanship in principle and to the Truman version of it in practice. Many of them also loathed McCarthy as deeply as most Democrats, a feeling they found it easy to transfer to his misguided friend Taft. Their own choice for the nomination was the immensely popular wartime hero Dwight David Eisenhower, who had turned down the Democrats four years earlier. After tactical successes in unseating southern delegates for Taft, the Eisenhower convention team put "Ike" across on the first ballot. The Taft people took what solace they could from the nomination for vice-president of Richard Nixon, the former IIUAC luminary who had won a scat in die United States Senate after still another demonstration of red-baiting politics. The Republicans' snaring of Eisenhower only deepened the pessimism with which die Democrats approached their national convention two weeks later. Many voters believe d the McCarthyite charge that their reign had -been "twenty years of treason." On the home front, die inflation brought by the Korean conflict also worked against the Democrats. The inflation was dramatized by die steel strike in 1952, which Truman failed to arbitrate and which re" Crumbling Consensus A second far-reaching measure was the adoption of the medicare amendments to the Social Security Act, which the president approved on July 30, 1965. The aged had won a significant victory over the relentless lobbying of the American Medical Association. Medicare provided hospital insurance and certain posthospi- tal care for^virtuallv all Americans on reaching the age of sixty-five. It also made available inexpensive medical insurance covering doctor hills, diagnostic procedures, and other medical services and supplies. In addition, the Eighty-ninth Congress ended the discriminatory national-origins quota system in immigration; provided special assistance to improve conditions in the depressed states of the Appalachian region; enacted programs to promote the purification of smog-laden air and the restoration of polluted waterways; created the National Foundation of the Arts and Humanities to encourage cultural and artistic development; and passed a Truth in Lending Act to give consumers greater protection in credit transactions. Recognizing the critical problems of urban Americans, Congress agreed to a rent supplement program for low-income families and established the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). To head it, Johnson appointed Robert C. Weaver, making him the nation's first black cabinet member. Massive new appropriations were made for older Great Society programs, including the war on poverty, regeneration of cities, and the space program. By mid-1966, the United States was looking to the moon to tire tune of over $5 billion annually. This sum in the To mobilize support for black voter registration, blacks and whites marched together from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama, in 1965. The persistence of racial violence drama* tized continued frustration in the ghettos and the limited significance of civil rights legislation in the day-to-day lives of most black people. Economic differences between black and white Americans loomed larger than ever. Yet the picture was not entirely bleak, and there were some significant breakthroughs. Middle- class blacks got substantial benefits from the "black revolution." Certain kinds of employment, formerly closed to them, were opened. Blacks were more conspicuous now in business, die professions, on the TV screen, in sports and entertainment, and on the college campuses. The new census revealed that black families whose annual incomes exceeded $10,000 had increased from 11 percent to 28 percent during the sixties. This decade, then, was significant for black people in a number of ways, perhaps most spectacularly in enhanced racial consciousness anti self-pride. Recognizing the immense problems that still persisted, Martin Luther King, Jr., sounded a note of optimism: "Lord, we ain't what we oughta be. We ain't what we wanna be. We ain't what we gonna be. But thank God, we ain't what we was." La Raza Since the mid-nineteenth century, Mexican- Americans had found themselves dispossessed of their lands, stereotyped, segregated, harassed, and deported at the whims of law officers. By World War II, their numbers had sharply increased, usually to meet demands for cheap labor. An unorganized labor reserve, politically powerless, they lived in barrios or Mex-towns of the cities. In the 1960s and 1970s, however, the nearly 5 million "Spanish-sumamed" Americans (as the Census Bureau defined them) manifested a new sense of cultural identity. In New Mexico, Reies Lopez Tijerina headed the Alianza, a nationalist movement that eventually required military force to contain it. In Colorado, Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales, an ex-prizefighter and war- on-poverty official, inaugurated a Crusade for Justice. Although Chicano (a form of Mexicano) had once designated Mexican refugees in the United States, it now included all Mexican- Axnericans, particularly those committed to the cause of La liaza (the Mexican "race"). Cesar Chavez marches in support of the boycott of nonunion growers: God knows that we are not beasts of burden, we are not agricultural implements or rented slaves, we are men." (UPI) Few events dramatized their quest for economic justice more than Cesar Chavez's battle in California to organize* a farm laborers' union. The seasonal nature of agricultural labor, movement from crop to crop, anti vigorous opposition of well-organized growers am! corporate tanners bad foiled previous efforts. But in 1965, in California, grape pickers struck for higher wages, improved working conditions, and union recognition. Soon the grape strike (la huelga) and a national consumer boycott of nonunion grapes became a rallying point of Chicano protest. Like those lie sought to organize, Chavez spent his youth in farm labor camps, left school at the seventh grade, and was a devout Roman Catholic. Like Martin Luther King, Jr., he made his religion a weapon for social justice and pledged his movement to nonviolent resistance. Through his National Farm Workers Association, Chavez hoped not only to raise living standards of Mexican-Americans, but to establish a precedent that would affect more than 4 million Crumbling Consrntiis farm workers—brown, black, and white—who lacked job security and economic power. By the end of the 1970s, his efforts had aroused considerable support and controversy. Most important, the union had improved wages and working conditions for thousands of farm laborers. At the same time, and inseparable from the struggles of the farm workers, Mexican-Americans organized around a new ethnic consciousness, broadened their efforts to improve the quality of life of barrio dwellers, and made some significant political gains. Native Americans The "Great Society" programs of the 1960s tried to restore purpose and incentive to Indian lives by redirecting federal policy toward such matters as health, education, housing, and vocational training. More important, the Indians themselves showed a growing ethnic consciousness. Indian groups and individual leaders in the 1970s sought to awaken their people to a new sense of dignity, self-respect, and cultural pride. Even the television and motion picture screens began to reflect a reconsideration of In- dian-white relations. "The whites told only one side," Yellow Wolf of the Nez Perce Indians once complained. "Told it to please themselves. Told much that is not true. Only his own best deeds, only the worst deeds of the Indians has the white man told." But the 1970s gave clear indication that this complaint was finally being listened to. Even so, years of repression and neglect could not be wiped away simply try correcting historical accounts. Problems persisted. In the 1970s, Indians still had one of the highest infant mortality rates in the country; their life expectancy of forty-four years was far below the national average; disease continued to take a great toll. Their average family income was well below that of other groups, and the unemployment rate on some reservations was as high as 50 percent. To draw attention to these problems and to what was seen as a paternalistic government policy, Indian militants in 1973 occupied the Bureau of Indian Affairs office in Washington, D.C., and seized Wounded Knee, South Dakota. Some years earlier, in 1969, Indians had invaded .Alcatraz Island, near San Francisco, and asked that it be converted to an Indian cultural center. None of these actions proved to be anything more than symbolic reminders that native Americans, like their black and Chicano con- To call attention to their cause, American Indians briefly occupied Alcatraz Island in 1969 and took over Wounded Knee, South Dakota in 1973, "We have everything at stake. . , ." one of the Alcatraz demonstrators remarked. "Not just on Alcatraz, but everyplace else, the Indian is in his last stand for cultural survival." The Politics of Righteousness only had the Democrats underestimated Reagan's appeal, but the president's efforts to exploit Reagan's right-wing background had badly misfired. The confidence Carter seemed unable to inspire, Reagan managed to capture with his folksy and nostalgic rhetoric about restoring the small-town values of his idealized Illinois boyhood. Reagan won over the nation's increasingly white and middle-class voting population, and he effectively buried tire old New Deal coalition, even in the South; only black voters remained loyal to the Democratic party. The election results, while an overwhelming triumph lor Reagan, also revealed a new low in voter turnout, with only 52 percent of the eligible voters choosing to participate. The new president entered the White I louse having received a "land- slide" of only 2fi percent of the electorate. Although Reagan's election had been expected, the success of the Republicans in securing control of the Senate for the first time in twenty-six years had not been. And the ideological makeup of tire new senators confirmed the* election of 1980 as an impressive triumph for conservative principles. Reagan chose a cabinet dominated by businessmen who shared his political philosophy. Alexander Haig, his choice for secretary of state, was ideally suited for Reagan's commitment to a tougher foreign policy. "There are things worse than war," Haig told a Senate committee, and he vowed that the United States would not enter any war it was not prepared to win. The inauguration had hardly ended before both Haig and Reagan unleashed a verbal attack on the Soviet Union that had not been heard since the days of the Cold War. "They don't subscribe to our sense of morality, Reagan said of the Soviets; "they don't believe in an afterlife; they don't believe in a God or a religion. And the only morality they recognize, therefore, is what will advance the cause of socialism." At the same time, Reagan and Haig made it clear that the United States would in the future be more flexible in applying human rights standards to friendly governments. Even as Reagan and Haig announced the end of detente, the president turned to pressing economic matters—to what he called "the worst economic mess since the Great Depression." In his inaugural address, as in the measures he subsequently adopted, he sought to lead the nation in a different direction—toward military preparedness, the dismantling of federal regulations, a sharp reduction in the federal commitment to expensive social programs, and a balanced budget. In time, he was certain, these policies would restore prosperity. The new president had come to power on a wave of disillusionment with the government's ability to resolve fundamental problems. In proclaiming that the federal government itself was the root of the problem and in promising to "get the government oil the backs of the people," he signaled a new departure for the American people —a sharp retreat from the New Deal tradition that both Democratic and Republican presidents bad helped to sustain. The American Dream in the 1980s The inaugural celebration that ushered in the Reagan presidency, costing nearly $11 million (much of it donated), heralded an era of opulence and splendor. The new president talked of boundless opportunities, of an "energy-rich nation," and of "an era of renewal." He vowed in tire campaign to restore to Americans a pride in their country and a confidence in its destiny. He evoked memories of an America that had conquered many new frontiers. I'm talking about the very essence of what il is to he mi American. We are different. We have always been different. If we at! feel that way the world will once again look on in awe at us, astonished by the miracles of education and freedom, amazed by oar rebirth of confidence and hope and progress, and when they are amazed anti when it happens we ll be able to soy to the world, "Well, what did you expect? After all. we're Americans.'' But the number of Americans who could share in the American Dream as reaffirmed by Reagan remained questionable. Most found themselves iir deep economic distress, unable to pay their bills, exhausting their savings. The nation was experiencing difficulties absorbing the vast numbers of new refugees flocking to its shores, mainly Cubans, Haitians, and Vietnamese seeking better lives. For black Americans, the gains of the civil rights movement were eroding, along with their standard of living. 