NOTICF: This material may be protected by Copyright Law(Title 17 U.S. code)Rise oftheLIBERTY EDITIONAmerican NationLEWIS PAUL TODDMERLE CURTIHBJHarcourt Brace Jovanovich, PublishersNew York Chicago San Francisco Atlanta Dallas and LondonLEWIS PAUL TODD has acquired national distinction as a teacher andE 178writer on American history and related subjects. He taught American historyfor many years and was head of the Department of Social Studies at BoundBrook High School, Bound Brook, New Jersey. He also has taught Americanhistory, historical geography of the United States, American government,T67and related courses at Queens College, New York, at Western ConnecticutState College, Danbury, Connecticut, and at New York University.Dr. Todd is widely known among social studies teachers for his text-1982book writing and for his many articles and editorials in social studies jour-nals. He has contributed to the Yearbooks and other publications of theNational Council for the Social Studies (NCSS). For many years he waseditor of Social Education, the official journal of the NCSS. Dr. Todd alsohas served as editorial writer for Civic Leader. In addition to his collabora-tion on Rise of the American Nation, he co-authored two series of socialstudies textbooks for elementary schools.MERLE CURTI is Frederick Jackson Turner Professor of American History,Emeritus, at the University of Wisconsin (Madison) and has been VisitingProfessor of History at the University of Tokyo. He has lectured at manyAmerican colleges and at Cambridge University. He also has served ashonorary consultant in American cultural history, Library of CongressDr. Curti was formerly Professor of American History at Teachers College,Columbia University, where he and Dr. Todd began their collaboration oninstructional materials for American history classrooms.Professor Curti has been president of the American Historical Asso-ciation, the highest honor a historian in the United States can receive. Healso received the award of the American Council of Learned Societies forparticularly distinguished scholarship. His long list of distinguished histor-ical writings includes Human Nature in American Thought: A History, TheSocial Ideas of American Educators, The Making of an American Com-munity, The American Paradox: The Conflict of Thought and Action, andThe Growth of American Thought, for which he won the Pulitzer prize forhistory.Copyright e 1982, 1977, 1972, 1969, 1966, 1984, 1951, copyright 1950by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc.All rights reserved No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any formor by any means, electronio or mechanical, including photocopy, recording. or any informa-tion storage and retrieval system, without permission In writing from the publisher.Requests for permission to make copies of any part of the work should be mailed to: Permis-sions, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Publishers, 757 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: For permission to reprint copyrighted material, grateful acknowledg-ment is made to Joan Daves Literary Agency for an excerpt from "I Have a Dream," anaddress by Martin Luther King. Jr., R 1963 by Martin Luther King. Jr., and to Harper & Row,Publishers, Inc. for an excerpt from The Big Change by Frederick Lewis Allen.Printed in the United States of AmericaISBN 0-15-376030-382-141625ContentsUNITBuildingONEthe Colonies Beginnings 170:31CHAPTER1Discovering and Settling the Americas (Beginnings to 1624)21. The first Americans discover and settle a new world.32. Portugal and Spain lead the way to the Americas.83. Portuguese and Spaniards explore and conquer.144. Portugal and Spain plant their civilizations in the Americas175. England challenges Spain and gains a foothold in North America.202The Growth of British Territory and Power (1620-1763)261. Pilgrims and Puritans search for a better life in North America.272. English settlers build more colonies in New England.323. People from several nations settle the Middle Colonies.364. A distinctive way of life develops in the Southern Colonies405. New France grows and threatens the British colonies.426. Great Britain smashes French power in North America.463The Start of an American Way of Life51(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. The southern planters seem more English than American.522. The townspeople mix English with American ideas.553. The pioneers gradually become the new Americans.584. The Africans are denied a share in colonial life.615. The Indians play a major role in colonial history.66AN AMERICAN ALBUM: Agriculture Then and Now714Democratic Ideas in Colonial America77(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. Religious tolerance spreads through the colonies.782. Freedom to learn and freedom to think strike fertile soil.813.The colonists gain valuable experience in self-government.864. Colonial legislative assemblies gain power in America.89VUNITWinningTWOIndependence1763-178993CHAPTER 5Moving Toward Independence (1763-1775)941. Great Britain regulates colonial industry and trade.952. The British face new problems in governing their empire.983. The colonists oppose taxation without representation1004. Tensions increase between Great Britain and the colonies.1045. The gap between Great Britain and the colonies grows wider.1076Winning a War for Independence (1775-1783)1121. British-American differences break out in open war.1132. The colonists decide to fight for their independence117THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE1203. British plans for an early victory end in disaster.1224. American Patriots defeat the British army.1265. Events off the battlefield lead to an American victory.1297Creating a Confederation of States (1775-1787)1351. The former colonies create new state governments.1362. The states unite under the Articles of Confederation1393. The Confederation lacks the power to solve important problems.1448Creating a Federal Union (1787-1789)1501.A spirit of compromise prevails at the Constitutional Convention.1512. The states ratify the Constitution only after heated debate.1553. The Constitution establishes a workable form of government1574. The Constitution separates and balances the powers of government.1595. The Constitution seeks to safeguard individual liberty.1616. The Constitution is a flexible, living document.163CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES166

UNITBuildingTHREEthe Nation 1789-1845201CHAPTER 9A Strong Start for the Nation (1789-1801)2021. The new federal government is organized.2032. Congress deals with the nation's money problems.2043. The national government adopts a foreign policy.2094. Political parties develop an active role.2125. The Federalist Party struggles to stay in power.2146. Federalist ideas and methods persist under the Republicans21710The Nation's Growing Size and Power (1801-1817)2211. The nation doubles in size under President Jefferson.2222. The nation grows stronger during Jefferson's administration2263. The war in Europe creates serious problems for the United States.2284. Americans again fight the British in the War of 1812.232viCHAPTER11Prosperity and Respect for the Unified Nation (1817-1825)2381. The Industrial Revolution reaches the United States.2392. New leaders develop the "American System."2423. The growing nation struggles with new and complex problems.2444. The United States warns Europe to stay out of the Western Hemisphere.2485. American education and arts reveal pride in the growing nation.25012The Nation's Growing Democratic Strength (1825-1845)2551. Andrew Jackson emerges as "the people's choice."2562. The people take a more active part in government2593. Andrew Jackson exercises his Presidential powers.2634. The Jacksonian era ends in an economic depression267UNITThe Rise ofFOURSectionalism1820%-1860%273CHAPTER 13Building New Industries in the Northern States274(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. Improved transportation unites the nation and stimulates business.2752. Wage earners help create the early industrial system.2813. Immigration swells the nation's rapidly growing population.285AN AMERICAN ALBUM: Transportation Then and Now28914Creating a Cotton Economy in the Southern States295(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. The southern states develop into the Cotton Kingdom.2962. The planters control the positions of power.3003. The slaves play leading roles in the development of the South.30315Expanding the Nation's Boundaries to the Pacific308(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. Fur traders and settlers expand into the Oregon country.3092. American settlers create the Lone Star Republic of Texas.3123. War with Mexico adds the entire Southwest to the nation.3164. A surge of migration brings California into the Union,32016Stirring the American People with Ideas of Reform325(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. Reformers struggle to improve American life.3262. Free public education makes a promising start.3303. A strong movement develops to abolish slavery.3324. The antislavery movement begins to divide the nation.3355. Writers preach faith in democracy and the individual.338viiUNITThe NationFIVETorn Apart1845-1865343CHAPTER 17A Time of Crisis and Compromise (1845-1861)3441. The North and South maintain an uneasy political balance.3452. The Compromise of 1850 eases mounting tensions.3473. The long period of compromise finally comes to an end.3504. The North and South move steadily toward war.3545. Southern states withdraw from the Union and war begins.35618A Nation Divided by War (1861-1865)3601. The North and South develop their war strategies.3612. The North and South struggle through four years of conflict.3643. Freeing the slaves becomes a goal for the Union.3704.The war brings severe hardship and suffering to the South.3745. Life behind Union lines undergoes important changes.3766. The Union faces political problems at home and abroad.380UNITRebuildingSIXthe Nation1865-1900385CHAPTER 19Restoring the South to the Union (1865-1900)3861. President Lincoln strives for lenient reconstruction3872. The nation struggles to restore order in the South.3913.The Radical Republicans enact a program of reconstruction3934. White southerners regain control of their state governments.3975. The New South advances in agriculture, industry, and education.4016. Black southerners struggle for a place in the New South.40420Severe Trials for Democracy (1865-1897)4091. Graft and corruption spread in the postwar years.4102. A start is made toward restoring honesty to government.4123. Efforts at political reform move forward.41621Conquering the Last Frontier (1865-1900)4211. The Indians make their last stand on the Great Plains.4222. The government tries to "Americanize" the Indians.4263. Ranchers build a cattle kingdom on the plains.4284. Farmers plow the tough sod of the last frontier.4325. Miners find new treasure in the western mountains436viii

UNITThe Rise ofSEVENIndustrialism1860%-1890%441CHAPTER 22Business Pioneers and the Growth of American Industry442(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. Transportation and communications systems bind the nation together.4432. Expanding business creates more products for more people.4463. New forms of business organization appear as industry expands.4484. Business pioneers give new directions to American life.45223The Struggle of American Workers to Organize457(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. Industrialism creates new problems for wage earners.4582. Immigration adds strength and variety to American society.4603. Wage earners organize to overcome their grievances.4624. Organized labor faces opposition as it seeks reforms.46524The Revolt of Farmers Against Big Business Practices471(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. Farm life remains laborious, but simple.4722. Farmers face complex new problems in the industrial age.4763. Farm organizations join efforts to regulate the railroads.4794. Farm organizations put increasing pressure on government.4815. The farmers fail to win control of the national government484AN AMERICAN ALBUM: Industry Then and Now48925New Life Styles in the New Industrial Age493(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. Cities grow and change under the impact of industrialism.4942. Education responds to the changing patterns of American life.4973. American writing reflects the new industrial age.4994. Architecture and other fine arts respond to a changing society.5015. New forms of recreation enrich American life.503UNITThe ArrivalEIGHTof Reform1897-1920507CHAPTER 26Reforms Under the "Square Deal" and the"New Freedom" (1897-1920)5081. The progressives open the door to reforms in America.5092. The progressives promote more democratic forms of government5113. Theodore Roosevelt promises Americans a "Square Deal."5134. Roosevelt acts to conserve America's natural resources.5185. The progressive movement gains and loses under Taft.5206. Wilson's "New Freedom" expands opportunities for Americans523ixCHAPTER 27"The Big Change" in American Ways of Life528(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. New inventions and new Ideas revolutionize American industry.5292. The lives of farmers improve in the early 1900's.5323. Conditions improve for industrial workers in the United States.534UNITBecoming aNINEWorld Power 1898-1920539CHAPTER 28American Expansion Overseas (1898-1914)5401. American interest in expansion abroad increases.5412. The war with Spain turns the United States into a colonial power.5433.The United States takes over the Philippines, Hawaii, and Samoa.5474. The United States plays a larger role in East Asia.550American Expansion in the Caribbean (1898-1914)555291. Americans begin to build an empire in the Caribbean.5562. The United States modifies and strengthens the Monroe Doctrine5613. Conflict breaks out between the United States and Mexico.56530America's Involvement in World War I (1914-1920)5691. Peace-keeping efforts fail and World War I breaks out5702. The United States attempts to remain neutral.5743. The United States declares war and mobilizes its strength.5774. American troops and ideals help the Allies win the war.5815. The United States refuses to join the League of Nations585UNITThe "Golden Twenties"TENand the New Deal1920-1941591CHAPTER 31A Decade of Prosperity Ends in a Crash (1920-1932)5921. The Democrats lose popularity and face growing unrest.5932. Republicans assume responsibility for governing the country.5953. The Great Depression shatters the prosperity of the 1920's.59932The Great Depression and the New Deal (1933-1941)6061. New Deal measures provide relief and speed recovery.6072. Recovery measures stimulate agriculture and industry.6103. The New Deal carries out reform measures.6144. Opposition increases toward New Deal policies and programs.6175. New Deal reforms continue despite growing criticism.6196. The New Deal's great experiment comes to an end.623AN AMERICAN ALBUM: Sports Then and Now627x

CHAPTER 33From the "Jazz Age" Through the Great Depression631(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. Machines continue to transform countryside, town, and city.6322. Industrialization speeds up changes in American society.6363. The depression drastically alters people's lives.6404. America's minorities struggle against hard times and discrimination6435. Literature and the arts reflect changing ways and times.647UNITFrom Isolation ThroughELEVENWorld War II6531920-1945CHAPTER 34The United States Moves Toward Isolation (1920-1932)6541. America closes its doors to Europe's people and goods6552. The United States moves toward the Good Neighbor Policy.6573. Americans cooperate with other nations in efforts to prevent war.65935Moving from Isolationism into War (1932-1941)6631. The United States broadens its relations with other countries6642. Americans try to follow a policy of isolationism6663. The nations finds isolationism difficult to maintain.6694. The United States becomes involved in World War II.67336Americans in the Second World War (1941-1945)6801. The Allies overcome early disasters and begin an offensive.6812. Americans accept controls and win the "battle of production.6863. The Allies gradually fight their way to victory in Europe.6904. Allied victories in the Pacific bring an end to World War II.695UNITReshaping theTWELVEPostwar World19 15-1960703CHAPTER 37Assuming the Responsibilities of World Leadership (1945-1960)7041. The United States helps to organize the United Nations.7052. The United States and the U.S.S.R. engage in a "cold war."7063. Growing nationalism and Communist aggression lead to a "hot war" in Asia.7104. The United States continues to meet the challenge of communism.71338Returning to Peace and Prosperity (1945-1960)7201. President Truman promotes a Fair Deal program.7212. President Eisenhower encourages Modern Republicanism.7253. The nation admits two states and prospers during Eisenhower's Presidency.729AN AMERICAN ALBUM: Communications Then and Now735xiCHAPTER 39Entering an Age of Rapid Growth and Change739(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. Science and technology make revolutionary advances.7402. The nation builds an economy of abundance.7423. Most Americans enjoy the advantages of a booming economy7454. Poverty in a land of abundance haunts the nation's minorities.749UNITInto aTHIRTEENNew Era1960's-1980's755CHAPTER 40Developments on the Domestic Front (1960-1980's)7561. Kennedy calls the nation to a "New Frontier."7572. Johnson urges Americans to build the "Great Society."7603. Nixon promises "to bring America together.'7634. The Watergate scandals force Nixon to resign.7675. President Ford completes Nixon's second term.7706. Presidents Carter and Reagan face critical domestic problems.77241Reexamining the Nation's Role in World Affairs (1960-1980's)7781. The United States assumes global responsibilities.7792. The United States becomes deeply involved in Vietnam.7833. World tensions are relaxed during the Nixon and Ford administrations7874. World tensions build up during the Carter and Reagan administrations79142Reaching for Greater Freedom and Justice797(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. New patterns of population growth and distribution alter ways of life.7982. Black Americans demand equal rights and opportunities8013. Hispanics share the struggle for freedom and justice.8054. Indians refuse to accept the role of "vanishing Americans."8085. Women redouble efforts to win equal rights and opportunities81043Into the Future813(CHANGING WAYS OF AMERICAN LIFE)1. Americans begin to reexamine their goals.8142. The American economy remains a source of continuing concern.8183. The United States attempts to resolve its energy crisis.8224. Americans share a growing awareness of environmental issues.826HISTORICAL ATLAS OF THE UNITED STATES833CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS IN AMERICAN HISTORY858INDEX863ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND CREDITS879xiiThe first Americans1discover and settlea new worldThere was a time when the American conti-nents lay empty of all human life. From thefrozen wastes of the Arctic to the southern tipof South America, no human voice had everechoed through the wilderness. No human foothad ever left its print upon the soil. The landbelonged to the wildlife that roamed the forestsand plains, soared through the air, and swamin the rivers and lakes.The first Americans. Many historians be-lieve that the first people to discover this im-mense wilderness came from Asia. The date onwhich those first people entered America is lostforever in the mists of history. Estimates placeAmerican Indians bullt prosperous cities while Europethe date somewhere from 10,000 to more thanwas in its Dark Ages. These ruins ring the central plaza25,000 years ago. The widely accepted theory isof Chichén Itzá, once a city of the Mayan Indians In whatthat they traveled from Siberia, in Asia, tois now Mexico.Alaska across land that now lies beneath thewaters of the Bering Strait (see map, pages 10-Settling the land. In these new lands, the11). At the time a glacier, a huge sheet of ice,early peoples gradually increased in number.covered much of what is now Canada and theNo one knows the exact size of the native popu-northern United States. The ice locked up solation by the time Europeans first reachedmuch water that the level of the oceansthese shores. Estimates range from as low asdropped by several hundred feet. This drop in16 million to as high as 112 million. Recent es-sea level exposed the land that then connectedtimates give a total population of 90 to 100Asia and Alaska.million, of which 10 to 12 million lived in theThrough the centuries wave after wave ofarea that is now the United States and Can-people wandered into Alaska from many partsada. Today we call all of these people and theirof Asia. When the glacial ice melted and thedescendants Native Americans, or Indians.sea rose again, the wanderers probably crossedThe Native Americans were divided intothe Bering Strait in small boats or, during themany hundreds of different tribes speakingwinter months, on foot over the ice.more than 1,000 different languages and dia-These people of the dawn of American his-lects. As time passed, they invented new weap-tory brought little with them from Asia. Theyons and tools and learned to grow crops.knew - or soon discovered- - how to make fire.The Native Americans developed rich andThey may have brought dogs. For weaponsvaried cultures,° or ways of life. Some lived bythey depended upon clubs and stone-tippedhunting, fishing, and gathering roots, nuts,spears. The wild animals, or game, they killedand berries. Others depended mainly on farm-provided them with food and with skins anding. Still others hunted and fished to supple-furs for clothing.ment the crops they grew in garden patchesIn their never-ending search for betteraround their villages. Some Native Americanshunting grounds, they moved across the greatwandered across the land in small groups.central plain of Alaska and southward alongOthers settled down and lived in towns andthe eastern foothills of the Rocky Mountains.Over many thousands of years, these people*A culture includes the whole way of life of a people-spread out across North, Central, and Souththeir habits and customs. their religion and education,America.their government. and their arts.3

villages. Some created civilizations, or highlymines into jewelry and rich ornaments for theadvanced cultures, which flourished long be-temples and palaces.fore Europeans came to America.The Incas rigidly organized their empire ina pyramid-like structure. Every member of theThe Mayas. One of the great early Indian civ-society had an assigned place and task. At theilizations was that of the Mayas of Yucatánbase were the farmers, laborers, and artisansand Central America (see map, pages 10-11).Next came the noble class, composed of priests,It rivaled in richness and complexity the civili-military leaders, and government officials. Atzations of Europe, Africa, and Asia. Greatthe top was the supreme ruler - The Inca, whocities - used mainly as religious centers-conwas called the "Sun God." All power and all au-tained broad plazas, massive public buildings,thority flowed from The Inca down through theand magnificent temples that rose above thenobles to the workers. As you will see, whenrain forest. Mayan artisans and artists deco-the ruler was destroyed, the entire social struc-rated the buildings with colorful murals andture collapsed.striking stone carvings and sculptures. Mayanscholars developed a method of writing. Mathe-The Aztecs. In Mexico, far to the north of thematicians created an accurate numbering sys-Incas (see map, pages 10-11), the Aztecs oncetem that included the use of the zero. Scientistslived as hunters. As they wandered, theyworked out a calendar more precise than thequickly learned new ways of life from otherone then used in Europe. Mayan astronomerstribes they met. They developed well-trainedmade such careful observations of the stars andarmies that conquered the peoples aroundplanets that they could predict the dates ofthem. In three or four hundred years, theysolar eclipses.created a mighty empire that by 1500 ruledThe Mayan civilization reached its peak ofmuch of Central America. Though they de-brilliance more than 500 years before Co-pended mainly on farming, the Aztecs alsolumbus sailed to America. Then it began tocarried on a busy trade with distant communi-decline, possibly because the Mayan popula-ties. Aztec merchants traveled far and wide,tion increased too rapidly for the available fooddealing in precious stones, cacao beans, andsupply. The Mayas abandoned their cities, andgold and silver.lush jungle growth quickly covered the MayanThe Aztecs collected great wealth from theruins. Some groups of Mayas were absorbedpeople they conquered. Part of it went towardinto other tribes, while others survived untilbuilding a beautiful capital city, called Tenoch-the 1540's. Their descendants still live in thetitlan (tay-noch-tee-TLAN), on the site wheresame area today.Mexico City now stands. There the Aztecsraised great temples, palaces, and other publicThe Incas. Far to the south of the Mayas, an-buildings.other civilization arose, centered in what isThe Aztecs who constructed this marvelnow Peru, in South America (see map, pageswere harsh rulers. The people they had con-10-11). Here the Incas conquered neighboringquered would need little urging to rise in rebel-states and organized a rich and powerful em-lion against them.pire. From their capital city of Cuzco, high inthe Andes Mountains, ran a network of roadsThe Indians of North America. The Nativeand bridges uniting the empire. Their fortifiedAmericans of what are now the United Statescities, their highway system, and their ter-and Canada did not live as subject people inraced fields and irrigation works on the moun-empires like those of the Incas and the Aztecs.tain slopes were marvels of engineering.In a few instances, several tribes did join to-Like the Mayas, the Incas depended upongether for mutual support or protection. Some-farming for their livelihood. Two domesticatedtimes tribes traded with neighbors and stagedanimals, the llama and the alpaca, served asraids against nearby enemies. As a rule, how-beasts of burden and sources of food. Wool fromever, each of the numerous North Americanthese animals and from the wild vicuña pro-tribes lived a largely independent life in itsvided not only everyday clothing but also ma-own territory.terial from which weavers created beautifulEach tribe adapted its way of life to its ownfabrics with intricate and colorful designs. Ar-environment. Usually tribes that lived neartisans fashioned gold and silver from the Incaneach other had similar ways of life. A region in4

Quetzalcoati (whose name means "feath-ered serpent") was tall and white-skinned, witha flowing dark beard. A kindly god, he hadtaught his people how to farm, make metal, andgovern themselves. Then, for some reasonnever known, he had angered one of thegreater gods and had been exiled from the landof the Azteos. Before he salled away, he prom-ised that some day he and his descendantswould come back from the east.During the reign of the emperor Moctezuma,the Azteos felt that the time for Quetzalcoatl'sreturn was approaching. Would he bring goodor evil? There were ominous signs. Lake Tex-coco overflowed its banks for no apparent rea-son, destroying many buildings in Tenochtitián.The city's great temple mysteriously caughtfire. Comets flashed across the sky. The voiceof a woman was heard wailing night after night,"My children, we must flee far away from thiscity! My children, where shall I take you?"A TIME OF FEARFUL WAITINGAdded to the legends and the omens wereIn ages past, according to legends told byrumors. Tall, bearded men had been seen inthe Aztecs, the Valley of Mexico where theyregions near Mexico, men with white skins wholived had been a place of wonders. The earthcarried thunder and lightning in their hands.gave forth all kinds of fruits and vegetablesThese years, the early 1500's by European cal-without being farmed. Cotton took on beautifulendars, were a time of uncertainty. The Aztecscolors while still on the stalk. The air was sweetwere fearfully awaiting the return of a god.with delicate perfumes. People had enjoyedWhen the Spanish explorer Cortés landed onthis golden age during the reign of Quetzal-their shores, they thought Quetzalcoati had ar-coati (ket-sal-KOAT-ul), the god of the air and ofrived. The Aztecs would quickly learn just howlearning.wrong they were.which most of the tribes had the same sort ofAmerica. A thousand years ago, ancestors ofculture is described as a culture area. The dif-the Pueblos carved apartment-like dwellingsferent culture areas produced a rich variety ofout of the walls of canyons. They built otherways of life on the North American continent."apartments." one with 800 rooms, of stone andIn the next few pages, we will look briefly atadobe, or sun-dried brick.a few of the principal tribes in different cultureThe Pueblos were peaceful people. In ir-areas as they were before the Europeans ar-rigated fields they grew corn, beans, squash,rived (see map. page 61. In later chapters, as weand cotton. They wove textiles and createdfollow the advancing line of settlement acrossbeautiful pottery. In colorful ceremonies en-the country, we will see how these same tribesriched with songs, the sound of drums, anddealt with the invasion of their lands by whitedances, they worshiped the gods and the ani-settlers.mals, earth, and sky that the gods had created.Specially chosen and trained storytellersIndians of the Southwest Three major In-passed on from generation to generation thedian groups lived in the hot, dry, semi-deserthistory of creation and of the human place in it.area of what is now the southwestern UnitedThe Navajos and the Apaches were two ofStates. These were the Pueblos, the Navajos,the Pueblos' closest neighbors. The Navajosand the Apaches.learned how to farm from the Pueblos. They"Pueblo" is the Spanish name for "town." Italso became skilled weavers who created won-is an appropriate name for a tribe that builtderful designs for rugs and blankets. Unlikeand lived in the first "apartment houses" inthe Pueblos, who lived in compact towns made5

Ves-n atlongHisnion- ofgeo-andsacci.then.ban-I onainthewil-, asact.According to Artec legend the god Quetzalcoati was supposed to return fromtionacross the sea For A time the Artecs believed Cortes to be Quetzaicoali . defterscendant This painting shows the Aztec ruler Moctezuma weicoming Cortés intoof athe great city of Tenochtitian as a reluining godain, of'Itlan. their leader. was not among them Killedfiercely Cortes might have perished if he hadhisin a battle, he lay buried in the Philippinenot persuaded enemies of the Aztees to join hisboaIslands, half a world awayarmy With the aid of these Indians, whoMagellan's expedition proved that the landsgreatly outnumbered his own soldiers, CortésColumbus had discovered were undeed part of aland seige to Tenochtitlán, the Aztee capital.lannew world-continents not known to theMoctezuma, the Aztec emperor, was murdered,netEuropeans of that day The expedition alsoand Cortés conquered the wealthy empire. Thegesgave Spain its claim to the Philippine Islandsconquest brought glory and fortune to CortésIn the years that followed Spain sent soldiersand enormous treasures of gold and silver tohisto conquer the Filipinos missionaries to con-Spainar-vert them to Christianity and merchants toSeveral years later. in 1531-35, anothertel-open up tradeSpaniard Francisco Pizarro pee-ZAHR-ohl, ledseean even smaller army against the Incas. TheConquest of the Aztecs and Incas. Mean-Incas, frightened and divided, did not resist,ledwhile. other Spaniards came to the New Worldand Pizarro advanced to the very heart of thenglooking for gold "The Spaniards are troubledIncan empire high in the Andes. There,elfwith a disease of the heart for which gold 18 thethrough treachery, he kidnapped The Inca,Imremedy." said Hernando Cortés (kor TAYNI, acollected a huge ransom of gold and silver, andhisconquistador In their search for riches, Cortésthen ruthlessly murdered his captive. Theenand the other conquistadors destroyed thedeath of The Inca. their "Sun God." left theangreat civilizations of the Aztecs and the IncasIncas without a leader. and control of the em-Cortés landed on the caast of Mexico in thepire quickly passed into the hands of the Span-allyear 1519 as leader of a small army of aboutiardssh550, among them some Africans The Spanishlyships seemed like "towers on the sea" to the In-The search for gold. Other conquistadorsthdians, and the guns. horses, and fron-clad menpushed north and west in search of fame ander.were strange and fearful sights The Indiansfortune In 1513 Juan Ponce de León (POHN-Sayerthought that Cortés might be the god Quetzal-day first explored the land he namedthcoatl (ket sal KOAT uli, returning as he hadFlorida. He was killed on a later expedition byel-promised (see feature. page 5. They quicklythe natives after looting their villages and cap-learned he was not and began to fight backturing some as slaves15After defeating the Aztecs, the Spaniards tore down Tenochtitlan and built Mexico City on the ruins. By the 1700's Mexico City was the largest Spanish city in theworld. The beautiful central plaza of the city is shown in this painting.The colonists prosper. By 1580, before thethe Portuguese and the Spaniards began toEnglish or the French had won even a footholdtransport black slaves from Africa. Their num-in the Americas, Portugal and Spain hadbers grew rapidly, and some historians estimatefirmly established their New World colonies.that by the mid-1500's more Africans than Eu-The Portuguese, unlike the Spaniards, foundropeans were living in the New World.no huge treasures of gold and silver. They had,In the mining regions and farming lands ofhowever, developed flourishing sugar planta-the interior, the Indians, many of them slaves,tions in the lowlands along the northeast coastcontinued to provide the main labor source.of Brazil.After the Spanish government abolished In-The Spaniards were even more successful.dian slavery in the 1540's, the Spaniards stillIn less than a hundred years after the first set-used forced labor but under a different system.tlers arrived, they had built prosperous farms,ranches, and cities in the New World. TheyForced labor. Before the Europeans arrivedcontinued to secure immense fortunes in goldthe Indians of the Aztee and Incan empires hadand silver from the old Indian mines in Mexicolived as subject peoples. The Spanish conquestand in Central and South America. Theysimply substituted European for Indian rulers.operated seaports that served as centers of vig-It was easy for the new rulers to introduce aorous trade between the Old World and thesystem of Indian labor that was only a stepNew. They printed books in the New Worldaway from outright slavery. This system in-and educated at least some of their youth included both the encomienda (en-coh-mee-ENnewly built colleges and universities. Mexicodah) and the repartimiento (ray-par-tee-mee-City and Lima in Peru compared favorablyEN-toh).with many cities in the Old World.The encomienda was a grant of those Indi-ans who lived on a specific piece of land. A newSlavery in the colonies. The EuropeansSpanish settler might receive a grant of landneeded a large labor force to work the colonialand the accompanying encomienda. The settlermines and plantations. At first, they enslavedwho received the grant owned neither the landthe Indians for these jobs, although many Indi-nor the Indians but served as a trustee for both.ans escaped or rebelled. The systems of IndianIn return for the use of the land and the Indi-slavery sometimes produced disastrous results.ans, the settler paid taxes to the SpanishIn the Caribbean islands and coastal lowlands,Crown- the king and queen- in someEuropean cruelty and the spread of Europeancases, to the Church.diseases wiped out almost all of the Indian pop-ulation. Faced with a severe labor shortage,A repartimiento was another system offorced Indian labor. It gave the receiver a18

specified number of Indians to work as forcedFriar Bartolomé de Las Casas. Throughout hislaborers on a ranch or in a factory, mine, orlife he fought for freedom and justice for themonastery. From their meager wages, the Indi-Indians. He urged the Spanish Crown to forbidans, including women and children, had to paypeople from entering the New World who couldtaxes to the Crown and to the Church.not show that they were moved by love andbelieved in freedom. He and those who sharedThe Church and the Indians. From thehis faith and his convictions fought a losingbeginning of colonization, the Spanish kingbattle.and queen, the ruling class, and the officials ofthe Roman Catholic Church had proclaimedGoverning the Spanish colonies. At thethat their major aim was to Christianize thepeak of its power, Spain ruled the largest em-Indians. A few hundred years earlier, Euro-pire in the world aince the time of ancientpean Crusaders had fought the Muslims to res-Rome. In the New World, it reached from thecue the Holy Land for Christianity, Now theAtlantic to the Pacific and from CaliforniaSpanish clergy determined to free the Indianssouthward to the Strait of Magellan.from what the Europeans saw as false gods.In law and in theory, all authority centeredPriests and missionaries came to the colo-in the Spanish king. He ruled in the name ofnies in large numbers. They worked tirelesslyGod and with the assistance of advisers.to convert the Indians. In the towns and cities,In the New World, the king was repre-they built churches and cathedrals. In thesented by two viceroys-officials who ruled incountryside they set up missions around whichthe king's name. The viceroy located in Mexicothey gathered the Indians. There the priestsCity ruled New Spain- - the Caribbean, Centraltaught them the ways of European agriculture,America, Spanish North America, and part ofcarpentry, masonry, and other skills.South America. The viceroy located in Lima,The mission system had faults. It imposed aPeru, ruled the rest of the Spanish colonies inEuropean way of life on the natives and, inSouth America. Lesser officials in descendingdoing so, weakened or destroyed their nativeorder of rank served the viceroys. The smallestcultures. Nevertheless, the kindness and dedi-political unit in the empire was the town orcation of many of the missionaries stood invillage.sharp contrast to the harsh exploitation prac-The system sometimes worked better inticed by other colonizers.theory than in practice. Orders issued by theThe most famous of the missionaries wasCrown and by the Church in Spain had toSPANISH SETTLEMENTS AND MISSIONSCALIFORNIASan Francisco San JoseNomeroyPACIFICFSan Luis ObispoSandeTacsOCEANBarberkNEW* : FePeccaLos SanMEXICOLos AdamGillsSt. Augustine:SanPensacolaLos NacogdochesTEXASSanNew OcleansOffate 1598El PaseAntorioThe BahlaVizcaino 1602CulaymasKino 1680San Juln BadutEncaOULF OF MEXICOSerra and Portolà 1769Chief settlementsDurangoChief missionsMEXICO1Chief missions andpresidiesMexico CityoMies1000oKilometers1600

Indian knowledge and skills were invalu-Each group found it difficult to understand andable to the colonists. The Indians providedaccept many of the other group's ideasseeds and taught the whites how to plant andThe Native Americans had learned to livecultivate the fields. From the Indians the colo-in harmony with their environment Theynists learned how to live off the game, fish, andlived on and with the land without polluting itplants of the forest lands. Along Indian trailsand without exhausting its resources Theythe whites, in time, advanced into the heart ofhad, as John Collier expressed it in his bookthe continent. Many of today's highways followIndians of the Ameriens, a "reverence and pas-the routes of the old Indian trails. Hundreds ofsion for the earth and its web of life."Indian words survive in our language and inThe colonists did not understand theseplace names across the land.ideas. To them success and progress dependedThe whole world owes much to the Indiansupon changing the natural environment Theand their cultures. In agriculture alone the In-resources of the New World appeared to havedians' contributions have been priceless.no end. They were there to be used This wasNearly 500 years have passed since men andespecially true in the British colonies Thewomen from Europe began to settle the Ameri-French relied heavily on the fur trade. whichcan continents. During all that time, none ofdisturbed the environment less than farmingthe settlers or their descendants has discov-did. The French also had fewer and smaller set-ered and developed a single major agriculturaltlements. In the British colonies, though farm-product from the wild trees and plants of theing was highly important So. heedless of theNew World. Yet long before the first Europe-future, the colonists slashed and burned theans arrived, the Indians had developed moretrees, dug and planted the fields, and raisedthan 50 valuable products. In addition, theytowns and cities on the former huntinghad learned to use many other products of thegrounds of the Indians.forests and the grasslands, including a largeThe colonists and the Indians almo had dif-number of medicinal plants still in use today.ferent ideas about land and property The colo-More than half of all the agricultural goodsnists acquired Indian lands by purchase. byproduced in the world today come from plantstreaty, and, at times, by fraud and by forceoriginally discovered and cultivated by Ameri-The colonists believed that property could becan Indians.bought and sold by individuals The colonistsHow different our eating habits would be ifdid not understand that Indian property waswe did not have corn, tomatoes, white andheld collectively by the tribe. An Indian chiefsweet potatoes, and the many varieties ofwas actually a trustee for the tribe and had nobeans! If we did not have peanuts, chestnuts,right to give away or sell any part of the tribalpumpkins, strawberries, blackberries, blueber-lands.ries, cranberries, and crab apples! If we did notTwo such different ways of life could nothave chocolate and maple syrup! If we did notlong exist peaceably side by side. Conflict washave turkeys!inevitable. As the colonists pushed westwarddriving the Indians from their homelands, theClash of cultures. These were and are im-fighting on both sides became increasinglypressive contributions, and the colonists gladlyfierce. Finally, most colonists decided that theaccepted them. Yet the colonists ignored otheronly solution was to exterminate the Indiansimportant lessons that the Indians could havetaught them. The colonists had beliefs and val-ues that differed from those of the Indians.Efforts at conversion. Not all colonistathought of the Indians as cruel. inferior beingsSOURCESI. Deganawidah, and the Confederated Chiefs now uproot the tallestDEGANAWIDAH'Spine tree, and into the cavity thereby made we cast all weapons of warVISIONInto the depths of the earth, deep down into the underearth currents ofwater flowing to unknown regions, we cast all weapons of strife We burythem from sight and plant again the tree. Thus shall the Great Peace beestablished68d andSuch colonists believed that it was importantto draw them away from their own religious) livebeliefs and convert them to Christianity. RogerMAMUSSETheyWilliams, John Eliot, Jonathan Edwards, andWUNNEETUPANATAMWEing itothers tried to teach Christianity to the Indi-Theyans and to deal fairly with them. Judge SamuelU IP-BIBLUM GODbookSewall, who argued against slavery for blackNANEESWEl pas-people, also criticized New Englanders forregarding the Indians as little better thanNUKKONE TESTAMENTtheseanimals.KAH WONKndedOther religious groups also tried to convertThethe Indians to Christianity The Quakers andwusku TESTAMENT.haveMoravians especially tried to understand the: wasIndians, to deal fairly with them, and to proveThethat love could overcome all barriers.hhichNe Worrinteumoh CHRISTsobmingEfforts at education. A few attempts to edu-e set-cate the Indians in European ways of livingJOHN ELIOTarm-met with little success. Eleazar Wheelockf theraised funds to start a college in New Hamp-1 theshire where Indians could be educated and con-aisedverted to Christianity, but the experiment hadCAMBRIDGE:itinglittle success. In Virginia, at the College ofGene kahWilliam and Mary, a few Indian boys were...I dif-taught in separate classes. When the boys re-colo-turned to their tribes, the chiefs complained1, bythat they had been made unfit for Indian life.orce.Benjamin Franklin offered to supervise thed beeducation of some Indian boys. He was cour-This title page comes from a Mamusse Bible translatedhiststeously told that Indian methods of educationby John Eliot. who was known as the "Apostie to the In-waswere better suited to the boys' development.dians." It was the first Bible printed in this country.thiefThe Indians offered instead to take some whited noboys and teach them Indian arts and skills.ribalThe colonists declined the offer.With such deep misunderstanding on bothsides, a long-lasting pattern of conflict betweennotAttempts at understanding. A few thought-the Indians and the settlers was planted andwasful colonists took genuine interest in Indiannourished in colonial America.ard,life. Roger Williams in the 1600's learned onetheof the Indian languages and wrote an Indiannglydictionary. In the 1700's Benjamin Franklin,SECTION SURVEYtheThomas Jefferson, and a few other scholarlyans.colonists became interested in the customs asIDENTIFY: sachem, Deganawidah, longhouse, sha-well as the languages of the Indians. Jeffersonman, Eleazar Wheelock.aistsadmired the eloquence of Indian chiefs at1. What methods of plowing and planting did thengs.treaty-making ceremonies. He also appreci-Indians of the Eastern Woodlands use?ated the dignity and nobility they showed2. Describe the political organization of the Iroquoiswhen facing hardship.Confederation.On the whole, however, genuine concern for3. Indian knowledge and skills were invaluable tothe Native Americans was extremely rare inthe colonists Explain.itcolonial America. Most colonists made no effortr.4. (a) How did the colonists' and the Indians' viewsifto understand them, distrusting and despisingof the environment and land ownership differ? (b)ythem instead. For their part, the Indians foundWhy might such differing views lead to conflict?elittle to value in the whites' way of life. Nor5. Picture Study: Look at the Indian village shownwere the Indians able to understand why theon page 67. How do you think the Indians pic-colonists feared and hated them so intensely.tured there might have made their living?69

This 1799 cartoon concerns the XYZ affair It shows three American commissioners being threatened by is five headed monster representing the Frenchgovernment Money Money Money the monster demandscareer. Although many members of his owneralist majority in Congress passed a series ofparty were demanding war. Adams tried oncelaws designed. they said. to unite the country.again to secure peace. In 1799 he sent anotherIt was generally understood, however, that thegroup of commissioners to Paris.laws would also weaken the Republican Party.By the time the Americans arrived. Napo-These measures, often called the Alien andleon had overthrown the government andSedition Acts, included four different laws,made himself dictator of France. NapoleonCongress passed these laws against the advicewanted to begin his rule free from conflictsof President Adams and other leaders of thewith foreign nations Thus he was eager toFederalist Party.reach a settlement with the United States,The Naturalization Act stated that aliens,The Americans and the French agreed toor foreigners, must reside in the United Statesabandon the old treaty of 1778. The Unitedfor 14 years before they could become natural-States agreed to drop its claims against Franceized citizens. Up to that time, only 5 years offor illegally seizing American ships Neverthe-United States residence had been required.less, the French continued to seize AmericanCongress said that this act would help protectships that attempted to trade with the Britishthe country from enemy aliens in wartime.In spite of the agreement's shortcomings,However, since most newcomers joined thePresident Adams had avoided full-scale warRepublican Party as soon as they became citi-with France. Like Washington before him.zens, the real reason for the law was clear. TheAdams believed that the infant nation couldFederalist Party wanted to remain in office.survive only if it avoided European conflicts.The Alien Act authorized the President toIn avoiding war. President Adams sacrificedexpel "all such aliens as he shall judge danger-any popularity that he might have enjoyedous to the peace and safety of the Unitedwith his own party.States" or those involved in plots against thegovernment. The Alien Enemies Act author-The Alien and Sedition Acts. In 1798. whileized the President. in time of war or invasion,anti-French feeling was running high. the Fed-to imprison or banish any foreigners the Pres-215

fect at once. The Alien Act and the AlienEnemies Act were not enforced, but the merethreat of them drove many French aliens fromthe country. Likewise, fear of punishmentunder the Sedition Act undoubtedly kept manyAmericans silent.Twenty-five persons were prosecuted underthe Sedition Act. Ten-all - Republicans andmost of them newspaper publishers-werfined and jailed. The Sedition Act thus inter-fered with freedom of the press and freedom ofspeech, two principles protected by the FirstAmendment and deeply cherished by Ameri-cans then and now. Many Americans believedthat the Alien and Sedition Acts were unjustattempts by the government to interfere withthe rights of individuals - aliens and citizensalike.Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions. TheRepublicans were furious. They claimed thatthese measures destroyed free speech andgreatly increased the power of the federal gov-ernment, particularly the power of the Pres-ident. They voiced their protest in the Ken-tucky and Virginia Resolutions.The Kentucky Resolutions, prepared byThomas Jefferson, were adopted by the legisla-ture of the new state of Kentucky in 1798 andGilbert Stuart painted this portrait of John Adams in1799. The Virginia Resolutions, prepared by1815. Both Adams and his sometime political rivalJames Madison, were adopted by the legisla-Thomas Jefferson would die on July 4. 1826- the fiftiethanniversary of the republio.ture of Virginia in 1798. Together, these reso-lutions outlined the states' rights, or compact,theory of the Constitution. This theory in-cluded the following ideas: (1) The federalident considered a danger to public security.government had been created by the states.The Federalists said that these two laws were(2) The federal government was merely annecessary war precautions. It was clear,agent for the states, operating under a com-though, that they could also be used to silencepact, or agreement, that had delegated to theanti-Federalist opinion. After all, a Federalistfederal government certain specific powers andPresident would be able to decide which aliensno more. (3) The federal government, or itswere "dangerous" to American security.agent, could be criticized by its creators, theThe Sedition Act was intended to silencestates, if it committed unauthorized acts. WhoAmerican citizens themselves Sedition means,would determine when an act was unauthor-among other things, the use of language to stirized, or unconstitutional? Why, the states, ofup discontent or rebellion against a govern-course.ment. Under the Sedition Act, fines and im-Carried to an extreme, the states' rights, orprisonment could silence anybody who wrote,compact, theory would give the states thesaid, or printed anything "false, scandalous,power to declare null and void, or not lawfuland malicious" against the government, theand binding, any act of Congress that theCongress, or the President "with intent to de-states felt was unconstitutional. The theoryfame."could lead to secession, or withdrawal, of oneIf these laws had been fully enforced, theyor more states from the Union. Of course,would have ended all opposition to the Federal-Hamilton and the Federalists completely op-ist Party. The Naturalization Act went into ef-posed this interpretation of the Constitution216were not recognized by law. In that year theIn the 1830's, however, the small stream ofsupreme court of Massachusetts decided inimmigration swelled to a great flood. Fromone case that labor unions had a legal right to1830 to 1840, more than half a million im-exist in Massachusetts. This decision set amigrants poured into the United States. Forty-precedent, though not a strong one. Wagefour percent came from Ireland, 30 percentearners had to struggle in one state after an-from Germany, 15 percent from Great Britain,other for the right to organize.and the remainder from other European coun-In the fourth place, the depression of 1837tries. Between 1840 and 1850, a million and athrew thousands of men and women out ofhalf immigrants arrived in the United States,work. These unemployed workers could not af-49 percent of them from Ireland.ford to pay union dues. They usually had to ac-cept any job they could get, regardless of whatIrish immigrants. The Irish came to escapethe job paid.terrible conditions in their homeland. In Ire-Finally, during the 1830's immigrantsland during those years, many people workedbegan to come to the United States in largeas tenant farmers on the estates of landownersnumbers. Many of them were willing to workwho lived in England. The landowners did lit-for low wages. Immigration, therefore, forcedtle or nothing to improve the conditions of theirdown the wages of many native-born Americantenants, who barely managed to make a living.workers and almost brought the labor move-Then, in 1846, a terrible famine struck Ireland.ment to a halt.Thousands died during the "Potato Famine,"as it was called. Other thousands fled acrossSECTION SURVEYthe Atlantic to America.The people who left Ireland were attractedIDENTIFY: Waltham system, collective bargaining,to the United States for several reasons. Theystrike, picket line, Sarah Bagley, strikebreaker.liked what they had heard about American de-1. What groups of people made up most of the fac-mocracy. They were thrilled at the reports oftory labor force during the early 1800's?plenty in the United States. Moreover, Ameri-2. (a) Why did workers begin organizing laborcan contractors encouraged them to come andunions during the 1820's and 1830's? (b) What didwork on the roads, canals, and railroads.these unions want?American manufacturers attracted them intothe new mills and factories.3. Why were early attempts to organize unions onlypartially successful?Hardships of immigration. The immigrants4. (a) In what ways was the situation of womenworkers different from that of men workers? (b)endured terrible hardships in reaching theIn what ways was it similar?United States. The following news item fromthe Edinburgh Review of July 1854 gives an5. (a) How were black workers discriminatedagainst in jobs and unions? (b) How were theyidea of their sufferings: "Liverpool wasused by employers to weaken the labor move-crowded with emigrants.The poor crea-ment?tures were packed in dense masses in ill-ventilated and unseaworthy vessels, undercharge of improper masters, and the naturalresult followed. Pestilence [disease] chased theImmigration swellsfugitive to complete the work of famine. Fif-3the nation'steen thousand out of ninety thousand emi-rapidly growing populationgrantsin British bottoms (ships) in 1847died on the passage or soon after arrival. TheAmerican vessels, owing to a stringent [strict]passenger law, were better managed; but theBetween 1790 and 1830, the population ofhospitals of New York and Boston were never-the United States more than tripled. It in-theless crowded with patients from Irish es-creased from about 4 million to nearly 13 mil-tates."lion. Nearly all of this growth resulted fromPoor, unable to move to the western lands,births in the United States itself. During thesemany Irish immigrants found homes in theyears fewer than 400,000 immigrants enteredslums of such growing cities as New York, Bos-the country.ton, Albany, Baltimore, St. Louis, Cincinnati,285

revolutions failed. Other Germans came to (Immigration to the United States,cape military service. Above all. they came1820-1859earn a better living.Most German immigrants settled in timiddle western states - Ohio, Indiana, IllinoBy Country of OriginWisconsin, Iowa, and Missouri. Able. thriffarmers, they built prosperous farms. MarGreat Britain (15.6%)also settled in the cities, By the 1860's thiIreland (38.9%)formed large communities in such citiesBuffalo, Detroit, Cleveland. Cincinnati, Ctcago, and St. Louis.Other (7.3%)Immigrants resented. Most immigranCanada (2.3%)quickly became American citizens. Becaumany had come to the United States in seartof political freedom. they helped to strengtheFrance, Switz., andLow Countriespolitical demoeracy. Because they were eag(5.5%)to work, they contributed to the wealth of thGermany (30.4%)growing nation. Despite these contributionmany native-born Americans resented the inmigrants. They feared that large numbersTotal Number of Immigrants"foreigners" would change the older waysliving in America.1820-24$8,689Some Germans, for instance. aroused suspcion because they organized their own club1825-2989,813gathered in social halls to talk and sing, et1830-34230,442tablished their own churches and schools, pullished their own newspapers, and continued t1835-39307,939speak German. Many native-born American1840-44400,031viewed these activities with misgivingsThe Irish became the chief targets of Amel1845-491,027,306ican resentment Like many newcomers to1850-541,917,527strange land, they tried to settle near theifriends from the Old Country. As a result1855-59897,027growing numbers of Irish people settled in thTotal - 4,998,774cities. Many dressed as they had in IrelancSeurce: Statiation at the StatesTheir accent sounded strange to other Americans. Many native-born Protestants dislikethe Irish immigrants simply because most cthem were Roman Catholies Because the Irisiand New Orleans. Many Irish men went towere "different" in these and other ways, somwork as unskilled laborers on roads, canals,Americans at first looked upon the newcomerand railroads. Many Irish women took jobs inwith suspicion. Suspicion of this kind unfortufactories, where they displaced native-bornnately has been the fate of every large imAmerican wage earners.migrant group.Resentment against the immigrants ofterGerman immigrants. Germans formed theled to friction and violence. Riots broke out itsecond largest group of immigrants. Betweenseveral cities. As more immigrants arrived1845 and 1860, more than 1.3 million Germansresentment against them increased. In 1845 4landed in the United States.national organization of native-born AmeriMany Germans came because, after 1815,cans was started. A year later, this society warEurope (and the German states in particular)reorganized as a secret order called the Suwas controlled by rulers who opposed democ-preme Order of the Star-Spangled Banner ofracy. Thousands of Germans who rebelledthe Sons of the Sires of '76. Members solemnlyagainst political oppression fled when theirpromised to oppose foreigners and to support286

estotheftymybeyashi-htsiserchenna,Do-ba,In this picture painted in 1855 the artist captures the excilement and hopefulspirit of Irish immigrants as they land in Now York City Nearly 400.000 immigrantstolike them had arrived in the United States in the previous year aloneonly American-born Protestants for public of-way of life were causing the revolution takingfice. When asked about the soctety, membersplace around them. Immigrants were only onewould answer. "I know nothing Because ofof many new elements in the changing patternItsuch answers, the organization came to beof American society. However. many native-heknown as the Know-Nothing Partyborn Americans blamed all their troubles, bothidDuring the early 1850's, the Know-Nothingreal and imaginary. on the flood of new im-n-Party. by now officially called the AmericanmigrantsedParty. was very strong in American politicaloflife. In the election of 1854. it polled one fourthahof the total vote of New York and two fifthsneof Pennsylvania's vote. In Massachusetts itSECTION SURVEYelected every state officer and nearly the entireu-legislature However. the election of 1854 wasIDENTIFY Potato Famine. Know-Nothing Party,n-the high tide of the movement In the nationalurbanconvention of the Know-Nothing Party in1. (al What conditions led the Irish to emigrate toof1855, southern members and northern mem-the United States? Where did they settle?inbers split over the question of slavery AsWhy?da result of this split. the Know-Nothing Party2. Why did some native-born Americans resent theagradually lost its strengthimmigranta?n3. (a) What was the major aim of the Know-Nothing35Changing ways of life. From the 1830's toParty? How succesaful was it in achieving thisuthe 1860's, familiar, traditional ways of Ameri-aim?ofcan life were replaced by new and unfamiliar4. Graph Study Look at the graph on page 286.ways, Most older Americans did not realizeAccording to it. from what countries did thertthat machines, factories, and an urban. or city,largest number of immigrants come?287Many Americans expressed their horror atfreedom. They had also confined the Indians tosuch brutality. Others rejoiced that at lastreservations.General Custer had been "avenged." As for theIndians, the brutal massacre at Wounded KneeThe reservations. On the reservations, farbrought an end to all organized armed resis-removed from their original tribal lands, thetance in the United States.Indians confronted the problem of adaptingtheir ways of life to unfamiliar climates andterrains. When they tried to escape, they wereSECTION SURVEYpursued, captured punished, and sent back tothe reservation. To make matters worse, justIDENTIFY: Great American Desert, Bureau of In-when some of the Indians were beginning todian Affairs, concentration, reservations, transcon-adjust to their new environments, the govern-tinental railroad, Chief Joseph, George Custer,ment would move them to different reserva-Geronimo, Ghost Dance, Wounded Knee.tions.1. How did the following contribute to the defeat ofLegally, the reservation Indians werethe Indians: (a) the revolver, (b) the railroads, (c)wards of the government, like minor childrenthe destruction of the buffalo?without parents. In return for the lands they2. Describe and explain the purpose behind each ofhad given up, they were supposed to receivethese United States policies toward the Indians:certain supplies, such as blankets, seed corn,(a) concentration, (b) reservations, (c) militaryand basic food. These supplies were often poorforce.in quality and quantity and slow in reaching3. Compare the actions of Chief Joseph and Geron-the Indians. Some agents in charge of the res-imo in response to United States policy towardervations were honest, but many agents prof-the Indians.ited from corrupt deals with traders and withthose who provided the supplies. The Indianswere commonly treated with contempt or, atbest, as children might be treated.2The government tries to"Americanize" the Indians"Americanizing" the Indians. Even with theIndians confined to the reservations, there wasstill a serious "Indian problem" in the view ofThe Indians, the first Americans, had oncemost white Americans. Most white Americansclaimed all the North American continent asbelieved that it was necessary for the Indianstheir own. By 1890 their conquerors hadto be "Americanized." This meant that the In-stripped them of most of their land and theirdians had to be assimilated into the whiteThis photograph shows the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in southwestern SouthDakota. It was the final, government-run home of the Sioux, who had tried tostop the spread of settlement onto their lands but had been unable to do so.

8 tofarthetingandrere< tojust, toem-"Va-vereIremheyeiveandorn,aingres-SCHOOrof-vithansThese young men were part of an effort in 1900 to "Americanize" the Indians.atThey attended a school for Indians near Carson City, Nevada. Judging from thephotograph. what means were used to "Americanize" them?thewasAmerican way of life and forced to accept theHelen Hunt Jackson, in her book A Century ofN ofculture of the dominant majority. To the In-Dishonor (1881), provided documentary evi-ansdians - reduced in numbers to between 200,000dence of the government's broken promises.ansand 300,000 at that time- - this idea meant giv-The reformers were also deeply disturbed byIn-ing up many of their deeply held values andthe corruption, inefficiency, and lack of leader-hitecustoms. These included the collective or tribalship in the Bureau of Indian Affairs.ownership and use of land; a belief that workSarah Winnemucca, daughter of a Nevadawas only a means of providing food and shelter,Paiute chief, played a unique role in urgingnot an end in itself; marriage traditions, in-reform. She was a scout, a guide, an interpretercluding having more than one wife; many re-at army posts, a teacher of Indian children, theligious beliefs: and even clothing styles andwidow of one army officer, and the wife of an-adornments. Indian men. for example, re-other. In lectures at Boston, San Francisco, andsented efforts to make them cut their long,elsewhere, she spoke out against the injusticesbraided hair. Nor did Indian men and boys ac-to her people. She denounced the corruption ofcept the idea that they were supposed to plantagents of the Bureau of Indian Affairs andand cultivate the soil; that had always beencalled for better distribution of lands to Indi-ans. General Oliver Otis Howard, for whomwomen's work.The vast majority of white Americans nei-she was a scout and interpreter, declared thatther understood nor appreciated the Indianshe "should have a place beside the name ofcultures. They were unaware of the importancePocahontas in the history of our country."of these cultures to the Indians' sense of iden-One reform group, the National Indian De-fense Organization, argued that the deep-tity and self-respect.rooted cultures of the Indians could not be rap-Reform activities. Some Americans, how-idly changed without grave consequences.ever, were deeply troubled by the long historyMembers of this group argued that the Indiansof the white settlers' injustice to the Indians.should be allowed to retain their own tradi-427tions and customs. Most other reform organiza-Failure of the policy. The new laws petions, however, believed that the Indians couldsuaded and enabled some Indians to adopt t]and should be speedily "Americanized." Theyway of life of the white majority and to beconfelt that the Indians must adopt Christianity,American citizens. Even so, Indians who lewhite American forms of education, and indi-the reservations to live in American towns aividual land ownership.cities often met with discrimination in jobs aiReformers who urged individual land own-unfair treatment. Most Indians remained (ership for the Indians actually strengthened,the reservations, clinging as best they couldwithout intending to, the more selfish intereststheir tribal customs and living as wards of t]of land speculators, miners, ranchers, andfederal government. The government policyfarmers who were already occupying the un-encouraging individual land ownership and isettled areas of the West. These groups, whodividual farming among the Indians largewanted the more valuable parts of Indian res-failed when land speculators found loopholeservations, supported the reformers' policy of in-the Dawes Act. Between 1887 and the 1920dividual Indian ownership. Since individualsmuch of the reservation land was, in one wicould more easily be persuaded or bribed to sellor another, taken from the Indians. The lartheir land, such a policy would open remainingthat remained was generally eroded and infreservation lands to white occupation.rior. Moreover, provisions for safeguarding tlhealth of the Indians were neglected. MalnWriting the policy into law. The federal gov-trition and disease were widespread.ernment in the Dawes Act of 1887 made a gen-The late 1800's and early 1900's wereeral policy of what it had been trying to do in amany ways the Indians' darkest period. Ypiecemeal fashion. With the Dawes Act,their vitality and spirit were not extinguisheCongress hoped to hasten the time when theMany continued to insist that they be treatIndians living on reservations would beas separate peoples with worthy ways of viessuccessfully "Americanized."ing human relationships, of understandirThe Dawes Act provided that each maletheir environment, and of sensing their plahead of an Indian family could, if he wished,in the universe.claim 160 acres (64.8 hectares) of reservationland as his own. Bachelors, women, and chil-dren were to be entitled to lesser amounts.SECTION SURVEYLegal ownership of the property was to be heldin trust by the federal government for 25 years.IDENTIFY: ward of the government, "AmericanizDuring this period the Indians could neithertion," Helen Hunt Jackson, Sarah Winnemuccsell their land nor use it as security for aDawes Act of 1887, Burke Act.mortgage. This restriction was intended to pro-1. It has been said that much of United States politect the Indians from unscrupulous land specu-toward Indians during the 1800's consistedlators. The Burke Act of 1906 modified thisbroken promises and acts of injustice. Give eprovision. It gave the Secretary of the Interioramples to support this view.authority to reduce the 25-year trust period in2. Describe the efforts by reformers to improve cothose cases where the Secretary was persuadedditions for Indians during the late 1800's,that the Indians were capable of handling their3. (a) What arguments were made for and againown affairs."Americanizing" the Indians?The Dawes Act and the Burke Act alsoprovided that Indians who accepted the landand abandoned their tribal way of life were tobe given citizenship, including the right toRanchers buildvote. Meanwhile, Congress voted larger but3a cattle kingdomstill inadequate funds for the education of In-dian children. Regular day schools or boardingon the plainsschools far from their homes were set up. Inthese schools the children were taught, oftenCattle raisers began to move out onto thby poorly trained and unsympathetic teachers,Great Plains in the 1860's, long before the Indto look down on Indian ways of life as inferiorans were conquered. By the 1890's the cattland degraded.industry had become big business. Its proc428

sisted and brought misery to many industrialSECTION SURVEYworkers.Between 1870 and 1900, hundreds of thou-IDENTIFY: "company town," technological unem-sands of jobless persons searched for work. Inployment, Triangle Building fire, business cycle.1889, a fairly typical year, about 19 percent of1. How did the move toward huge, corporation-the workers in manufacturing and transpor-owned factories change relations between ownerstation were jobless.and workers?As long as the frontier remained open,2. Discuss the problems faced by workers as a resultfarmers on worn-out eastern land could chooseof increasing mechanizationbetween migration to the frontier or migration3. How did each of the following affect workers: (a)to the city. Many chose to continue farmingrailroads, (b) the business cycle, (c) the end of theand moved west. After about 1900, however,frontier?eastern farm families had fewer and fewer op-4. Picture Study: Look at the photograph on pageportunities to find good, cheap western land.458. Do you find any evidence to show that in-They turned in larger numbers to the cities fordustrialization could bring problems as well aswork, swelling the work force of the cities andbenefits?driving down industrial wages.Low wages and long hours. During the lastImmigration addsquarter of the 1800's, many wage earners com-plained bitterly about their low wages. Un-2strength and varietyskilled male workers might earn no more thanto American society$10 a week. Skilled male workers-those whosejobs required a certain amount of training andeducation - might earn no more than $20 aImmigrants played an essential part in theweek. In both skilled and unskilled jobs, theindustrial development of the United Stateswage scale for women workers was even lower.between 1865 and 1900. Immigrants cameIn 1903, for example, a woman might receiveseeking jobs and new opportunities. In trying$2.16 for a 62-hour workweek in a cap factory.to find places for themselves in their newStill, industrial expansion brought higher realhomeland and in the industrial age, the im-wages to workers as a whole. Nevertheless,migrants were often greeted with suspicion.large numbers of workers, like many farmers,believed that they were not receiving a fairThe immigrants. Part of the difficulty wasshare of the profits from the country's indus-the overwhelming number of immigrants whotrial growth.poured into the country. From 1870 to 1899,Wages tended to be low for several reasons:more than 11 million women, men, and chil-the increasing power of employers over em-dren entered the United States.ployees, the competitive national labor mar-The changing character of immigration asket, depressions, and the flood of immigrantwell as the swelling tide alarmed many Ameri-workers into the labor market.cans. Until the early 1880's, most immigrantsWage earners also complained about theircame from northwestern Europe-Great Brit-long working hours. After 1865 an 11-hour dayain, Ireland, Scandinavia, Germany, and thewas common in American industry. Yet evenNetherlands. After 1890 an increasingly largein the 1880's, many textile workers workednumber came from southern and easternfrom 12 to 14 hours daily, and the 12-hour day(including Poland), Greece,was common in the steel industry.Austria-Hungary, and Italy. The languages,It was indeed a new and rapidly changingcustoms, and ways of living of these im-world with which the American wage earnermigrants were quite different from those of im-wrestled in the late 1800's. The problems ofmigrants from northwestern Europe.wage earners were complex, and the workers,the owners of the industries, and Americans inEffects of immigration on labor. The im-general lacked ready answers.migrants had an enormous influence on Ameri-can life. Although some settled on farms, the"real wages: wages measured in terms of actual pur-great majority moved to the densely crowdedchasing power, or what the money will buy.slum areas of the cities. Here tenement owners460

190In 1869 Joseph Becker painted this picture of cheering Chinese gandy dancersor railroad workers Gandy dancers took their name from the Gandy Manufacturing Company which made tools used in railroad construction Chinese immi-grants supplied much of the labor that built the western railroadsprofited in higher rents from the competitioncontinental railroad. By the 1870's nearlyfor housing between native-born Americans75,000 Chinese workers had settled in Califor-and newcomers from Europe.nia. where they made up about 20 percent ofMost immediate of all. however. was thethe labor force.immigrants' effect upon established workers.Then in 1873 a depression hit the country.Immigrants competed for jobs, thereby lower-As unemployment mounted. California work-ing wages. To be sure. immigrants helped toers worried that the Chinese would takestimulate the economy by creating new de-their jobs at low wages. Fear and insecuritymands for factory and farm products. Mostwere intensified because the Chinese. for rea-wage earners, however, were more disturbedsons not always of their own choosing. lived en-by the job competition of the immigrants thantirely to themselves Thus they did not have anthey were impressed with the stimulating ef-opportunity to learn and adapt to the ways offects of immigrationliving accepted by most CaliforniansTensions on the Pacific Coast. ChineseRestricting Chinese immigration III feelingworkers on the Pacific Coast. particularly inwas fanned into violence by crowds of unem-California, were early victims of the rising dis-ployed California workers who gathered ontrust of all immigrants. By the terms of thestreet corners and sand lots. The "sand lotters"Burlingame Treaty of 1868. Chinese peoplesoon attacked the Chinese, killing some andhad the right to immigrate to the Unitedburning the property of others.States, For some years Chinese laborers hadIn cooperation with distressed farmers,been welcome additions to the labor supply.California workers were able to influence theThey had been forced to accept the hardest andwriting of a new state constitution in 1879.least desirable jobs for very low wages, TheyCalifornia's new constitution discriminatedwere the backbone of the construction gangsagainst the Chinese by prohibiting them fromthat built the western section of the first trans-owning property or working at certain jobs.461The opponents of Chinese immigration alsomigrants who poured into the United Statessucceeded in getting Congress to pass an ex-between 1870 and 1900, profits to owners ofclusion bill in 1879. This bill prohibited allindustry would have been much smaller. Asbut a few Chinese from settling in the Unitedit was, employers could keep wages of im-States in any year. Because this bill violatedmigrants lower than those of establishedthe Burlingame Treaty of 1868, PresidentAmericans. Without immigrants America's in-Hayes vetoed it. Under pressure, however, thedustrial progress also would have been muchChinese government agreed not to object if theslower. Immigrant muscles and brains helpedUnited States regulated immigration In 1882to transform the United States from a predomi-Congress enacted a new Chinese Exclusionnantly agricultural country into a giant indus-Act, which, with several extensions, continuedtrial power.in effect until World War II. The Chinese Ex-clusion Act forbade the immigration of ChineseSECTION SURVEYlaborers and denied American citizenship toChinese born in China. Only students and aIDENTIFY: immigrants, slums, "sand lotters," "liter-few other groups of Chinese could enter theacy test" bill.United States.1. How did the composition of the immigrant popu-lation change after 1880?Other restrictions. The Chinese Exclusion2. Discuss three ways in which immigration af-Act of 1882 was the first of a long series of re-fected American workers.strictions on immigration, enacted mainly be-3. Why did Congress pass the Chinese Exclusioncause of pressure from worker groups. The sec-Act of 1882?ond was the repeal in 1885 of the ContractLabor Law.4. (a) Explain the provisions of the Contract LaborLaw of 1864. (b) Why was it repealed?The Contract Labor Law had been adoptedby Congress in 1864, when booming wartime5. Give evidence to support this statement: Im-industries desperately needed workers. Thismigrant muscles and brains helped to transformthe United States.law permitted American employers to recruitlaborers in Europe. Under the law it was legalfor employers to have workers abroad sign con-tracts agreeing to come to the United States towork for a specified employer for specified3Wage earners organize towages for a specified time. It was illegal for theovercome their grievancesworkers to leave their jobs while the contractwas in force. American workers objected to thelaw because (1) it came dangerously close toFaced with numerous problems brought onsetting up a slave-labor system and (2) it sub-by the new industrial age, wage earners, likejected American workers to the unfair competi-farmers, looked for solutions to their problemstion of cheap foreign labor.through organizationAfter the repeal of the Contract Labor Law,American wage earners pressured Congress forThe National Labor Union. Labor organiza-other restrictive measures. One bill that kepttions were not new. During the war yearscoming up for 30 years would have forbidden1861-65, however, as industry boomed and theentry to any immigrant who could not read andcost of living soared, the labor movementwrite. Congress actually did pass this law ongained new momentum.several occasions, but each time the PresidentIn 1866 the National Labor Union wasthen in office vetoed the bill. In 1917, however,launched under the leadership of William Syl-Congress passed a "literacy test" bill over Pres-vis, an experienced and able organizer of ironident Woodrow Wilson's veto, and the door tomolders. In 1868 the National Labor Unionimmigration was shut a little further.helped push through Congress a law setting an8-hour workday for laborers and mechanicsThe role of immigrants. Except for the Chi-employed by or in behalf of the federal govern-nese Exclusion Act, the restrictions placed onment. After unsuccessfully supporting a third-immigration from 1865 to 1900 were relativelyparty movement in the election of 1872, thisminor. Without the more than 11 million im-union faded away.462

LaceSECTION SURVEYtion seemed to support this belief. Many Amer-ail-icans held that the best workers could still risehadIDENTIFY: National Labor Union, Uriah Stephens,to become managers and even owners. Mostarbitration, strike, Terence Powderly, HaymarketAmericans blamed the entire labor problem as1 ofAffair, Samuel Gompers.well as industrial conflict itself on "power-1. Why did some American workers decide to or-hungry" labor leaders interested in their ownganize unions during the mid-1800's?personal advancement.her2. Describe the (a) purpose, (b) successes, and (c)fL.reasons for the decline of the Knights of Labor.Immigrants and labor unions. Many unionthe3. How did the American Federation of Labor differleaders were of foreign birth. In several laborfrom the Knights of Labor?organizations, especially in the textile andfL4. (a) What is the difference between a craft unioncoal-mining industries, immigrant workersraftand an industrial union? (b) Give examples ofwere a source of strength. Immigrant workersbupeach today.took leading parts in the strikes of New Yorkaft,garment workers as well as in the textileTheworkers' strike in Lawrence, Massachusetts.ledHowever, a great many immigrants op-in-Organized laborposed labor unions. Coming from rural back-A.hat4faces oppositiongrounds in Europe, most immigrants had noprevious experience with labor organizations.rellas it seeks reformsBewildered by their new environment, theyoften did not feel a need to join with native-ainborn American workers in an effort to promoteles,When American workers began to organizecommon interests.'Lduring the late 1880's, they encountered manyMany immigrants had left Europe partly toep-obstacles. The workers' attempts to formbe as free as possible from all sorts of restric-ntsunions and to seek recognition of their unions'tions. Thus they did not like labor unions, withcalright to bargain for them met strong and wide-their dues, their rules, and their insistenceniespread opposition.that no one work for less than a certain wage.in-Many immigrants felt that however bad work-Public opposition. During the late 1880's,ing conditions in the United States might be,vurAmericans in general as well as the govern-they were better than working conditions backeg-ment usually supported employers in conflictsin Europe.ibsbetween employers and unions or between em-Most immigrants, also, were unskilledinployers and workers striking for union recogni-workers. Thus the A. F. of L. made little or noedtion. This opposition to unions is not hard toeffort to admit them to the craft unions. Fi-18.understand. Most Americans had grown up innally, there was widespread prejudice amongin-the older, rural America. Individual workersnative-born American workers toward im-nethen had more control over their fates thanmigrant workers. This prejudice deepenedthey now had in the giant corporations. Mostwhen foreign-born workers were recruited bybe-Americans also believed that employers hadbusiness managers to break strikes.is-the right to hire and fire as they pleased.thMany Americans resented union demandsWomen and unions. Many unions did notw-for the closed shop. The businesses that hadadmit women to membership, but in a few craftet,such agreements with a union could hire onlyunions women played important roles. Mostn-union members. Employers resented this re-notable was the International Ladies Garmenterstriction on what they considered their right toWorkers Union, in which Rose Schneidermanhire anyone they pleased. Many workers alsoand Leona O'Reilly were leaders. The A. F. ofheresented these closed-shop agreements, whichL. expressed interest in organizing women but24forced them to join a union whether theydid not vigorously pursue this aim.:wanted to or not.In 1903 the National Women's Trade UnionL.Moreover, many Americans believed thatLeague was founded, largely by middle-classn-most workers were quite content with their lot.women. It assisted women workers intoThe fact that as late as 1914 only about oneseveral ways, especially by providing financialworker out of ten belonged to a labor organiza-support during strikes. The league stressed465

Under the so-called dollar diplomacy,American bankers, sometimes by invitation ofConflict breaks outthe Department of State, lent money to Carib-3between the United Statesbean governments. When the debtors failed toand Mexicorepay their debts or the interest on their loans,the United States government intervened toprotect American investments. This interven-From the early 1800's and particularlytion took various forms, including the landingafter the Mexican-American War in 1848, theof marines, the supervision of elections, andUnited States and Mexico had been uneasy, ifsupport to the political group that favored thenot hostile, neighbors.United States.Unreconciled - differences. Relations be-The Virgin Islands. Back in 1868 Secretarytween the two countries had been troubled byof State Seward had tried to get Congress torepeated acts of violence, some major, othersbuy three of the Virgin Islands (see map, pageminor. The Mexican people could not forget557) from Denmark. Congress had refused; itthat through the Mexican-Americar War theyrefused again in 1902.had lost one third of their country to their pow-In 1917, however, with World War I ragingerful northern neighbor.in Europe, the United States feared that Ger-Moreover, in the years following the war,many might secure control of these strategicthe borderlands between Mexico and thebases. It renewed the offer to buy the islands,United States remained a source of tension.and this time negotiations were completed.With the payment of $25 million to Denmark,During the 1870's and 1880's, American troopsoften pursued bands of Indians across the bor-the islands became outposts of America's Ca-der into Mexican territory. There were long-ribbean empire.standing disputes involving the water rights toAs the map on page 557 shows, the Virginthe Rio Grande and the Colorado River. Ban-Islands lie at the eastern edge of the Westditry, smuggling, and cattle rustling were com-Indies. United States naval bases on the is-mon along the border. Underlying all of theselands, in Puerto Rico, and at Guantánamo Bayconflicts was the deep-seated and mutually-in Cuba help to guarantee American controlshared prejudice of Anglo-Americans and Mex-over the Caribbean Sea and the approaches toican Americans in the borderlands.the Panama Canal.It was American investments south of theRio Grande that eventually involved theUnited States in outright conflict with Mexico.SECTION SURVEYBy the time Woodrow Wilson became Pres-m-ident in 1913, American citizens had investedrs,IDENTIFY: Napoleon III, Benito Juarez, arbitration,nearly $1 billion in Mexican oil wells, mines,ndRichard Olney, Drago Doctrine, territorial integrity,railroads, and ranches. Most of Mexico's tradedollar diplomacy.was with the United States.ne1. (a) How did the United States justify its interven-mtion in Latin-American affairs? (b) Do you agreeDictatorship and revolution. Mexico wasththat this intervention was justified? Why or whyclosely tied to the United States, and Mexico'sanot?President, for this. Porfirio Diaz, although Diaz, was called the "President," oflargely responsi-)S-2. (a) What were the provisions of the originalbleMonroe Doctrine of 1823? (b) Describe two occa-was actually a dictator. With exceptionsions on which the Monroe Doctrine was testedle-and upheld.three Mexico years since 1877. During his long had rule, and ruled had hefrom 1881 to 1884, hery3. (a) In what way did the Roosevelt Corollary mod-had brought peace and order to Mexicotoify the original Monroe Doctrine? (b) Give ex-amples of cases in which the Roosevelt Corollaryhelped To develop develop Mexico's resources, Diaz hadto the country's resources.en-seadwas applied.investors to finance ando4. Cartoon Study: (a) What is the subject of the car-couraged operate foreign privileges. industries With thismines, factories, and otherp,toon on page 563? (b) What attitude does the car-ol-toonist seem to have toward this situation? Howby offering them specialencouragement, foreign capital, much of itcan you tell?565

This painting, "Impassioned Democracy," is part of a giant mural that decoratesMexico's Palacio Nacional. The mural was done by artist Diego Rivera in the1930's as a visual record of Mexico's leading historical figures and issues.from American investors, had poured intotiano Carranza, plunged Mexico more deep)Mexico. Thus foreign investors and the privi-into bitter fighting and bloodshed.leged friends of dictator Diaz enjoyed most ofthe benefits of Mexico's developing economy.Wilson's "watchful waiting." Many AmerIn 1910 the Mexicans staged a successfulcans were deeply troubled by this situationrevolution and restored constitutional govern-Many were dismayed because Huerta hament to their country. Diaz resigned and leftrisen to power as the result of a cold-bloodefor Europe. Francisco Madero then becamemurder. Others with investments in MexicPresident, but only for a short time. Early inwere disturbed by attacks on their property1913 Madero was assassinated by VictorianoPresident Wilson was urged to send militarHuerta (HWAIR-tah), who then seized controlforces into Mexico to protect American investof the government.ments and to restore law and order.Huerta had many enemies, includingThe President chose instead to follow a polfriends of the late President Madero. His ene-icy that he hoped would preserve the indepenmies also included many Mexicans who de-dence of the Mexican people. He outlined himanded drastic social and economic reform.policy in a speech shortly after his electionThe struggle against Huerta, led by Venus-"The United States will never again seek on566additional foot of territory by conquest," heVeracruz. In 1915 Carranza guaranteed thatdeclared. "We have seen material interestsMexico would respect foreign lives and prop-threaten constitutional freedom in the Unitederty, and the United States recognized him asStates," he went on to say. "Therefore we willleader of the Mexican government.now know how to sympathize with those in therest of America who have to contend with suchAmerican troops in Mexico. Carranza's re-powers, not only within their borders but fromforms divided his followers, who began to quar-outside their borders also." He then urged therel among themselves. One of those who turnedLatin-American countries to settle the Mex-against Carranza was Francisco "Pancho"ican problem in their own way.Villa (VEE-yah). Villa was angry at the UnitedAlthough some European countriesStates for helping Carranza. Hoping to forcepromptly recognized the Huerta government,American troops to intervene in Mexico, VillaWilson refused to do so. He was convinced thatand his followers in 1916 seized 18 Americansthe Mexicans themselves would soon get ridin northern Mexico and put them to death.of Huerta. Meanwhile, the United StatesLater, Villa crossed the border and raided Co-would follow a policy of "watchful waiting."lumbus, New Mexico, killing 17 Americans.Wilson's refusal to intervene pleased mostPresident Wilson announced he would sendLatin Americans. However, many Americansan expedition into Mexico to capture Villacriticized the President as they saw American"dead or alive." Carranza reluctantly agreed,lives and property destroyed in Mexico.and General John J. Pershing led some 5,000troops across the border. The deeper PershingAmerican intervention. As the monthspushed into Mexican territory, the more hos-passed, even President Wilson began to losetile the Mexicans became. For a time thepatience. Hundreds of small revolutionarythreat of war hung over both countries. Fi-groups roamed Mexico, but they were notnally, in January 1917, American troops with-organized and Huerta remained in power.drew from Mexico without having capturedAmerican citizens in Mexico were killed, andthe elusive Villa.there were rumors that Huerta might try toconfiscate, or seize, American property.Mexican immigration. One major result ofThe final crisis came in April 1914, when athe years of unrest in Mexico was the increasedMexican official arrested several Americanimmigration of Mexicans into the Unitedsailors near Tampico, Mexico, which was underStates. Many came as political exiles. Othersmartial law. The sailors were soon released,came to escape from the uncertainties of life inbut Huerta refused to apologize for the in-a country torn by revolution. Still others came,cident. To make matters worse, a German shipas millions of immigrants from other countriesarrived at Veracruz with machine guns andhad come, in search of a better life in a moreother military supplies for Huerta. Presidentprosperous country.Wilson then ordered United States marines tooccupy Veracruz. This action united Mex-ican public opinion against the United States.SECTION SURVEYThe ABC mediation. At this critical stage,IDENTIFY: Porfirio Diaz, Victoriano Huerta, ABCArgentina, Brazil, and Chile-sometimespowers, Venustiano Carranza, "Pancho" Villa, Johncalled the "ABC powers" - invited PresidentPershing.Wilson to send representatives to meet with1. Give examples to show how the economic inter-Mexican leaders and those of other nations toests of the United States and Mexico were closelytry to reach a solution. Wilson accepted the in-interwoven.vitation, and the conference was held at2. What differences and events contributed to theNiagara Falls, Canada. Among its other rec-growing hostilities with Mexico?ommendations, the conference urged Huerta to3. (a) Describe the circumstances that led to Wil-retire. Huerta did retire, faced with the factson's policy of "watchful waiting." (b) Explain thethat his forces were being beaten by those ofpolicy. (c) Why did Wilson abandon "watchfulhis rival, Carranza.waiting"?Carranza then established himself in power4. How did the ABC powers help solve the conflictin Mexico, and American forces withdrew frombetween the United States and Mexico?567

Gains in civil rights. The growing sense ofHoover's administration In addition, at thepride and self-assertiveness led blacks in bothurging of Eleanor Roosevelt, the President'sthe North and the South to make headway inwife, blacks were appointed to important fed-their struggle for equal justice under the law.eral positions. Among them were MaryBlack leaders denounced lynching, white ter-McLeod Bethune, Ralph Bunche, and Robert C.rorism, and discrimination in housing and inWeaver. These and other leaders made up anthe courts. In these areas the efforts of theinformal group of advisers often called theNAACP to bring lawsuits designed to bring"black cabinet."about the enforcement of equal rights forSuch New Deal actions revolutionized theblacks began to show important progress.voting habits of black Americans. By 1936,The major political parties did little to fur-black voters were shifting to the Democraticther the struggles of blacks in the 1920's. TheParty. By the end of the decade, the DemocratsRepublican Party was trying to build stronghad firmly secured the black vote.political organizations in the South. As a re-The depression and the new opportunitiessult, the Republican administrations hesitatedprovided by the New Deal increased the deter-to meet the demands of southern blacks for fed-mination of blacks to win their legal and con-eral protection of their voting rights or for astitutional rights. In many northern cities,fair share of federally appointed jobs. Never-black leaders organized "don't-buy-where-you-theless, Oscar de Priest of Chicago ran as acan't-work" campaigns. In the rural areas, ten-Republican and in 1928 became the first blackant farmers, black and white, often joinedelected to Congress in 28 years.together against wealthy landlords. The Na-The Democratic Party held power in thetional Negro Congress united black andSouth and continued efforts to exclude blackinterracial organizations from all across thevoters. In spite of this, Democrats in northernnation in the struggle for black rights.cities began to seek black support, and blacksDespite these advances and the progressslowly began to join the Democratic Party.stimulated by New Deal programs, much re-mained to be done. For the vast majority ofBlacks and the depression. For blacks theblacks, the elimination of prejudice and full ac-k pride wascoming of the depression was a catastrophe.ceptance into the mainstream of American lifeents in artsMany businesses and banks owned by blacksremained an unfulfilled dream.ouraged thewent bankrupt. Black workers lived with the.s The Newbleak knowledge that they were "the first firedIndian policy. Other racial and ethnic prob-at Howardand the last hired." During the worst years oflems in the nation were becoming critical inth reflectedthe depression, an estimated two thirds of thethe 1920's. The policy of "Americanizing" theng place inblacks in American industry lost their jobs.Indians under the Dawes Act (page 428) hadThe New Deal provided black Americansfailed. Individual farm ownership was contraryd that thewith relief and employment in the Worksto Indian traditions. Many tribes had neverblack heri-Progress Administration, the Civilian Conser-engaged in farming. Indians who did try to:ricans stopvation Corps, and the National Youth Ad-learn modern methods of farming often had tohite Ameri-ministration. By 1936, one sixth of those onstruggle with worn-out, nonfertile land. As forse that self-relief were blacks. One black newspaper writereducation, the government-sponsored boarding,was thelity.explained the meaning of one New Deal pro-schools and day schools deprived Indian chil-gram to blacks: "The really important thingdren of their tribal identity but gave them notity, manyabout the WPA is that it is a guarantee of a liv-identity that they could find meaningful.ecessary toing wage." Blacks also had a share of new low-In 1924 the Indian population as a whole re-within thecost housing, and black farmers and sharecrop-ceived United States citizenship, partly in rec-owned andblack com-pers received benefits from New Deal agricul-ognition of the young Indian men who hadbusinessestural agencies. However, blacks suffered somefought in World War I. Citizenship did notdegree of discrimination in almost all Newlessen the harsh fact that Indian poverty wasimulate fi-Deal programs. A smaller percentage of blacksgreater than that of any other group in thewere employed in the work programs, and theUnited States. The discovery of oil on some In-'OO stores.housing and agricultural programs were par-dian lands brought unexpected wealth to a fewance com-ticularly unfair to blacks.Indians, but for most life was grim. Still, ear-blacks asNevertheless, blacks did receive more aidlier predictions that the Indians were a vanish-under the New Deal than they had undering race proved incorrect. The Indian popula-645

tion increased from about 243,000 in 1863 tothroughout the Southwest and, increasingabout 350,000 in 1924.the Middle West. They entered the UniteStates speaking a different language and praIndians and the New Deal. In 1928 a reportticing different customs. For the most part porby the Institute for Government Research de-and ill-educated, they met with prejudice anscribed the destructive conditions on Indiandiscrimination in jobs, housing, and schools.reservations. The report and other criticismsEstablished labor groups resented them biled Congress in 1934 to pass the Howard-cause they lowered wage scales by acceptingWheeler Act, or the Indian Reorganization Act.out of necessity, almost any rate of pay. WhitThe new law halted the breaking up of res-resentment also grew because these new inervations by granting lands to individual Indi-migrants could cross and recross the border 8ans. It tried to restore to tribal ownership partseconomic conditions in Mexico improved cof reservations that had not yet become indi-worsened.vidual homesteads. The act also emphasizedDespite these burdens, Mexican Americanlocal control. It permitted tribes to choosetook an increasingly active part in the organwhether or not they wished to practice localized labor movement They shared each other'sself-government. It allowed them to strengthenproblems and developed a sense of cooperatio:community life by reestablishing traditionalthrough mutalistas, or self-aid societies. Particbeliefs, customs, and crafts. Under the act, In-ularly in New Mexico, they made their infludians were allowed to engage in any businessence felt politically.of their choice, to make contracts, and to sue orThe United States and Mexico jointly develbe sued in court.oped a program to deal with immigration fronThe Howard-Wheeler Act also tried to teachMexico. The Expatriation Program, as it waIndians to use their land more effectively. Soil-called, was designed to persuade Mexican imconservation practices and improved methodsmigrants to return to their own country. Fronof raising and marketing crops and livestockthe Mexican point of view, the purpose of thewere taught. The new educational programprogram was to revitalize the Mexican econincluded adults and children and made theomy by making use of the skills the Mexicansschool a center of community life.had learned while in the United States. SomeMany problems remained in spite of the500,000 men and women did return to Mexicochange in policy. Some tribes that had beenOnly too often, however, they were disapmore or less successfully "Americanized" dis-pointed with their decision. Conditions in theirliked the new policy. They believed it wouldnative land were bleak and they were readykeep them inferior in American society. Effortswhatever the obstacles, to try once again tcto improve unused Indian lands met with littleimprove their lives in the United States.success. Thus although the new policy broughtThe depression added to the burdens of thegreater freedom and recognition to the Indians,Mexican Americans Jobs in agriculture andits aim of raising Indian standards of livingon railroads became scarce. Increasingly, thewas not realized.Mexican Americans moved from rural areasinto the cities, where there was at least someMexican Americans. As you may recall,hope, however slim, of finding work. At leastmany former citizens of Mexico became citi-in the cities, if jobs were not available, Newzens of the United States at the close of theDeal relief programs were.Mexican War in 1848. In the 1890's increasingnumbers of Mexicans migrated into the UnitedStates looking for jobs. The need for labor dur-SECTION SURVEYing World War I and the desire of many Mex-icans to escape the troubled economic and po-IDENTIFY: Marcus Garvey, The New Negro, Oscarlitical conditions in Mexico increased the flowde Priest, "black cabinet," National Negro Congress,across the border. During the 1920's about halfIndian Reorganization Act, mutalistas, Expatriationa million new Mexican immigrants arrived.Program.Most of these immigrants were poor fami-1. What factors helped cause the race riots of 1919?lies from rural areas. They were forced to work2. (a) What does the term "new Negro" mean? (b)for low wages as migrant laborers in agricul-How did growing black pride affect business? Howture, in mining, and in railroad constructiondid it affect politics?646more Europeans settled in the United States1America closes its doors tothan in any previous decade.Europe's people and goodsWhy did a nation of immigrants and de-scendants of immigrants suddenly close itsdoors? One reason was the anti-European feel-ing that swept over America after the war.After World War I, the United States inHowever, certain Americans had reasons ofsome ways drew back from involvement intheir own.world affairs. America refused, for example, toOrganized labor, for example, argued thatjoin the League of Nations in part to avoidnew immigrants were willing to work for lowerbecoming entangled again in Europe's troubleswages than American workers and thus pulledand quarrels.down the standard of living. Industrialists hadThe United States also tried, with consider-formerly favored immigration as a source ofable success, to keep out the people and prod-cheap, unskilled labor. By 1920, with theucts of Europe and Asia. The immigration andrailroads built and basic industries such astariff laws passed during this period were thesteel well developed, they no longer neededmost restrictive in American history.masses of unskilled workers. Finally, many es-tablished Americans felt that the newer im-Closing the doors. During the 1920's themigrants, mainly from eastern and southernUnited States reversed one of its oldest tradi-Europe, did not easily become "Americanized."tions by almost completely halting immigra-tion. Earlier, it is true, laws and internationalThe immigration laws. Congress passed threeagreements had excluded the Chinese, the Jap-laws in the 1920's that progressively restrictedanese, and most other Asians Despite theseimmigration from Europe. The Emergencyexceptions, few Americans had questioned theQuota Act of 1921 introduced a quota system.historic role of the United States as a place ofThis limited the number of Europeans andrefuge and of opportunity for immigrants. In-others who could be admitted to 3 percent ofdeed, during the decade before World War I,the total number of persons of their nationalityIII-will toward the growing numbers of immigrants coming to the United Statesbegan long before the 1920's, as this 1891 cartoon shows. What is the cartoonist'sopinion of the Immigrants of the time? What evidence can you find of it?PLE0

the ink was hardly dry on the peace treatiesImmigration to the United States, 1890-1939before the nations of the world were engaged inanother war- - a trade war fought with tariffs.By Country of OriginAs you have read, the Fordney-McCumber Tar-Italy (18.8%).Austria-Hungaryiff of 1922 increased import duties on hundreds(17.0%)of items.In 1930 Congress passed the Hawley-SmootTariff Act, providing for the highest tariff inAmerican history. President Hoover felt thatOther (14.7%)Russia (13.6%)some of the rates were too high. He also pon-dered a petition signed by 1,000 leading econo-Maxico (3.2%)mists who argued that such high tariffs wouldraise prices, create hardships for AmericanIraland (5.0%)consumers, and seriously interfere with worldCarata (8.4%)Scandinavia (5.8%)trade. Nevertheless, believing that protectiveGermany (6.8%)Great Britain (6.7%)tariffs encouraged business prosperity, Hooversigned the bill.Total Number of ImmigrantsAmerica's high-tariff policy proved a cruel1890-942,320,5451913-191,172,679blow to many countries in Latin America and1895-991,373,6491920-242,774,680in Europe. When America's high tariffs de-1900-043,255,1491925-291,520,910prived these countries of their best markets in1905-094,947,2391930-34426,953the United States, their economic strength1910-145,174,7011935-39272,422declined. Factories closed, people were thrownout of work, and the surplus of farm productsTotal - 23,238,947mounted steadily.Source: Statarical Absteer of the UnitiedSome countries struck back by raising theirown tariff barriers against American goods.Thus the high tariffs that Congress hopedresiding in the United States in the year 1910.would aid American industry in the end de-The act also set a total yearly limit of aboutprived many American businesses and farms of350,000 immigrants.the foreign markets they badly needed.In 1924 an even more restrictive law re-duced the yearly quota from 3 to 2 percent. ItWar debts and high tariffs. America's high-also changed the base year from 1910 to 1890.tariff policy created still another problem. HowThis change discriminated against Italians,could European countries pay their war debtsAustrians, Russians, and other eastern andto the United States if they could not sell theirsouthern Europeans who had immigrated togoods in this country?America mainly after 1890.The war had changed America's relation toFinally, the National Origins Act of 1929Europe from debtor to creditor. Before the warshifted the base year of immigration to 1920.American business leaders had borrowedHowever, it counterbalanced this more liberalmoney from Europeans to finance new indus-provision by reducing the yearly limit on im-tries. During the period before the Unitedmigrants to 150,000.States entered the war in 1917, however, Euro-The new immigration policies aroused apeans began to sell their American stocks andgreat deal of bitterness, especially among east-bonds to buy war goods. As the war progressed,ern and southern Europeans. The Japanesethe American government also loaned hugewere also aroused because the immigration actsums to the warring countries. As a result,of 1924 ended the Gentlemen's Agreement ofby 1918 nearly all the European countries1907. Japan had faithfully observed the agree-owed money to the United States. The totalment and resented the policies which closedamounted to about $10 billion.the doors to Japanese immigrants.The American government reduced the in-terest rates on the loans. It also arranged forThe war of tariffs. While closing its doors tothe debtor nations to repay the money over aimmigrants, the United States also raised tar-long period of time. Despite the generous terms,iff barriers to keep out foreign products. In fact,the bankrupt European countries emerged656

an'sboth a patriotic duty and a sound investment.In July 1942 the National War Labor BoardHowever, these measures alone could not pre-(NWLB) tried to work out a compromise. Iter-vent inflation.granted a 15-percent wage increase to meet theetIn 1942, following the example of Europeanrises in living costs. Several months latervutgovernments, Congress created the Office ofCongress and President Roosevelt authorizedthePrice Administration (OPA). The OPA es-the NWLB to freeze the wages and salaries ofaretablished ceilings, or top limits, on prices andall workers at the newly established levels.iil.set up a rationing system. The OPA issued ra-For a time there was relatively little trou-in-tion books containing coupons that purchasersble. However, as prices continued to rise, laborts,had to use in addition to money to buy gaso-again became restless, and here and thereveline, fuel, shoes, coffee, sugar, fats and oils,strikes broke out. In such instances the govern-Inmeat, butter, and canned goods. The OPA alsoment usually stepped in and for the most partpsestablished rent controls.settled the disputes quickly.ar-Despite these efforts, the prices of consumerThe government also tried to regulate pro-goods rose, especially food prices. By 1944 thefits -mainly by means of taxation. Personal in-recost of living had risen 30 percent above 1941come taxes were greatly increased for people inesprewar levels. Some Americans violated thethe higher income brackets. The most drasticntprice control and rationing system by payingmeans of controlling profits was the excessn-exorbitant prices to obtain more than theirprofits tax, levied in 1940. This tax obliged cor-el-share of rationed products. Most Americans,porations to pay to the government as much astohowever, accepted price controls and rationing90 percent of all excess profits. Americans did:has wartime necessitiesnot like government controls. Nevertheless,irthey accepted them with the understandingControl of wages and profits. Shortly afterthat they would be removed when thedthe attack on Pearl Harbor, the leaders ofemergency was over.yorganized labor promised President Roosevelt3-that American workers would not strike dur-The Japanese Americans. The upheaval ining the war. At the same time, they insistedeveryday life resulting from these controls andthat the government had to ensure thatfrom the whole vast war effort revealed the$workers would be fairly treated. By the springextraordinary willingness of the Americanof 1942, however, the cost of living had risen,people to make sacrifices for the nationaland workers were becoming restless.emergency. Despite discomforts and sacrifices,Hastily bullt tarpaper barracks were the new homes for Japanese Americans in1942 when they were forced to leave their former homes and relocate in detentioncamps. This camp was set up in the desert near Manzanar, California.the people maintained a remarkably high levelPrejudice and discrimination against Mex-of morale.ican Americans in jobs, housing, and recrea-Americans also suffered deep anxieties andtion facilities also aroused bitter resentment.fears. However, these fears did not lead to theThis resentment, reaching a boiling point inwidespread repressions of minority groups thatLos Angeles in 1943, erupted in a riot betweenoccurred in World War I. The tragic exceptionservicemente and Mexican Americans.to this overall tolerance was the forced reloca-Aware of their contributions to the war ef-tion of some 100,000 Americans of Japanesefort, blacks and other minorities became in-birth or parentage.creasingly restless. As they listened to patri-After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor,otic speeches about freedom for all, theymany Americans were genuinely fearful of abecame more determined to make these idealsJapanese attack on the United States. Thismeaningful for themselves.fear was soon turned against the Nisei- na-tive-born Americans whose ancestors camefrom Japan. As a result, most Japanese Ameri-SECTION SURVEYcans-the great majority of whom lived inCalifornia-were forced to leave their homesIDENTIFY: OWM, WPB, WMC, Selective Serviceand were taken to detention camps in otherSystem, price controls, rationing, Nisei.states, where they were imprisoned until the1. (a) Why did the federal government establishend of the war. Most of the Nisei lost theircontrols and regulations over many aspects ofhomes and businesses. Yet there had neverAmerican life during the war? (b) What werebeen any real proof that these Japanese Ameri-some of these controls? (c) How did they affectcans had been disloyal. Indeed, nearly all of theindividuals?Nisei remained loyal, patriotic American citi-2. How did the following contribute to the warzens despite their harsh, unfair treatment.effort: (a) unions, (b) women, (c) minorities.Many of those allowed to serve in the armed3. Graph Study: Examine the graph on page 688. (a)forces distinguished themselves for bravery.About how many women were in the labor forceAfter the war Americans regretted theirin 1920? in 1950? (b) What percentage of theunjustified actions against the Nisei. In 1945labor force were women in 1920? in 1950? (c)the Nisei were permitted to leave the detentionWhat may have contributed to the changes?camps and settle wherever they wished. In1948 Congress passed an act to help the Niseirecover a part of their losses.Minorities in wartime. American minoritiesThe Allies graduallycontributed not only to the fighting but to ef-forts on the home front as well. In 1941 Presi-3fight their waydent Roosevelt directed that a Fair Employ-to victory in Europement Practices Committee be set up to enddiscriminatory hiring policies in defense indus-tries. As a result, the doors of the defense in-In the summer of 1942, as the tide of wardustries opened to minority workers.was turning in favor of the Allies, PresidentLess was accomplished, however, in pro-Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill de-moting equal housing opportunities in thecided to strike at what Churchill called theovercrowded cities. Discrimination on the part"soft underbelly" of the Axis.of white Americans led to outbursts of violenceand even riots in several cities. In Detroit inVictory in North Africa. The opening blow,1943, for example, federal troops restored orderas you recall, fell late in October 1942, whenafter 25 blacks and 9 whites died in a riot.the British broke through Rommel's lines at ElIn 1942 the United States and MexicoAlamein and began to drive the Germans backsigned a treaty. Under its terms thousandsinto Libya. Meanwhile, on November 8, a forceof Mexicans known as braceros entered theof 500 troop transports and 350 warships underUnited States on a temporary basis as farmGeneral Eisenhower's command landed thou-workers. Their efforts helped keep vital foodsands of Allied troops in French Morocco andproduction high during the war.Algeria. The African offensive was the greatest690

novels reflecting the deadening effect of confor-blacks - that bore the heaviest burdens of pov-mity were Sloan Wilson's The Man in the Grayerty. In their struggle to overcome prejudiceFlannel Suit and W. H. Whyte, Jr.'s, Theand discrimination, America's minorities bat-Organization Man. J. D. Salinger's widely readtled for freedom, justice, and dignity as well asThe Catcher in the Rye vividly captured the lifefor a share of the nation's material goods.of an adolescent boy coming of age in the post-war years. Ralph Ellison's novel Invisible ManThe first Americans. In this struggle no mi-dealt with the attempt by a black to find hisnority in the country faced more obstacles thanplace in a hostile white society.the American Indians. In addition to discrimi-One of the most influential books of thenation, severe unemployment, and widespread1950's was The Affluent Society by the Harvardpoverty, the Indians have had to cope witheconomist, John Kenneth Galbraith. Galbraithnumerous federal regulations and controls.reminded privileged Americans that in theirTheir problems have been compounded bypursuit of personal wealth they were neglect-shifting federal policies and programs.ing the nation's poor, permitting the cities toThe efforts to overcome these handicapsdecay, and causing the environment to deterio-have been carried on by Indians from all walksrate alarmingly.of ife-doctors, lawyers, scientists, writers,teachers, singers, athletes, and others. Theirshas been a long, difficult, and at times dis-SECTION SURVEYheartening struggle.IDENTIFY: "baby boom," urban renewal, suburb,Failure of the Reorganization Act. As youNational Defense Education Act of 1958, John Ken-have read (pages 645-46), Congress had re-neth Galbraith.versed a long-standing policy when it adopted1. During the 1950's America's population was mov-the Indian Reorganization Act in 1934. Thising in a great human tide across the face of theact was intended to encourage Indians to prac-land. Explain this statement in terms of (a) thetice self-government and to strengthen tribalgrowth of central cities and (b) the growth ofcustoms and tribal life. The promises of the actsuburbs.were seldom fulfilled. Some tribes that had al-2. How were the following related to one another:ready managed fairly well in adapting to the(a) increased leasure time, (b) the two-car family,white culture rejected the new policy. They(c) the rising popularity of television?claimed that it would keep them in an inferior3. Why were more women entering the labor forcestatus in relation to the white majority.in the 1950's?Also, many of the 25,000 young Indians4. Graph Study: In 1930 the population of thewho had served in the armed forces duringUnited States was about 120 million. Make aWorld War II were reluctant to return to tribalchart or graph reflecting population growth inways of life. These Indian veterans felt that thethe years that followed: 1930's -increase of 9million people; 1940's-increase - of 19 million;country for which they had fought and for1950's- - -increase of 28 million. Why was the in-which many had died owed them the full rightscrease so great during the 1950's?and opportunities of American citizenship.They believed that the complete recognition ofthese rights was more important than preserv-ing tribal ways of life.Poverty in a land ofThe termination policy. During the 1950's4abundance haunts thethe federal government once again adopted anation's minoritiesnew Indian policy. In this policy it reversedmuch of the 1934 program and established en-tirely new goals. One of the new goals wasMillions of Americans did not share in theknown as "termination."prosperity of the postwar years. The poor cameThe termination program was intended tofrom all races and all national backgrounds.end all federal ties with the Indians. Responsi-They lived in rural areas and in the cities.bility was to be transferred to those states withHowever, it was the nation's minorities -large Indian populations. Acting under thisparticularly Indians, Hispanic Americans, andpolicy, the government terminated federal ser-749

policy of importing contract labor was con-tinued after the war. From the Mexican pointof view, it provided work for otherwise unem-ployed workers. It also provided relief throughthe money sent home by the braceros to impov-erished Mexican families. However, oppositionto the program was building up on both sides ofthe border. The Catholic Church opposed it onthe ground that it broke up families. The Mex-ican government began to object because theMexican economy was expanding and laborwas needed in Mexico itself. The program alsomet growing opposition from organized laborin the United States. The newly-formed farmlabor unions pointed out that it was competi-tively unfair to American workers.Before the program was abandoned in 1962,more than 4.5 million Mexican workers hadbeen imported as contract laborers into theUnited States. This number does not includethe unknown number of illegal migrants, orundocumented immigrants.Puerto Ricans were often at the bottom of the economicSpanish-speaking immigrants. The bracerosladder, but many nevertheless had a fierce pride intheir cultural heritage. This pride is evident here in theirwho came as farm laborers were required to re-annual parade up Fifth Avenue in New York City.turn to Mexico after their contracts ended.During the 1950's, however, more than360,000 Mexican immigrants entered thevices for a number of tribes, including theUnited States to become American citizens.Menominees of Wisconsin and the Klamaths ofThey were joined by another 450,000 Spanish-Oregon. The policy was a disaster for the Indi-speaking immigrants from countries in Cen-ans because states were unwilling or unable totral and South America and the West Indies.provide needed services.These newcomers came from all walks of life. AThe second goal of the new Indian policylarge percentage were highly educated profes-was to assimilate the Indians into the majoritysionals and white-collar workers.culture. This called for relocating as many In-dians as possible in cities. The Bureau of In-Puerto Ricans. By the 1950's Puerto Ricansdian Affairs attracted thousands of Indians tomade up one of the largest Spanish-speakingcities with promises of job training and jobgroups in the United States. Unlike other im-placement In many cases these promises weremigrants, who had to be naturalized to becomenot kept. Some Indians managed to overcomeAmerican citizens, Puerto Ricans were Ameri-great odds and achieve success. Many others,can citizens at birth. As you recall, Puerto Ricofacing discrimination and without the supportbecame an unincorporated territory of theof tribal life, lived in loneliness and poverty inUnited States in 1898 and then, after 1932, athe cities, which remained for them a strangecommonwealth Since 1898, Puerto Ricansenvironment. Some, embittered by the experi-have been legally entitled to the rights andence, returned to the reservations. For most In-privileges of American citizenship.dians, relocation, like termination, proved toEven before the depression of the 1930'sbe a failure.brought severe hardships to their island, manyPuerto Ricans had migrated to New York CityImmigration from Mexico. People fromin search of jobs. During and after the depres-Mexico also faced hardships during the post-sion, they came in ever-increasing numbers.war years. As you have read (page 690), theBetween 1945 and 1960, migration to thebracero program encouraged the entry of Mex-United States varied between 30,000 andican farm workers during World War II. The45,000 annually.50Puerto Ricans who moved to New YorkCity, Newark, Chicago, and other northernMedian Family Income,cities faced many problems. Most came from1939-1979rural villages. They lacked the skills necessaryto compete for jobs in a highly complex urban$20,000environment. Many had only a limited knowl-edge of the English language, which hand-icapped them both in the labor market and inthe schools. Perhaps most serious, they were$15,000victims of prejudice and discrimination.Because of these handicaps, most of thenewcomers were able to get only unskilled jobsthat paid the lowest wages. Puerto Rican fami-$10,000lies were crowded into such tenement districtsas Spanish Harlem in New York City,In some ways the experience of PuertoRicans in the United States resembled that of$5,000earlier immigrants. As you will see (pages806-07), many gradually moved up the eco-nomic ladder and found places in small busi-nesses, semi-skilled trades, the professions, and$1,00019391950196019701979the arts. In the 1950's, however, progress ofthis kind remained beyond the grasp of mostwhite familiesPuerto Ricans.non-white familiesA major victory for black Americans. BlackSoutces Matarical of the United Stateral the Delled StatesAmericans returning from World War II, likeother minority veterans, often faced bitter dis-appointments. In spite of their war service,they continued to be treated in many ways as"separate but equal" facilities were constitu-second-class citizens. To be sure, by the 1940'stional. The Court unanimously ruled that stateblacks had won substantial successes in everyor local laws requiring black citizens to sendfield of activity - science, medicine, the profes-their children to separate schools violated thesions, business, music and art, entertainment,Fourteenth Amendment.and sports. At best, however, only a very smallSeveral months after the 1954 decision, theminority of American blacks had achievedSupreme Court required local school authori-such success. For most blacks, the doors of op-ties to work out plans for gradually endingportunity remained closed or at best only

segregation in public school systems. The Su-slightly open.preme Court also instructed federal districtDuring the years after the war, the move-courts to require local school authorities toment to end discrimination in government,"make a prompt and reasonable start towardbusiness, education, and sports speeded up.full compliance" and to move "with all deliber-President Truman urged Congress to adoptate speed in carrying out the law."legislation strengthening civil rights laws andtheir enforcement. When Congress failed toDirect action. Encouraged by the Supremeact, Truman used his executive powers to orderCourt ruling, civil rights supporters redoubledan end to segregation in the armed forces andtheir efforts to break down discrimination Dis-in the government.satisfied with the slow response in a number ofstates to the Supreme Court's rulings, blacksThe Supreme Court rules. The most impor-turned to direct action.tant development, however, was the SupremeEarly in December 1955 Rosa Parks, a 40-Court decision of 1954 during Eisenhower's ad-year-old seamstress in Montgomery, Alabama,ministration In Brown v. Board of Educationtook a courageous step. Her action led to a na-of Topeka, the Court reverse the 58-year-oldtionwide protest movement. On her way homePlessy v. Ferguson ruling (see page 406) thatfrom work, Rosa Parks boarded a bus and took751A little over a year after Rosa Parks was arrested, she again boarded a bus inMontgomery, Alabama. This time, though, she was no longer expected to sit at theback. The successful boycott had enabled her to sit anywhere she chose.a seat in the front section reserved for whites.when several black students tried to enter theThe driver ordered her to move to the back. Sheall-white high school.refused and was arrested.Responding to the growing unrest and vio-The next day, led by a 26-year-old minister,lence, Congress in 1957 adopted a Civil RightsMartin Luther King, Jr., 50,000 blacks joinedAct designed to secure voting rights for blackin a boycott of Montgomery's bus system. Itcitizens. This was the first civil rights act sincewas a peaceful protest, and it worked. WhenReconstructionthe bus system began to drift toward bank-During the 1960's and the 1970's, the strug-ruptcy, King and other black leaders were ar-gle by blacks and other minorities for freedomrested. Finally, almost a year after Rosaand justice became increasingly intense. YouParks's initial action, the Supreme Court de-will read about this struggle and the govern-clared that the Alabama segregation law wasment's response in Chapter 42.unconstitutional.Inspired by the victory in Alabama, MartinSECTION SURVEYLuther King called a conference of southernblack leaders. Early in 1957 these leadersIDENTIFY: termination, relocation, undocumentedorganized the Southern Christian Leadershipimmigrants, Rosa Parks, Montgomery bus boycott,Conference (SCLC). The organization an-SCLC.nounced to the nation that it intended to attackdiscrimination everywhere in the country by1. (a) Why did the Indian Reorganization Act fail?nonviolent means.(b) What new Indian policy was set up in the1950's? (c) How successful was the new policy?Congress finally acts. Efforts by both whites2. (a) Identify several groups of Spanish-speakingand blacks to avoid violence were only par-Americans. (b) How are their backgrounds dif-ferent from one another? (c) How has their treat-tially successful. Attempts to integrate schoolsment in the United States been similar?as the Supreme Court had directed in 1954 ledto violence in a number of communities. In3. Why is each important to the black civil rightsmovement: (a) Brown v. Board of Education of1957 President Eisenhower sent federal troopsTopeka, (b) Eisenhower's action in Little Rock,to Little Rock, Arkansas, to maintain orderArkansas, in 1957, (c) Civil Rights Act of 1957?752

result, doctors were able to reduce the nation'sNew patterns of populationdeath rate, especially among children, and to1growth and distributionprolong life.alter ways of lifeIn the years following World War II, thebirth rate soared to an average level of 3.5births per woman. By the 1970's, however, thebirth rate was slowing down. In DecemberDuring the years after 1960, America's pop-1972 the Census Bureau reported that it hadulation continued to grow and shift. The move-dropped to about 2 births per woman. This isment from rural to urban areas continued.the level of Zero Population Growth (ZPG).This, in time, led to a severe crisis for Ameri-This birth rate replaces the existing populationcan cities.but does not increase it.The birth rate reached its lowest point inGrowth of population. By 1980 there werethe nation's history in 1976. Although it rose43 million more people living in the Unitedslightly during the remaining years of theStates than there had been in 1960. The in-1970's, it seemed having two children was thecrease in that 20-year period alone-from 179popular goal for many American families.million in 1960 to more than 226 million in1980-almost equaled the total population ofThe redistribution of people. The growingthe country a century earlier.mobility of Americans also had far-reaching ef-One reason for this growth was the remark-fects, particularly after 1960. Americans wereable advances made by medical science. Anti-increasingly able and willing to move frombiotics and many other drugs created in theplace to place. In earlier times many peoplepostwar years made important contributions.had lived their whole lives in the areas inSo, too, did new methods and improved in-which they were born. However, by the 1960'sstruments for diagnosis and treatment. As aand 1970'a, this pattern was changing. One outof every five Americans was moving to a newresidence each year.Immigration to the United States, 1940-1979These population movements affected dif-ferent sections of the country in different ways.By Country of OriginThe West and the South, particularly the Sun-South and Cantral Americabelt areas, became the fastest-growing sectionsand West Indies (21.6%)of the nation. In 1964 California passed NewCentral Europe (2.3%)York to become the most populous state. Dur-France, Switz.,ing the 1970's about 40 percent of the nation'sand Lowtotal population growth occurred in the Sun-(3.4%)Asía (18.4%)belt states of Florida, Texas, and California.Italy (5.4%)Meanwhile, the states of the NortheastGreat Britainwere losing population in relation to the rest of(6.2%)the country. By 1980 the high cost of homeheating during the cold winters was convine-Germaity (9.1%)Mexico (12.8%)ing more and more people to move to thewarmer Southern states.Carada (10.4%)Other (10.4%)Change in rural population. Another dra-matic change in American life was the sharpTotal Number of immigrantsdecline in farm population. Between 1940 and1940-44203,5891960-541,419,0131980, the number of people living on farmsdropped from more than 30 million to around 61945-49653,0191165-891,794,736million. In some years more than 1 million1950-541,099,0351970-741,923,413men and women left the farms to seek better1955-591,408,2331975-792,308,912opportunities elsewhere.total 10,801,950Despite the shrinking farm population,America was producing more food and otherSource of the United Statesfarm products than ever before. By the 1970's798found a romantic replacement in New York, buthe undoubtedly received a warm welcome. Hewas one of the crew on the German trainingvessel Gorch Fock, one of the tall ships thatsailed up the Hudson River on July 4, 1976. Thestunning naval parade of which it was a partwas the highlight of New York City's obser-vance of the bicentennial of the United States.The waters were full of ships that day. Alongthe shores were anchored 53 warships, repre-senting 22 nations. Between their rankscruised some 200 sailing vessels of OperationSail (Opsall for short). Its stars were the 16 tallships-square-riggers with a mast height ofmore than 127 feet (38.7 meters). There areonly 20 of these left in active service, and theyhad come from all over the world: the AmerigoVespucci from Italy, the Nippon Maru fromJapan, the Dar Pomoza from Poland, theSagres II from Portugal, and the Kruzenshternfrom Russia. They were led up the Hudson bythe United States square-rigger Eagle and es-corted by spouting fireboats. Other notableships in the waters that day were a Chinesejunk, a replica of a Viking boat, and the Englishschooner Sir Winston Churchill, with an all-woman crew, as well as over 10,000 smallprivate craft.THE TALL SHIPSSome 6 million people watched the navalparade that day. The gesture of international"All you look at for three weeks is thegood will lifted the spirits of all who saw it.water and your crewmates. When we seeBut the day was more. It was a visible bridgeland, we shout and jump. I think I lost mybetween the present and the past. It remindedgirifriend because I go to sea so often.those who saw it that, for all the strikingAre there girls in New York?'changes of the past 200 years, the UnitedThe 20-year-old naval cadet may not haveStates as a nation still endured.each farm worker was producing enough foodFor the first time since the 1820 census, ruralfor more than 50 people. American farms wereareas and their small towns were growingproducing more than enough food to feedfaster than metropolitan areas. Between 1970Americans. Huge surpluses for hungry peopleand 1980, nonmetropolitan areas grew by 15.4overseas were also available. From the 1960'spercent. Metropolitan areas grew only by 9.1to the 1980's, farm products were a substantialpercent.part of the nation's total exports.Technological advances now allowed manyEfficient, large-scale corporation farms andbusinesses to move out of urban centers. Im-spectacular developments in agricultural sci-proved transportation and communication sys-ence and technology made such productivitytems meant that rural areas were no longer aspossible. Better strains of plants, greater use ofisolated as they once had been. Also the ruralfertilizer, and improved breeds of livestockareas, at least for the time being, did not sufferwere just a few major developments. Theyfrom many of the problems that troubled thecombined to raise the average yield ofnation's older urban areas.some farm crops by as much as 50 percent. Atthe same time, worker productivity increasedUrban areas. Many of those who left farmstwice as fast on the farm as in industry.moved to urban areas. These urban areas in-Although the farm population was shrink-cluded central cities and the suburbs arounding, the 1980 census revealed a surprising fact.them. These cities and their suburbs were799

and to those men and women with specializedtraining and skills.One result of the law was a sharp increasein the number of Asians and Hispanics enter-ing the country. By the mid-1970's more than300,000 were arriving each year. In 1977, forexample, some 150,000 Asiatics and more than200,000 Hispanics entered.Most of the newcomers, although by nomeans all, were poor. Most settled in the cities.There they moved into the homes and apart-ments left by the white middle class who hadmoved to the suburbs or back to rural areas. Asimmigrants and minorities moved into thecities, increasing numbers of whites movedout. This "white flight" contributed greatly tothe decay of the cities.DECAYThe urban crisis. In the 1960's and 1970's,conditions in America's cities became desper-ate. Urban renewal programs had helped re-build the business and financial areas of manycities. However, the older residential areas hadNo sign was needed here. The ruined building says it all.Buildings like this were on the increase as the middleoften become heavily overcrowded. Many hadclass fied the cities, leaving them to the urban poor, mi-deteriorated into slums. Property owners, dis-norities, and new immigrants.couraged by the flight of the middle class to thesuburbs, refused to spend money to repair theirbuildings. The core areas of the cities were soclosely related. Originally the cities were thebadly run down that they needed to be entirelywork-places and the suburbs were the livingrebuilt. This would take years and require theareas. Gradually such a clear distinction faded.investment of billions of dollars.The real boundaries between the cities and theMeanwhile, people living in the slumssuburbs became harder to draw.needed more and better services - health, edu-These city-suburbs combinations werecation, sanitation, recreation, and police andgiven the name of Standard Metropolitan Sta-fire protection. They also needed jobs and job-tistical Areas (SMSA's). By 1980 there weretraining programs. However, the cities did notover 280 SMSA's in the nation. Over 72 per-have the finances to do the work that had to becent of the nation's population lived in suchdone. The people most able to pay the taxesareas.needed to support such programs were leaving.Those least able to pay and most in need wereNew immigrants. These SMSA's received abecoming more numerous City after city facedswelling tide of men and women from otherthe prospect of bankruptcy.lands. During the 1960's and 1970's, immigra-tion increased sharply. Patterns of immigra-"Social dynamite." The urban crisis was intion also changed dramatically.fact a national crisis. In 1961 James B. ConantThe Immigration and Nationality Act ofof Harvard issued a report titled Slums and1965 abolished the old national origins acts ofSuburbs that attracted nationwide attention.the 1920's (see page 656). It also changed theThe report pointed out the alarming contrastethnic character of the nation's population.between the poverty of life in the decayingThe new law provided for the annual admis-cores of the cities and the growing wealth ofsion of 120,000 immigrants from the Westernthe suburbs.Hemisphere and 170,000 from all other na-Nevertheless, during the next two decades,tions. No more than 20,000 could come fromconditions grew steadily worse. "We are allow-any single country. Preference was to be givening social dynamite to accumulate in our largeto members of families of American citizenscities," Conant warned.800

discrimination and increase opportunities forUnited States. The great majority worked forblacks?the large commercial farms. Most were illiter-3. In view of the many gains made by blacks by theate, at least in English, and insecure in theirmid-1960's, why were 80 many still frustrated?jobs. As migrant workers these men, women,4. What is the relationship (a) between poverty andand children labored for low pay in lettuce andviolence and (b) between neighborhood housingasparagus fields, citrus groves, and apple or-patterns and school segregation?chards. They moved as the crops matured to5. (a) What is the purpose of affirmative action pro-Oregon, Washington, Nebraska, and the Greatgrams? (b) Why do some people oppose them?Lake states, living in substandard shacks ormobile trailers. They received little benefitfrom the social legislation that was intended toHispanics share theprotect workers. "We were jailed, beaten, even3killed," wrote the historian Dr. Julian Navo.struggle for freedomFrom the early 1900's on, some efforts hadand justicebeen made to organize the migrant workers.These early efforts met only limited success. Inthe 1960's, however, Cesar Chavez made head-The discrimination suffered by blacks wasway in organizing the workers in the Califor-also experienced in varying degrees by othernia vineyards and lettuce fields. Sympatheticethnic groups. The Hispanics, some 15 millionpriests, civic groups, and idealistic studentsaccording to one 1980 estimate, were secondaided in his efforts. In 1965 he launched aonly to blacks in terms of numbers. There arestrike that led to a nationwide boycott ofsome estimates that they will overtake theproduce not bearing the label of the Unitedblacks and become the nation's largest minor-Farm Workers. In 1970, the strikers finallyity during the 1980's.won. Although the gulf between MexicanAmericans and other farm workers was stillThe Hispanics. The Hispanics are peoplewide, it had begun to narrow.from a number of different Spanish-speakingcountries and their offspring. They includelarge numbers of Mexicans, Puerto Ricans,Mexican Americans have had success in winning politi-cal power. especially In the southwestern states. HenryCubans, Filipinos, Dominicans, and recent im-Cisneros. who is pictured here, was elected mayor ofmigrants from other South American countriesSan Antonio. the third largest city in Texas.and the West Indies. All of these people share acommon Spanish-influenced heritage. In addi-tion to the Spanish language and Spanish cul-tural traits, they often share the ties of theEMRoman Catholic religion.Despite their common heritage, the His-panics are a varied group. These immigrantsrepresent a wide range of jobs, from farmworkers to lawyers. In fact, more than 30 per-cent of the immigrants from South Americahave been highly educated professionals andwhite-collar workers. The most numerous ofthe Hispanics are the Mexican Americans.Among them are the descendants of Mexicansliving in California, New Mexico, Arizona, andTexas when these lands belonged to Mexico.These people often call themselves Hispanos.Migrant farm workers. Most of the recentHispanic immigrants, including the un-documented or illegal migrants, came frompoor rural areas to seek a better life in the805Mexican Americans in cities. In time, largeversities. El Grito del Norte and other newspa-Mexican-American communities or barriospers and periodicals were further evidence ofgrew up in such cities as El Paso, Los Angeles,the vitality of the Chicano movement.Denver, Seattle, Minneapolis, and Chicago.The residents of the barrios met with prejudiceThe Puerto Ricans. Puerto Ricans made upand discrimination in employment, in courts ofthe second largest Spanish-speaking group inlaw, in relations with the police, and in schoolsthe United States. As you recall, Puerto Ricowhere English was often an unknown lan-has long had a special commonwealth relation-guage to them.ship with the United States. The inhabitants ofDespite obstacles, an increasing number ofthe island are legally American citizens. ManyMexican Americans went to high school andPuerto Ricans have left their homeland incollege, acquiring vocational and professionalsearch of jobs in the United States. By 1975skills. Loyal to family and to their Mexican-more than 5 million Puerto Ricans, includingAmerican culture, the city dwellers contrib-mainland-born descendants, were living in theuted to the economic development of theUnited States.country as well as to the arts. During the Viet-The Puerto Ricans were concentrated innam War, the death rate for Mexican-New York. There, by the mid-1970's, theyAmerican servicemente was higher than that formade up 10 percent of the city's population.any other group. This was due largely to theLarge numbers also lived in Newark, Philadel-fact that many fought in high-risk branches ofphia, Cleveland, Chicago, Boston, and otherthe service, such as the Marines.cities. In these urban areas they faced prob-lems of unemployment, poor housing, preju-The Chicano movement. Inspired in part bydice, and discriminationthe struggles of blacks for their rights, Mex-The lives of young Puerto Ricans were espe-ican Americans in the 1960's took increasingcially difficult. Making up 33 percent of Newpride in their Hispanic background. They, too,York's school population, they were han-struggled to win their civil rights. They alsodicapped because they did not speak English.fought to overcome the prejudice that manyThe dropout rate was very high. Street gangs,"Anglos," as they called other Americans, heldfriction with the police, and high unemploy-against them.ment added to their problems. Yet many real-Referring to themselves as "Chicanos,"ized that education was a road to a better life.leaders of the movement used boycotts, sit-ins,Evidence of this was the fact that in 1975 moredemonstrations, political organizations, andthan 17,000 young Puerto Ricans were enrolledthe courts to secure their rights. In New Mex-in colleges and universities.ico, Reies López Tijerina formed an organiza-Despite difficulties and discrimination,tion to regain land that, he claimed, Anglosmany Puerto Ricans moved up the economichad taken illegally. In Denver, the boxer,ladder. Some found places in small businesses.newspaper editor, and poet Rodolfo "Corky"in semi-skilled trades, and in offices. By theGonzales won recognition for his work in thelate 1970's, about 10 percent of employedDemocratic Party. He organized demon-Puerto Rican males held professional or tech-strations and became one of the leaders of thenical jobs. More and more were able to leaveChicano movement. In Los Angeles Vilmathe crowded slums for better living conditionsMartinez, like a growing number of Mexican-in the cities or in the suburbs. In the field of theAmerican women, took an active part in de-arts, entertainment, and sports, José Feliciano,fending the rights of her people.Rita Moreno, and Roberto Clemente becameMany new militant organizations sprangwell known.up. One of them, La Raza Unida, sought to reg-Puerto Ricans realized that politicalister Mexican Americans and to see that theymethods could improve their position and as avoted. Youth organizations also demandedresult they set up political organizations.Mexican-American studies and the use ofOther politicians soon became aware of theirSpanish in high schools and colleges.bloc-voting power. In 1970 Herman Badillo ofMexican-American studies soon were recog-New York City became the first Puerto Ricannized in many schools and colleges. Able Mex-member of Congress.ican-American historians, social scientists,Many Puerto Ricans, on the other hand,and humanists were professors at leading uni-rejected the "establishment." They emphasized806

forceful demands and revolutionary tactics towin greater opportunity. Frustration andpride led some to support Puerto Rican in-dependence. Nevertheless, in a number of elec-tions Puerto Ricans have rejected both state-hood and independence, preferring instead toremain a commonwealthThe Cubans. In 1959, as you have read (page780), Fidel Castro overthrew the governmentof the reactionary dictator, Fulgencio Batista.When it soon became clear that Castro wishedto create a Communist state, refugees began toescape to the United States. Many crossed the90-mile stretch of water in small fishing boats.From 1961 to 1970, more than 208,000 arrived.During the 1970's the number landing on theseshores each year increased steadily. In 1977alone more than 66,000 entered the UnitedStates. Most of them settled in the Miami area.In an effort to relieve the strain on the city,county, and state, the federal government setEach year, uncounted thousands of aliens pour into theup the Cuban Refugee Program. With an an-United States, some legally and some illegally. Thesenual budget of $40 million, it provided welfarenewcomers were among the more than 100,000 Cubanswho sailed here from their homeland in 1980.assistance, health services, and vocationaltraining. The refugees, largely middle class,used their assets, skills, and initiative to set upOpposition to the uncontrolled flood of peo-businesses and other enterprises. As a result ofple approached the stage of violence. Finallytheir efforts, they soon became an importantthe Carter administration announced that thepart of the Miami area's economy."Freedom Flotilla" would be shut down. ByEfforts by the refugee program to promotethat time, more than 125,000 Cubans had en-settlement in other parts of the country weretered the United States.effective. By the mid-1970's half of the Cubanswere living in New York, Chicago, Los Ange-les, and other cities, In 1979 the CensusSECTION SURVEYBureau estimated that the Cuban populationin the United States had reached 700,000.IDENTIFY: Hispanos, migrant farm workers, CesarThen, in the spring of 1980, a flood of refu-Chavez, barrio, Anglos," Chicanos, Rodolfo "Corky"gees began to pour into Florida. The "FreedomGonzales, Vilma Martinez, Herman Badillo, "Free-Flotilla," an improvised fleet of privatelydom Flotilla."owned boats, ferried them from Cuba to south-1. (a) What cultural characteristics do most His-ern Florida. It was a dangerous, haphazardpanics share? (b) From what nations do theyoperation. Some of the boats, estimated tocome?number more than 2,000, were capable of car-2. (a) In general, how have Mexican Americansrying only five or ten people.been treated by other Americans? (b) What ac-At first President Carter welcomed the ref-tions have members of the Chicano movementugees with "open heart and open arms," but hetaken? (c) How successful has the Chicano move-soon was forced to change his position. By thement been?end of May, more than 60,000 refugees had en-3. Compare the situation of Puerto Ricans with thattered and several thousand more were arrivingof Mexican Americans in terms of (a) problemseach day. Increasing numbers of American citi-and (b) attempts to solve the problems.zens objected to the arrival of the Cubans. They4. (a) Why have many Cubans come to the Unitedclaimed that the nation was in a recession andStates since 1959? (b) How has the Cuban Refu-that unemployment was high. They feared thatgee Program tried to help them adjust to theirthe newcomers would take already scarce jobs.new life?807

TheImmigration to the United StatesAmerican9People8.587.6The people who settled America7came from many lands. Indeed,6.5all Americans were immigrants or6the descendants of immigrants.5.5The American Indians, the first5Americans, for example, originally4.5were hunting peoples who came4to North America from Asia. Today3.5the United States has a diverse3population, composed of people2.5with many national and racial back-2grounds, religious beliefs, and re-1.5gional loyalties. The following1graphs and charts tell much about.5these Americans. One graph por-0trays which decades experiencedthe largest immigration to thiscountry. Another graph showswhich countries were the formerStater United States inmigration and Naturalization Servicehomes of large numbers of Amer-icans. The following pages alsoprovide information on howPopulation Distribution by Racial Backgroundquickly the population of thecountry grew over the years andhow specific regions, states, andcities have participated in thisgrowth. In addition, this sectionof the Atlas highlights certainWhites*trends that concern all Americans188,300,000There are graphs which show arise in average life expectancy, agrowth in family income, and anincrease in educational enroll-ment. Graphs and charts, such asthese shown here, are valuablereference tools for the study ofBlacksthe history of the United States.26,500,000They support many of the formerthemes stated in the text and pro-vide a richer understanding of theNative Americans(includes Eskimos, Aleuts,American experience.& American Indians) 1,400,000Others* 6,800,000Asians & Pacific Island Peoples 3,500,000to de 1500 censas, sisty percent of people - - "Whites" terly percent asof the 1980 Provisional Date842National Backgrounds of Immigrants, 1820-1979millions of Immigrants0.511.522.533.544.555.566.57Vietnam137,000Beiglum204,000Spain261,000Switzerland350,000Netherlands360,000Denmark365,000Turkey387,000Japan410,000Philippines432,000Portugal453,000Poland521,000Cuba541,000China546,000Greece660,000France753,000West Indies798,000Norway857,000Sweden1,273,000Mexico2,176,000Russia3,377,000Canada4,119,000Austrial/Hungary4,316,000Ireland4,724,000Great Britain4,912,000Italy5,300,000Germany6,985,000Sources Adamer af de United States United immigration and Natumellazion ServicePopulationDistribution byDistributionChurchby Age GroupsMembership5 to 17 years45 to 64 years43.9 millionNot affiliated46.9 mitlion92 millionUnder 5 yearsProtestants15.6 million72.8 million25 to 44 years60.1 million65 years and overOther affiliated 1.2 million24.7 millionEastern Churches3.8 millionRoman CathoildChurchJewish Congregations5.9 million49.8 million18 to 24 years29.3 millionNational Council or Chiches843

