Ernest R. May Charles Warren Professor of History Harvard University McDougal, Lifted & Company Evanston, Illinois Ernest R. May, an award-winning historian, teacher, and author, is the Charles Warren Professor of History at Harvard University, Currently, he is teaching at the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, where he is chairman of the faculty committee for the Executive Program in National and International Security. He has been Dean of Harvard College and Director of Harvard's Institute of Politics, Professor May has served as consultant to the National Security Council and various committees for the Congress. In addition, he has written many books about United States history, including "Lessons" of the Past: The Use and Misuse of History in Anierican Foreign Policy- Radford Gregg, Principal McLean Middle School Fort Worth, Texas Elizabeth Kane, Teacher. Chairperson Social Studies Department J unction Middle School Livermore Valley Unified School District Livermore. California Carol Khadjenouri, Curriculum Coordinator San Francisco Unified School District San Francisco. California Wilbur I.eaphart, Principal Sammve E. Coan Middle School Atlanta. Georgia Erika Mahoney, Communication Specialist Boston. Massachusetts E. Caroline Penn, Curriculum Specialist Harris County Department of Education Houston, Texas Deborah Rosen, Writer, Former Teacher Winnetka, Illinois Roberta Ruby, Writer. Instructor Evanston. Illinois Armand Enrico Trujillo, Jr. Teacher of .Social Studies Denver Public Schools Denver, Colorado Roberta /Jinring, Social Studies Teacher Elm Place Middle School Highland Park. Illinois ISBN 0-88343-712-0 (Teacher's Edition) Acknowledgments: Sec page 767 No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system without permission in writing from the Publisher. Copyright © 1983 by McDougal, Littell & Company Box 1667, Evanston, Illinois 60204 All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Focus Page Introduction Study the map, explain the term ethnic group, a net then do Question 1 together Mam Concept Over the years the olending ot ethnic groups has given the United States an image ol a 'salad bowl Hispanics Today The United States has been described as a "salad bowl" of many different peoples. Over the years, Afro- Americans, Jews, Chinese, Poles, Japanese, Hispanics, and many other groups have made distinctive contributions to American life. Groups of people who share a certain language, religion, history, and even physical characteristics are called ethnic groups. At least one hundred six ethnic groups have been represented in America. His- panic-Americans, those who share a Spanish heritage, are one of the fastest- growing ethnic groups in the United States today. According to the 1980 census, a total of 14,605,883 Hispanic-Americans now live in the United States. Hispanics who are in the country illegally were not included in this count. The map on this page gives a visual picture as well as approximate 1980 figures for Hispanic-American populations in each state. Nearly one-third of all Hispanics in the United States live in California. About one-fifth live in Texas. Many Hispanics also live in New York and Florida. Between 1970 and 1980, Hispanic populations increased in forty-two states and in the District of Columbia. These increases were caused by growing birth rates and immigration. It is estimated that one million legal and illegal Hispanics enter the United States each year, most of them from Mexico, Cuba, and Puerto Rico. At present there is no indication that this migration will diminish. 1. What is meant by the term ethnic group? List as many different ethnic groups in the United States as you can think of in one minute. Do you think most Americans belong to an ethnic group now? Would the ancestors of most Americans today belong to an ethnic group? 2. People used to say that the United States was a "melt- ing pot" of different peoples. Today the image of a "salad bowl" is more common. What does each phrase imply about the character of America? What other images might describe the variety of peoples who make up America? 3. List in order the ten slates with the greatest Hispanic populations. What geographic areas seem to have the greatest Hispanic populations? the lowest? 4. The Spanish legacy in the United States has lived for centuries. In what ways are Hispanic-Americans today different from their ancestors? 5. Find out about the heritage of an ethnic group that is part of you and your ancestors' past. Write a short report. Answers to Focus Page Questions 1. People who share certain languages, religions, historical, physcial characteristics 2. Melting pot-cultures blend, lend to become indistinct: salad bowl-individual heritages remain evident, that America consists olmany different types ol people kaleidoscope, slew, other mixtures 3 Calif. Tex .N Y. Fla.. Ill. N.J.. N M . Ant. Colo. Mich.; southwest, northeast, northwest south. 4, Today they speak English, have other religions, and so on Lesson introduction Ask students to imagine what kinds ot conditions in then lives might cause them to risk great danger and an uncertain luture to move to a strange, distant location Reacting Skills Detine these words migration, divine right. Royalists, Roundheads, monarchy, immigrant, recruiter persistent Distinguish between immigrant and emigrant Uain Idea People migrated to theSnglish colonies lor a wide variety oI reasons despite many dangers encountered during the long trip Thousands of English settlers came to the colonies from 1607 to 1660. For the most part, they were young and poor and male. In the words of one commentator, they were "vexed and troubled" people who felt out of place in their own country. In the early 1600's England was undergoing many changes. The common land, once used by everyone to feed livestock and grow gardens, was fenced and enclosed by the rich landowners. The poor tfere forced off the land. They fled to the cities, where they could not find jobs. In the 1640's a series of crop failures made a bad situation worse. Hence, some migrated to the colonies. For almost a hundred years, Protestants and Roman Catholics had experienced religious, controversy and uncertainty in England. The Protestants finally felt safe when James I succeeded Elizabeth in 1603. James, however, thought that the way to protect England from Spain was to have his son, Charles, marry a Catholic Spanish princess. When Spain rejected the offer, Charles chose a Catholic French princess, Henrietta Maria. Parliament vs. King Charles. Charles I, like many rulers of his time, believed that kings ruled by divine right—that their right to rule came directly from God, not from the people they ruled. He wanted as little to do with Parliament as possible. Parliament, however, had one power over the king: the authority to tax. Kings could not tax the people without the consent of Parliament. Before Parliament would agree to a new tax. it would demand that the king yield more of his power to Parliament. Charles, by living very carefully. was able to postpone a request for new People were released from debtor's prison on the condition that they leave England and settle in the colonies. Ask students why a country would want to release people from prison, and then send them out ot the country taxes for several years, and so he avoided confronting Parliament. Finally there came a time when his war debts had to be paid, and Charles was forced to work with Parliament. When Parliament refused to give him the money he wanted, the angry king dissolved it after only a few days. That was a serious mistake. Charles still needed the money and had to call another Parliament a few weeks later. This time Parliament immediately passed a law that said Parliament could not be dissolved without the members' consent. As a result this "Long Parliament" stayed in session for eleven years. During this time a civil war raged across England. The Royalists, who supported the king, fought the Roundheads, who were led by Oliver Cromwell and supported the Puri- •on Introduction Make a ust of ethnic backgrounds represented by students in the class Then determine how many are included m the groups of European immigrants that came to the colonies (see lesson subheads) fiea'j,oq Skills Define these words access, Deutsch, detection, thrift, rebellion, frontier, patriot artisan, wholesale retail burgher rights Man ideas People ol different ethnic groups tended to live together m their own groups, nevertheless, the colonies were unique because they were comprised of a mixture of people from all over the world, especially Europe Many groups of settlers in the English colonies did not come from England. Certainly Africans were among the largest groups. Groups of Dutch, Swedes, Finns, Germans or Pennsylvania Dutch. Scots, and Scotch-Irish also came in large numbers and settled throughout the English colonics. Among these were small numbers of Jews and Roman Catholics who settled in the various colonies. A still smaller group to come were the French Huguenots. Although these settlers were Protestants, they remained apart from other colonists. Some of these non-English settlers were already in colonies settled by their own countries when those colonics were conquered by the English. Others came from Europe to escape political and religious problems in their homelands. Many came because America offered them a chance to make a better living and to own their own land. The Dutch. Dutch families were already in Connecticut when Thomas Hooker founded Hartford. Likewise. English families lived on Long Island, within New Nether- land. king Charles's decision to bring New Netherland under English control was based partly on information comingfrom those English settlers. Charles learned from the English on Long Island that the Dutch were unhappy with Peter Stuyvesant's rule and that New Amsterdam was poorly defended. Relatively little changed when New Neth- erland became New York. James, the Duke of York, wanted to make a profit from his colony. He was not interested in sending the Dutch hack to the Netherlands and replacing them with English colonists. The houses, with their brick walls and tiled roofs, looked Dutch and not English. English became the official language, but it was a gradual process. Sometimes in the transition, both Dutch and English appeared in the same sentence, even in official documents. The English flag replaced the Dutch flag, and the Dutch governor was exchanged for an English governor; but Dutch ways persisted in the daily lives of the people. The Swedes and Finns. Swedes and Finns settled New Jersey and Delaware as early as 1638. When the Dutch conquered New Sweden. the Swedes and Finns stayed on their lands and continued to work their farms. When New Netherland became New York, the same thing happened w ith the Dutch. In 1682 the Duke of York gave Delaware to his friend William Penn so that Pennsylvania would have access to the Atlantic Ocean. For many years the Dutch, Swedes, and Finns of Delaware had equal representation in the Pennsylvania legislature with the settlers of Pennsylvania. But as Pennsylvania continued to grow, the people of Delaware feared they would soon have only a minority voice. They asked for a separate legislature and. in 1704. received it. The governor of Pennsylvania, however, governed Delaware until the Revolutionary War. The Germans. The people called Pennsylvania Dutch were not Dutch at all, but Germans and some Swiss. German immigrants to Pennsylvania referred to themselves as Deutsch, a word meaning "German." They had known about Pennsylvania because William Penn had advertised all over Europe for colonists and had even had pamphlets printed in several languages. The earliest group of Pennsylvania Dutch settled in Germantown, near Philadelphia, in 1683. Some of the Pennsylvania Dutch were Quakers. Others were Lutherans, United Brethren, and Dutch (German) Reformed. Many German-speaking immigrants left their homelands because of religious persecution. Many Germans came from the Palatinate region, then a part of Bavaria in Germany, to escape the wars that had been going on for decades. Some, like Nicholas Hess, came because the harsh laws of the times caused them trouble. Hess was a shepherd in the Palatinate. The king had made a law that peasants were not allowed to hunt. When his dog accidentally killed a rabbit, Nicholas was afraid he, himself, would be hanged for breaking the law. In desperation, he signed on a ship as a member of the crew, and escaped detection by the German authorities. After his arrival in 1741, Hess became a farmer like many other German-speaking immigrants. In 1752, he was able to buy 113 acres at 11 ( an acre. Hess built a house of stone, married Catharine Funk, a woman born in Pennsylvania, and prospered. The Germans soon had the reputation of being a hardworking and thrifty people. Colonists remarked about the care the German farmers gave their cattle. They sheltered them in huge, well-built stone barns because the animals were not as hungry for expensive grain when they were kept warm. Many German immigrants kept to themselves, holding on to their language and traditions. According to Philadelphia resident Benjamin Franklin, few of the German children knew English, and the signs in the streets had "inscriptions in both languages, and some places only in German." Some early German immigrants also settled in Georgia and North Carolina. The .Scots and the Scotch-Irish. In 1680 William Penn, who was already involved in the colony of West Jersey, joined with eleven other Quakers to buy East Jersey. The twelve men then took in several Scottish partners. The proprietors wanted to make a home for the Scottish Presbyterians who were being persecuted by the king. The first group of Scottish settlers came to East Jersey in 1683. Another Scottish settlement. Port Royal, was started in South Carolina the same year. The little settlement was captured by the Spanish just three years later in 1686. Some immigrants came to the colonies from Scotland after the uprisings there in 1715 and in 1745. Most of the settlers, though, were Scotch-Irish, or Scots who had lived in Ireland. In order to put down an Irish rebellion, the English king had asked Scots to settle in Ulster, or Northern Ireland. They pushed the native Irish into the harsher lands where the soil was poor. Still, British laws made many Scots angry and bitter, and as a result they left Ireland for the colonies. Between 1700 and 1776 more than 200,000 Scotch-Irish left Ulster. The Scots and Scotch-1 rish settled th rough- out the colonies instead of concentrating in certain areas. Many stayed in the frontier parts of western Pennsylvania. Others moved south through the mountains to Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas. During the American Revolution the Scots generally were loyal to Britain, while the Scotch-Irish were usually patriots. The French Huguenots. In 1685 France repealed a law called the Edict of Nantes, To. r Town "nd r~ Above, immigrants from Scotland drew much attention with their kilts. Left, farmers depended on almanacs for information on crops and weather. Above, a painting of an Irish peasant woman. By the late 1600's more families emigrated to North America. which had protected the French Huguenots. During the persecution that followed. Huguenots fled to other countries in Europe and to all the English colonies. The settlement of Charleston in South Carolina welcomed them in a special way. The Huguenots wanted the religious freedom guaranteed hy Carolina law. The Carolina proprietors wanted the skills of the Huguenots, who were often artisans (skilled workmen or craftsmen), wine-makers, and silkworm growers. In fact, the first Huguenot refugees brought silkworm eggs with them on the ship. Unfortunately, the trip took too long and the eggs hatched at sea. The silkworms soon died for lack of proper food. Upon arrival in their new country, the French Huguenots immediately set to work. Some arrived as penniless refugees. Pierre Manigault and his wife first worked in the fields. Later they opened a tavern, then a distillery and a barrel-making shop. Their son became the richest man in the colony. The Jews. The Jews were a small, yet important, group of immigrants. At the time of the Revolutionary War there were only about 2,500 Jews in America, compared with 200,000 Germans. There is no accurate record as to when the first Jewish immigrants came to the colonies. Some records say that between 2,000 and 3,000 Sephardic (Spanish or Portuguese) Jews, mostly merchants and traders in the northern seaport towns, were given full citizenship by an act of Parliament in 1740. But a number of Jews had come from Central and South America a hundred years earlier because of religious persecution. Jewish immigrants were not always welcomed in the colonies, either. Peter Stuyvesant ordered a shipload of Jewish refugees to leave New Amsterdam. Influential Jewish stockholders in the Dutch West India Company, however, complained to the directors, who overruled Stuyvesant's order. The Jews not only remained but were permitted to though no clear record exists ol wnen the lirst Jews came to America, a small group did arrive in New York City m 1654 Early f/mgegues were then established in Philadelphia and Savannah. Ga., in addition to those in Charleston. SC,, and the lirst in Hurt fort. R I. In most of the colonies, Jews had the same rights as Christians TheTouro Synagogue in Newport was built in 1763 by a small congregation led by Isaac Touro. It is the oldest synagogue in the United States. "■ engage in wholesale trade. In 1657 they were allowed to work in retail trade. The largest community of Jews stayed in New York City. Smaller groups settled in Rhode Island and in Charleston, .South Carolina. Not a single rabbi served any Jewish community in the colonies until 1840, though the first congregation was formed in Massachusetts in 1658. More than a hundred years later, the first synagogue in the colonies was built in Newport. While Jews could vote in Rhode Island, they were, like Catholics, not allowed to vote in most colonies since a voter had to be a member of the colony's established church. In New Amsterdam Jews obtained burgher rights, which allowed them to work in skilled crafts or in retail trade. When New Amsterdam became New York, the burgher rights were honored under English law. In 1696 the English government tried to pass a law barring persons "not born in England, Ireland or the English plantations" from being merchants. The Jews and the Huguenots protested. and the law was never passed. A Nation of Immigrants. Thomas Paine, a leading writer of the Revolutionary War period, claimed that America was not the child of England but of Europe, He argued that although the original thirteen colonies belonged to England, the settlers came from all parts of Europe and Africa. These immigrants brought their various languages, religions, and customs as well as their skills, crafts, and trades. Non-English immigrants came to the colonies for the same reasons as their English counterparts. They too wanted freedom of religion, a voice in the government, and the chance to make a better life for themselves and their children. They hoped that life in America would offer those things sooner than life in Europe. For Review 1. What did slaves and indentured servants have in common in the 1700's? 2. For what reasons did European settlers come to North America? 3. How did immigrant minorities adjust to life in the English colonies? 4. Why is it difficult for some people to tolerate differences in others? Explain how you arrived at your opinion. A/istve^s Id Review Questions 1. Both slaves and indentured servants were bound to work for their masters 2. European settiers sought freedom oI religion, a voice in then government, and the chance to make a better life for themselves and then children 3 Immigrant minorities tended to hve m then own groups and preserve their Old World cultures 4. Answers will vary, people feres be intolerant because of a lack of understanding and appreciation for other cultures Ten Years and Counting focus Page Introduction Show students a copy of the 1980 census form that each household in the country completed Plead some questions, and ask students why it would have been difficult to take a census before 1790 (Question 4) Vain Concept Since no official census records were kept before 1790, colonial population figures musf be estimated From its very beginning the United States has served as a magnet that has attracted people from all parts of the world. Over the years hundreds of thousands of people have come to America with the hope of making a better life for themselves and their families. The United States government took its first census in 1790. Since then the government has counted the number of people in the country every ten years. Among many other things, the census reports changes in the country's population. The census also helps determine the number of representatives each state will have in the House of Representatives. Two factors influence population growth. One is natural increase, meaning the difference between the number of births and deaths in a particular period. The other is migration, the movement of people into or out of the country during a particular period. Because no official records are available before 1790, the table on this page is an estimation of population growth from 1610 to 1780. Since the figures shown here are estimates, they have been rounded off to the nearest thousand. 1. Give one reason why it is important for the government to keep track of the nation's population. 2. According to the table, in which years did the population increase the most? the least? Not counting the period of 1610-1620, in which years was the percent of increase in population the greatest? When was it the least? 3. According to the table, in what year did the population go over one million? two million? 4. Give several reasons why it would have been difficult to take a census before the year 1790. Colonial Population Estimates (1616-1780) Year Population Increase During Decade Ending (n Year Shown Number Percent 1610 (Less than 500) 1620 2,000 2,000 1000.0 1630 6,000 4,000 200.0 1640 28,000 22,000 366.7 1650 52,000 24,000 85.7 1660 85,000 33,000 63.5 1670 114,000 29,000 34.1 1680 156.000 42.000 36.8 1690 214,000 58.000 37.2 1700 275,000 61.000 28.5 1710 358,000 83,000 30.2 1720 474.000 116,000 32.4 1730 655,000 181,000 38.2 1740 889,000 234,000 35.7 1750 1,207,000 318,000 35.8 1760 1,610,000 403,000 33.4 1770 2.205,000 595,000 37.0 1780 2,781,000 576,000 26.1 BmIK3 to Focus Page Questions 1. The number of Representatives each state sends to Congress is based on population Ml.t 1760-1770. 1610-1630, 1630-1640. J770-J78O 3 1750, 1770 4. Poor transportation, poor communication, nocentral 119 mrtrment to coordinate the work. Lesson Introduction Ask students lo hypothesize how the history ot the United States might he dil'erent it there had never been a market tor slaves Where might other sources ot tabot have been found? Reading Skills Delme these words refuge. Islam, exotic, manuscript, productive, malaria, visible. Middle Passage, auction, defect Mam idea immigrants from Africa were unique because they comprised the only major group that did not come lo the New World by choice The first black child born in America was a baby boy named William. The records do not give his last name. His parents, Anthony and Isabella, were indentured servants in Jamestown. Unlike the servants from England. these tw o did not choose to settle in the colonies. They came in 1619 in a Dutch ship that had raided a Spanish ship on the high seas. The cargo included over a hundred blacks from different African villages from the western and central parts of the continent. After a stormy journey of several weeks, the Dutch sought refuge and sailed their ship up the James River. In Jamestown they offered to trade twenty Africans for food and supplies. Anthony and Isabella, two of the twenty, were soon married in Virginia. William was brought to the Anglican church in Jamestown to be baptized in 1624. Life for the first black settlers in the English colonies was to continue in w'ays very different from their past African heritage. African Empires. Black Americans came unwillingly from all over Africa, but the majority were from the west or Atlantic coast. Africa, like Europe, was made up of many countries and kingdoms. Thousands of years earlier the great civilizations of Egypt and Ethiopia had flourished. Later Islam, the Moslem religion, was carried across Africa by the Arabs. Ghana. Mali, and Songhay were three powerful states in western Africa. Timbuktu, one of the great cities of Songhay, was known throughout the world for its university, for law and medicine, and for gold and exotic goods. A visitor to Timbuktu in the 1500's wrote. "It is a wonder to see what plentie of Mer- chandize is daily brought hither and how costly and sumptuous all things be. . . ." Scholars traveled to Timbuktu to use the university's valuable collection of manuscripts, which were written in many languages. Slavery Throughout the World. Slavery was a common practice in the ancient world. Slaves in Egypt built the pyramids. Greek slaves brought art and learning with them to Rome. Slavery was a common consequence of being defeated in war. During the crusades. Moslems and Christians felt doubly justified in taking slaves. The slaves were not only captured enemies, but also enemies of God because they did not follow the religion of their captors. Both Christians and Moslems felt that their religions justified taking Africans as slaves. They thought they were doing a service to the African's soul by bringing it to an awareness of the Christian or the Moslem God. The early African slaves in America had Spanish names because the Spaniards who brought them thought it important to protect African souls by baptizing them into Catholicism and giving them the names of saints. Spaniards were interested in both protecting souls and selling human bodies. For several centuries the Moslems controlled the slave trade in Africa. Only in 1444 did Christians become involved, after Portuguese sailors attacked an African village and took 165 men, women, and children prisoners. They sailed home to Portugal, where the prisoners were baptized and given Portuguese Christian names and were enslaved. Within ten years Portugal was importing a thousand African slaves a year. Above, a tapestry shows captured slaves being taken to a waiting boat. The work is from Dahomey, an African kingdom in the 1600'S. The slave trade lasted 400 years. During this period about 40 million people were taken from Africa. Twenty million arrived in the New World. OnTftVflLsDAYthc third D.iy cA Acc.uir next. Ninety-Four Thirty-nine Men,Fifteen BoYs.j'jf] Twenty-four Women, and pi a* . r— ) Sixteen Girls. In theBrigantineDi:. ni\,Fra/h as Bare, Mai ter, from Sierra Leon, by • rTitrnt53!lriiUiiL.jf;ivislT Seeing profits to he made, the Spanish and the Dutch, and later the English, French, and l Swedes, joined the Portuguese in slave trade. Some Africans bought and sold African slaves, but in most African countries the ! slave trade was forbidden. The Slave Trade. Antony and Isabella, William's parents, were probably free people since other Africans were listed as ser- I vants. and servants were usually not allowed I to marry. Like the white indentured servants I from Europe, blacks were sold to masters in I thecolonies and had to work a specified number of years to earn their freedom. During the first forty years that black men I and women were in the colonies, they worked I side by side with white men and women. They could be seen cultivating tobacco, clearing land, building roads and houses, or working as servants to government officials. In 1659 it was noted that "there are in Virginia about fifteen thousand English, and of Negroes brought thither three hundred good ser- vants." The black population grew steadily. In these years servants, white or black could look forward to becoming productive members of their communities. They could work off their passage, become free, buy land of their own. vote, and testify in court. Sometimes they became wealthy enough to buy indentured servants of their own. Anthony Johnson, a black man from England, came to America in 1621 and was a servant on the Bennett plantation in Virginia. When he be- This diagram of a ship's hold shows how the greatest possible number of slaves was fitted Into the area. Slaveholders formed search parties to look for escaped slaves. Use the details of the picture: palm trees, the swamp, and the river to guess the location of this search party. came free, he married Mary Johnson, a servant on the same plantation. In 1651, thirty years later, he had five servants brought to Virginia. Already a successful farmer, he was given 250 acres of land for doing this. After 1660 sugar became the major crop of the new British colonies in the West Indies, and life changed for blacks. By then tobacco had become important in the Southern Colonies. Tobacco required both land and workers; plantation owners welcomed the source of cheap labor that slavery offered. The landowners had tried to use Indians as slaves, but many sickened and died. Most whites also failed to do well in the hard work under the hot sun in tobacco fields. Black workers, however, generally satisfied the wealthy plantation owners. Most black workers stayed healthy even in areas where malaria was common. They were also inexpensive. The same money that would buy an English or Irish indentured servant for ten years would buy an African for life. Also, since blacks did not come willingly, there was no expense in convincing them to come. Finally, the supply was easily obtainable. Once in the English colonies, blacks were highly visible. White servants could run away and fade into the crowd. Indians could escape to tribes in the surrounding country. Blacks would always be noticed and identified. Free blacks were never safe. In the 1660's colonial laws began to change, and blacks became servants for life. Children of black mothers were born bond (slave) or free, depending on whether the mother was a servant or free. Slavery had taken root in North America. The Spanish had already introduced slavery in their colonies. The English now followed. Africans were captured in native wars, kidnapped by Europeans or Africans, or sold into slavery for breaking native law's. They were chained together and marched as far as five hundred miles to the coast. There they were purchased by the European trading companies and branded "with a red-hot iron, imprinting the mark of the French. English, or Dutch companies." Africans were crammed into ships' holds, which sometimes were no more than eighteen inches high. One sea captain observed, "They had not so much room as a man in his coffin either in length or breadth. It was impossible for them to turn or shift with any degree of ease." Here they lived for the six to ten weeks of the voyage. It was not unusual to find the living and the dead chained together in the hold. So many dead bodies were thrown overboard from slave ships that it was said that sharks would pick up a ship off the coast of Africa and follow it to America. Gustavus Vasa w'as only eleven when he was captured in Benin. Africa, and forced aboard a slave ship bound for Virginia. He wrote of his experience, which many shared: When I was carried on board [the slave ship] I was immediately handled, and tossed up, to see if I were sound ... 1 was soon put down under the decks. . .. The stench . . . of the place, and the heat of the climate, added to the number in the ship, which was so crowded that each had scarcely room to turn himself, almost suffocated us. . . . The shrieks of the women, and the groans of the dying rendered the whole a scene of horror almost inconceivable. . .. The survivors of this "Middle Passage," as the trip from Africa to America was called, were sold at auctions in both New England and the Southern Colonies. They were examined like cattle for defects and were sold to the highest bidder. The slave trade made some English and Americans very wealthy. It was a major economic force in both New England and the South. This trade and the issue of slavery, however, would cause repeated problems. For Review 1. What evidence shows that slavery was a common practice in the world before the 1500's? Why did it continue for so long? 2. How did the practice of slavery start in the English colonies? 3. Give several reasons why slavery might not have been able to survive in the Colonies. How do you think the United States would be different today if slavery had not been so firmly rooted? MReview Questions 1, Evidence shows that slavery existed m Egypt. Greece, ana during the Crusades 2 The first the English colonies were traded by a Dutch ship for supplies, they were probably indentured servants 3. Sfavery might 123 survived it there had not been a need lor unskilled labor, it the slaves had not adapted well to the climate, or il they had erpens've. the Civil War and long struggle lor nghts by blacks would not have taken place How might life on this New York farm have differed from life on a southern plantation? A colonial tin shop. Articles were made here and sold to others. Women often worked in family businesses. and lawyers were as influential in New York as in New England. Pennsylvania. From the start, Pennsylvania welcomed all sorts of people. With its emphasis on religious toleration. Pennsylvania quickly attracted large numbers of settlers. Many persecuted Protestant groups from German-speaking countries came. So did many dissatisfied Scots. By 1760 only Virginia and Massachusetts had more colonists than Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania colonists from German- speaking lands prospered on rich farmlands. They also settled communities throughout the colony. One Pennsylvania farmer wrote: "I have no rent or tax to pay. I have a cow which gives plenty of milk, a horse to ride around; my pigs increase rapidly, so that in the summer I have seventeen, where at first I had only two. I have many chickens and geese, and a garden, and shall next year have an orchard, if 1 remain well, so that my wife and I are in good spirits." Thousands of Scots and Scotch-Irish came to Pennsylvania. Most of them moved to the unsettled areas where frontier land was cheap or free. These Scots carved farms out of the frontier and established communities in western Pennsylvania. Some families later drifted south along the Blue Ridge Mountains to take up new homes on the Virginia and Carolina frontiers. They were among the first to cross the mountains into Kentucky, Many English, Scots, and Germans arrived with enough money to purchase land in Pennsylvania. Others came skilled, knowing a trade. Doctors, bakers, cobblers, and cabinetmakers came. Philadelphia quickly turned into a center of business and trade. It drew many people from the other colonies. Philadelphia, Colonial Leader. William Penn chose Philadelphia as the capital of the Pennsylvania colony. He thought of Philadelphia as a "greene countrie towne" when he drew plans for it in 1682. Within twenty years, more than 4,500 lived there. Wheat, oats, and other Pennsylvania farm products were shipped overseas from Philadelphia. Each year, many ships tied up at the city's wharves to unload and take on cargoes. Philadelphia grew rapidly. Peter Kalm. a Swedish visitor to America, remarked in the 1740's on the city's broad, straight streets, many of which by then had been paved with flagstones. "The houses," Kalm w rote, "make a good appearance. They are frequently several stories high, and built either of bricks or of stone.... [andl covered with shingles." Kalm noted Philadelphia's many churches and its public library, which had opened in 1742. He also observed the academy in the western part of the city. "The town is now quite filled with inhabi- tants," Peter Kalm went on. "which in regard to their country, religion, and trade, are very different from each other. You meet with excellent masters of all trades, and many things are made here full as well as in England." Kalm noted that Philadelphia's population in 1740 was around 10,000. Philadelphia thrived on trade with frontier and coastal communities as well as overseas ports. In 1735 nearly 200 ships arrived at the port and 212 sailed from it. Ten years later, By 1700 Philadelphia had about 5,000 people and was the busiest port in the colonies. tack was on Deerfield. Massachusetts, in February, 1704. At least fifty English colonists were killed. Colonists in Massachusetts again planned an attack on the Port Royal fortress in Canada in 1707, but the attempt came to nothing. In the summer of 1710, though, a fleet carrying 1,500 colonials and 400 English soldiers sailed from Boston and captured Port Royal with little difficulty. This time it remained English, and was renamed Annapolis Royal in honor of the Queen. Queen Anne's War ended in 1713. England agreed to recognize Louis XIV's grandson as King Philip V of Spain. In return, France gave the Hudson Bay region and Nova Scotia, except for Cape Breton Island, 1 AHbtfants rosfudr the picture on this page How might the 'esider ISuet-' migftl iKe to drew a town plan of their Own which would have pn Bit** they needed protection? to England. France also recognized England's claim to Newfoundland. With the English in control of Nova Scotia, the French threat to New England's fishing industry diminished. Failure to specify boundaries, however, opened the door to future conflict. As a consequence of the Act of Union between England and Scotland in 1707, England gradually came to be known as Great Britain, and the English people as British. England, Wales. Ireland, and Scotland made up Great Britain. King George's War (1744-1748). About a quarter-century of peace followed Queen Anne's War. Immigrants, especially Scotch- Irish and Germans, flowed into the English colonies. Tobacco and rice plantations flour- goods coming into the United States. Excises are taxes on the manufacture, sale, or use of goods made within the country. Imposts are classifications of imported goods for the proper assessment of taxes. Clause 2 is the basis for national banks and the Federal Reserve System. There is no limit on the amount of money the government can borrow. Clause 3 was intended to remedy a weakness of the Articles of Confederation. Over the years, the Supreme Court has interpreted this clause so that Congress can regulate many forms of interstate commerce. As a result. Congress is concerned not only about commercial activity that crosses state boundaries but also about activity that affects commerce in more than one state. For instance. Congress can pass laws and provide funds to improve waterways, to enforce airsafety measures, and to forbid interstate shipment of certain goods. Congress can also regulate the movement of people, of stocks and bonds, and of television signals. It is a federal crime for people to flee across state lines from state or local police. This clause sees that interstate travelers receive fair treatment regardless of race or nationality. 4. Naturalization, Bankruptcy. To establish a uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies throughout the United States. 5. Money. To coin money, regulate the value thereof and foreign coin, and fix the standard of weights and measures. 6. Counterfeiting. To provide for the punishment nf counterfeiting the securities and current coin of the United States. Clause 4 insures uniform rules for naturalization, the process of becoming a citizen, and rules for people who owe debts they cannot pay. Clause 5 gives Congress the right to make currency and to regulate its value. Clause 6 allows Congress to punish people who make imitation government bonds, stamps, or money. 7. Post Office. To establish post offices and post roads. 8. Patents, Copyrights. To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive tight to their respective writings and discoveries. 9. Federal Court. To constitute tribunals in feriot to the Supreme Court. 10. International Law. To define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and offenses against the law of nations. Congress has attempted to reform the Post Office Department, making it an independent agency. Postal workers now have the right to organize and to bargain collectively. Clause 8 gives Congress the responsibility to promote science, industry, and the arts by making laws under which inventors, writers, and artists receive patents and copyrights to protect their works. A patent is an official document that gives an inventor the exclusive right to make, use, or sell the invention for a specified number of years. A copyright is the exclusive right to publish or perform literary , artistic, or musical works for a certain number of years. Clause 9 allows Congress to set up the federal district courts, the United States Courts of Appeals, and other special courts. Through Clause 10. Congress has power to make laws regarding crimes committed on the seas or oceans. It also has power to make laws to punish persons who break international laws, 11. War. To declare war. grant letters of ma-Hfua-taui--reprisal, and make rules concerning captures on land and water. 12. Armed Forces. To raise and support armies, but no appropriation of money to that use shall be for a longer term than two years. 13. Navy. To provide and maintain a navy. 250 On this page detine these words naturalization.counterfeiting.patent.copyright.appropriation A mare complete disc, patents may he found on page 466 Working on the Railroad Chinese laborers played a major role in linking the nation by rail. Workers on the transcontinental railroad endured many hazards, including blizzards, bison stampedes, hostile Indians, and danger from blasting tunnels through solid rock. Many Chinese laborers took part in the construction of the railroad, and they came to be respected for their ability to continue working despite the many hardships. The transcontinental railroad was begun in 1863 and completed in 1869. During those six years at least fifteen thousand Chinese workers labored on the project. Many lost their lives while doing the dangerous work. Chinese immigrants did not begin arriving in the United States until the early 1850's. In fact, in 1848 the official Chinese population in the United States was only forty-three. Gold was discovered in California in 1849. By the end of 1852, at least twenty thousand Chinese immigrants had come to California in search of gold. When little gold was found, much work was available. Many American businesspersons used Chinese workers as a source of cheap labor. By 1882 there were about 375,000 people of Chinese origin in the United States. Many other people in the United States disliked them, though, because they looked and dressed differently. Chinese immigrants were also often resented because of their willingness to work hard for long hours and very low wages. For those reasons, Chinese immigrants were not allowed in the United States between 1882 and 1943. The law was then changed, but today only a small percentage of all immigrants to the United States come from China. Nevertheless, Chinese-Amer- icans now form an important segment of this nation's population. and they continue to be successful in many occupations. There are currently about half a million Chinese-Americans in the United States; most of them live in California. New York, and Hawaii. 1. Why did many Chinese come to the United States during the 1850's? 2. What reputation did the Chinese who worked on the transcontinental railroad gain? 3. How did news of the gold strike reach China? 4. Why do you think that early Chinese immigrants were often w illing to work longer hours and for less money than other workers in America? 5. Prejudice develops when an attitude toward a person or group is formed without enough accurate information. Discrimination occurs w hen a person or group is treated differently for no reason. What instances of prejudice or discrimination have you experienced or witnessed yourself or heard reported in the news? Focus Page Introduction Look at the sketch; why did Man/iro draw all people -even Americans -to look like Japanese? Mam Concept Manpto Nakahama was the lirst to tell the Japanese about America, and also Americans about Japan Manjiro Nakahama made this sketch of a whaler in action. The ship is American even though the crew members appear to be Japanese. Manjiro Discovers America One day sixteen-year-old Manjiro Nakahama was fishing near his island home in Japan when a sudden storm carried him far out to sea. A whaling ship finally rescued him, and during the long voyage to the United States he learned English. Manjiro arrived in Massachusetts in 1843. He became the lirst Japanese to live in the United States for more than a short while. Eventually Manjiro sailed to California, where he found enough gold to buy a whaling ship of his own. He then returned to Japan after having been away for ten years. Once in Japan. Manjiro taught classes about the wonders of the world outside of Japan. He helped persuade the Japanese government that American Commodore Matthew C. Perry's visit would be peaceful. Manjiro translated books and also taught engineering and whaling techniques. He returned to the United States in 1860 while serving as an interpreter for the first group of Japanese officials to visit this country. Manjiro Nakahama was one of the first people to tell Americans about life in Japan, and also to tell the Japanese about life in America. He recorded many of his interesting observations about customs in the United States, including these: American women have quaint customs; for instance, some of them make a hole through the lobes of their ears and run a gold or silver ring through this hole as an ornament. American men, even officials, do not carry swords as the samurai [Japanese soldiers] do. But when they go on a journey, even common men usually carry with them two or three pistols; their pistol is somewhat equivalent to the sword of the samurai. Meanwhile, Japanese- Americans today comprise an important part of our society. Many are successful in a wide variety of occupations. Over 600,000 Jap- anese-Americans now reside in the United States; about three-fourths of them live in Hawaii and California. 1. When did Manjiro leam English? Why did he eventually go to California from Massachusetts? then Japan? 2. After being rescued by a ship, how long was Manjiro away from Japan? How did he return? What did Manjiro's family probably think had happened to him? 3. What jobs did Manjiro do when he returned to Japan? How long did he remain in Japan before returning to America? 4. What knowledge and skills did Manjiro have that others in Japan at that time did not have? ... Answers to Focus Page Questions 1. During the voyage to America probably to search lor gold 2 Ten years, on hisam ^-FA ship that hehadperished at sea 3. Translated books, taught engineering and whaling techniques, worked with the gov seven years 4- Ab'hty to speak English, knowledge of engineering Western culture and customs, others Special Feature Introduction Emphasize the rapid change that came to California during the mid and late 1800's Note that Machado claimed his 14.000 acres in 1820. and California was still part of Mexico in 1845. Five years later it became a state, two generations later, by about 1900. Los Angeles alone had a population over 100.000' Mam Concept The Mexican War and the gold rush caused tremendous changes in California, and with those changes came many difficulties lor Spanish-Mexican ranchers who had occupied the land tor generaiions. Machado family tradition says that the original boundaries of their ranch. Rancho La Ballona, located in southern California, were set by the distance that a horse and rider could travel in one day. The rider was Jose Agustin Antonio Machado, and between sunrise and sunset that day in 1820 or 1821 he managed to encircle nearly fourteen thousand acres. The story may be fiction; however, the Machado family and the size of the ranch are not. Jose Agustin Antonio Machado started Rancho La Bollona when California was still an outpost of Spain's American empire. He maintained it while Mexico governed the area and also during United States rule following the Mexican War. This Spanish-Mexican rancher was the fifth son of Jose Manuel Machado, a soldier in the Spanish colonial army. Born in 1757 in Mexico, Jose Manuel married Maria de la Luz Valenzuela in February of I 780. He was then stationed at Los Alamos, in the northern Mexican province of Sonora. The following year he and Maria joined sixteen other soldier families that were sent to southern California. There the men became part of the Spanish forces that were guarding the missions of Los Angeles, San Diego, and Santa Barbara. By the time Jose Agustin was born on August 27. 1794, the population of the little settlement of Los Angeles had grown to three hundred fifteen. Some residents had moved out to establish cattle and sheep ranches on surrounding land. That is what Jose Agustin did, in partnership with three others, when he was about twenty-five. They worked hard to make a success of their ranch. Ballona was a California spelling of bayona, the Spanish word for "bay." The Machado land was located near the Pacific Ocean, and the lagoon and marshland on it resembled a bay during time of flooding. Rancho La Ballona seemed to be an appropriate name. This portrait shows Jos6 Agustin Antonio Machado to be a most distinguished looking gentleman. In 1826 Jose Agustin married eighteen-year-old Maria Petra Manucla Buelna. Her mother had come to California from Mexico about the same time as Jose Agustin's parents. Maria Petra died two years after the marriage while giving birth to a son. Eight months later Jose Agustin married Maria Romona Sepulvida, the daughter of a neighboring rancher. They had fourteen children, the last born in Los Angeles in 1853. Rancho La Ballona produced corn, beans, pumpkins, wheat, and hay. Vineyards and fruit trees thrived along Ballona Creek. A special white wine that Jose Agustin developed was popular in Los Angeles. Flocks of sheep and herds of cattle and horses grazed on the extensive pasture lands. Jose Agustin also sold horses. One of a group of buyers related their experiences while visiting Rancho La Ballona: We stayed at the Rancho ten days. The food was good. Mrs. Machado, to be sure that the eggs were fresh, would catch the hens, put them into baskets, and keep them covered until they announced that they had fulfilled her requirements. Whereupon she would give them handfuls of corn, to reward them for their industry and to silence their squawking. We bought thirty head of fine saddle horses of Machado. The lowest price was twenty dollars and the highest thirty-five, delivered to the Lopez corral in Los Angeles. We paid Machado the money and had a brand placed on the left shoulder of each horse. He would take no pay for our ten days' board and lodging, but we persuaded his wife to take three doubloons, which had the value of forty- eight dollars. By I860 Jose Agustin Antonio Machado was considered a wealthy rancher in the area. Not only did he own part of Rancho La Ballona, but he also had acquired land near San Diego. The Mexican War of 1846-1848, followed by the gold rush in 1849-1850, brought great change to California. At first the increase in population benefited Spanish-Mexican ranchers. Those in southern California could sell their cattle in mining areas to the north for thirty to forty dollars a head. However, people came to California looking for land as well as for gold, and many newcomers simply settled on portions of Spanish-Mexican land. They fenced it and picked up stray cattle and other animals for their own use. They paid for neither land nor livestock. Conflicts between old-time settlers with Spanish land claims and newcomers were frequent. Finally the United States government established a policy to determine who owned what. In the A Generation of Expansion Marfa Romona Machado, wife of JosS Agustin Antonio Machado. Francisco Machado, son of Jose Agustin Antonio Machado. process of court action and decisions by government agencies, many Spanish-Mexicans lost their land. Their proof of title was often a picture or rough map honored by tradition. Such proof did not satisfy government officials used to seeing required surveys of land. Other Spanish-Mexicans lost because they borrowed against their land from American lenders at interest rates of 5 percent per month or more. When they could not meet their debts, they had to give up their holdings. The Machado land had originally been granted under the authority of the Spanish crown. The size of the holding had been determined by the number of cattle Jose Agustin planned to graze on it. After the Mexican Revolution, the Mexican government had the ranch surveyed and confirmed the grant to Machado. However, Jose Agustin had to work for years to establish title to Rancho La Ballona. When he died on May 17, 1865, the matter was still not entirely clear. His heirs continued to struggle in the courts until they finally succeeded in obtaining the title near the end of 1873. A number of Jose Agustin's children continued to live on Rancho La Ballona land into the 1800's. Gradually, however, through sale, inheritance, and for payment of debt, the ranch was broken up. The adobe ranchhouse that once housed the Jose Agustin family disappeared. Grazing land finally gave way to urban development. Only Ballona Creek--its banks now lined with concrete to prevent erosion and to help control the flow of water—still remains. Compare what happened to many SparushUexican families with, lor example, the situation of the Cherokees (see page 349) How were the two cases similar"> (Both had legal title to their lands, both had lands that American settlers wanted badly, others i How were they afferent? (Some Spanish- Mexican families did keep their property, they were not torced to move by the government, others ) What tmally caused the disappearance ol Rancho La Ballona? (Urban development) in August, 1856. at Osawatomi, killing twenty abolitionists, but Brown escaped. Kansas finally entered the Union as a free state in 1861. What amounted to civil war in Kansas shocked most Americans. Events there showed vividly how deep the national rift over slavery had become. The Republican Party. The slavery issue had driven a wedge between factions in both Whig and Democratic parties. The popular uproar over the Kansas-Nebraska Act led political parties to make adjustments. A coalition, or alliance, of some Whigs and Democrats met in Ripon, Wisconsin, and elsewhere in 1854. They urged the formation of a new party opposed to the extension of slavery in the territories. As a result, the Republican party was started. Abolitionists generally supported the new party. Its stand against the further expansion of slavery pleased farmers and working people who feared competition from slave labor. Business people found the party's support of a transcontinental railroad, other internal improvements, and high protective tariffs agreeable to their interests. A Whig who became a Republican was Abraham Lincoln. Know-Nothing Party. An indication of the weakness of' the Democratic and Whig parlies was the growing strength of the Know- Nothing party. Officially the American party, its password, "I don't know," led the public to call it the Know-Nothing party. The party appealed to anti-immigrant and anti-Catholic sentiments; it urged that Catholics and foreigners not be allowed to hold public office. The party also called for a twenty-one-year residence requirement for immigrants before they could become citizens. Eventually the issue of slavery weakened the Know-Nothing party as it did the Whigs and Democrats. Election of 1856. The Know-Nothing party nominated Millard Fillmore for President in 1856. Fillmore was also nominated as the Whig party's candidate. Fillmore had already served as President: as Vice-Presi- dent, he had succeeded Whig President Taylor, who died in oflice in 1850. Fillmore was not nominated in 1852. He came in a distant third in 1856. The Republicans chose John C. Fremont as their presidential candidate. Republicans adopted "Free soil. Free men, Fremont and Victory" as their campaign slogan. Democrats made popular sovereignty their main campaign issue and nominated James Buchanan as their candidate. Buchanan had been minister to Great Britain during the Kansas-Nebraska dispute. Not being involved in the controversy made him a safe candidate for the presidency. The Democratic party organized well for the campaign, and Buchanan proved to be an able vote getter. He received 174 electoral votes; Fremont, 114. (See map on page 414.) The Democrats continued to draw support from both the North and South. The Republicans, however, were concentrated in the North. The slavery issue seemingly had given birth to a strong sectional party that served to deepen the North-South rift. For Review 1. What were the provisions of the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850? of the Kansas- Nebraska Act? 2. How did the underground railroad work? 3. What did Harriet Tubman, Sherman Booth, and John Brown have in common? How were they different? 4. Name the four political parties that sponsored candidates in the election of 1856. ery 4 rOwfi 15 Hi, m i (Sjf 1 i ! - 1 r /" ■HEdrf | f/ M ' A The United States 1870 Daniel and Maria Dean Brown move to Fori Madison, Iowa. 1870-1900 Industrial production increases tremendously. 1871 Great Chicago Fire. 1874 Gold discovered In South Dakota. 1876 Sioux Indians defeat Custer's troops. 1876 Baseball's National League formed. 1877 End of Reconstruction In South. 1877 Edison Invents phonograph. 1882 Chinese Exclgsia Act passed 1870 The World 1875 1880 1873 Prince Edward Island becomes Canada's seventh province. 1871 Rome becomes capital of Italy. 1870-1871 Franco-Prussian War. 1879-1883 Peru and Bolivia wage war against Chile. 1879 Britain defeats Zulu kingdom In Africa. ■fatskyscraper begun in Chicago. ■■4-1888 Economic depression. 1893-1897 Economic depression Sion d. d Mi Huckleberry Finn published. 1885-1887 Severe drought in parts of the West. 1896 Plessy v. Ferguson decision. 1886 American Federation of Labor founded. 1890 Census Bureau reports end of frontier. 1899 Carnegie Steel Company organized. ists 1890 1895 1900 1M5 Canadian Pacific Railway spans Canada. 1890 New Zealand begins program of social reform. 1894 France, Russia sign military alliance. lc. 1900 United States becomes world's leading industrial nation. 1898 Spanish-American War. Lssson Introduction To gam an understanding of the nation s railroad system during the mid-1800s, have students study the maps on pages 366 and 511 How were the rail, mining, lumper, and agricultural industries related0 HuH'ngSkills Define these "ro/os transcontinental, influx. vigilante, conserve, forest reserves, registration interrelated Warfi/flfsj Ra&O industrial expansion caused widespread changes <n the United States one of these changes was the formation of a complex. interrelated economy In the years after the Civil War, railroads spun a giant web of track connecting far- flung places across the nation. Yet even a nation accustomed to bigness was impressed with the completion of the first transcontinental railroad. Most Americans considered the rail connection as one of the great marvels of the age, like the Brooklyn Bridge. Plans for both a southern and a midconti- nental railroad developed in the early 1850's. Efforts to organize Kansas and Nebraska to provide a route aroused great sectional controversy in the days of John Brown. The desire to link West with East persisted. In 1862, in the midst of the Civil War, President Lincoln signed a bill providing government aid to two firms, the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific Railroad companies. The government offered the companies grants of land, which they could sell to raise money to build the transcontinental tracks. In addition, the government promised to lend them several thousand dollars as each mile of track was completed. The railroad companies could also issue stock and sell bonds to raise other money1. Chinese crews began building the Central Pacific tracks east from Sacramento, California. They trudged through the high Sierra Nevada Mountains to descend onto the deserts of Nevada and Utah. Predominantly Irish crews pushed the Union Pacific tracks west from Omaha, Nebraska. On May 10, 1869, locomotives of the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific stood nose to nose at Promontory Point, just north of Great Salt Lake. Many Americans heard about the completion of the first transcontinental rail- Tne Thomas Gilcreasa Institute ot American History and Art. Tulsa. OK Chinese workers had to blast through mountains before tracks could be laid for the Central Pacific. road through the wires of the telegraph lines, that carried word of the momentous event. Other Rail Networks. With one in operation, more transcontinental lines were built. The Southern Pacific connected New Orleans to Los Angeles, and the Santa Fe ran from Kansas City to Los Angeles. The Great Northern and the Northern Pacific linked Minneapolis with the Pacific Northwest. In the meantime, feeder lines leading to transcontinentals were constructed in the West. Elsewhere other railroads such as the Illinois Central and the Baltimore and Ohio expanded. American railroad mileage grew five-fold from 30,000 miles in 1860 to 188,000 in 1900. Railroads and the Economy. The growth of railroads had far-reaching effects on the Lesson Introduction Have students look at the pictuie on page *73 and also read rne caption Why did young children work" (To increase me family earnings ) Why did families work try such tow wages? (They needed every penny, and had no choice) Where did the lather probably work? (In a local factory or mine) Reading Skills Dehne these words legend lumberjack, unskilled labor, devoid, sweatshop, destitution, workmen's compensation, disability pay, unemployment compensation, retirement, bargain, depression, exploitation Mam Idea, Intolerable working conditions and extremely low wages sparked trie organisation or labor unions The amazing industrial growth of the United States depended on abundant natural resources, remarkable leaders, and a ready force of workers. American men, women, and children worked long and hard for growing industries. Thousands of immigrants also shouldered the burdens of business. Working on the Railroads. One of the organizers of the Central Pacific Railroad. Charles Crocker, became tired of rowdy crews that would sign up to work, only to disappear after payday. In two years the Central Pacific laid only fifty miles of track. In desperation, Crocker hired fifty Chinese from San Francisco as an experiment. They worked so well that three thousand more were soon hired. Before long, four out of five workers on the Central Pacific were Chinese. Inch by inch they picked and blasted their path through the mountains. The Chinese worked for less pay and longer hours than other workers would accept. Finally they went on strike in 1867. Crocker broke the strike by forcing them to go without food or water until they returned to their jobs. Irish workers made up a large part of the Union Pacific's construction gangs. The Irish cleared the way and laid track from Omaha to Promontory Point. One song especially attached to them: Drill, my paddies, drill! Oh, it's work all day, No sugar in your tay, Workin' on the U-Pay Ra-ailway! Railroad Folklore. Much American folklore developed around railroaders. John Henry was a legendary black railroad construction worker. It was said that one day John Henry took on a steam-driven machine in a spiking contest. The machine never stopped until an exhausted John Henry gave up and died. They took him on the Chesapeake and Ohio to Washington. A popular song recounted: And they buried him in the sand. There's peoples from the East, there's peoples from the West Come to see such a steel-drivin' man. Oh, Lordy! Sec such a steel-drivin' man. Although Casey Jones was a real person, his story has become legend. Casey Jones was an Illinois Central engineer. He met death one day in Tennessee when, rounding a blind bend, his freight train plowed into another train that had not cleared the track. The song concluded: Twas round this curve he saw a train; Something happened in Casey's brain; Fireman jumped off, but Casey stayed on, He's a good engineer, but he's dead and gone. Lumberjacks. Immigrants from Sweden. Norway, and Finland cleared forests around the Great Lakes and then moved on to the Pacific Northwest. They labored six days a week, often when the temperature stood "two feet below zero." And when night fell, as one lumberjack related, "We roll into our soft downy couches of lousy blankets, and lie and listen to the mockingbird, with music by the entire band, and snoring in seven different languages, mostly imported." Gigantic Paul Bunyan was a favorite hero of folklore for lumberjacks and all Americans. According to various tall tales, Paul lesson introduction Hhvo students study the picture on pages 482-483; as a class, try to list nationalities idenhlied in the picture Were most immigrants from Europe? i ng Sws Define these words heritage. Homogeneous, famine, rudder, steerage, peddler, discrimination, ghetto, natn/ism, diversity U&ildea Alter 1850 the character ot immigration changed dramatically, with most newcomers to the United Stales arriving from easiern European nations. China, and Japan At the time of the Revolution, the United States contained mostly Dutch, French, Swedish, and Scotch-Irish, as well as English, Americans. Still, English was the most common language, and Americans shared a colonial as well as a Protestant and northern European heritage. Allowing for certain sectional differences, the country was largely homogeneous—that is, uniform in character. Changing Character of Immigration. Most of the 3.5 million immigrants who came to America between 1820 and 1850 were from the British Isles or northern Europe. Most were Protestant. Then the Irish, fleeing from famine and harsh British laws at home, began to arrive in the 1840's. Most of these immigrants were Roman Catholic. After 1850 many people came from Italy, Austria-Hungary, Greece, the Balkans, Poland, and Russia. These non-English- speaking peoples with varied cultural backgrounds added entirely new elements to American society. Newcomers from Eastern Europe. People's reasons for leaving Europe after 1850 were as varied as their cultures. Poland at the time was divided between Russia, Prussia, and Austria-Hungary. Many Poles wished to escape foreign rule. Thousands of Jews fled persecution in Russia. Armenians w'anted to escape Turkish persecution. Italians and Greeks left their countries because many could live there only in poverty. The United States offered more political and economic freedom than many Europeans could hope to experience in their countries. In addition, unskilled immigrants could earn five times more in the United States than in "The Steerage," taken by Alfred Stieglitz in 1907. The trip from Europe to New York cost about $30. A Stieglitz photo told a true-to-life story. some parts of Europe. Many immigrants planned to earn money and then to return home. While some achieved that goal, others stayed, though, and sent money so that their families could join them. Immigrants sailed from many European ports. The passage to the United States took Hester Street, a large Jewish community in New York City in the 1880's. fcjJW - >L r , '^53 Hrv' IE!* aj grin * Ah* iLM ftti ■ .. a s i! i oil -m ' Q| ■. — j. -I * i HHI f B M f iy.'a' 0 1 . J Li|J: M 4 at least six weeks. During that time immigrants lived in crowded holds of ships not designed to carry passengers. They were jammed back near the rudder in an area that became known as steerage. Although the majority of the new immigrants came from farms or small towns, hardly 20 percent farmed after reaching the United States. Most lacked the money to buy land, so many newcomers settled in cities. There, skilled workers set up their own shops. The unskilled found jobs as porters, peddlers, dock workers, or heavy construction laborers. Others worked in the textile, iron and steel, and meat-packing industries. Some went to coal-mining towns. Newcomers from China. As never before, immigrants also came from Asia. Thousands of Chinese crossed the Pacific during the 1860's to work in gangs on the Central Pacific Railroad. After the transcontinental railroad was completed, most settled in California. Some missed railroad work and left California in the 1870's to work on the construction of the Alabama and Chattanooga Railroad in Mississippi. The first Chinese immigrants were welcomed in California when they came in the 1850's. The governor, John McDougal, even suggested a land grant program to encourage more Chinese to come to California. The economy, however, changed when railroad construction was over and mines gave out. Jobs were harder to get and many Americans resented Chinese workers willing to accept low wages. As the economic depression settled across the country, the Chinese and other newcomers were blamed for it. More and more Chinese suffered discrimination, even violence. The Workingmen's Party in California urged the government to pass laws discriminating against the Chinese. The Sidewalk Ordinance, for instance, prohibited people who used poles to carry merchandise from walking on the sidewalk. Since only the Chinese were used to carrying goods in this manner, the law was specifically against them. Some Americans demanded that Chinese immigration be stopped. In 1882 Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act, which prohibited Chinese laborers from entering the country for ten years. When this act was renewed a second time in 1902, Congress deleted the terminal date. Japanese Newcomers. Fewer Japanese immigrants came to the United States. In Some Chinese immigrants used money they earned working on the railroads and other jobs to open their own businesses. 1870 there were only fifty-six Japanese in the whole country; in 1890, around two thousand. About seven thousand Japanese arrived each year between 1900 and 1909, but this was a tiny number compared to the millions who came from Europe. Japanese newcomers readily assumed American ways of living, learning English and sending their children to public schools. They also hoped to take advantage of American opportunities in business. Young Japanese might start as farm laborers or as deckhands on fishing boats, but they often ended up the owners of land and boats. Gradually, resentment against the Japanese also grew. In 1906 the San Francisco school board ordered that Japanese children must attend separate schools. The Japanese government protested the school board order, and President Theodore Roosevelt stepped in. He persuaded the board to drop the order. Then he gained Japanese consent to a "gen- tlemen's agreement" whereby Japan volunteered to limit the number of its citizens allowed to come to the United States directly. Strangers in Another Land. Between 1860 and 1900, more than fourteen million Europeans left their homelands to come to the United States. Many felt caught between cultures, identifying with the words of the Norwegian Ole Rolway, "We have become strangers, strangers to the people we forsook, and strangers to the people we came to." Such an upheaval of persons brought significant changes to American cities and industries. Americans of longer standing witnessed these changes and reacted, sometimes with fear, sometimes with anger. Newcomers and established citizens alike struggled to adjust to the changing times. Most of the immigrants settled in cities and soon found a kind of comfort and support in ghettos within (he city. A ghetto is a section of a city where many members of some minority or ethnic group live. Areas called "Little Italy," "Grcektown," and "Chinatown" became communities within the larger city, where immigrants could maintain the cultures they cherished. Early in the 1900's, more Italians lived in New York City's "Little Italy" than in Rome. In the city many immigrants struggled with unfamiliar language and customs. Most found work in factories, sweatshops, or mines. Many Germans, Irish, and Swedes worked in steel plants. Some mines reported —122,000 Australia and New Zealand —142,000 Africa —744,000 West Indies -2,160,000 Mexico -2,178,000 Central and South America -3,000,000 Asia -4,121,000 Canada 36,248,000 Europe Between 1820 and the 1980's approximately three-fourths of the immigrants who came to the United States were from Europe. Alter students study me imnvgraoon figures asA wny me Statue ot Uoerty eras cfit B background for W •Slavic - Italian * PoliMn-Hu&uan * Tf**: - Gaet* - /e/s" - LiTNuNiAN-PotrrvthSt Memories of "the old country" will fade as these new citizens join in the mainstream of American life. some 70 percent of their laborers were Slavic-born. Many employers refused to hire Irish immigrants, posting signs that read "Irish need not apply." Jews and other ethnic groups also faced discrimination. The changing character of immigration after 1880 aroused many old prejudices in some Americans who were already growing anxious with the profound changes reaching into their lives. Some Americans expressed anti-Catholic, anti-Semitic, anti-black, anti- Chmese.or anti-alien attitudes. Nativism,the practice of favoring the native-born over immigrants, found popular acceptance. Such prejudices persisted until World War I focused attention on other issues. For immigrants, life in America was both rewarding and difficult. Most were somewhat better off than they had been in Europe, and their children had greater opportunities. The examples of Carnegie and Gompers provided inspiration for other immigrants. On the other hand, immigrants also faced prejudice, discrimination, and social and economic barriers. Many of tl:e new arrivals found it hard to adjust, to take on the new and let go the old. It was to help these immigrants that Jane Addams started the first settlement house in Chicago in 1889. Called Answers toRoview Questions 1. Bot&e 78] Japan 2. Sectionotaoty where - u ■ -f immigrants, place to help people, espeo6 GOflttr&fjf/ons remain today 4 (jrtfamtuar u Hull House, its type of settlement sprang up in many cities. It not only helped immigrants to learn English and prepare for American citizenship, but it offered their children an opportunity to explore the arts and participate in recreational activities. Gradually American customs became the way of fife for immigrants and their children. The contributions of the millions of immigrants to the United States are significant. They supplied the muscle to support the industrial change in mines, factories, and railroads. At the same time, immigrants provided works of literature and art and introduced new words to the American language and new foods to the American diet. They brought a diversity to the United States that made it different from any other nation. For Review 1. Compare and contrast immigration to the United States before and after 1850. 2. Explain the terms ghetto, nativism, and settlement house. 3. What evidence shows the contributions made by immigrants? 4. What conditions and attitudes made it difficult for immigrants to adjust to life in the United States? ethnic group Uve. p'ttci/ceof taw ignat^e Lu"npt, ; , er jdfijst to rum onvironment. 3. They helped t>wiu At -tr ca, and (hor A Gift of Friendship Foojs Page Introduction Ask students to look at the picture on page 4 79. and imagine that they are immigrants on board ft stup. What mould their thoughts be mhon the Statue o' bbedy hnatty comes into view? Mam Concept The Statueot Liberty, o gilt from the people ot Trance to the people ol the United States har. meic.omoa millions of p© ■"' * to this country sinco 1886 After 1886, the first glimpse of America seen by arriving immigrants was usually the Statue of Liberty. Today the majestic monument to freedom still welcomes all to New York Harbor and the United States. Sometimes forgotten, however, is the fact that the Statue of Liberty was originally given as a gift of friendship from the people of France to the people of the United States. French citizens contributed about $400,000 for construction of the Statue of Liberty. Donations in France paid for the statue, just as donations in the United States paid for the pedestal on which the statue rests. Joseph Pulitzer, publisher of the New York World, sparked the campaign that resulted in about $280,000 for construction of the pedestal. Letters and articles printed in his newspaper prompted thousands of donations from people all over the country. Many contributions were made by poor people; even schoolchildren sent nickels and dimes. Frederic Auguste Bartholdi, a young French sculp- The Statue of Liberty is visited by thousands of Americans yearly. tor, designed the statue that is actually named Liberty Enlightening the World. The monument was dedicated on July 4, 1886. Bartholdi chose to represent the idea of liberty as a proud woman thrusting a torch upward with her right hand. In her left hand he placed a tablet containing the date of the Declaration of Independence. The statue is nswe'S to Focus Page Questions 1. The statue represents both the American u, \endship between franc€o■ Jthe United States 2 JJ&ofty >s not3 con-*rete ot iftygnf people, answers w ."ary, but he could have jsed an eagle, a soldier, or nm© ijj! &t, people struggling to be free 4. Answers w / vary, Lincoln Methona made of copper, weighs 405,000 pounds, and measures 305 feet from the base to the tip of the torch. In 1903, a poem by Emma Lazarus entitled "The New Colossus" was inscribed on the base of the Statue of Liberty. It contains these welcoming lines: Give me your tired, your poor. Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free. The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me, 1 lift my lamp beside the golden door! 1. Explain this statement: The Statue of Liberty is a monument to both freedom and friendship. 2. Why do you think Bartholdi had a difficult time deciding how to represent the concept of liberty in a statue? How else could he have represented the idea of liberty? 3. Explain what Emma Lazarus means in her poem. 4 Survey your class to see how many members have seen '.he Statue of Liberty. How many have made the climb to the crown of the statue? What other monuments in the United States also serve as symbols of freedom? iet at Lesson Introduction Ask students to skim this lesson and find nine cities mentioned fN Y.C . Chi. Phil.. Minneapolis. Denver. Pittsburgi'.. San f ran . Se^r.'/e. Go? run , rhave :*'eni locate these cities on the map on page 752 Reading Stotts, Define these wotds urban, tenement. a kyscraper < guidebook, vaudeville Matn idea As American cities grew rapidly around the turn of the cm crime control, and sanitation needed to be sofved "Cities are the centers of influence," proclaimed the Reverend Dwight Moody around 1815. "If we can stir them we shall stir the whole country." Indeed, the influence of American cities exceeded the strength of their numbers. In 1860 only 16 percent of the population lived in cities, then defined as areas having populations of eight thousand or more. Within forty years the percentage of Americans living in urban areas had doubled. Between 1850 and 1900, New York's population grew from 969,000 to 3.4 million. Much of Chicago burned to the ground in 1871 but roared back to life with 1.7 million people by 1900. Philadelphia grew from 121,000 to 1.3 million in the same time. Minneapolis and Denver were scarcely settlements in 1850; fifty years later they had populations of 202.000 and 134,000, respectively. Other cities showed similar growth. Geography and Urban Growth. The growth of cities was often related to their locations. The Mississippi River, for example, provided Minneapolis with excellent transportation. As railroads connected the city with the rich western wheatlands, Minneapolis became important as a center for flour milling. Pittsburgh used the Ohio River for water transportation. Near the city were rich coal mines. Coal, along with iron ore from Minnesota and limestone from Michigan, carried by water and rail transportation, made Pittsburgh a mighty iron and steel center. Chicago prospered because of not only its location on Lake Michigan, but also its central location in the nation. Chicago became a center for food processing. Hogs, cattle. Met students note the nine cities mentioned in this lesson have then We largest metropolitan areas in the United States today (t New Yon 10-Boston ) Be certain to explain the concept ot a metropolitan area i ingle city ohtsettM igemnty, chateau, conspicuous, mugging, municipal, jury, difficult problems of housing, transportation, fiteand and farm produce from the Plains States reached Chicago by rail. After processing, meat and other foods were shipped via the Great Lakes and railroads. Chicago was, as the poet Carl Sandburg wrote: Hog Butcher for the World, Tool Maker, Stacker of Wheat, Player with Railroads and the Nation's Freight Handler; Stormy, husky, brawling, City of the Big Shoulders. Chicago attracted thousands of immigrants —Poles, Bohemians, Irish, Germans, Serbo- Croats, Lithuanians, Swedes, Norwegians, Greeks, Jews, Slovaks, and Italians. As a Chicago newspaper reporter wrote: "To the north of the Loop [the central business district! was Germany. To the northwest, Poland. To the west were Italy and Israel. To the southwest were Bohemia and Lithuania. And to the south was Ireland." On the west coast, San Francisco and Seattle used their fine harbors to become commercial and shipping cities. New York City continued to use its harbor and became a leading channel of trade between Europe and the rest of the country. Natural features of the land made certain areas more suitable for settlement and trade. Numerous cities prospered because early settlers used the advantages of natural features such as rivers, lakes, and ocean harbors. These natural features linked them with other settlements and resources and promoted their growth. Making Space. Growing cities soon faced problems. More and more people needed housing, jobs, garbage collection, and transportation. New York, the nation's largest city, •eter to the chart on page 749 to find out which are among ... : City 3 Chicago. 4 Philadelphia: 6-San Francisco, 485 city ot cities and suburban areas), as opposed to)ust a took the lead in the size of its problems and in efforts to solve them. Many newcomers had found housing in buildings which, after years of use and successive tenants, became known as tenements. Some of these were large old houses once owned by well-to-do families that had moved to other neighborhoods, and which now held several families. In 1900 the New York State Tenement House Commission found that over one million people lived in forty-three thousand crowded Manhattan tenements without adequate light, air, or sanitation. Jacob Riis, a New York reporter, wrote: A little boy stood by the window, flattening his nose against the pane and gazing wistfully up among the chimney pots where a piece of blue sky about as big as the kitchen could be made out. .. Docs [the sun] never come here? I asked [the mother]. Yes it did, she said. Once every summer, for a little while, it came over the houses. She knew the month and the exact hour of the day when its rays shone into their home, and just the reach of its slant on the wall. They had lived there six years. In June the sun was due. As these buildings aged, they became dirty, even dangerous, places in which to live. They housed roaches and rats as well as humans. They were cheap, however, affording shelter to those with little money to spend on rent. Tenement slums were a sign of crowded cities. Another kind of building pushed city growth skyward. Skyscrapers, born of steel and ingenuity, became another sign of city life. The thirteen-story Tacoma Building in Chicago seemed a city giant in 1888. Then the twenty-story Flatiron Building, completed in 1902, pushed urban space still farther upward. Together, slums and skyscrapers symbolized the problems and progress of urban living. City dwellers could also marvel at the homes of the wealthy, who formed small, but conspicuous, neighborhoods in cities. New York's Fifth Avenue, running north from around Fiftieth Street, was a well-known wealthy neighborhood. Here, one branch of the Vanderbilt family—whose money had come chiefly from shipping and railroads— built a splendid dwelling at Fifth Avenue and Fifty-Second Street. The house resembled a chateau—a type of building found among the wealthy in France. Getting Around in the City. The wealthy and many members of the middle class could afford private horse-drawn carriages. Other people used public transportation at a nickel a ride. In the 1880's horse-drawn streetcars began to give way to electric streetcars. New York and Chicago built elevated train lines, tracks erected on steel stilts over streets. At first, steam-driven locomotives pulled elevated trains, showering people below with soot and ashes. Later the "els" were powered by electricity. Police and Fire Departments. American cities of the nineteenth century' were built from wood, the most available material. Wooden structures, though, were great (ire hazards, and only gradually did cities improve their fire-fighting capabilities. Fire swept through parts of cities periodically. The worst fire occurred in Chicago in October, 1871. What began as a minor blaze quickly became a conflagration that destroyed one-third of the city. Some three hundred persons died and ninety thousand were left homeless. During much of the nineteenth century, communities relied on volunteer lire fighters. Telephone cables streak the skies over New York. Later, these wires would be relaid underground. Expanding cities, however, needed professional fire departments. Steam engines furnished power to pump water onto fires, and ladders were made to extend to the roofs of taller buildings. As more and more people crowded into cities, such crimes as picking pockets, theft, mugging, and robbery increased. Cities had to organize police departments to protect their citizens. City Sanitation Needs. Sanitation was another urban problem. The common use of horses for transporting goods made regular street cleaning a necessity. Regular sewage and garbage disposal was also needed. By 1900 many city homes and offices had piped-in water from underground sources. Cities gradually extended their underground sewage systems, which often drained into rivers and lakes. In return, the rivers and lakes became increasingly polluted. Although individual wells for drinking water were still common in 1900, by then more than three thousand cities had installed municipal water systems. In the 1890's New York began to add chlorine to its water to purify it. As the practice spread, such diseases as cholera and typhoid fever declined. City Entertainment. Baseball, the circus, bicycling, and other forms of recreation also resrfe with virtually allot Hie same piotj/ems that were present a hundred 487 ny at the nation s cities are in need ot redevelopment and revitalization station, and pollution are some ot the difficult issues toeing modern cities Central Park offered New Yorkers a variety of recreational activities throughout the year. owe their popularity to city crowds. Baseball began in the raid-1800's and, with the organization of professional teams, quickly became popular. Teams in eight eastern cities formed the National League in 1876. Football games, boxing matches, wrestling and horse races also drew huge crowds. After the 1880's bicycling became a popular recreation among thousands of people. Bicyclists formed clubs, the most powerful of which was the League of American Wheel- men, According to a guidebook for tourists in the United States published in 1893, The League of American Wheelmen, which has divisions in every State, is doing what it can to improve the country roads, and its great influence gives hope of success. Already it has secured for the wheelman many rights formerly denied him, including the freedom of public parks, in almost all cities, on an equality with other vehicles. During the summer, bands gave public weekend concerts in parks. New York, Chicago, and Boston had symphony orchestras by the 1880's. The theater was popular and so was vaudeville, which offered a variety of song-and-dance numbers, comic routines, and trained dog acts. Every summer thousands of city dwellers could count on the appearance of one or more circuses, which traveled from city to city by train. Indeed, Americans of 1900 could reflect on the many changes that they had personally experienced in their lifetimes. New Americans speaking different languages walked the bustling streets. Streetcars, electric lights, and skyscrapers were signs of progress everywhere in the cities. For Review 1. Name three cities that grew because of the natural advantages of geography. 2. Describe a tenement; a skyscraper. 3. Why did American cities look different in 1900 than they did in 1870? 4. Do you expect cities to change faster or slower in the future than they did between 1870 and 1900? Why? Housing Woes A population explosion rocked the United States during the late 1800's and early 1900's. The arrival of immigrants from many countries pushed the population of the nation in 1910 to seven times what it had been in 1860! Because of this skyrocketing increase, housing quickly became a problem. Most immigrants, as well as many other Americans, headed for the nation's largest cities. In 1820, for example, only one in every fourteen Americans lived in an urban area. By 1917, less than a hundred years later, half of the population lived in urban areas. Housing became a major concern because land was much more scarce in the cities. Fortunes were made by developers who could pack the greatest number of housing units onto a city block. Soon five- or six-story "sky- scraper" apartment buildings began to appear in many cities. However, these apartments were often poorly constructed, unsafe, and without proper lighting and ventilation. Even some prizewinning structures were poorly designed. The view was extremely limited for these apartment dwellers in 1890. For example, the "dumb- bell" apartment building had a long, narrow opening or air shaft in the middle. This made its shape similar to a weightlifter's dumbbell. On paper, the design looked appealing. In reality, however, the air shafts served as deadly chimneys during fires in the wooden structures. People threw garbage into the middle openings, which attracted rats. The design also encouraged overcrowding. With ten or twelve such buildings on a city block, it was not uncommon for ten thousand people to live on one block! Today new building techniques, in addition to more government regulations, have eliminated some difficulties. However, many housing problems of a hundred years ago still remain unsolved. 1. Name several things that were wrong with early apartment buildings. What sometimes happened to buildings that were thought to-be well designed? Explain. 2. Find out how high some of the tallest skyscrapers are today. What materials were used for construction? 3. Make a bar graph that shows the percentage of people living in urban areas in America since 1784. Use these figures: 1784. 4 percent; 1820, 7 percent; 1850, 15 percent; 1870, 25 percent; 1900, 33 percent; 1917, 50 percent; 1930, 56 percent; 1960, 70 percent; 1981, 77 percent. Between which of those years was the increase greatest? itzer's entire Sunday edition staff, who marched together front the Worlds offices to the Journal's,. Pulitzer offered more money and his staff returned. A counteroffer by Hearst secured the fickle staff for good. The battle between Pulitzer and Hearst was on. Hearst began publishing grisly stories about atrocities in Cuba, and the Journal circulation soared. Pulitzer followed suit. Soon the term yellow journalism was coined to describe the sensationalism they used to move popular opinion into clamoring for war with Spain in 1898. After the war Pulitzer regretted his use of yellow journalism. His editors admitted that great mistakes had been made. Pulitzer urged his staff, "Be more energetic and enterprising ... but above all, be right." Magazines and Books. Americans eagerly read magazines, and a host of new ones sprang up to reflect reading tastes of all kinds. In 1885 there were four monthly magazines of general interest with circulations of more than one hundred thousand. They sold for thirty-five cents a copy. By 1900 there were twenty such periodicals, with a total circulation of 5.5 million and priced at five or ten cents a copy. Among the new and popular magazines' were Munsey's, Cosmopolitan, and McClure's. The Atlantic, Harper's, and The North American Review generally appealed to more sophisticated tastes. The growth of cities also expanded book sales. Many American writers made city life the focus of their works. For example, Upton Sinclair focused on an immigrant family living in Chicago next to slaughterhouses and meat-packing plants in his book The Jungle. Writing under the name O. Henry, William Sidney Porter turned out many short stories about the lives of "little people" in cities, most I Answers to Review Questions t. Between 1870end 1900.2 A belief ft Nation Army it wassuccesshii ana is still performing needed servw: prizes advertising became successful, publisher, became moreaggr =5 rec/eat < n, religion, education, social behavior, enj others, yt? of them members of the lower middle class. 0. Henry became especially known for his stories' surprise endings. Samuel Clemens, using the name Mark Twain, wrote humorously of life in America with his stories of Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn. Dime novels, named for their low price, were probably the most popular reading of the late 1800's. These were tales of adventure, romance, and heroism, many set in the Old West. One of the more popular means of getting information and ideas—as well as enter- tainment—was Chautauqua. The name came from Lake Chautauqua in New York, where the movement began. Chautauqua was a form of adult education, although children attended gatherings too. (See page 543.) Changing Culture. By 1900 America was a much different nation from what it had been at midcentury. Millions of immigrants added diversity to the American population and contributed greatly to industrial expansion. With industrial production increasing, newspaper and other media expanding circulations, and spectator sports growing in popularity, America was on its way toward becoming a new society. For Review 1. When did free public education become common in the United States? 2. Explain the term social gospel. What group promoted the ideas of the social gospel? Discuss its success. 3. Give three reasons for the increased influence of newspapers by 1900. 4. This lesson describes different aspects of popular culture around 1900. Write a paragraph to explain the term popular culture. Is the term used today? rkto bring changes to society; tt\e ... essive 4 Answers will vary, but should include areas such Chapter Review Mastering the Facts Match each year with the arrival of an immigrant group to America. Then list the section of the country where each group settled. 1. 1840 a. Chinese 2. after 1850 b. Irish 3. 1860 c. Japanese 4. 1900 d. Italian, Greek, Polish Define each term and use it in a sentence: 1. homogeneous 4, tenement 2. ghetto 5. social gospel 3. nativism 6. cities Exploring Trends and Ideas 1. What were some of the reasons Eastern Europeans came to the United States after 1850? Since most immigrants came from small rural communities, why did they choose to settle in large cities? What types of jobs did they find? 2. In what ways were Chinese and Japanese immigrants discriminated against? Why were immigrants feared? 3. What were some of the problems facing the growing cities in the late 1800's? How did cities cope with their rapid growth? What were some of the major services that had to be provided to the many urban dwellers? 4. Explain why Joseph Pulitzer and Randolph Hearst were considered the most aggressive and imaginative newspaper publishers of their time. How did they resolve their differences? What effect do you think they had on other newspaper publishers? Using Maps and Pictures 1. Study the chart on page 482 and then develop a hypothesis, or explanation, for the difference in numbers of immigrants coming from various parts of the world. Why do we have so many more Europeans than Asians coming to our shores? Why do we have almost as many immigrants from Mexico as from Central and South America? Why have there been so few immigrants from Africa in comparison to Europe? Why might our smallest number of immigrants be from Australia and New Zealand? Can anyone come to live in the United States today? 2. Describe the street scenes on page 480 and 487. In what ways are the two pictures alike? Name two ways in which the city has changed in the picture on page 487. On Your Ow n 1. When did some of your relatives come to the United States from other countries? Try to find out about their experiences. How did they support themselves? Where did they live? Were they discriminated against? 2. Select a city and find out how this city has changed since 1900 in population, housing, sanitation, government, social services, and entertainment. How has the city remained the same? Do you think the changes have had a positive or negative effect on the city? Additional Reading 1. Fleming, Thomas. The Golden Door: The Story of American Immigration. New York: Grosset & Dunlap, Inc. 2. Mays, Lucinda. The Other Shore. New York: Atheneum Publishers. 3. Meigs, Cornelia. Jane Addams, Pioneer for Social Justice. Boston: Little, Brown & Co. 4. Meltzer, Milton. The Chinese American. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell. Lesson Introduction Ha i/e students refer to page 482 to review sources of immigration to the United States Between I860 an 1900 alone, over 14 million European immigrants came to America most to large cities Reading Skills Define these words hazardous, sweatshop, employee, hardship, heritage, plight, charity, political machine underlings Mam ktea Big city political machines often took advantage of immigrants, who were usually unskilled arnJ ci>u'it sneak httte English As the machine age exploded across the land, more Americans flocked to the cities. They were followed by millions of immigrants from Europe. Most came for the same reasons that colonial immigrants had come. They saw better economic and educational opportunities in America. The Atlantic crossing was no longer a hazardous journey. Steamships provided faster, cheaper, and safer trips. The new' immigrants did not have to work for years as indentured servants to pay back their passage money. Still, since most could only afford the cheapest fare, the immigrants' trip was rarely easy. Most arrived in their new country with little or no money and spoke little or no English. One Jewish immigrant recalled his first experience after arriving in New York: When we came to New York, I thought we were entering heaven. But here in the new land ... we lived on the East Side in tenements and had to climb to the fourth and fifth doors to tiny rooms that were dark and airless. There were no bathrooms in the flats. A large bathtub stood in the kitchen near the old iron stove that was heated with coal in which mothers also did the laundry. Once here, most newly arrived immigrants had to take the lowest-paying, most dangerous jobs. After 1900, factory owners hired Polish, Greek, and Syrian newcomers to replace the older English and Irish immigrants, who could by then get better-paying jobs as clerks or sales people. Sweatshop owners in Chicago and New York found Italian and Jewish replacements for the German and Irish immigrants who were able to move on to better jobs elsewhere. Many immigrants experienced the failure described by sociologist Mary Antin in her book The Promised Lund. Mary, who came to the United States at the age of thirteen, wrote about her Jewish father: In business, nothing prospered with him. Some fault of hand or mind or temperament led him to failure where other men found success . . . "Give me bread!" he cried to America. "What will you do to earn it?" the challenge came back. And he found that he was the master of no act, of no trade; that even his precious learning was no avail. In those early years after their arrival, immigrants usually did not make much money. Some families worked together at home making lace or paper flowers. They were paid by the number of pieces they finished; this work could bring the family about seventy cents a day. A Chicago factory owner was asked how much he paid unskilled workers; he answered sixteen cents an hour. His employees usually worked about fourteen hours a day. Many immigrants wanted to improve their situation but found it almost impossible to advance. As one Polish immigrant related; ... I earn only $5 or $6 in one week, and when I pay teacher $2 [to learn English], I have only $4 or $3. . . . Better job is very hard for me because I do not speak well English and I cannot understand what they say to me. Immigrant Children Grow lTp. Despite their own hardships on the job. most immigrant parents were determined that life would be better for their children. Many dreams rested on getting an education in order to get ahead. In the early 1800's over a million children under 16 worked in factories. Some worked 13 hours a day or more. Immigrant children worked hard in school. The older ones returned home at night to help the rest of the family learn English and American customs. In their efforts to become Americans quickly, some were embarrassed by their parents' language and customs from the "old country." One Italian boy, John Fame, described how he tried to hide his heritage: Doesn't my name sound French? Sure! So ... when people ask my nationality, I tell them I am French.., . Thus I begin to [hatel my heritage. I avoid Italian boys and girls who try to be friendly__At the lunch hour I huddle over my lunch pail, for my mother doesn't wrap my sandwiches in wax paper and she makes them too large. . . . Worse, the bread is homemade; not bakery bread, not "American bread." I make a great fuss because I can't have mayonnaise and other "American" things. In return, immigrant parents felt hurt when their children rejected their native customs. One father wrote: I don't know how to express it, but the fact that my children arc well educated and have outgrown me makes me feel bad. ... People envy me my good, fine, educated children but (I am ashamed to admit it) 1 often think it might be better for me if they were not so well educated, but ordinary workingmen, like me. Growing Awareness of the Plight of Immigrants. Jacob Riis, a Danish immigrant who came to the United States as a young man of twenty-one, worked as a police reporter for two newspapers. For twenty years he reported on city conditions and exposed problems for the New York Tribune and the New York Evening Sun. By choice the slums were his beat. In 1890 he described life in the slums in his book How the Other Half Lives: "The death of a child in a tenement was registered at the Bureau of Vital Statistics as 'plainly due to suffocation in the foul air of an un- ventilated apartment.' " He related that in one tenement "a sanitary official counted 146 cases of sickness ... from smallpox on down . . . of 138 children born in it ... 61 had died, mostly before they were one year old." An epidemic of measles "ravaged three crowded blocks in Elizabeth Street . . . [be- fore] it had spent its fury, the death maps in the Bureau of Vital Statistics looked as if a black hand had been laid across those blocks." Death also came from starvation. "I am satisfied from my own observation," reported Riis, "that hundreds of men, women and children are every day slowly starving to death in the tenements." Jacob Riis did much to make other Americans aware of the poor conditions that were part of the daily life of many immigrants. Some Americans understood the immigrants' plight and worked to bring about improvements. Others blamed the immigrants for slums, diseases, and crime as well as for poor working conditions. Political Machines and Bosses. In 1900 there were no federal government programs to help needy people. Churches and agencies helped a little. However, people in charge of charity programs often thought the immigrants were dirty and poor and lived in slums because they were lazy. Many immigrants turned to political officials for assistance. Some political party organizations have been called political machines. The party members who control policy and political jobs are sometimes called bosses. As the number of immigrants increased, political bosses viewed them as future voters. To insure that immigrants would vote for their party, bosses did favors for them. Often the boss or one of his underlings met immigrants as they first arrived. He helped grateful families find housing and brought them bags of groceries or baskets of coal. On holidays he brought presents for the children. He encouraged their ethnic customs and understood that homesick people needed the celebrations and feast days from their homeland. When there was minor trouble with the law—a common occurrence when people did not speak English and could not read—he fixed things with the courts and the police. Sometimes he found jobs for them. Many immigrants felt that the boss was their only American friend. Favors and services, however, were not given out of friendship. The boss expected the immigrants to get their citizenship and to vote for the candidates the machine wanted. Sometimes they were asked to vote more than once. Immigrants and Change. The arrival of the new immigrants helped change the country. The economy changed because more workers produced more goods, influenced prices, and eventually demanded improved working conditions. Cities also changed. They grew with the increased numbers of immigrants and others attracted to city life. Politics changed as immigrants began to rely on political bosses for jobs and city services. For Review 1. What kinds of jobs were newly arrived immigrants likely to get? 2. What did Jacob Riis hope to accomplish? 3. Describe how immigrants learned American customs. 4. Explain what political machines and bosses did. Answers (o Review Questions 1. Joes in factories, mines, and sweatshops that were the lowest paying and most dangeious 2 Mils hoped to make other Americans aware ot the poor conditions most immigrants were forced to endure 3. Immigrants ot ten learned American customs from then children 4. Political bosses and political machines often traded small favors for votes Lesson Introduction Ask students to re<er to me Presidents chart on pages 750- 751. Were any of our Presidents members of the Populist Party? Can a minor party still play an important role even il its candidate Is not elected? Reading Skills Define tnese words capitalism, technology, investment, productivity, tariff, enploilation, grange, strife, gold standard, muckrakers, fiction, progressivism Mam Idea Once the movement tor political reform began, it gained momentum and had far-reaching consequences The American economy grew at a remarkable pace between 1870 and 1900. Demands for iron, steel, railroad equipment, oil, building construction, and farm machinery grew. So did the markets for food, clothing, and other consumer items. American capitalism was able to expand because the necessary factors of resources, labor, capital, and enterprise were available. Improved machinery and technology placed the vast resources of the land, with its forests, mines, and farms, at the disposal of American industry. Increased immigration added more men, women, and children to the labor force. Larger amounts of investment capital became available through the widespread practice of selling stock to start or expand corporations. American enterprise, with its promise of profit, rewarded some and motivated many more to work hard in the hope that some day they too might become wealthy. Popular Dissatisfaction. Although the economy grew, not all Americans prospered. Farmers complained that while productivity increased, prices for farm crops dropped. Cotton that sold for thirty cents a pound in 1865 sold for fifteen cents a pound in the I870's and brought only five cents a pound by 1893. In addition, farm machinery was expensive and prices of farm machinery were kept high by tariffs or special taxes. Farmers also felt that railroads took advantage of them. Farm crops were perishable and had to be shipped when ready. Without competition. railroads charged high prices and farmers had no alternative but to pay. Thousands of unskilled factory employees worked long and hard in unhealthy or even dangerous conditions. Many began to feel the economy took advantage of their cheap labor. Early labor unions made limited progress in improving conditions. The working poor grew more and more aware of corruption and exploitation by powerful city machines. Journalists revealed appalling practices in politics and business. The limited efforts in the area of civil service reform and the greater popular participation in government did not answer the complaints of growing numbers of Americans. Farmers Take Political Action. Angry because they were constantly in debt and needing to borrow, farmers began to demand action from the government to remedy their hardships. In 1867, they formed their first organization, the National Grange of the Patrons of Husbandry. Grange meetings were held across the country. In some southern and western states, farmers took political action. In the 1870's Grangers backed candidates who were against monopolies and supported government control of railroads. Some states did pass laws to regulate railroads. These "Granger laws," however, were often ignored and in some cases were repealed. Farm prices took another dive in the late 1880's, and once again farmers took political action. New organizations called Farmers' Alliances replaced the older Grange meetings. In the South, the alliance supported farm-conscious Democratic candidates in the election of 1890. In the West, farmers supported independent party candidates. Beginning of the Populist Party. The call for far-reaching reform stirred the hearts uesi/. roc Special Feature Introduction Have students took at the family portrait on page 575. and see it they can determine how many generations are represented in the picture (Probably lour I Why would it be difficult lor each succeeding generation to remember the customs and heritage of their ancestors7 Main Concept The story of American history does not always concern famous people, the great ma/onty of those who built the nation were simply responsible, hard working individuals from a variety of cultures and backgrounds - people like the Machados (see pages 394-396). Grandmother Brown (see pages 514-516). and Fat Tuen Lowe Pardee Lowe wrote this book about his father in 1943. •pOTt)££ £OW£ "I strongly suspect that my father's life is a fraud," wrote Pardee Lowe in his book. Father and Glorious Descendant. ''But if it is, it is a magnificent one. Nor. were this proved true, would it alter my affection and respect for him. I still would be, as I am now, proud and happy that he practiced such a glorious deception on the land he loved, America." Father, whose name in English was spelled Fat Yuen Lowe, always insisted that he was a native-born American. He had, however, been born in China. At some point during his early life in America, he had acquired a legal paper making him a United States citizen. Few people knew about that, though. Fat Yuen Lowe's birthplace had been a sleepy little Chinese village called Sahn Kay Gawk, meaning "The-Corner-of-the- Mountain-Where-the-Water-Falls." At about age twelve, he left his native land for America, planning to earn and save money before returning home. Thousands of Chinese made similar plans. In San Francisco, Father found a job in a Chinese shop that made underwear, overalls, and other garments. Father also attended an adult school run by missionaries to learn English, although no one figured out how he found the time. His workday lasted from dawn to nine o'clock at night. Besides sewing, he also ran errands, made deliveries, and swept the shop. Eventually he and two older brothers opened their own garment shop, which they called Kwong Hop, or "Everlasting Unity." With the money saved. Fat Yuen Lowe returned to China and married. His savings soon ran out. however, and he was back in San Francisco in 1896. Later, when news came from the Chinese village that his wife had died, his brothers urged him to return home once more and remarry. He had no children yet, his brothers said; not to have descendants would be disloyal to his family, which had lived in the village for ten generations. Besides, they asked, without children, who would care for him when he grew old? Father agreed. However, he did not want to go back to China again. Surely there must be some Chinese girl in San Francisco he could marry. His brothers finally consented, and, following ancient custom, they hired a marriage broker to find a bride. The broker was successful, and years later she told this story about his mother to Pardee Lowe. "Your mother," she said, "the A Generation of Responsibility eldest daughter of a family of eight, was an extremely capable person about the house. She was born in San Francisco's Chinatown. Although unschooled, she was well trained." Meanwhile. Pardee's maternal grandmother showed an opinion common at that time that girls did not need an education, the broker added. " 'It is a waste of time,' your grandmother would say. 'Girls arc made only for marriage.' " Children soon arrived, and Father wished to avoid giving them Chinese names that could easily be mispronounced in English. He called his first child Mabel. The others were named for well- known Americans. The first son Father named Pardee, after George C. Pardee, then governor of California. The next daughter became Alice Longworth, named after the first daughter of Theodore Roosevelt. Then followed Helen Taft, named after William H. Taft's wife. The next two sons were twins. They became Woodrow Wilson and Thomas Marshall, named after the President and Vice-President elected in 1912. The Lowe family remembered well how the "Earth Dragon," as they referred to the earthquake, erupted in San Francisco in April of 1906. The devastation wiped them out completely. Father and his group continued their life in Oakland, across San Francisco Bay. There cousin Ming gave Father a job in his dry Ask students to review some ot the many difficulties encountered by early Chinese immigrants to the United Stales on page 461 In addition, have them review the account ot the San Francisco earthquake on pages 509-510 The family posed for this picture on the sixty-sixth birthday of Fat Yuen Lowe, seated in front at right. As the war closed. President Wilson warned his Attorney General, "Palmer, do not let this country see red." A. Mitchell Palmer had the Federal Bureau of Investigation to trace radical groups. It raided homes and labor headquarters. More than four thousand aliens and radicals were rounded up in an effort to wipe out the Communist party. Palmer arranged the deportation of 249 Russians. Sacco and Vanzetti, 1920. Nicola Sacco, a shoemaker, and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, a fish peddler, became symbols of the fear sweeping the country. It cost them their lives. Sacco and Vanzetti were accused of killing a Massachusetts shoe factory paymaster and guard. Both men admitted being radicals and organizing protest meetings against Palmer's raids. The evidence linking Sacco and Ven- zetti to the crime was questionable; however, both were convicted and sentenced to death. Many claimed that the men were on trial because they were Italian radicals. Sacco and Vanzetti were executed on April 23, 1927. Closing of Immigration. Some Americans, forgetting our long history of immigration, wanted to establish a society without foreigners. Strong antiforeign and antiblack sentiment developed. Some groups called for the preservation of "Nordic superiority." The Ku Klux Klan led attacks against blacks. Catholics, Jews, and immigrants. Evidence of torture and murders, however, led to a decline in Klan membership after 1926. Labor unions also pressured Congress to restrict immigration. Samuel Gompers of the American Federation of Labor, himself an tmnirgiiim, wi'oic, ' Cnea^ laoui. ignorant labor, takes our jobs and cuts our wages." Congress responded by passing the 1921 Emergency Law, which established a quota system. Annual immigration was limited to 3 percent of a nationality already in the country, based on the 1910 census. In 1924 Congress passed another immigration act, this one based on the 1890 census. This limited immigration from eastern and southern Europe still further. The immigration laws of the 1920's did not apply to those coming from other countries in the New World. As a result, immigration from Canada, Mexico, and the West Indies increased. Anti-Japanese Prejudice. Few minority groups escaped the intolerance which swept the country. On the West Coast, hatred was directed against the Japanese and Chinese. Newspaper fanned the flames by printing anti-Japanese stories. Japanese farm laborers were attacked. State legislatures passed laws forbidding Japanese to own land. In Japan, anti-American sentiment was equally strong. In 1924, when Congress passed the Japanese Exclusion Act, the Japanese reacted violently, boycotting products from the United States and staging "Hate American" meetings. Diplomatic relations between the two countries became strained. United States Tariff Policy. Following the war, the United States adopted a high tariff policy to protect its own industries. American industry suffered from a drop in world markets after the war. Wages fell and the country faced a postwar recession. Farmers and business people were calling for high tariffs to keep out cheap foreign goods. In 1921 President Harding signed an emergency tariff bill. It placed duties, or taxes, on wool, sugar, meat, wheat, and corn. In the following year Congress passed more tariffs. The high tariffs were hard on European countries. They wanted to sell their products Remind students that anu-Japanese and ant'-Cnmese feelings had surfaced several times previously in the United Stales For 010 e> ample. me Chinese were resented as early as the 1860's (see page 368). the Japanese suffered similar treatment around the turn ol the century (see pages 569-570; "You opened my country, let me open yours." President Calvin Coolidge and his wife. Grace, appeared to have opposite personalities. She was fun-loving while he was usually quiet. Left, this cartoon reflects the strained relations between Japan and the United States, as a result of immigration laws and curtailment of privileges. What was Uncle Sam's reply to the man? in the United States to earn money to repay their war debts. Tariffs were also hard on American consumers, who paid higher prices for goods purchased. Harding's Scandals. Harding rewarded his friends and campaign managers with government jobs. They rewarded Harding with scandal. Harding himself was not implicated; however, the pressures of the job and the scandal broke his health. He died just as the Teapot Dome scandal exploded. The government owned oil lands in California and Wyoming, including a hill called Teapot Dome. President Wilson had reserved these valuable oil deposits for the navy. Through Harding's appointees, private individuals, among them Doheny (see page 588), obtained drilling rights. Fortunes made from drilling public oil flowed into private hands. Government investigations revealed widespread corruption, resulting in jail sentences for some of the people involved. Calvin Coolidge. With Harding's death in August, 1923, Vice-President Coolidge became President. Thin-lipped and serious, Coolidge lived and preached frugality. He saved money from his presidential salary. He continued reducing taxes and government spending. He also supported the high tariffs of Harding's administration. Coolidge vetoed bills which would cost the government money. He vetoed a bonus for World War I veterans and farm relief bills for farmers. His "Republican Prosperity" appealed to the voters, and Coolidge won the 1924 presidential election. President Coolidge, with Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon, worked with Congress to pass the Revenue Act of 1926. It reduced personal income taxes and abolished other taxes. In the cartoon on this page, which specific American is the Japanese visitor alluding to when Ate says 'Ybu opened my country 619 (Commodore Matthew C Perry -seepage 568) Ash students to describe the expression on Uncle Sam s lace Focus Pago Introduction 'Keep Cool with Coohdge' was a popular campaign slogan m 1924 Coohdge (born on the Fourth of July in 1872) had considerable political experience, including serving as governor ol Massachusetts Coolidge liked practical jokes. Sometimes he would push every button on his desk just to see all his aides run at once. Not-So-Silent Cal Mam Concept With the passage ol time, impressions ol people can often become distorted when they are based on incorrect information Perhaps no other President has been more misrepresented to the American public than Calvin Coolidge. Many jokes and cartoons poked fun at Coolidge during his years in the White House. They often gave incorrect impressions about him. and today many people unfortunately believe that those distortions showed the real Calvin Coolidge. For example, Coolidge was tagged with the nickname Silent Cal. However, he gave more speeches than any of the twenty-nine Presidents before him! He made radio addresses about once each month and held five hundred twenty press conferences. It is said that Coolidge supplied more information tp the press than Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson combined. Another myth about Coolidge is that he was a poor conversationalist at the dinner table. It is true that he hated small talk. However, some biographers claim that Coolidge could speak in great detail on a wide range of subjects, including classical and current literature as well as current events. Was Coolidge actually a man of little humor? Not really. As a youth in Vermont, he was one of the jokers in a local show. During his college graduation ceremony, he gave a humorous speech. Humorist Will Rogers helped create some of the myths about Coolidge, but even Rogers admitted that "Mr. Coolidge has more subtle humor than almost any public man I ever met." Popular opinions about many public figures become distorted when they are based on incorrect information. That is w hat has happened w ith President Coolidge. and the misrepresentation of him as Silent Cal deserves to be put to rest. 1. Use facts to explain why President Coolidge probably does not deserve the nickname Silent Cal. 2. Reread page 596. Whether he wanted to or not, how might Will Rogers have helped create some of the myths about Coolidge? 3. Government leaders are always concerned about their image, which is the impression that they create in the minds of people. Images of strength and intelligence are the most desirable. Why might political opponents have enjoyed building up the image of Silent Cal? 4. Even popular Presidents have to deal with stories about them that are untrue. However, not all myths work against a President. Refer to page 354; what myth helped William Harrison win the presidency? Answers ro Focus Page Questions 1. Coolidge gave more speeches and press conferences than many other Presidents, could 622 intelligently discuss many sub/ects. and did have a sense ol humor 2. Will Rogers was extremely popular and influential, and hn fohes often left lasting impressions on many people a. This would present a poor image to the people *■ Though wen to-do, Harrison was successfully portrayed as a common person. Pearl Harbor. The year 1941 saw an extension of the conflict in Europe. In June, ignoring the treaty of friendship. Hitler sent armies into the Soviet Union. Then, in December, the United States entered the war. The relationship between Japan and the United States had become quite tense by the fall of 1941. On the morning of December 7, 1941, Japanese planes appeared over the United States naval and army bases at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. Japanese bornbs destroyed or damaged many American warships and killed more than two thousand Americans that Sunday morning. About one hundred seventy war planes were destroyed. The Japanese government immediately declared war on the United States. Americans were shocked. The next day President Roosevelt asked Congress to declare war on Japan. With only one dissenting vote. Congress declared war on Japan. Two days later, on December 11, 1941, Germany and Italy declared war on the United States. The United States declared war on them the same day. Internment of Japanese Americans. For many Americans, the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor created bitter feelings toward Americans of Japanese descent. These feelings were intense on the west coast, where earn profits 4 That the United States wanted to remam President Roosevelt called December 7, 1941 'a date which win live in intamy' Though the United States lost eighteen ships, no aircraft earners had been at the base That gave the United States a chance to quickly rebuild its Pacific fleet The United States Navy received more damage at Pearl Harbor than it did during all of World Wart. many Japanese Americans lived. A great number were Nisei, second generation Americans. They were accused of helping Japan. The pressure of western politicians and frightened military people led President Roosevelt to authorize quarantine action for Japanese aliens and Japanese Americans. All Japanese in the area were sent to one of ten relocation centers that were situated in several western states. The relocation program forced 110,000 people of Japanese descent—most of them American citizens—from their homes. All had to leave their jobs and property while being detained for up to four years. During the war, many Japanese Americans experienced hardships and discrimination. Still, many young Nisei fought bravely for the United States. Other Japanese Americans served in the intelligence service or as translators. After the war, the government eventually repaid thousands of Japanese for the losses they suffered. However, the Japanese Americans received less than one-fifth of what they claimed to have lost. For Review 1. Explain the following terms: totalitarian government, fascist, Nazi. 2. Identify acts of aggression committed by Germany, Italy, Japan, and the Soviet Union in the 1930's. 3. Why did the United States try to remain isolated from world problems in the 1920's and 1930's? 4. What did the cash-and-carry program, lend-lease program, and draft laws show about American foreign policy? / authonty of one individual or group, b-Italian totahlarians believing m Party 2. Germany-invaded Poland, others. Italy conquered B i Many reasons, including belief that some businesses wanted* >, s to hitral. but still favored the Allies Washington, D.C., to march for decent jobs and better housing. Dr. King brought cheers from the crowd with his speech: I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character.... This will be the day when all of God's children will be able to sing with new meaning, 'My country 'tis of thee, sweet land of liberty, of thee I sing; Land where my fathers died, land of the pilgrim's pride, from every mountainside, let freedom ring.' When we let freedom ring... all of God's children ... will be able to join hands and sing the old Negro spiritual, 'Free at last! Free at last! Thank God almighty! We are free at last!' Then, just eighteen days later, a bornb killed four black girls as they attended a Sunday school class. Demonstrators were also killed. Most Americans were appalled by the violence. In 1964 another civil rights act was passed to outlaw discrimination in jobs, voting, and public accommodations. That same year. Dr. King was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo, Norway. Encouraged by these gains, the civil rights movement continued. In 1965, Dr. King led marchers from Selma to Montgomery to dramatize the plight of Alabama's black citizens. The march encouraged the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which allowed federal officials to register black voters when local officials were apparently not doing the job. The civil rights movement made other gains. However, Dr. King was shot to death in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1968. His death destroyed clear leadership for the civil rights movement and progress slowed. Demands for Equality Grow. The drive for civil rights and equality, spearheaded by blacks, spread to other groups. Mexican Americans, American Indians, and women began to demand their own rights. Americans of Spanish descent are the second largest ethnic group in the United States (see page 64). Large numbers of migrant workers, many of them Mexican Americans, followed Cesar Chavez. Chavez had started the National Farm Workers Association (later the United Farm Workers) in 1963. Chavez organized a strike against California growers. The live-year strike ended in an agreement between striking migrants and California growers. By 1970, most Mexican Americans had left rural areas to find work in the cities. Once there, new problems demanded their attention. New adjustments had to be made. Large numbers of women began calling for an end to discrimination based on sex. The efforts of women to improve their conditions were often referred to as the Women's Liberation Movement. In 1965 the National Organization for Women (NOW) was started. Members wanted equal pay for equal work. Women were encouraged to seek jobs that were not traditionally considered woman's work. Some became truck drivers, police officers, and construction workers. By the 1970's, over 40 percent of the work force consisted of women. For Review 1. Compare and contrast the lives and accomplishments of John Adams, Frederick Douglass, and Eleanor Roosevelt. 2. Describe three accomplishments of the civil rights movement. 3. Who was Dr. Martin Luther King. Jr.? What did he do to improve conditions in the United States? 4. What groups began to demand greater equality in the 1960's? Answers to Review Questions 1 Adams-a hie of public service asa distinguished leader Douglass -a voice of conscience who worked against discrimination. Roosevett-a tireless worker tor the underprivileged 1. School integration, new civil rights legislation, spreading of drive for equality to other minority groups 3. Civil rights leader, president of SCLC, led many peaceful hilt Fi/yuvGrfi tl nrnttx f c a/iAinef zf/c/'nmiRatinn A lnWnnr ■—— The new civil rights laws prohibited discrimination in all programs funded by the government as well as in all hotels, restaurants, and other businesses which served the public. The laws also guaranteed equal job opportunities for all. A few months later, in April, 1964, President Johnson demonstrated his great talent for getting people with opposing views to work together. The railroads and the unions were preparing for a nationwide strike. Johnson called representatives from both sides together. To union officials he said, "You represent the unions. You know more about what your men need than anybody else in the country." To the railroad representatives he said, "You know more about what the railroads can do than any other men." Addressing both groups, he advised, "Now, if I were either of you, I . . . would want to get in there and settle that strike before somebody like Lyndon Johnson, who doesn't know much about either side, has to do it." The differences were settled in record time. The Great Society. Johnson easily won the 1964 presidential election against Barry Goldwater, the conservative Senator from Arizona. The 1964 election brought many new Democratic Representatives and Senators to Congress. With these results, Johnson felt ready to move ahead and out of Kennedy's shadow. Lyndon Johnson wanted to continue the work of Roosevelt's New Deal, Truman's Fair Deal, and Kennedy's New Frontier. He wanted to build a Great Society where there was opportunity for everyone. His Great Society called for a war on poverty, an attack on diseases, enforcement of the civil rights laws, reform of immigration laws, and increased aid to education. All these programs A solemn Lyndon Johnson, accompanied by his wife Lady Bird (left) and Jacqueline Kennedy, takes the oath of office after President Kennedy's death. The ceremony took place aboard the presidential plane. were to be accomplished with the reduction of personal and business taxes. In 1964 and 1965, Johnson and Congress worked together to pass an extraordinary number of bills for social programs. Congress passed a billion dollar aid-to- education package. President Johnson took special pride in returning to a one-room schoolhouse in Texas and signing the bill in front of Kate Deadrich Loney, Johnson's first teacher. "I started school when I was four years old, and they tell me, Miss Kate, that I recited my first lessons while sitting on your lap," said Johnson. Congress also passed an Appalachia bill to improve living conditions in eleven states in the Appalachian Mountains region. Medicare created a health insurance program for older Americans. A new housing law granted federal money to help poor people buy or rent houses or apartments. Johnson created two new executive departments, the Department of Transportation Europe. This demonstrated how much the world relies on oil from the Middle East, and prompted huge price increases (see page 705). Empire this term usually refers to a group of states or countries that operate under one ruler, such as the Spanish Empire during the I500's. However, an individual or company can also create an empire in a certain field, such as a railroad or steel empire. ■ As European nations scrambled to create empires during the late 1800's and early 1900's, the United States also joined the race. Many American businesses believed the country would suffer if it did not also have an empire (see pages 568-571). Environment the total collection of conditions, objects, and influences that surround each living thing. An environment can change living things, and living things can change an environment. ■ Environment often plays a major role in shaping a culture or society. For example, the southern colonies grew and developed much differently from the New England colonies—largely because of different environments (see pages 132 and 139). Executive one of the three branches of the federal government as defined in the Constitution. The executive branch, with the President as its head, carries out the laws of the nation. ■ As the nation's first President, George Washington outlined many of the duties of the executive branch (see pages 281 -282). Federalism a system of government in which the states and the central government both share authority. Each of the two levels of government (state and national) has certain specific powers that cannot be exercised by the other. ■ During the Constitutional Convention, the delegates turned to federalism as a compromise solution that would satisfy both the large and small states (see pages 238-239). Free Enterprise System the economic practice of letting privately-owned companies compete freely for business with little control from the government. Though the American economy is still based on a free enterprise system, many rules and regulations for businesses have had to be established by local, state, and national governments. ■ When allowed to operate without controls, the frcc enterprise system can lead to the formation of monopolies. This occurred with the Northern Securities Company, which President Theodore Roosevelt ordered to be broken up in 1902 (see pages 545-546). Frontier the edge of civilization, or the part of a settled country that is located next to an unexplored region. Today, however, a frontier can also be any area that has not been completely investigated, such as the fields of medicine or solar energy. ■ According to Frederick Jackson Turner, exploration and settlement of frontier areas played a significant role in forming and shaping the character of America and Americans (see page 507). Geography the study of the earth's physical features as well as its climate, plants, animals, natural resources, and so on. ■ Geography played an important role in determining where people decided to settle. For example, by following certain passes through the Rocky Mountains, early explorers found fertile valleys in Oregon (sec pages 379-380). Hypothesis an educated guess that is based on reliable facts. A hypothesis is formed as an attempt to explain why something happened. ■ One hypothesis concerning the disappearance of the colony of Roanoke is that the settlers abandoned the town and went to live with nearby Indians (see page 95). Immigration the movement into a new area or country by people wanting to make a new home there. Immigration is one factor that causes the population to either rise or fall. ■ The largest source of immigration to the United States has been from Europe (see page 482). Imperialism the practice of maintaining an empire. In recent times, some nations have been accused of continuing economic imperialism—seeking to dominate the affairs of weaker countries in order to control the resources of those countries. and so on, However, resources can also be qualities such as strength and intelligence in people. ■ Theodore Roosevelt was one of the first Presidents to recognize the importance of preserving our nation's abundant natural resources (see page 547). Revolution the action of change or turnaround in a government. When a revolution takes place, new leaders seize power from the old. Sometimes revolutions are peaceful: often they arc violent. ■ The American Revolution marked the first time in history that colonies had rebelled and managed to become an independent nation (sec page 227). Secondary Source Material indirect information about an event. People who have not actually seen certain events, but who have heard about them from others, provide secondary source material. ■ Books that have been written about history, such as those by Professor Ernest May, are examples of secondary source material (see page 28). Sectionalism a great concern for the interests of only one section or part of a country. ■ Newspapers often promoted sectionalism when they printed exaggerated statements about other areas of the country during the late 1850's and early I860's. Eventually extreme sectionalism helped cause the Civil War (see page 410). Socialism a political system in which some of the production and distribution of goods is managed by a group or government rather than by private individuals or companies. Some people believe that socialism represents a middle step between capitalism and Communism. • Though it is a Communist country, the full name of the Soviet Union is the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (see page 659). Strategy the plan or method used to achieve a goal. ■ Strategy is important during wartime. For example. Union strategy during the Civil War involved an overall plan to cut the South into two parts (see pages 428—429). During World War II, American strategy was to concentrate first on the war in Europe, and then on the war in the Pacific (sec page 664). Suffrage the right to vote in political elections. In colonial limes, only white males with property could vote. Eventually suffrage was extended to more people, including blacks and women. ■ The Nineteenth Amendment finally granted women suffrage in 1920 (see page 266). Tariff a fee or tax placed by a government on goods that are imported from, or exported to, another country. This extra tax is usually paid by those who buy the goods; for example, today people who buy items such as foreign automobiles may end up paying the cost of tariffs that have been imposed by the United States government. ■ James Madison called for the first tariff in 1789, and it was that tax that provided the government then with most of its revenue (see page 283). Tax a payment, usually a percentage of value, that is levied by a government in order to support the government. A tax can be placed on such items as income, property, sales prices, gasoline, and so on. Local, state, and federal governments all have the power to tax citizens. ■ Opposition to Britain during colonial times began to mount because of taxes. The colonists claimed they were forced to pay taxes though they had no representatives in Parliament (see page 194). Technology the scientific study and application of principles and skills that is put to use to build machines and other items. Long before 1969, scientists knew what they had to do in order to place a person on the moon. However, it was not until then that technology—the application of the knowledge —allowed equipment to be built that could accomplish the goal. ■ American technology was largely responsible for bringing World War IT to a close. Technology (hen made the United States the most powerful nation in the world (see pages 46 and 669). Urban being part of the city rather than the country. The United States Census Bureau calls a town an urban area if its population is greater than 2,500. ■ In 1784 only 4 percent of Americans lived in urban areas. By 1981, however, 77 percent of Americans lived in urban areas (see page 489). 743 