A History the United States Clarence L. Ver Steeg Professor of History Northwestern University Evanston, Illinois Teacher Consultants Henry T. Conserva Curriculum Specialist San Francisco Unified School District San Francisco, California Kay Forrest Tcacher'Member, Education Committee. Illinois Commission on Status of Women Central School Glencoe Public Schools Glencoe, Illinois Lovette Hood, Jr. Instructional Coordinator Atlanta Public School System Atlanta, Georgia Verneda Stephens Teacher/Consultant Cockrell Child Parent Center Chicago, Illinois tAmerjqan Spirit About the author Dr. Clarence L. Ver Steeg is Dean of the Graduate School and Professor of History. Northwestern University, Evanston. Illinois. He received his master's and doctorate degrees at Columbia University and did post-graduate work at Northwestern University Law School. His historical writings span a breadth of subjects—from home to high finance—and a scope of publications—from elementary textbooks to professional journals. Among his early historical luniks are Robert Morris, Revolutionary Financier which was awarded the Beveridge Prize by the American Historical Association, the widely acclaimed The Formative Years 1607-1763, the bestseller The Story of Our Country, and Great Issues in American History: From Settlement to Revolution, 1584-1776. His more recent books include A People and a Nation, Origins of a Southern Mosaic: Studies in the Early Carolinas and Georgia, and World Cultures. In addition to writing many history textbooks, he has contributed to others. Often the recipient of fellowships and visiting lecturer status. Dr. Ver Steeg has served on many committees, including the Committee on the Commemoration of the American Revolution Bicentennial of the American Historical Association, a committee to plan the future of Northwestern University (the plan has been largely implemented), and a committee to advise in preparing the Master Plan for Higher Education for Public Institutions of the State of Illinois. © Copyright 1985. 1982, by Allyn and Bacon. Inc. All rights reserved. No part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without written permission from the copyright owner. Pnntcd in the United States of America. 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 94 93 92 91 90 89 88 87 86 oqiiHM35(pj< Table of Contents m List of Maps 11 List of Charts, Graphs, and Tables 12 How To Use This Book 14 To The Student 21 Unit 1 Peopling the Nation Chapter 1 Understanding Time and Place 24 Learning About Time and History Learning About Place and History Chapter 2 The Native Americans 42 The First Americans Farmers of the Southwest The Mound Builders The Iroquois of the Eastern Woodlands Native Americans of the Pacific Northwest The Eskimo Heritage Of Native Americans Chapter 3 The Arrival of Europeans 62 A Widening World Christopher Columbus Spanish Claims in the Americas French Claims in North America People As Explorers Chapter 4 English Settlements in North America X4 Prelude to Settlement The Early Settlements Later Middle and Southern Colonies The Role of Native Americans Heritage Of the English Colonies Chapter 5 The Growth of the Thirteen Colonies 104 Who Came and Why Colonial Characteristics Britain and the Colonial Economy European Rivalries People At Worship Chapter 6 Lifestyles: Colonial Times 124 Families and Homes Values and Learning Work and Play History Workshop 138 Table of Contents Unit 2 Forming the Nation Chapter 7 Understanding Graphics 142 Understanding Pictures and Cartoons Understanding Charts, Tables, and Graphs Chapter 8 Rebellion in the Colonies 158 Stirrings of Discontent The Coming Crisis The Final Break People In Conflict Chapter 9 A New Nation 176 Upheaval in the Colonies The War for Independence From Colonies to States: Problems of Government A New Constitution Heritage Of the Constitution Chapter 10 The Constitution's First Test 196 Washington as President Hamilton's Economic Program The Rise of National Political Parties John Adams's Stormy Presidency Heritage Of Political Parties Chapter 11 Republicans in Power 214 Party Changeover The Louisiana Purchase Foreign Policy Under Jefferson President Madison People As Leaders Chapter 12 Lifestyles: The Revolutionary Era 234 Families and Homes Values and Learning Work and Play History Workshop 248 Table of Contents Unit 3 Building the Nation Chapter 13 Chapter 14 Chapter 15 Chapter 16 Chapter 17 Understanding Historical Sources 252 Finding Information Evaluating Sources National Expansion 268 Westward Bound Displaced Native Americans To the Pacific Settlements and Conflicts in Texas The Mormon Settlement in Utah People A nd the Wes/ New National Forces 288 Newcomers from Europe The Transportation Revolution Changes in Making a Living Changes in Political Attitudes Heritage Of Invention Democratic Politics and Reform 308 Relations with Other Nations Democracy in Politics Jackson as President Improvement in People's Lives Heritage Of Reform The South and Slavery 328 The Southern Economy The Slave System Free Blacks The Antislavery Movement People And Slavery Chapter 18 Lifestyles: The Growing Nation Families and Homes Values and Learning Work and Play History Workshop 362 7 1 Table of Contents s Unit 4 Saving the Nation Chapter 19 Understanding Historical Decisions 366 Understanding the Decision-Making Process Understanding Decisions of National Importance Chapter 20 The Gathering Storm 382 Background of the Crisis Efforts to Compromise A House Divided The Road to Secession People And Principles Chapter 21 A Nation Divided 402 Rival Governments Behind the Lines The War's First Phases Union Victory Heritage Of the Union Chapter 22 Reconstruction 422 After Appomattox The Politics of Reconstruction The South Under Reconstruction People As Politicians Chapter 23 The Last Frontier 442 The Miners Native Americans of the West Cattle and Cowhands The Farmers' Frontier Heritage Of the Frontier Chapter 24 Lifestyles: The Civil War Era 462 Families and Homes Values and Learning Work and Play History Workshop 476 Table of Contents Unit 5 Transforming the Nation Chapter 25 Understanding Historical Focus 480 Understanding Historical Analysis Understanding Historical Synthesis Chapter 26 The Age of Machines 496 Changes in Transportation and Communication New Developments in Industry Big Business Labor Heritage Of Enterprise Chapter 27 City Lights 516 Urban Growth City Dwellers Leisure Time Heritage Of National Culture Chapter 28 Politics of Protest 556 The Beginnings of Protest The Populist Party The Progressive Movement Progressives in National Politics People As Progressives Chapter 29 The Nation as a World Power 556 China, Japan, and the Pacific The Spanish-American War New Life for the Monroe Doctrine People And Empires Chapter 30 Lifestyles: The Industrial Age 576 Families and Homes Values and Learning Work and Play History Workshop 590 9 m- Table of Contents Leader of the Free World 650 Failure of a Lasting Peace The United States and World War II Postwar Foreign Issues Postwar Issues at Home Heritage Of International Leadership Only Yesterday 670 Kennedy in Office Johnson and the Politics of Protest The Resignation of a President Into the Third Century' People As Equals Lifestyles: Modern Times 690 Families and Homes Values and Learning Work and Play History Workshop 704 The Reference Shelf 706 Emerging as a World Leader 592 Understanding Tomorrow's History 594 Understanding the News Media Piecing Together Tomorrow's History Unit 6 Chapter 31 Chapter 32 Chapter 33 Chapter 34 Chapter 35 Chapter 36 World War I and After 610 The War in Europe The United States and the War War and Peace The Twenties People In War and Peace The New Deal 630 The Deepening Depression Roosevelt and the New Deal Recovery and Reform The Rise of Big Labor Heritage Of the New Deal Atlas 708 Declaration of Independence 720 Constitution of the United States 724 United States and Possessions by Population. Area, and Capital 748 Cities 750 Presidents and Vice-Presidents of the United States 752 Conversions 753 Chronology 754 Glossary 762 Index 774 Acknowledgements 797 Greenland . / arc"x"am □ land bridge ---Migration routes Man) early migrants slowly trawled southward in search of food and comfortable climates Early Migrations The story of the first Americans begins more than 20,000 years ago. when the world was in its last Ice Age. During the Ice Age much of the Northern Hemisphere was frozen. Huge glaciers formed when parts of the Arctic Ocean turned to ice. As more and more water froze, the level of the sea fell. Land that was once underwater began to appear above the surface of what is now the Bering Strait. This new ground formed a wide land bridge between Asia and America. Scientists believe that migrating Asians crossed this land bridge to North America on foot in search of food.They followed the animals that also crossed from Asia: shaggy bighorn sheep, giant bison, rugged bears, huge moose, caribou, and deer. The early hunters, traveling in groups, crossed from Asia to North America carrying their hunting tools and a few goods for the home. They lived off their kill as they slowly made their way into the unpeopled continent. The migrations lasted for thousands of years. Many generations of early Americans lived and died as the slow migrations continued. The early arrivals moved south into the land that is now the United States. They probably followed an ice-free path just east of the Rocky Mountains. Some of them may have used small boats to travel south along the Pacific coast In time they moved into and settled almost every part of the Americas. The Pieces of the Puzzle Many scientists have worked on the puzzle of when and how these Asians came to the Americas. Some have studied rocks and land- forms. Their findings helped show how the land bridge was formed. Discoveries by other scientists, called archaeologists, helped explain how the migrating people lived in the Americas. These scientists have uncovered deeply buried human remains as well as settlements. They also found the goods these early people used in their everyday lives. One early find was made in 1908 near Folsom. New Mexico. A black ranch worker named George McJunkin was riding his horse beside a canyon that had been swept by floodwaters. He noticed some bones sticking out of a canyon wall, just below the rim. Curious. McJunkin climbed down and removed the bones. The bones McJunkin found were larger than cattle bones. He could not guess from what animal they had come. Neither could other people who visited the site. Finally, in 1926. Jesse D. Figgins found that the bones were those of a huge bison that had lived there during the Ice Age. Figgins and some helpers went to work digging at McJunkin's "bone pit." They found more bones from the Ice Age. Among the bones they found pieces of chipped flint. The flint points, made by humans for use as spearheads, told Figgins that Native Americans must have lived in New Mexico earlier than 8<HK) h.c.. when the giant bison still roamed the land. The findings at Folsom surprised many people who thought that Native Americans had come to North America thousands of years later. Other surprises were to come. In 1936 diggers in Los Angeles uncovered a human skull. Scientists who tested it for age have found that it dates from about 21,000 b.c. In 1966 there was another surprising find. Peter Lord, a Native American, discovered a carved caribou bone at Old Crow, Canada. It looked like a tool used to scrape flesh from animal skins. Scientists' tests showed that it dated from about 25JKMI ".c. Because of these linds and others, most scientists believe that people have lived on the North American continent for more than 20,000 years. By the lime the Ice Age ended, about 8000 b.c.. Native Americans had settled large parts of both American continents. It was not long before these groups were living in wavs that were different from those of their big-game hunting ancestors. Groups living in eastern woodlands hunted deer instead of bison. Those living in western deserts gathered food where they could. Those who remained in the Arctic made warm clothing from animal skins and homes from ice. So different were their ways of living that the history of the early Americans is not a single story. It is many stories. The spearheads found at Folsom. New Mexico, are more than 10.000 years old. Checkup 1. What chain of events during the Ice Age formed a land bridge between Asia and North America? 2. Why did early Asians first cross this land bridge? 3. What two routes might early arrivals have followed in moving south into what is now the United Slates? 4. What did Figgins and his helpers find at McJunkin's "bone pit"? 5. How did Higgins's findings help him date the arrival of migrants in New Mexico? 6. What two other finds help date the arrival of newcomers to North America? LOOKING AHEAD: How did the beginning of fanning change the lives of early people in the Southwest? 45 m Signs in a language other than English are common in the ethnic neighborhoods of mans large cities in the l nited States. began as early as 1642. In 1776 there were only two major universities in all of England, but there were nine colleges in the colonies. Today the United States has thousands o( colleges and universities, far more than most countries in the world. The most important and lasting gifts of the English colonists were their ideas of leadership and government. George Washington. Thomas Jefferson, and others who shaped the country were born and raised in the colonies. These leaders inherited a vision of what a democratic society should be. The achievements and influence of these leaders will never dim. Over the years people from almost every country in the world have continued to make the United States their home. Every city or town is made up of neighborhoods. Many neighborhoods have a special identity, such as Polish. Jewish. Italian. African. Swedish. Chinese. Japanese, or Mexican. The list of people with different cultural backgrounds in the United States is almost endless. People from different backgrounds brought different customs to the English colonies. The Puritans raised the church to a position of great importance by making it the very center of their lives. The Moravians in Pennsylvania, who came from what is today Czechoslovakia, brought with them their great love of music. The Germans in Pennsylvania mtmduced their own ways of farming and of building bams. Other Europeans learned from the Native Americans how to grow corn and tobacco. The French Protestants in Charleston. South Carolina, drew on a history of play making w hen they started their theaters in the colonies. Schooling and Leadership Education was important in the English colonies. Schools were founded to teach reading, writing, and religion, especially in New England. There, public schools Little-Know n People Many people, whose names are often overlooked, shared in the growth of this country. They farmed, made shoes, traded goods raised families, and took part in their own government. They made possible the founding of a nation of which you are a part. You share in their heritage. So many town meetings were held inside Faneuil Mall that John Adams named it "the cradle of liberty." 101 3ft English settlers also came for different reasons. Thomas Shepard left for Massachusetts Bay to be with his friends. One reason John Winthrop decided to go to Massachusetts was to gain more land for his children. Caleb Hcathcote came to New York to forget an unhappy love affair. And one mother sent her son to Virginia "to be tamed." Estimated Colonial Population, 1630-1760 Year Total population (white and black) Percent black 1630 4.646 1% 1640 26.634 2% 1650 50,368 3% 1660 75.058 3% 1670 111.935 4% 1680 151,507 5% 1690 210.372 7% 1700 250,888 11% 1710 331.711 13% 1720 466.185 14% 1730 629,445 14% 1740 905.563 16% 1750 1,170,760 20% 1760 1,593.625 20% After 1700, the number of immigrants from England dropped. But more people from Europe— Jews, French Protestants, and German, Irish, and Scots-lrish farmers—came to the colonies. Changes in English Attitudes In the 1600s English leaders wanted people to leave England for America. They believed that England was overcrowded. English leaders also believed that allowing such dissenting groups as Puritans, Separatists, Quakers, and Roman Catholics to go to America would improve conditions at home. Most people who left England in the 1600s were farmers and other workers of the lower middle classes. Most of these people came to find what they could not find in England—work and the opportunity to better themselves. By the 1700s the situation had changed. English leaders no longer wanted people to leave for America. England's economy had expanded. Workers were needed in factories. And workers were needed on the larger farms. After 1700. England encouraged only convicts to go to America. The Arrival of Non-English People While fewer English people came to the colonies in the 1700s. more people came from other countries. French Protestants who had been driven from their homeland were among the newcomers. The French settled in South Carolina. New York, and Massachusetts, hoping to build a new life. Jews from Europe also came to America. In much of Europe Jews were not allowed to practice certain trades or to own land. So they came to the colonics looking for equal rights and freedom to follow their faith. Farmers from Germany flooded into Pennsylvania to escape European wars and to find good farmland. The Irish and Scots-lrish settled in Pennsylvania, western Virginia, the Carolinas, and Georgia. They were escaping hunger and hardship at home. All immigrants carried their heritage with them. Their languages, customs, dress, work skills, knowledge, and beliefs became a part of American life. Indentured Servants Many settlers in both the 1600s and 1700s came to America as indentured servants. Indentured servants were people who had their way to America paid by someone else. To repay these costs, they agreed to work four to seven years for their sponsors. When they had worked the agreed number of years, indentured servants became free. In some colonies freed servants were given 50 acres (20 ha) of land and some livestock and seed to begin farming. Skilled carpenters, blacksmiths, and schoolteachers came to America as indentured servants. Before 1700. indentured servants came mostly to Virginia and Maryland. After 1700. most indentured servants settled in the Middle Colonies, especially Pennsylvania. Many slaves did not survive the cramped and unhealthy quarters aboard ship. Those who did survive were sold into slavery when they reached the Americas. The Arrival of Blacks In 1619 Dutch sea captains brought the first African blacks to Virginia. Whether these Africans were sold as indentured servants or as slaves is not clear. But they certainly were brought against their will. Thirty years later there were both free blacks and slaves in the English colonics. During the 1600s traders brought as many African slaves to Rhode Island and New York as they did to Virginia and Maryland. Bui after 1690. as more land in the Southern Colonies was planted in tobacco, rice, and indigo, the need for slaves grew. African slaves then became the chief work force in Virginia. Maryland, and the Carolinas. The passage on slave ships from Africa to the colonies was frightful. Sometimes half the slaves on board died from sickness. One freed Virginia slave, Gustavus Vassa, wrote about his crossing. Vassa had been captured in Benin. Nigeria, and shipped to North America. He described the strong smell of men and women jammed below decks in stuffy holds. He wrote of Africans being chained together and being given little food or water. He told of slave traders punishing captured Africans who stood up for their human rights. After the terrible trip, the slaves were sold and put to work in I homes and in the fields. Black slaves came from many different re- I gions of Africa. They brought with them their special skills as farm- Icts. toolmakers, and traders. They also brought their customs. I languages, and cultures. Their work helped the colonies, and their I culture enriched American life. Many people settled on farms away from towns. Yet the town remained the center of life in the New England Colonies. People in the Middle Colonies Unlike New England, where most colonists were descendants of English settlers, the Middle Colonies had a greater mix of people. In New York the Dutch influence on language, ways of building, and customs remained for more than a century. About 175.00(1 Germans came to settle in the Middle Colonies, mostly in Pennsylvania. And the flood of Irish became so great that one Quaker leader wrote: "It looks as if Ireland is to send all its inhabitants." Most people in Pennsylvania lived on farms some distance apart. A few inland villages sprang up where major rivers met. where mills were built, or where Native Americans brought furs to trade. But most goods coming into or going out of Pennsylvania passed through the great port of Philadelphia. Schooling was not required by law in any of the Middle Colonies. Some families sent their children to private schools. Others hired indentured servants to teach their children, either in a home or in a school supported by several families. Many youngsters never had any formal book learning. Instead, they learned a trade as an apprentice to a blacksmith, carpenter, printer, or other craftsworker. An apprentice lived with the family of the craftsworker. obeying all rules the craftsworker made. Some youngsters became apprentices when they were only seven years old. The apprenticeships lasted until the youngsters were fully trained and ready to make their own livings. The Middle Colonies harbored the followers of widely different churches and beliefs. Quaker Pennsylvania allowed religious groups such as the Moravians. Amish, and Dunkers to worship as they pleased, Maryland welcomed Roman Catholics as well as members of the Church of England. In New Jersey and in the counties surrounding New York City the Church of England was the official church. But the Dutch Reformed Church and the Presbyterian Church also had many members there. Because they came from so many different backgrounds, people in the Middle Colonies never shared the sense of unity that New Englanders did. Traits of the Southern Colonies The Southern Colonies are most often remembered for large plantations. stately homes, and the use of slaves. But most people in the Southern Colonies worked small farms and ow ned no slaves. Southern farmers grew such garden crops as corn, squash, and beans. They also raised livestock and made butter and cheese to sell. Some raised a small amount of tobacco or another crop for market. m 112 each state were to vote for a certain number of persons called electors. These electors would cast a single ballot with two names on it. Each name counted as one vote. The candidate getting the most electoral votes became President. The candidate gelling the second highest number of electoral votes became Vice-President. In 17% this method gave the country Adams and Jefferson, a President and a Vice-President who had sharply differing views. Trouble with France President Adams faced a difficult four years in office. His biggest problem was with France. The French became angry because the United States was trading with Britain again. They said they would seize American ships if they found even so much as a British-made handkerchief on board. Adams sent three representatives to France to settle the differences between the two nations. When the Americans arrived, three French officials told them that talks could not begin until they paid a bribe of $250,000. The Americans refused. President Adams told the whole story to the newspapers. Instead of giving the real names of the three French officials, Adams called them only A'. Y, and /, The XYZ story shocked the country. Newspapers reported that the United States delegates had said. "Millions for defense, and not one cent for tribute [bribes)." The XYZ affair made Adams popular and Americans rallied behind their leader. The United States prepared for a possible w ar with France. Even children began to talk of fighting the French. Federalists used the troubles w ith France to pass a number of laws in 1798. The Federalists hoped the laws would make their own party stronger. The Sedition Act was the harshest. It staled that anyone who spoke against the President or members of Congress could be fined or jailed. This act was passed to halt all criticism of the Federalists, especially by Republicans. The law also went against the rights of citizens to free speech and a free press, rights protected by the Constitution. At least three editors of Republican newspapers were sent to prison. Another law was called the Naturalization Act. It raised front five to fourteen the number of years a person had to live in the United States before becoming a citizen. Most immigrant citizens joined the Republican party. Federalists hoped the law would keep the Republican party from gaining new members. Under another law. the Alien Act. the President could order noncitizens to leave the country. This last law' was not often used. Republicans believed the Alien and Sedition Acts were unconstitutional. Vice-President Jefferson wrote a document to be votedTM & 208 Ew forces—of population, transportation, and economy— greatly influenced the growth of every part of the United Hundreds of thousands of people from Europe came seeking erlife in the United States. They wanted land of their own and rai from hunger and despair. Some of these newcomers, as as the native-born, traveled on newly made roads, w aterways, railroads that linked the different parts of an expanding nation, of making a living changed as new goods were produced for me markets. imers from Europe Ircds of thousands of Europeans came to the United States in 51 half of the nineteenth century. They wished to become citi- ftof the new nation. They came to raise families in the farmlands Prereading 1. Why did more immigrants settle in the East and the Lake Plains than in the Gulf Plains? 2. How did the transportation revolution change the movement of people and goods? 3. W'hat changes in making a living resulted from the improvement of transportation? 4. W'hat changes in political attitudes developed as sections of the country developed different economic interests? #> Germany 152,454 25% Ireland 207,654 35% England, Scotland Wales 75,810 13% All others 163,207 27% Germany 434,626 25% Ireland 780,719 46% England, Scotland Wales 267,044 16%, All others 230,862 13% Origin of Immigrants to the United States, 1821-1850______________ 1821-1830 1831-1840 1841-1850 and in the cities. They came to work in the fields and in the factor^ Their work helped strengthen and build the young republic, tween 1820 and I860 about 4 million immigrants from Europe! tered the United States, half of them after 1850. Almost half of th immigrants came from Ireland and Germany. Others came fn Great Britain. Norway, Sweden, and Denmark. Still others ca from France, Holland. Belgium, and Switzerland. Reasons for Leaving Kurope People from these nations came for the same reasons that led otlj immigrants to come years earlier: bad conditions at home and I promise of a better life in America. In Ireland, for example, I peasant farmers could not find work. And when their potato i failed in 1846. they had nothing to eat. Unlike the Irish in the late 1840s the Germans had morel sons than survival for leaving their homeland. Many were unh with their governments. Others found that they were not a Howe worship as they pleased. Governments in Germany sometimes | the cost of sending such persons to the United States. German | ant families packed all that they owned in knapsacks and headedj the nearest seaport. There they hoped to get passage on a boat to j United States. During the voyage a family of six to ten people often I stay in a boxlike compartment below deck. This space was ab three steps wide, two steps long, and about as high as it was The compartment became home for the length of the voyage- four to six weeks. Many passengers caught "ship's fever." other diseases often spread quickly under such crowded conditi Fifteen out of every hundred immigrants died during voyages to| United States. Growing numbers of immigrants came to the United States in search of jobs and freedom. Where Immigrants Settled Most of the immigrants settled in the East, the Northeast, Lake Plains. Many Irish had only enough money to reach the Un States. So they settled where they landed—in the ports of New Ya City, Boston. Philadelphia. Baltimore, and New Orleans. looked for work in the shops, on the docks, and any other | where workers were needed. Many Germans coming off the boats left the seaports headed west. Some became farmers in Michigan. Illinois. Wisconi and Minnesota. Others settled in such cities as Cincinnati, Louisul Chicago, and Milwaukee. In 1840 one third of the voters in Cin nati were German. Three German immigrants—Adolph Sutro.l Spreckels, and Henry Miller—helped to develop California. Only a few immigrants settled in the Gulf Plains. Most of them unskilled workers and peasant farmers. They were not needed the Gulf Plains, where slaves did the work. Also, the rich prairie ' in the North could be farmed at less cost than it would take to a southern plantation. Some newcomers did migrate to southern cities. In 1860 immi- ts made up one out of every five persons in Savannah. Georgia, almost one out of every three persons in Memphis. Tennessee, i many more settled in northern cities. In New York City, fully half the people were foreign-born. And more than one half the !e in Chicago, Milwaukee, and St. Louis were foreign-born. As numbers of immigrants swelled, the American writer Herman Iville wrote: "We are not a narrow tribe. . . . No. Our blood is as flood of the Amazon (largest river in the world], made up of a "sand noble currents all pouring into one. We are not a nation, so "h as a world." position to Immigrants comers often had trouble finding jobs and housing. Many were ted harshly. People born in the United States were angered by coming into the country from Europe. Many newcomers were '"g to work for lower pay than were people born in the United Newcomers often had religious views and customs that *d strange to native-born Americans. Some storekeepers and ry owners so disliked the foreign-born that they put up such as "No Irish Need Apply" (for work). Some people formed secret groups to fight immigration. One 7h group founded in 1849. the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, members all over the country. They were called Know-Nothings use when asked about their sometimes violent acts against im- jnts, they answered. "I know nothing." The Know-Nothings formed a political party—called the rican party—to oppose immigrants, especially Catholics. After 3 the American party became powerful enough to win political at all three levels of government. Fighting sometimes broke The Know-Nothings tried to gel people to burn Catholic con- 5 and to break up Irish or German groups. Immigrants fought It was dangerous at times for outsiders to enter Irish or Ger- parts of a city. Other organizations were formed to help the newcomers, leaders spoke out firmly against the Know-Nothings, calling un-American and undemocratic. Immigrants—both on their and with the help of support groups—worked hard to become ans. They made many contributions to the growing nation. Checkup 1. How many immigrants entered the United States between 1820 and 1860? 2. Name five European countries from which many immigrants came. 3. What were two reasons immigrants had for migrating to the United States? 4. What made the voyage to the United States a bard one for many immigrants? 5. What two reasons did many people born in the United States have for resenting foreign-born newcomers? 6. What was the purpose of the American or Know-Nothing party? LOOKING AHEAD: How did the transportation revolution change the ways people moved goods and traveled from place to place? 291 * part of the country developed its own special factory-made or farm products. Faster shipping led to giant increases in the exchange of foods within the United States and overseas. And cities and towns that were quickly becoming centers of trade and manufacturing drew in workers by the thousands. The Manufacturing Revolution In the early 1820s the older as well as the newer sections of the country became known for their special products. Shoes and cloth had been manufactured in New England ever since colonial times. ! in the l8(X)s more tools, more workers, and waterpower for the ils gave new life to manufacturing in New England. When Samuel Slater arrived from England in 1789. he brought him valuable manufacturing know-how. England was the d's leading cloth maker. To protect its cloth-making secrets, it not allow either the machines or the workers who ran them to vc the country. Slater, who was in charge of machinery in a cotton I in England, left there in disguise. He did not bring drawings of machines with him. but he was able to remember how the ina- s worked. Slater set up a cotton mill in Pawtucket. Rhode 1s- using the new machinery. This cloth-making factory thrived. Another improvement in New England cloth making was the iopment of looms for weaving yarn into cloth. In 1813 Francis t Lowell of Massachusetts, with the help of Paul Moody, per- ed a power loom like those used in England. With this loom New and factories could produce as much cloth each day as factories England. The cloth mills hired young unmarried women as workers. The "en lived in large rooms called dormitories where they were fully supervised. They had strict work rules, and they were red to be neat and to attend church. Later, immigrants replaced the New England women workers. immigrant families, including children, worked in the mills, pay was poor, the hours long, and the conditions bad. New York. New Jersey, and Pennsylvania shared in the rise of ufacturing. Large flour mills were built in western New York the wheat belt. Factory towns grew up in New Jersey. And great its of coal were discovered in Pennsylvania between 180(1 and . Coal became a cheap fuel for iron making, increasing Pennsvl- s iron output. r Yields for Farmers families in the Ohio and Mississippi valleys began to do well, did the small towns nearby w here farmers bought their tools and |On the Lind where they had cut an trees to build houses the fcrs often began to plant their A "Den" for the Newly Arrived One member of a reform group—the New York Children's Aid Society—described the homes of some immigrant families. / visited lately one of their lodging houses for the newly-arrived—a dert such as I had no idea existed in New- York. ... A number of ragged children were playing at the door; within, the hall was dark and reeking with the worst filth. I climbed the dirty stairway, knocked at the door, and entered a little room where some women were cooking: in .. . a little closet of a place, half-a-dozen . . . girls were sitting, making coarse straw bags, "for a cent a-piece". . . . The upper part of the house was ... all very filthy. The people seemed very poor, honest.... not long here, and without work, usually. Women and men, evidently not of the same family, were herded into the same rooms. . . . How did the Donner children feel about the move west'.' How did their mother feel? Wlit might Henry Bibb have felt he had to tell Malinda about his mention to run away? . When Lucy Stone and Henry Blackwell married, what of hers legally belonged to him? Did j their protest change that? What household items, | comparable to whale-oil lamps Jixi stoves of the past, are signs nf prosperity today? 353 #> kitchen. In the summer the table tras set in the middle of that shady and breezy floor. . . . I can see that farm vet . . . the family room . . . with a "trundle'' bed in one corner and a spinning wheel in another . . . the vast fireplace, piled high on winter nights . . . the lazy cat spread out on the rough hearthstones; the drowsy dogs braced against the jambs , . the slick and carpelless oak floor . . . ; half a dozen children romping in the background. . , . I he Winnebago of 1852 lived in •igwams made with hides. People I joutherners and the taking of their [property, including slaves. He Ihvored stiff punishment for most | BUthcmers and death for some. Stevens believed the South was a I gull, defeated part of the country I that was properly under the control |ofthe federal government. He also eved that the Republican party I to remain in power. Only in |this way. he thought, could the ry be sure of long life for such ublican measures as high tariffs, ■steads in the West, and era! aid to railroads. Stevens championed voting i for freed slaves. With those Ins finally granted, the way was for the election of Blanche i Bruce to the United Stales ate. Itnator Blanche K. Bruce < was born a slave in Virginia 1. He moved to Missouri as a jter. He attended Oberlin jCbllege in Ohio for two years. In I he became a planter in eyvillc, Mississippi. He also ved in county offices in that state. Then he was elected to the United States Senate in 1874 where he served a full term from 1875 to 1881. A Cold Welcome On his first day in the Senate Bruce was not warmly welcomed. Usually new senators taking the oath of office are accompanied by the senior senator from their state. As Senator Bruce started up the aisle, the senior senator from Mississippi, James Alcorn, remained in his seat. So Bruce walked alone toward the front of the room. When Bruce was halfway up the aisle, a tall man came up to him. "Excuse me. Mr. Bruce, ! didn't see that you were without an escort. Permit me. My name is Conkling." Senator Roscoe Conkling of New York linked arms with Bruce, and the two marched up the aisle together so that Bruce could take the oath of office. Senator Bruce favored increasing business between the states. He worked for the improvement of the Mississippi River for the transport let after the war ninny blacks exercised their new right to vote. Conkling befriended Bruce. of goods and people. He also tried to end election fraud. Champion for Minorities Senator Bruce was most effective in working for civil rights. He spoke out for the rights of blacks. Native Americans, and other minority peoples. When a law to stop Chinese immigration into the United States was discussed in the Senate, he spoke against it. He declared, "Mr. President, . . . representing as I do a people who but a few years ago were considered essentially disqualified from enjoying the privileges ... of American citizenship ... I shall vote against this bill." When congressional Reconstruction ended in Mississippi, blacks were once again kept from voting. Bruce spent his remaining years in several minor government posts, filled by Presidential appointment rather than election. The influence of both Stevens and Bruce was brief. Their goal of equal rights for blacks was hard to reach. Stevens had helped make it possible for Bruce to be elected. But prejudice would keep other black leaders out of Congress for many years to come. Cattle and Cowhands Cowhands, like this Mexican caballera. spent many hours in the saddle on lone cattle drives. As miners were hunting for riches under the earth, cattle ow began to reap the riches of the surface grasslands. The wide offered millions of acres for free cattle grazing. Soon after the Cr War a cattle empire arose on the Great Plains. plant The Long Drive The cattle industry in the United States began in southern Tex near the Nueces River. The Spanish had introduced cattle raising; the New' World, and the Mexicans had followed their lead. Ma traditions of the American West—such as roundups, cowboys, an rodeos—began with the Spanish-Mexicans. In the early 1860s millions of tough, wild longhorn cattl^ roamed in herds over the Texas grasslands. They were fierce mals. But these longhorns—thousands of them—belonged to anyon who was brave enough and skillful enough to round them up driving a herd to a point along a railroad line, a person could maw money shipping the cattle cast to market. By 1865. railroad built were moving across Missouri toward Kansas. Texans started "long drives" to bring the cattle north to the new railway stops i Missouri and Kansas. The first long cattle drive began in the spring of 1866. Duriq the winter, herds of cattle had been rounded up. When the gn lands turned green, cowhands drove their herds north. Ab 250.000 cattle crossed the Red River in Texas on the way to northen markets that year. Some of the cattle reached Sedalia, Missouri, am were shipped by rail to Chicago. Most were sold to cattle breedersii Kansas. Missouri, and Iowa. The cowhands faced many problems on the first long driu Much of the trail led through wooded areas. The cattle, used to tli open range, were frightened by the trees. Mad with fear, the animal were more dangerous than ever. Another problem arose when man; fanners in Kansas and Missouri tried to keep the herds off th land. They did not want the longhorns trampling their crops. Fan ers also were afraid that the cattle might be carrying Texas fevci Such a disease could spread to their own herds. These problen made the long cattle runs "a heap of trouble." But the money tot gained made the work and the worry worthw hile. Longhorns costiq $4 to $5 a head in Texas could be sold for $30 to $40 in the Non By 1867, railroads had reached well into Kansas, making dma farther west possible. A new route, called the Chisholm Trail. I from southern Texas to Abilene. Kansas. This route was set Joseph G. McCoy, an Illinois meat dealer. He chose Abilene ast trading point and made special deals with the railroads to carry tin k to Chicago and other cities. In a few years Abilene changed a sleepy little town to a busy, somewhat lawless cattle stop. Between 1868 and 1871 nearly a million and a half cattle were "ed through Abilene. As the railroads moved farther west, the k trails moved with them, first to Ellsworth. Kansas, then to je City. Farther west still was the Goodnight-Loving Trail. :d after trail drivers Charles Goodnight and Oliver Loving. This 1 led to the Union Pacific Railroad at Cheyenne. Wyoming. Years nGoodnight declared: "All in all. my years on the Trail were the test I ever lived. There were many hardships and dangers t . most of the time we were solitary adventurers in a great land fresh and new as a spring morning. . . ." Cowhand's Life Tisands of books, movies, and television shows have made the rican cowhand an exciting figure. For the most part, however, a hand's life was hard and tilled with dull jobs. Riding the dusty day after day tired even the hardiest of the hands. For weeks at time cowhands had to catch quick naps, sleeping w ith their boots and using a saddle as a pillow. Their Colt revolvers were never of reach. And there w as always the danger of a stampede. The longhorns, frightened by any strange noise, would scatter in all ions, crushing everything in their path. Much of a cowhand's life was spent doing daily chores on a Texas ranch. There were no fences between ranches, so the roamed freely during most of the grazing season. To keep on the owner's ranch, cowhands rode all day back and forth the property lines. Cattle drifting over the rancher's border driven back. This job was called line driving. Despite line driving, cattle still drifted from ranch to ranch, herds became mixed. To return cattle to their rightful owners, rs held roundups—usually two a year. In the spring newborn ts would be rounded up for branding. Each ranch had its own J. a mark that identified the owner. In the fall came the beef up. when the ranchers chose the cattle to be driven to market. All the ranchers in an area joined in the roundup. Each rancher a group of cowhands and a chuck wagon with a cook. The nds would gather a huge herd of cattle. Then they would sepa- the cattle by brands. When one herd was separated, the process repeated with another herd. The roundup lasted for weeks. Though the rich rancher—the so-called cattle baron—was the of cattle country, the cowhand was its hero. Most hands were * men. often in their teens. About a third of them were blacks Mexican-Americans. Cowhands worked for room and board and $40 a month. They carried or wore everything they needed. corporations to direct those corporations' business choices. The U.S. Steel Corporation was a holding company that also controlled some railroads. By 1904 six major business firms guided the operation of over a thousand railroad lines. And two men—Morgan and Rocke- feller—had a hand in all six firms. Many people worried about the trend toward bigness in business. If one person or a small group could control a whole industry, that industry would be a monopoly. A monopoly can set prices to its own advantage. Those who use its products or services have no choice—they either pay the price or do without. The American Telephone and Telegraph Company once held the telephone industry as a monopoly. Organized in 1885, atat owned or ran most telephone companies by 1900. These companies made the telephones, installed and repaired them, and handled almost all the calls made around the nation. People were worried about how much power the Morgans. Rockefellers, and others had over the nation's economy. In the 1890s and early 1900s big business and monopolies became important issues in the nation's politics. bor Growing industry needed more workers. Before the Civil War three out of every live persons in the United States worked on a farm. By 1880 more people worked in jobs off the farm than on the farm. immigrants as Workers After 1880 great numbers of immigrants came to the United States from eastern and southern Europe—from Poland, Russia. Austria. Yugoslavia. Italy. Greece, and Spain. Between 1900 and 1915 more than 9 million immigrants arrived. Some settled on farms, but many more became factory workers. Employers were eager to hire the newcomers who so needed work that they accepted low wages. In 1907, in the Carnegie Steel Works alone. 15.000 out of 23.00(4 persons on the job were foreign born. Checkup 1. How docs a business become a corporation? 2. What are three advantages of a corporation? 3. How did J. Pierpont Morgan gain power on Wall Street? 4. How does a trust differ from a holding company? 5. What is a monopoly? 6. What arc the possible dangers of a monopoly? LOOKING AHEAD: What problems did labor leaders try to solve for workers in growing industries? trolley suburb subway leisure entertainment vaudeville jazz motion picture rural urban slum ethnic skyscraper terminal apartment tenement The growth of industry in the age of machines gave rise to city life. New cities came into being and older cities gained in size anti numbers. In 1850 the United States was a rural nation. A few ihrgc trading and manufacturing cities were sprinkled among the | farms, villages, and small towns. By 1X90 most of today's cities had jbeen founded. By 1910 parts of the nation were becoming urban, lie up of cities that were growing centers for factories and busies linked together by rail lines. More and more people came to cities to work and live. In 1875 nlyone fourth of the nation's people lived in cities. By 1920 half of I them had moved there. In some parts of the country—the Atlantic aboard, for example—two out of three people lived in urban corn- unities. places with populations of 2.5(H) or more. The astonishing rowth of cities changed the face of the nation. Prereading 1. What were some reasons for urban grow th between 1850 and 1910? 2. How did the city change the lives of those who lived there? 3. In what free-time activities did city dwellers take part? 5*. Urban Growth Between 1880 and 1920 towns and cities grew quickly. A British visitor observed that "towns and villages have been raised by mat; ic." Railroad agents, land companies, individual business owners, and others all helped found urban communities. An agent for a railroad wrote: "I shall have two or three more towns to name vers soon. . . . [One] is now . . . a cornfield, sol cannot have it surveyed. But yesterday a man came to arrange to put a hotel there. This is a great country for hotels." One land promoter had a grand ide "One of my plans was the creation of a chain of great towns aero, the continent, connecting Boston with San Francisco by a magni' cent highway of cities." Other promoters promised investors they would get rich quic "Would you make money easy?" one advertisement asked, quickly answered its own question. "Find then the site of a city a the farm it is to be built on! How many regret the non-purchase that lot in New York: that block in Buffalo; that acre in Chicago; t' quarter section in Omaha. Once these city properties could bought for a song." People from the countryside and from foreign lands wc drawn to cities in the United States in greater numbers than cv before. The unending stream of people brought both prosperity ar problems. The new urban centers struggled to provide housing, p lie transportation, schools, parks, public water and sewers, and lice and fire protection for their ever-growing populations. Migration from Farms to Cities After 1900. farmers who earlier might have migrated west mo instead to the city. Between 1880 and 1910 at least 11 million pec born in rural homes became urban dwellers. At the end of thisp(| riod about one in four city dwellers was newly arrived from a f or small town. A visitor to Vermont in the 1880s found a vil nearly abandoned except for a few outlying farms. When he as where all the villagers had gone, he was told they had left forlfl factory towns and the large cities. One American declared thaltw city had become the heart of the nation, "sending its stream life ... to the very fingertips of the whole land." The city served as a magnet for farmers who had lost t) farms and who were seeking other jobs. The city also offered m art, and theater. In many ways the city was another frontier. I fered all comers a chance to improve themselves. With all its charms, the city had its darker side. New York reminded one visitor of "a lady in a ball costume, with diamon her cars, and her toes out at her boots." Alongside the bca a IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED ST AT nes, the stately churches, and the city's places of business and dusiry lay the slums. There many hopeless people lived out their . in poverty. I Migration of Immigrants to Cities | Newly arrived immigrants came to the cities for the same reasons farmers did—jobs and a better way of life. Between 1880 and 910 the number of immigrants settling in the cities almost equaled inumber of people moving to the cities from the farms. Between Band 1910, however, more immigrants than farmers poured into t centers. As in the past, many newcomers arrived from the countries of ■Wstcm and northern Europe—from Britain. Ireland. Scotland, Nor- iy, Sweden. Denmark. Germany, and France. But after 1880 an cn greater number came from eastern and southern Europe—from and, Russia.Czechoslovakia. Austria-Hungary, Yugoslavia. Italy. iGreece. Spain, and Portugal. Historians often call this influx from ptem and southern Europe the "new" immigration. Most of the new immigrants had few of the skills needed for Bung in big cities or working at high-paying jobs. Only a few- spoke pnglish. While most earlier immigrants had been Protestants, many k" arrivals were Catholics or Jews. They often faced prejudice. Rbey were also distrusted, even hated, by workers who feared they fouid lose their jobs to the newcomers. Most immigrants settled in the large cities where there were fcorc jobs. Immigrants speaking the same language and following \same customs often kept together. Ethnic neighborhoods began Time shape in almost every large city—a Polish neighborhood next Ian Italian neighborhood next to a Jewish neighborhood. Many pmc groups published their own newspapers. In 1890 there were fel German-language newspapers issued in the United Slates. The Hi Journal of New York, printed in Yiddish, was one of the best- pling papers in the city. The different ethnic groups also built their Immigrants came to the L'nited States by the thousands, but all together they were still only a minority in the population. Blacks Czechoslovaks Germans Irish |____J Italians ■ Pol** ~~] Scandinavians Others Present-day shortiin* Factories and homes went up side by side in central Chicago as the city pushed out in all directions own houses of worship. They spoke the language of their birtiip away from the lake. in their homes and shops. Their dress and food habits were a brought from the "old country." In 1890 New York City had more foreign-born residents than v other city in the world. Four out of five people living there were cr born in another country or had foreign-born parents. New brk City had as many Italians as Naples. Italy, and as many Ger- s as Hamburg. Germany. There were twice as many Irish in ' York City as in the city of Dublin. The number of Jews in New ork City was more than twice the number of Jews in Warsaw, d. In other large cities around the country—Cincinnati, Cleveland. Louis, and San Francisco—immigrant population was also high, ven today, more Poles live in Chicago than in any city in Poland pt Warsaw. Immigrants from Asia, especially China, swelled the ethnic lations of many western cities. Most of the Chinese who had e to work on the railroads in the West stayed on when the Toads were finished. Many settled along the West Coast in such as San Francisco and Los Angeles. Others moved elsewhere in United States. Usually they lived together in one part of a city or II town, giving rise to the so-called Chinatowns found in many n centers today. Japanese people came to the United States after . but in smaller numbers than the Chinese. They too settled iy on the West Coast. Asian immigrants were saddled with strict rules. For a time the eof California would not allow Asians to own property or hold in jobs. In 1882 Congress passed a law forbidding further immi- n from China. Later the United States government asked the ese government to discourage Japanese people from coming, bans lasted until 1952. Until then, immigrants from Asia were allowed to become citizens of the United States. i Building Boom building materials—steel, aluminum, and concrete—changed skylines forever. The first modern skyscraper—the ten-story Insurance Building made with an iron frame—was built in ago in 1885. From that time on, developments in steelmaking machinery made taller and taller buildings possible. High qual- . low-priced steel was quickly put to use in big city skyscrapers, n the electric motor came along, together with safety devices, rn elevators became possible. Most cities built huge train stations or terminals for the heavy nger and freight traffic. South Station in Boston was completed 1898. Union Station was built in Washington. D.C.. in 1907. The Tgo and North Western Railway Station went up in Chicago in 1. And Grand Central Station began to serve New York City in . Some people saw these train terminals as monuments to the 521 5*. Three separate rail companies shared New York's (irand Central Station when it was completed in cities of the United States much as the giant cathedrals were monu ments to European cities in earlier times. Many city dwellers an almost every visitor to the city passed through these great structun The high price of city land called for saving space in housin Stacking housing units one on top of the other instead of buildiq them side by side was one idea. Apartment buildings went up i great numbers between 1880 and 1910. Tenement Housing Some apartments became so crowded and ill-kept that they threal ened the health, and even the life, of the residents. New York I the largest slum of any city in the United States. By 1901 two thin of its 3.5 million people lived in tenements. Many of these te ements were dumbbell-shaped apartments—long, narrow buildiq with six or seven rooms at each end. Only four rooms out of eve fourteen on a floor had direct air and light. A room might measure three steps by five steps, or three steps by two steps. Often five people lived in a two-room apartment. The only light came from an air shaft between buildings into which people also tossed their garbage. Of this practice one man said. "It is better than breaking your legs running up and down the stairs in the dark." Toilets were placed m sheds in the alley. In 1900 the city of Baltimore still had 90,000 such outdoor toilets. Few of these crowded tenements had water piped into the building. Instead, everyone went to a public pump in the street to get water for cooking and bathing. People living in tenements were said to receive only two good baths in their lives—one at birth and the other at death. A reporter from a New York newspaper described tenement conditions in detail. The hall is dark, and you might stumble over the children. . . . Not that it would hurt them: kicks and cuffs are their daily diet. . . . Here where the hall turns and dives into utter darkness is a step. . . . You can feel your way, if you cannot see it. . . . All the fresh air that ever enters these stairs comes from the hall door that is forever slamming, and from the windows of dark bedrooms. . . . The sinks are in the hallway, that all tenants may have access—and all be poisoned alike by their summer stenches. In 1901 the New York legislature passed a law that forbade further building of dumbbell-shaped apartments. Other stales later copied this law. Streets and Transportation Roads made of concrete did not come into use until after 1900. In 1W0 two thirds of Chicago's streets were dirt. The other streets were paved with wood blocks, gravel, cinders, or cobblestones. A person bad to be alert to pass safely through the horses, buggies, wagons, people—and later, bicycles and cars—packed in the streets. Crossing busy streets was less dangerous after traffic signals came into use. After 1900, steam trolleys carried passengers from place to place in many large cities. Overhead, or elevated, steam railways began to reach beyond the city into the suburbs. Tracks were laid for subway trains in underground tunnels in Boston in 1897 and in New York City in 1900. Ten years later New York had more than 100 miles of subways. In the early 1900s many cities put electricity to work in trolleys ,ind trains. Electric-powered engines were cheaper, faster, and dcaner for enclosed city stations than were noisy, smoky steam engines that burned wood or coal for fuel. 523 9ft. them paid for out of taxes. Between 18911 and 1918 one new public high school was opened in the United States for each day of the year. Total student enrollment doubled during that period. High schools grew rapidly for several reasons. Business industry needed trained young workers, men and women. The tion was becoming wealthy enough to pay more taxes for schoolr In earlier times families needed every penny that every mcmbe could earn just to feed, dress, and house themselves. After 1880. a* especially after 1900, the father's income or the income of both | ents allowed the family to meet its basic needs without help fromt' children. More children could therefore attend high school. Ma people saw education as a way to better jobs and improved livin conditions. Public schools developed more slowly in the South. But aft 1900, North Carolina. Virginia. Tennessee, and Georgia led agene move toward better schools for more students. More money w spent for equipment. Teachers were better trained. Enrolltnen jumped sharply. Blacks attended separate schools that often we not as well equipped as those for whites. Many new colleges and universities in the United States we founded between 1870 and 1920. By the early I9tXK. for the h time in history, the training for doctors and lawyers in the Unit States was as good or better than it was in Europe. Reformers in the Cities With the rise of cities and city problems many church leaders be^ to preach what has been called the social gospel. Church grtr became interested in improving schools, hospitals, and orphan.) Many formed play centers and young people's groups. Chu: groups also tried to help newly arrived immigrants or farm fami make new lives in the city. In 1892. on the first floor of a Greenw Village store in New York City, the Missionaries of St. Cha: opened a church called Our Lady of Pompeii. Their mission was help the thousands of Italian immigrants who came to the Unit States. Some church groups built places of worship in industrial i ters to help workers as well as job-seekers. Such church gro: pushed for laws to end child labor and to protect workers who I died dangerous machines. In 1908 the Federal Council of Chu* was organized. Its main purpose was to discuss workers' needs to speak for those who did not share in the general prosperity. Other reformers also took on the task of improving the I city dwellers. Jane Addams is one of the most famous. She opt Hull House in 1889 in a part of Chicago w here she could w closely with immigrants. Hull House was a combination social ( iklren's center, and aid station for immigrants. It had a kindergarten, a recreation center, a gathering place for the elderly, a training nd for the theater, and a music school. Addams had been sickly as a child because of a deformed After finishing college in 1881. she entered medical school but ame too ill to go on. In 1883 she was sent to Europe by her nts. She took a second trip several years later, feeling uncertain |jbout what to do with her life. One evening in Madrid. Spain, after ching a bloody bullfight, she suddenly knew she should work on terns that affected human lives. In 1888 Addams visited a center in London where she saw ge students helping people in a working neighborhood. She deed to follow their example. She came to Chicago to set up a lement house called Hull House. She sought out well-trained Ipers. Hull House stood in a neighborhood made up largely of people irnm eastern and southern Europe—Italians, Greeks. Poles, Russians. Jews, Bohemians—as well as Germans and French Canadians, ich day Addams wrestled with the problems of crowded tennis. She also grappled with other problems that immigrants d on coming to America. She saw, for example, a German musi- scrubbing floors in an office building and an Italian goldsmith veiing coal in a factory. She grieved when a Russian peddler was lied with rocks and the fruit cart of an Italian was overturned by a hand of youngsters. She worked to bring pleasure and relaxation to children and adults whose lives would otherwise be gray and empty. Addams later recalled that an Italian woman, impressed by the beauty of red roses at a party at Hull House, thought they had come directly from Italy. The Italian woman did not know that these roses e from a flower shop ten blocks from where she lived. She had er even taken a five-cent trolley car ride to a public park because was afraid of the unknown. die Man McDowell (holding the Hag. above) once lived at Hull House (left). She started her own settlement house in Chicago, following the example of her friend Jane Addams (right, abovel. Checkup 1. Why did city families spend less time together than farm families? 2. What were two signs of women's growing independence? 3. What measures were taken to improve the lives of city children? 4. About what time were state legislatures passing useful child labor laws? 5. What were two reasons for the rapid increase in the number of public high schools? 6. Name two ways in which church groups and settlement workers tried to help city dwellers. LOOKING AHEAD: In what free- time activities did city dwellers take part? 529 sas. his position as United States minister to China in 1867. By then the Chinese were so taken with Burlingame's ability that they asked him I to serve the Chinese government. In 1868. as a Chinese representa*! live, Burlingame helped work out a new treaty between the two I governments. One part of that treaty encouraged Chinese to come to I the United States to work. They came in such numbers, however. I that in 1882 Congress cut off further immigration from China. By the end of the nineteenth century the United States looked I to China, with its population of about 400 million, as a promising I market for its factory-made goods. Other industrial nations—Gre Britain. France. Germany. Russia, and Japan—were also trading wit China. The United States feared that these other nations would the upper hand in China and that American trade would suffer. Bu ness leaders began to pressure the government to act. They we backed by church groups that wanted to keep their missionary wo alive in China. In 1899 Secretary of State John 1 lay sent notes to each of t great trading powers asking them to follow an Open Door polio China. By "open door" he meant that every nation should has equal rights to do business with the Chinese. No single count should receive special favors. Some people in China were opposed to any foreign trade a influence in China. A secret group called the Boxers started a re lion in 1901) to drive all "foreign devils'' out of China. They kil hundreds of foreigners and Chinese Christians, and they surroun the area where foreign citizens lived in Peking. Americans. Brit Germans. Russians. French, and Japanese in China held out f nearly two months until troops from all of these nations came t their aid and ended the rebellion. The Chinese government w forced to pay $333 million in damages to the various countries United States used its share of the money to send Chinese stude to school in America. This sign of good will helped improve rel tions between the two countries. Relations with Japan For centuries the Japanese had kept to themselves, not trusting f cigncrs. The Japanese government traded only w ith the Chinese a the Dutch, and only at the port of Nagasaki. In the late 1700s a early 1800s a number of American ships tried to land in Japan . were driven off. some by gunlire. Ships just passing through Ja nese waters in the 1840s were also driven out. Even shipwreck sailors were captured and thrown into prisons. In 1852 the United States sent Commodore Matthew C. Pc to Japan. Perry was told to make a treaty that would open trade "i Japan and protect shipwrecked American sailors there. People **2 560 Lifestyles Families and Homes Thomas Edison believed that his deafness began after a well- meaning friend pulled him aboard a mining train by grabbing his ears. Edison Is show n here in his lab at West Orange, New Jersey. Most men and women in the United States continued to mam I and to live in families. But there were changes in family life in :ht late 1800s and early IO(K)s. Women who lived in cities tended tol marry later and to have fewer children than women who lived ini small towns and on farms. Immigrant families made up a large part of the urban population. In most of these families both parents—and often M older children as well—had to work to earn enough to live. The" also worked to learn the ways of their new country and to makeH better lives for themselves. Romance by Morse Code Thomas Edison, partly deaf from the age of twelve on, said (hat£ deafness helped him in some ways. He believed that being deal allowed him to concentrate on his inventions. And. he claimed, C ing deaf was an advantage in his romance with Mina Miller, whafl he married in 1886. I In the first place it [deafness] excused me for getting quite a littleM nearer to her than 1 would have dared to if I hadn't had to be quill close in order to hear what she said. . . . My later courtship woi | carried on by telegraph. I taught her the Morse code, and whens could both send and receive we got along much better than ive i have with spoken words by tapping our remarks to one another hands. Presently I asked her thus, in Morse code, if she would i me. The word "Yes'' is an easy one to send by telegraphicsig and she sent it. . . . Nobody knew anything about many of our conversations. ... If we had spoken words, others would lime. them. We could use pet names without the least embarrassment.. We still use the telegraphic code at times. When we go to hear a spoken play she keeps her hand upon my knee and telegraphs t words the actors use so that i know something about the drama though I hear nothing of the dialog. A Family of "Greenhorns" Mary Antin was born in Russia in 1881. When she was thirtee years old, she moved to the United States with her mother. sisters, and brother. Her father had been in Boston for three v working to make a home for his family. In her autobiography. Promised Land. Mary described her first dav in the United St Our initiation into American ways began with the first step on t new soil. My father found occasion to instruct us or correct us on the way from the pier to Wall Street, which journey we made crowded together in a rickety cab. He told us not to lean out of windows, not to point, and explained the word "greenhorn " [ inexperienced newcomer]. We did not want to be "greenhorns' *%2 578 Lifestyles gave the strictest attention to my father's instructions. . . . My first meal was an object lesson of much variety. Mv father produced several kinds of food, ready to eat, without any cooking, from little tin cans that had printing all over them. He attempted to introduce us to a queer, slippery kind of fruit, which he called "banana," but had to give it up for the time being. After the meal, he had better luck with a curious piece of furniture on runners, which he called "rocking- chair. . . ." We laughed immoderately over our various experiments with the novelty, which was a wholesome way of letting off steam after the unusual excitement of the day. Free land under the Homestead Act, religious tolerance, and jobs created by the industrial revolution attracted immigrant families to the l nited Slates. In their homelands they had known terrible poverty, hunger, and religious persecution. 579 3*. Lifestyles Work and Play Gasoline-powered machines made farm work easier. This man is harvesting potatoes in Florida. By 19(X) more Americans worked in factories Ihan on farms. Both in the factory and on the farm the workday was long—ten to twelve hours or more. In the factory, however, there was more noise, stuffy air. and dull routine. Many workers began to join together to ask for better pay. shorter hours, and improved working conditions. And the celebration of a day for workers— Labor Day—was begun. Anton's Job Anton Kmet, an immigrant from eastern Europe, was thirty years old when he arrived in New York. He moved with other immigrants to Cleveland. Ohio. The day after he arrived he went to the American Steel and Wire Company to look for a job. He was put to work moving large coils of wire from a loading platform into freight cars. When his boss discovered that he could lift the heavy loads without any problem, the other two men who had been working there were removed. Kmet now did the work of three men. Because he received twelve cents an hour and the other workers were paid only ten cents an hour, he was not unhappy. Sweatshop Girl Sadie Frounc. an immigrant from Poland, told of what it was like to work in a sweatshop in the early lWOs. At seven o'clock we all sit down to our machines and the boss bhn to each one the pile of work that he or she is to finish during the day. . . . This pile is put down beside the machine, and as soon as I skirl is done it is laid on the other side of the machine. Sometimes I work is not all finished by six o'clock, and then the one who is I must work overtime. Sometimes one is finished ahead of time ami | away at four or five o'clock. . . . Lifestyles The machines go like mad all day. because the faster you work the more money you get. Sometimes in my haste I get my finger caught and the needle goes right through it. It goes so quick, though, that it does not hurt much. I bind the finger up with a piece of cotton and go on working. We all have accidents like that. A Heartsick Ironworker Some newcomers were not able to find work. A Russian immigrant sent the following letter to the Jewish Daily Forward. I am an ironworker. / can work a milling machine and a drill press. I can also drive horses and train colts. I have been jobless for six months now. I have eaten the last shirt on my hack and now there is nothing left for me. . . . One goes about with strong hands, one wants to sell them for a bit of bread, and no one wants to buy. They tell you coldbloodedly: We don't need you. Can you imagine how heartsick one gets? . . . Lately l have spent five cents a day on food, and the last two days I don't even have that. ... If I had known it would be so bitter for me here, I wouldn't have come. The clothing industry employed many workers—from ironers and tailors in New York garment shops left l to bobbin boys in southern cotton mills. I.abor Day The custom of celebrating the first Monday in September as Labor Day started in 1882. Peter J. McGuire, the president of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, first suggested a parade in New York City to honor laborers. Workers were warned not to leave their jobs. But about ten thousand of them paraded around Union Square and up Fifth Avenue to Forty- Second Street. That afternoon the workers met for a big picnic. They ate, listened to speeches, and danced. A fireworks display ended the celebration. In 1894 President Grover Cleveland signed a bill making Labor Day a national holiday. Veterans of World War II and later conflicts were given mam benefits. While looking for jobs, veterans could receive aid if they needed it. They could borrow money at low interest rates to build homes or buy businesses. Veterans could also get money to attend school. Workers and managers had much to work out after World War n. During the war. wages had been frozen. At war's end, prices rose faster than workers' pay. Union members struck for more money. They also wanted long-term health and hospital insurance and retirement plans. In 1947 the Republican Congress passed the Tail-Hartley Act over President Truman's veto. This act greatly limited the power of the unions. Many workers called it a "slave labor bill." Farmers also had reasons to complain. They were producing far more than ever before. But farmers felt they were not receivings fair price for their crops. The nation was troubled by other problems. President Truman's answer to all these issues was a program in 1949 that he called the Fair Deal. The Fair Deal called for: 1. Repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act. 2. A higher minimum wage. 3. Government support for farm prices. 4. A housing program. 5. A civil rights program. Republicans in Congress fought against much of the Fair Deal. But parts of the plan were carried out. The minimum wage was raised. The National Housing Act helped cities clear slums and build low-income housing. And more people received Social Security. Farmers received some help from the government in the forml of a price support plan. If a farmer could not sell crops to a buyer at I a certain price, the government would buy the crops at a high per-l centagc of that price. I n exchange, farmers agreed to leave some land I unplanted. Having fewer goods on the market would drive prices up,| Farmers wanted even higher price supports, but neither Truman norl Eisenhower favored such a law. When Eisenhower took office in 1953, he slowed down govern-1 ment spending on Fair Deal programs. The housing program "a$l limited to one year. Cuts were made in taxes as well as government! spending at home and abroad. Minority Rights During the Second World War the government sent about I10U0 ] persons of Japanese descent to ten guarded relocation camps. A bon two thirds of these people who lived on the West Coast were ottfl zens. having been born in the United States. But the government feared that they might help the enemy. Not one single case of disloyalty, however, was ever discovered among them. Those held in camps returned to their homes after the war. They needed to find jobs, rebuild their businesses, relearn old skills, or learn new skills. Those who owned property often found it run down after years of neglect. The government offered to pay part of their losses. But most people collected only about ten cents for each dollar lost. After the war, many blacks were still denied their civil rights under the Constitution. In 1948 President Truman ordered all the armed services to end segregation and to offer blacks equal opportunity for higher rank and pay. During Eisenhower's term the 1954 Supreme Court decided in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka that communities could no longer have separate schools for blacks and whites. All nine justices on the Court agreed. This landmark decision overturned the "sepa- rate but equal" ruling of 1896 in Plessy v. Ferguson. School systems began planning for integration. The Court ordered that desegregation be undertaken "with all deliberate speed." A storm of protest arose in the South. In a few cases federal troops or marshals were used to protect black students entering white schools. Desegregation was begun. Loyalty Oaths During the Cold War many people began to fear that Communists held important positions in the federal government. Some even wanted every federal jobholder to take a "loyalty oath." Truman finally set up a loyalty board in 1947. Out of 3 million federal employees, only about 2CK) were fired for disloyalty. During Eisenhower's term some politicians, especially Senator Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin, used the loyalty issue to make wild, false charges. McCarthy cried that there were "200 card-carrying Communists" in the state department. Such claims were later found not true. But many scared people believed him—at least for a time. McCarthy even attacked President Eisenhower. In a televised public hearing his charges were proved false. In 1954 the Senate censured—that is. condemned—the way McCarthy had behaved. The charges McCarthy made were a sign that many United States citizens feared the power of the Soviet Union. After World War 11 the United States and the Soviet Union stood out as the two strongest nations in the world. The United States gathered its allies from among the western bloc nations. The Soviet Union had its allies in Eastern Europe. The postwar struggle to keep a balance of power between the United States and the Soviet Union, and their allies, continued into the sixties. Though innocent of any wrongdoing. Japanese- \mrricans were confined to relocation camps during World War II. Checkup 1. What two men served as Presidents between 1945 and 2. Name three points that were part of Truman's Fair Deal. 3. How did Japanese-Americans suffer from the way they were treated during and after World War II? 4. How did government try to right the wrongs suffered by blacks? 5. Why were charges of disloyalty made against government employees in the 1950s? 6. What have been the central problems in foreign policy in the postwar years? Unions sough! to organize Mexican- American farm workers (aboveI. while Native Americans in New York petitioned for the return of thirty sacred wampum belts held by the state government. The nation was also divided over equal rights. Blacks kept up their fight for fair treatment under the law. Spanish-speaking Americans whose roots lay in such countries as Mexico and Puerto Rico also began to work together for greater freedom and better jobs. Many Native Americans began to tell of the wrongs suffered by their people. And growing numbers of women brought their call for equal rights before the public. Parades and speeches on equal rights became everyday events all over the United States. Nixon did not favor far-reaching social plans aimed at the country as a whole. He closed the Office of Economic Opportunity— the office in charge of Johnson's war on poverty. He also refused to spend some money that Congress had set aside for social programs, believing that such programs should be handled mainly by state governments. He threw his weight behind a revenue-sharing program that would turn over billions of federal tax dollars to state and local governments. Congress voted in favor of this program in 1972. Nixon also worked for laws to prevent the courts from ordering busing to achieve school integration. But Congress did not pass these laws. Like the government itself, people throughout the country were divided on the busing question. Vietnamization In the campaign of 1%8 Nixon had promised to bring peace in Vietnam. But. he said, it must be a "peace with honor." Nixon planned to turn command of the war over to the South Vietnamese and slowly withdraw U.S. troops. He called this plan Vietnamization. Nixon gradually called home 75,000 troops. But he also stepped up other phases of the war. Peace talks, begun under President Johnson, dragged on without change. Nixon felt that another attack might force North Vietnam to accept United States terms. So. in a surprise move, he ordered United States and South Vietnamese soldiers into neighboring Cambodia (now Kampuchea) in April 1970. The Communist Vietcong lighters had been raiding South Vietnam through Cambodia. The attack in Cambodia set off great protests at home, especially at colleges and universities. At Kent State University in Ohio. Lifestyles____Values and Learning (•rowing vegetables during World War I was looked on b> some as an acl of true patriotism. Through all the changes recorded in American history some lucs have remained unchanged. These arc the principles of government by the people spelled out in the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution. "We the people" have struggled at home and abroad to protect these values for our children and our children's children. An Indian America Frank James, a Wampanoag. was invited to speak at a celebration marking 350 years since the Pilgrims' landing at Plymouth. Here is part of the speech he wrote for the 1970 celebration. High on a hill, overlooking the famed Plymouth Rock stands the statue of our great Sachem. Massasoit. Massasoit has stood there many years in silence. We the descendants of this great sachem have been a silent People. . . . Today. I and many of my People are choosing to face the truth. We ARE Indians. . . . We stand tall anil proud and before too many moons pass we'll right the wrongs "r have allowed to happen to us. . . . today we work towards a more humane America, a more Indian America where men and nature once again are important; where the Indian values of honor, truth and brotherhood prevail. With All My Heart, A Peaceful World Eleanor Roosevelt, wife of President Franklin Roosevelt and delegate to the United Nations, records in her autobiography the goals of her later years in life. 1 wanted, with all my heart, a peaceful world. And I knew it could never he achieved on a lasting basis without greater understanding between peoples. It is to these ends that I have, in the main, devoted the past years. ... I think that one of the reasons it is so difficult fo us. as a people, to understand other areas of the world is that we cannot pul ourselves imaginatively in their place. We have no famin But if we were actually to see people dying of starvation we wotdd care quite a bit. We would be able to think. "These could be my people." Two Cultures Many Mexican-Americans feel the pull of both their Latin culture and the culture of the United States. One young Texas student said, "I don't know whether I am a Mexican or an American. 1 guess I'm neither." John Salazar, however, takes a different view My first name is English and my second name is Spanish. My ancestry is Mexican but if you ask me what I am. I ll tell you I rn dj American and Em a good American. Eve worked for this country ini fought for it. I would also die for it. But I want the right to be my Lifestyles Ralph Nader, self-appointed spokesman for Che American biner. looks on as a three-year-old shows how an air hat; promotes car safety. own kind of American. I would no more renounce my Mexican heritage then the Anglos would renounce the English language. . . . I'm a Mexican-American and Em proud of it. Hi- Mexican- Americans can contribute to the greatness of our country. All we need to do is organize, state our wishes, and vote. A Little Spaceship John Muir once said, "When we try to pick out anything by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the universe." The study of how things arc "hitched" in nature is called ecology. Author Rachel Carson (The Sea Around Us. 1951, and Silent Spring. 1962) sounded the public alarm for ecology. And Adlai Stevenson, in his last address to the United Nations as U.S. ambassador in 1965, summed up the world's position in the matter. We travel together, passengers on a little spaceship, dependent on its . . . resources of air and soil; all committed for our safety to its security and peace; preserved from /destruction/ only by the care, the work, and. I will say. the love we give our fragile craft. Citizens became alarmed and involved as oil spills at sea and other accidents threatened the environment. Ecologists took up the search for safer, saner ways of living. Some modern-day youngsters prepare for classroom learning by watching educational programs on telerison. Checkup 1. What values does Frank Jones call Indian values? 2. What does John Salazar say Mexican-Americans can do to contribute to their country's greatness? 3. What is the "little spaceship" and the "fragile craft" that Stevenson refers to in his speech? 4. Name three machines used in education today that probably were not used in 1925. 5. What event moved the United States to improve science education in the 1960s? improving science training in their schools. Life magazine outlined what had to be done to bring about lasting change. We must raise the low standards of our secondary schools and eliminate their trivial courses. We must shore up the sagging quality of our science teaching, cut down on the teacher's extra jobs, give him time to become a professional scholar again. We must provide both opportunity and incentive for our gifted children. There must be an unremitting search for talent and intellectual giftedness. Reverse Discrimination? In the 1960s many people began to feel that just being against discrimination was not enough. They wanted affirmative action— planned attempts to bring more minority group members and women into schools, businesses, and government. In 1968 blacks made up about 12 percent of the nation's population. Yet only about 2 percent of the nation's medical students were blacks. In 1969 the University of California Medical School at Davis started an affirmative action program. In 1974 a white student named Allan Bakke was turned down for the second time as a student at the Davis medical school. School officials admitted that Bakke was better qualified than some minority students they accepted. Bakke sued. His case reached the Supreme Court. The Wall Street Journal reported on June 29. 1978, that the Court ordered the University of California to admit Bakke. But the Court also ruled that schools could take race into account in making admissions decisions. "The ruling means that universities may continue affirmative-action programs, so long as they consider candidates on an individual basis and don't set aside a rigid number of places for which whites can't compete." Sesame Street In November 1969 a new educational program for children was shown on American television. Soon everybody was talking about "Sesame Street." The program had been developed by Joan Ganz Cooney and the Children's Television Workshop. Cooney had studied young children watching television. "I'd found that kids were fascinated by commercials with fast action, catchy music, and cartoons. . . . We decided that our show would have to clip along at a fast pace. We wanted it to jump, move, and sound." A study done in 1970 showed that children between three and five who watched "Sesame Street" regularly made some real gains. But some people still prefer a more traditional approach. 699 Sift Lifestyles______Work and Play Dolores Huerta worked with Cesar Chavez, in the !970s to bring underpaid Mndcas-Americans into the l nited Farm Workers union. The work force has changed greatly since the early 1900s. Women are on the job to stay. More women today work outside the home than in the home. Labor unions, too. have become a lasting part of work life, though they have not grown as fast as the work force. Working part-time has become a common practice among teenagers, even those still in school. Many workers over the retirement age of sixty-five have also taken on part-time work. Partly through affirmative action programs, more blacks, Spanish-speaking Americans. Asian-Americans, other minorities, and women are holding higher-paying jobs. White males, however, still hold most high-paying positions. Up from the Sweatshop A young Russian immigrant named Bessie Abramowilz worked as a button-sewer at Hart. Schaffner & Marx in Chicago. For each pair of pants she finished she earned 4 cents. To earn more money, fifteen-year-old Bessie took bundles of pants home to work on at night. In the fall of 1910 Bessie's boss told her that her rate would be cut to 3.75 cents for a pair of pants. Bessie put down her needle and walked out. Seven other women joined her, Bessie was fired immediately. No other shop in the city would hire her. Bessie called a secret meeting at Hull House to urge a strike. The next day 8,000 tailors walked off the job. The strike spread. Thirty thousand workers fought for five months for more mones and better working conditions. Most of them had to go back to work with no change in workplace or pay. But the workers at Bessie's shop, with the help of the famous lawyer Clarence Darrow, won some changes. A three-person committee was set up to settle the dispute between workers and employers. That committee was the first to bargain with American industry for a union of workers. In 1914 Bessie and her husband Sidney Hillman founded the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America. This union has continued to fight for social reforms from 1914 until today. The Power of Ads In ihe prosperous 1920s. businesses fought for the buyer's dollar. Advertising became more important as a sales tool. Historian Frederick Lewis Allen described lhe change in the advertising business. The copy-writer was learning to pay less attention to Ihe special qualitities and advantages of his product, and more to the study of I what the mass of. . . mankind wanted—to he young and desirable. 19. 