McDougal, Littell & Company New York Dallas Sacramento The Authors Consultants Winthrop D. Jordan is a professor of history and Afro-American studies at the University of Mississippi. He holds a B.A. from Harvard, an M.A. from Clark University, and a Ph.D from Brown University. Formerly an instructor of history ar Phillips Exeter Academy, Professor Jordan began teaching at the University of Mississippi in 1982. Prior to that he taught early American history for eighteen years at the University of California, Berkeley. He is the author of several books, including the highly acclaimed White Over Black, a study of American attitudes toward blacks from 1550 to 1812. The book won four national awards, one of which was the National Btx>k Award. Miriam Greenblatt is a teacher, an editor, and a nationally recognized educational consultant. A graduate of Hunter College and the University of Chicago, she has written for or contributed to more than twenty-five elementary, junior high, and high school social studies programs. She is a member of the National Council for the Social Studies, the Illinois Council for the Social Studies, and the Asia Society, and is an officer of the Committee on History in the Classroom of the American Historical Association. John S. Bowes has taught United Stares history in junior and senior high schools in Boston and New York. He chaired the Social Studies Department at Bayport High School, lie holds graduate degrees in American History and in Education from Boston University. He is the author of Avenues to America's Past, Discovering Our Past: A History of the United States, and articles in Social Education and Social Studies. He has edited and contributed to a number of social studies texts. Special Contributors Susan Dye Lee hits taught United States history in senior high schools in Michigan and Illinois. She holds a Ph.D. in History from Northwestern University, where she also has taught United States history. An author and consultant for many educational publications, she is a member of the National Council for the Social Studies, the American Historical Association, the Organization of American Historians, and Women Historians of the Midwest. Frances L. Hagemann is chairperson of the Social Studies Department at Corliss High School in Chicago. She holds an M.A. in History from Chicago State University. She is editor of the Councilor, a professional journal for Illinois social studies teachers, and has served as president of both the Illinois and Chicago Councils for the Social Studies. She also has been a member of the National Council for the Social Studies hoard of directors, and a member of the Curriculum Council of the Illinois State Board of Education. The authors and publisher wish to thank the educators who critically reviewed this hook hi manuscript and tested the work in their classrooms. Ethki. Calloway Social Studies Chairperson John Tyler High School Tylct. Texas Constancy Cason Edward II White Senior High School Jacksonville. Honda E. Edward Duckworth Supervisor Social Studies Hampton City Schools Hampton, Virginia Alfred Eger Social Studies Chairperson and Matthew Mann LW. Sexton High School insing, Michigan Dr. Lynda C. Falkenstein School of Education Portland State University Portland. Oregon James Henson C. E. Donart High School Stillwater, Oklahoma Dr. Arthur D Kaledin Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, Massachusetts Gayle Kernicii and Mary Theresa Mareuch Rio Americano High School Sacramento, California Douglas Miller and Michael Mulvhiill Fremont High School Sunnyvale, California Marjorie Ostendore Clcnh.ird North High School Carol Stream, Illinois Frances D. Till Edinburgh High School Edinburgh. Texas Acknowledgments: Sec page 861 No part of this book may lie reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system without permission in wrinng from the Publisher. Copyright ® 1985 by MclXiug.il, Littell 6c Company Box 1667, Evanston, Illinois 60204 All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. 1985 Printing Colonial Times 12 CHAPTER 1 to 1600 Migrants to a New Land 14 1 The First Immigrants Arrive 15 2 Native Americans Settle North of Mexico 19 3 Europeans Reach America 25 Chapter I Review 35 FOCUS ON AMERICAN HERITAGE Opportunity 36 Arrival of the English 38 1 Beginnings of the Virginia Colony 39 2 The Virginia Colony Finally Succeeds 43 3 The Puritans Arrive in Massachusetts 45 4 Different Settlements Begin 50 Chapter 2 Review 57 FOCUS ON FREE ENTERPRISE The Purpose of Colonies 58 Colonial Life 60 1 The South: A Divided Agricultural Society 61 2 Slavery Flourishes in the South 64 3 The North Develops Commerce and Cities 68 4 The Variety of Colonial Life 70 Chapter 3 Review 73 FOCUS ON AMERICAN HERITAGE Family Life 74 Conflict with Indians and England 76 1 The Indians Fight for Their Culture 77 2 England Fashions a Colonial Empire 79 3 Adjustments in the British Empire 83 Output 4 Review 87 FOCUS ON GEOGRAPHY Environments of North America 88 4?; Revolutionary Times 90 The Expansion of English America 92 1 The Colonies Consider New Ideas 93 2 Social Influences in the Colonies 95 3 Britain Triumphs over France 101 C!wf>ter 5 Review 107 FOCUS ON FREE ENTERPRISE Adam Smith and the Wealth of Nations 108 Separating from Britain 110 1 Britain Tightens Control over Its Colonies 111 2 The Colonies Organize Resistance to Britain 115 3 A Tense Situation Develops in Massachusetts 117 4 A Series of Events Leads to the Breaking Point 120 Chapter 6 Review 125 FOCUS ON GOVERNMENT Taxes 126 War for Independence 128 1 Overcoming the Last Doubts 129 2 Patriots Declare Independence 132 3 The Struggle for Independence Begins 134 4 Farmers and Shopkeepers Defeat an Empire 136 5 The American Revolution Changes the World 143 Chapter 7 Review 147 FOCUS ON GOVERNMENT The Declaration of Independence 148 U.S.A., a New Nation 152 Starting a New Nation 154 1 Creating the First National Government 155 2 Surviving a Critical Period 158 3 Drafting the Constitution 162 Chapter 8 Review 167 FOCUS ON GOVERNMENT The Constitution 168 The Federalist Era 200 1 President Washington Takes Charge 201 2 The First Political Parties Develop 205 3 Foreign Affairs Become Troublesome 207 4 President Adams Faces Political Strife 210 Chapter 9 Review 215 FOCUS ON GEOGRAPHY Creating a National Capital 216 The Jeffersonians 218 1 President Jefferson Leads the Nation 219 2 The Road to the War of 18 1 2 226 3 The War of 1812 Brings Mixed Results 229 Chapter 10 Review 235 FOCUS ON AMERICAN HERITAGE Individualism 236 The Nation Grows and Changes 238 Nationalism and a New Economy 240 1 Economic and Federal Growth 241 2 The Monroe Years Bring Change 245 3 The South Becomes a Cotton Kingdom 248 4 The Industrial Revolution Spreads to America 251 C/upter J1 Review 255 FOCUS ON FREE ENTERPRISE The Industrial Revolution 256 The Age of Jackson 258 1 The Two-Party System Develops 259 2 Jackson Shows a New Presidential Style 262 3 Debating States' Rights and a National Bank 265 4 Jackson's Successors Follow His Lead 270 Chapter 12 Review 273 FOCUS ON FREE ENTERPRISE Business Cycles 274 An Era of Reform 276 1 Inventions Improve American Life 277 2 Reformers Work for Social Changes 281 3 Americans Speak Out on Slavery 283 4 Women Struggle for Equality 287 Chapter 13 Review 291 FOCUS ON GEOGRAPHY The Mighty Mississippi 292 Expansion and Conflict 294 1 The Spirit of Expansion Sweeps into Texas 295 2 The Nation Expands Westward to the Pacific 300 3 War with Mexico Results in New Territory 304 4 The Compromise of 1850 Postpones a Crisis 309 Chapter 14 Review 313 FOCUS ON GOVERNMENT Political Leadership 314 Tragic Times 316 A Decade of Crisis 318 1 The Subject of Slavery Refuses To Die 319 2 A New Proposal Opens Old Wounds 321 3 New Arrivals Lead to New Political Parties 323 4 Crises Lead to a Showdown 326 Chapter 15 Review 333 FOCUS ON GOVERNMENT Public Opinion 334 The Civil War 336 1 Bloodshed 337 2 The Real War Begins 340 3 The Goals of War Change 345 4 Life Goes On Behind the Lines 347 5 The Rough Road to Peace 349 Chapter 16 Review 355 FOCUS ON GEOGRAPHY Geography and Civil War Strategy 356 Reconstruction and Its Effects 358 1 The President Versus Congress 359 2 The Radicals Gain Control 362 3 Radical Reconstruction 366 4 Reconstruction Efforts Come to an End 370 Chapter 17 Review 375 FOCUS ON GEOGRAPHY Alaska 376 The Industrial Revolution Creates the Modem Age 378 The Passing of the Old Frontier 380 1 Invading the Indians' Homeland 381 2 Broken Treaties 384 3 Exploring the Cowboy Image 387 4 Fanners Tame the Frontier 392 Chapter 18 Review 3 97 FOCUS ON GEOGRAPHY The Great Plains 398 A New Industrial Age 400 1 Industries Expand 401 2 Railroads Connect the Nation 406 3 Businesses Become More Complex 412 Chapter 19 Review 417 FOCUS ON GOVERNMENT Government Regulations 418 Mushrooming Cities 420 1 Problems Arise as Cities Grow 421 2 Political Machines Acquire More Power 426 3 Americans Improve Cities and Services 428 Chapter 20 Review 431 FOCUS ON GOVERNMENT Democracy 432 Workers and Unions 434 1 Workers Have Cause for Complaints 435 2 The Labor Movement Takes Shape 438 3 Labor Experiences Setbacks and Victories 443 Chapter 21 Review 447 FOCUS ON FREE ENTERPRISE Alternatives to Capitalism: Socialism, Communism 448 The New Immigrants 450 1 Eastern Europeans Arrive in America 451 2 Difficulties Confront the New Immigrants 454 3 Demands Grow for Immigration Restrictions 457 Chapter 22 Review 46/ FOCUS ON AMERICAN HERITAGE Ethnic Diversity 462 Dawn of a New Century 464 Populism 466 1 Demands for Reforms Grow 467 2 Angry Farmers Begin the Populist Movement 470 3 The Influence of Populism Endures 474 4 Women Continue the Struggle for Suffrage 478 Chapter 23 Review 481 FOCUS ON AMERICAN HERITAGE Justice 482 Americans in the Gilded Age 484 1 More People Receive an Education 485 2 Sources of Information Multiply 487 3 Americans Enjoy Leisure 490 Chapter 24 Review 495 FOCUS ON AMERICAN HERITAGE Public Education 496 The Nation Claims an Empire 498 1 America Ready To Expand 499 2 The United States Goes to War with Spain 501 3 New Lands Come Under the American Hag 506 4 The United States Becomes a World Power 510 Chapter 25 Review 5/9 FOCUS ON GOVERNMENT Foreign Policy 520 The Progressive Era 522 1 The Progressive Movement Begins 523 2 Roosevelt Becomes a Progressive Leader 528 3 Progressivism Continues Under Taft and Wilson 531 4 Woodrow Wilson Declares a "New Freedom" 534 Chapter 26 Review 537 FOCUS ON GOVERNMENT Free Elections 538 The First World War 540 1 The United States Tries To Remain Neutral 541 2 The Nation Goes to War 547 3 The Fight for a Peace Treaty 552 Chapter 27 Review 557 FOCUS ON GEOGRAPHY' European Geography 558 Between World Wars 560 War & World Leadership 632 The 1920s Bring Social Change 562 1 Manners and Morals Change 563 2 Women Enjoy New Careers and Lifestyles 565 3 A Black Renaissance Emerges 568 4 Heroes and Issues of the Twenties 571 Chapter 28 Review 575 FOCUS ON AMERICAN HERITAGE Freedom of the Press 576 Politics and a Thin Prosperity 578 1 A Troubled Postwar World 579 2 A Return to Normalcy and Isolation 582 3 Coolidge Conducts the Nation's Business 586 4 Signs of Economic Troubles 590 5 A Slipping Economy Signals the End of an Era 592 Chapter 29 Review 595 FOCUS ON FREE ENTERPRISE The Stock Market 596 The Great Depression 598 1 The Nation's Economy Crashes 599 2 Hoover's Policies Have Little Effect 602 3 Roosevelt Faces a Difficult Challenge 606 Chapter 30 Review 611 FOCUS ON FREE ENTERPRISE Jobs and Productivity 612 The New Deal and Reform 614 1 The First Hundred Days 615 2 Roosevelt Seeks To Reform the System 618 3 The New Deal Comes Under Attack 620 4 The New Deal Transforms Lifestyles 625 Chapter 3/ Review 629 FOCUS ON GEOGRAPHY The Tennessee Valley Authority 630 The Road to War 634 1 Storm Clouds Gather 635 2 America Struggles To Remain Neutral 638 3 The Crisis Deepens 642 4 Germany Unveils a New Kind of Warfare 645 Chapter 32 Review 651 FOCUS ON FREE ENTERPRISE Multinational Corporations 652 The Second World War 654 1 The United States Prepares for War 655 2 The Nation Performs a Production Miracle 658 3 War Rages Across North Africa and Europe 663 4 Japan Surrenders Unconditionally 668 5 The Allies Plan for the Postwar World 671 Chapter 33 Review 675 FOCUS ON GEOGRAPHY The Pacific Coast 676 An Uneasy Peace 678 1 A New Leader Faces Domestic Problems 679 2 Truman Initiates a Period of Change 682 3 A Former Ally Becomes an Enemy 685 4 The Nation Seeks Internal Security 690 Chapter 34 Review 693 FOCUS ON AMERICAN HERITAGE World Leadership 694 The Cold War Turns Hot 696 1 Wars in China and Korea 697 2 The United States Fights in Korea 700 3 Eisenhower Leads the Nation 706 Chapter 35 Review 709 FOCUS ON FREE ENTERPRISE Economic Health 710 Adjustments of the 1950s 712 1 New Patterns of Living Develop 713 2 Changes in the World of Entertainment 716 3 Minorities Make Some Progress 719 4 Crises Threaten International Peace 725 Chapter 36 Review 729 FOCUS ON AMERICAN HERITAGE Yankee Ingenuity 730 Continuity and Change 732 A Time of Progress and Peril 734 1 A New Kind of Candidate Wins the Presidency 735 2 Kennedy Achieves Success at Home 738 3 The Nation Copes with Problems Abroad 740 4 Americans Endure a National Tragedy 746 Cha/>icr 37 Review 751 FOCUS ON GEOGRAPHY Vietnam— Past to Present 752 War in Vietnam and Troubles at Home 754 1 Johnson Tries To Build a "Great Society" 755 2 The United States Fights in Vietnam 759 3 The Continuing Struggle for Civil Rights 763 4 Women Seek To Improve Their Status 765 5 Other Americans Seek Changes 767 Chapter 38 Review 769 FOCUS ON FREE ENTERPRISE Computer Revolution 770 The Nation Seeks New Directions 772 1 The Nation Endures a Troubled Year 773 2 Nixon Heads a Law-and-Order Administration 777 3 The United States Charts a New Foreign Policy 780 4 The Nixon Administration Collapses 783 5 President Ford Directs the Nation 788 Chapter 39 Review 791 FOCUS ON FREE ENTERPRISE OPEC and the Energy Crisis 792 CHAPTER 40 Since 1976 Toward Another Century 794 1 The 1976 Election Brings a Change 795 2 Carter Faces Economic and Social Problems 798 3 Worldwide Conflicts Dim Hopes for Peace 802 4 Republicans Regain the White House 806 5 Americans Face the Future 813 Chapter 40 Review 815 FOCUS ON GOVERNMENT Americans Work for Change 816 Reference Section 818 Glossary of Social Studies Terms 819 Map of the World 830 Map of the United States 832 Facts About the States 834 Presidents of the United States 836 Recent Statistical Trends in the United States Index 842 List of Concepts and Skills 858 Acknowledgments 861 Migrants to a New Land to 1600 People in the Chapter The Aztecs, Mayas, and Incas— groups that build empires in Mexico and South America before the arrival of Europeans. The Algonquin—a group of peoples who speak the same language and are the first to come in contact with the early European settlers. The Adapters—people in the southeast part of the North American continent who are strongly influenced by the culture of the Aztec and Mayan civilizations. The Iroquois—people who live in present-day New York State and have the most efficient government north of Mexico. The Calumet—an Algonquin-speak- ing group who live in the Middle West and smoke a "peace pipe." The Pueblo—a peaceful people who live in the Southwest The Early Explorers—Europeans who "discover" the New World for the rest of the world. Linking Past to Present Scientists disagree about where the human race began. Some believe the first humans made their appearance somewhere in the Middle East. Others are equally certain that it was in Central Asia. A majority of scientists believe that humankind began somewhere in Africa. But almost all scientists agree on one thing—the human race did not begin in the Americas. For millions of years the human family increased in numbers, perfected survival skills, and, in time, began spreading out over larger areas of the world. But although the American continents teemed with animal and plant life, no human voice was heard. No human foot trod its rich soil. America was like a vast stage waiting for the actors to appear. And then one day they did. They came from Asia through the mountain passes of Alaska and Canada, and over thousands of years migration followed migration. Wars were waged and empires rose and fell. But the details, one historian noted, are "lost in the silence of centuriesWe do, however, know, what happened to the descendants of those first immigrants. As a result of European invasions, they died by the millions and their civilizations were swept away. But in that destruction the seeds of a new and great nation were planted. Chapter Outline VOCABULARY Beroigia mastodon If you look at a map of the world, you will see that a narrow stretch of water separates North America from the Siberian part of the Soviet Union. This water is called the Bering Strait It is only fifty-six miles wide, and there are two islands in it. 1 f you sailed across, you would never be out of sight of land The widest stretch of open sea is only twenty-six miles. But scientists believe that when the first Americans arrived, the strait did not exist. Instead, the two continents were connected by a land bridge sometimes called Beringia. The first arrivals walked from Asia to America. In that far distant past, the climate was quite different from what it is today. For millions of years large portions of North America were covered periodically by a series of glaciers, or ice caps, that crept south from the North Pole and then moved back to the north again. Each movement created an Ice Age that lasted for thousands of years. Each time, water was drawn up into the sky from the sea. But instead of falling back as rain, it fell onto the glaciers as snow which remained un- melted. This caused the level of the sea to drop. During those times, the land bridge of Beringia was exposed. Even now the strait is so shallow that "We Were Here. Remember Us." That may be the message lelt by a pre-Columbian artist on a cliff wall in New Mexico. The human figure is surrounded by animals, which provided food and clothing. The Clift Is fifteen miles outside of Taos. N.M '600 f------1------r------!------t-------1------1------1------1 o 400 aoo i?oo tfioo ?ooo 2*00 2900 3300 kilometers Map Skills These routes are believed to have been followed by the first migrants to America From what continent did the migrants come? What evidence of them has been found? if 120 feet of water were drawn off, the land bridge would reappear. Scientists believe that during the latest Ice Age, the first Americans crossed the land bridge. They aren't sure quite when but it was sometime between 20,000 and 40,000 years ago. As the glaciers retreated northward, a strip of ice free laud developed which ran from Siberia across to Alaska, along the Yukon and MacKenzie River valleys, and south into the present United First Migrations to the Americas Glai Glacier Miration routes Archaeological remains Ancient coastline Modem coastline and boundaries States. On either side of this wide corridor there loomed high glacier ice, but inside the corridor there was vegetation, fish and game. And w hat game! There were giant mammoths, bison, and mastodon (a sort of shaggy elephant), as well as horses and camels. Except for the bison, these species died out in America, but the horse was brought back much later by the Spanish. These beasts provided a wealth of food and clothing, and as they wandered southward feeding on the thick vegetation, they were followed by the first human immigrants to American soil. What They Were Like Trying to understand people so far back in our past is like trying to see the bottom of a well with a candle. But from what evidence we now have, these early Americans were hunters and gatherers. They probably ate wild rye, choke cherries, gooseberries, and currants. They wore hides and furs, had fire, and cooked their food. But they did not have dogs. Apparently they had not domesticated the animal. Nor did they have bows and arrows. Their weapons were wooden spears tipped with sharpened stones. As more and more people from Asia arrived, they pushed farther south. Of course this took thousands of years. Still, they fanned out into all parts of North America, and some even reached the tip of South America. I'he last to come over from Asia, scientists believe, were the Eskimos who today remain closest to the land bridge which now lies underwater. Clues They Left In 1925, near Folsom, New Mexico, a cowboy found some beautifully carved stones sharpened into points. They lay among some bleached bison bones in a dry creek bed. When scientists tested the bones with carbon 14, they learned that the Folsom points were about 9000 years old. In 1952, near Clovis, New Mexico, fluted spear points of stone sticking in mammoth bones were found. They were dated as being about 11,000 years old. In 1952, at Fort Rock, Oregon, about a dozen spear points were found that also dated back about 11,000 years. In Gypsum Cave, Nevada, scientists found stone darts and the charcoal of a campfire that had gone out about 8500 b.c. Although some twenty such stone and animal findings have been made in both South America and North America, there have been few findings of human remains. A possible reason is because the early Americans buried their dead on raised platforms where the bodies disintegrated into the air. In any event, in 1951 in a cave near the tip of South America scientists found some human remains w hich the carbon test put at about 6700 B.c. In 1949 the skeleton of a sixty-year old man was found under an old lake bed nearTepexpan, Mexico. He was named Tepexpan Man and is believed to have died about 9000 b.c. In 1955. in a sand pit neSr Midland, Texas, the bones of a woman about thirty years old were found. It seems that she was buried between 15,000 b.c. and 17,000 b.c., which makes her the oldest human thus far discovered in the United States. When They Came The signs ol a hunt that took place 8000 years ago near Folsom, N Ma spear point lying among bison bones For a time scientists could only guess at the age of the few: remains they found of ancient people. Then in the 1940s an accurate method of dating, using carbon 14, was discovered. Carbon is found in the air, and all living animals and plants absorb carbon 14 into their system. When they die, the carbon 14 leaves at a slow', steady, and known rate. An organism will lose about half its carbon in 6000 years. It w ill lose half of the rest in another 6000 years, and so on. By measuring the amount of carbon remaining in a bone, for example, scientists can get a good idea of how old the bone is. While there may be errors of a few hundred years more or less, the carbon 14 method is reasonably accurate. The Empire Builders While the new immigrants moved into all parts of the Western Hemisphere, those living between about latitude 25° north and latitude 15° south developed, over thousands of years, the first great civilizations in the New World. In the Old World, civilizations first developed in the warm river valleys of the Nile in Egypt, the Euphrates and Tigris in what is now Iraq, and along the Indus River valley in present-day Pakistan. In the New World, the great civilizations developed in the valley of central Mexico, in Central America, and in Peru. In these warm, moist, and fertile lands, people no longer had to hunt and gather seeds for a living. They could settle down and farm. After a while, they built cities with huge palaces and spacious squares. They erected flat-topped pyramids that matched those of ancient Egypt and, like those in Egypt, can still be seen. On top of the pyramids they placed stone temples to their gods. Some of their roads were better constructed and more extensive than those of the Roman Empire. Some of these societies had systems of counting and writing figures up to over a billion. Their mathematicians were the first to develop the concept of zero. Their astronomers worked out a calendar of 365 days. They could predict eclipses and chart the course of some planets. The best known of these peoples are the Aztecs of central Mexico and the Incas of Peru. This is because they were unfortunate enough to be in the way when the Spanish explorers landed on their shores. As a result, their entire civilizations were wiped out. Section 1 Review COMPREHENSION Developing Vocabulary 1. Explain these terms: Beringia, Tepexpan Man, mastodon COMPREHENSION Mastering Facts 1. About when did the first immigrants reach America? 2. What sort of animals did they find in America? 3. Which group of the early immigrants came to America last? 4. What sort of weapons did the first immigrants have? The rums of the great Aztec city of Teotihuacan. north of Mexico City, show the remains of the mam square and the temples of the sun and moon. The temples are pyramid in shape On American Heritage Opportunity No migration in human history has ever equalled the movement of peoples to the Western Hemisphere f irst on foot and later by ship, untold millions have made their way to America. Why did so many leave home to put down roots in an unknown land? From the very beginning, newcomers have viewed America as a "Land of Opportunity," a place to stake out a better future. When the first Americans trudged across the ancient land bridge from Asia, they viewed what would come to be called America as a vast new hunting ground for food and clothing. They saw opportunity as a chance to improve their lives. Since that time, many have viewed America as the opportunity of a lifetime—a chance to gel rich, a chance to live peacefully, a chance to erase the past and start anew. Right up through the present. America offers hope and promise. Opportunity is a creation of dreamers who question the way things are. Dreamers imagine different realities and act on their imaginations to produce change. Christopher Columbus, for example, believed that he could reach the riches of the cast by sailing west. So strongly did he believe in this idea that he succeeded m convincing Queen Isabella of its possibility. That interaction of people and ideas created a unique opportunity. Risks and Rewards. Making use of an opportunity requires certain qualities of character— qualities such as confidence, conviction, and a willingness to gamble. But not everyone can tolerate the uncertainty of an unpredictable situation. Three European monarchs refused to back Columbus before he finally convinced the Spanish queen that the chances for gain far outweighed the risks. Queen Isabella gambled and put her money on an individual determined to create opportunity, a dreamer with the courage to confront an uncertain outcome. I ler decision paid off handsomely; it won her lasting fame, and it opened the door to new' opportunities. Immigrants who came after Columbus shared his openness to change. They wanted to improve their lives and hoped that taking a chance on America would bring better circumstances. In America, opportunity was not reserved for a privileged few. From the time settlers planted colonies, some pioneers chose to venture westward in search of cheap land. By the time of the American Revolution, a majority of Americans owned their own land. Success Stories. The American experience abounds with stories of people who have used opportunities successfully. In 1850 Levi Strauss, a German immigrant, came to California to seek his fortune during the gold rush. Strauss, however, did not plan to search for gold. Working first as a peddler, he eventually patented the use of rivets at stTcss points to make durable workpants for western miners. Like so many successful business people and inventors, Strauss took full advantage of an opportunity when he saw it. Today, the Levi's that Strauss invented are worn by people around the world. Using opportunities successfully does not always mean becoming rich. Fat Yuen Low'e, a Chinese immigrant, came to the United States during the late 1800s. Working from dawn to nine at night seven days a week, Lowe sewed, ran errands, made deliveries, and swept floors in a clothing shop. Eventually Lowe and two brothers saved enough money to open their own garment shop. But the store was completely destroyed in the devastating San Francisco earthquake of 1906. Never one to give up, Lowe found a job in a dry goods store. Eventually he bought that business. His hard work enabled him and his wife to raise six children. Today his descendants revere Fat Yuen Lowe for the way he made use of opportunities in America. Unequal Opportunity. It must lie remembered, of course, that equal opportunity has not What opportunities do these Cuban refugees hope for as they arrive in Florida? been a consistent part of the American experience for all individuals. For most blacks until 1865, America was a land of slavery, a land of harsh limits rather than opportunity. Slaves could not enjoy the same opportunities that others took for granted: the chance to own land, to move around, to obtain an education, and to reap the fruits of their own labor. Virtually every ethnic and religious minority group—Germans, Poles, Chinese, Mexicans, Catholics, Jews—has endured discrimination. What was considered an "opportunity" for free land by European settlers was experienced as outright theft by native Americans already here. Nonetheless, even deprived Americans have been able to overcome the limits of their opportunities. Frederick Douglass, for example, was born a slave. He learned to read from children in the streets: he taught himself to write by copying signs. The more he learned, the more he imagined other opportunities. I le began to dream what freedom would be like. Eventually Douglass chose to take a serious risk in order to gain personal freedom. The risk succeeded, and after escaping north, Douglass spent the rest of his life trying to improve opportunities for others. I le believed that his personal opportunities meant little unless all Americans shared the same freedoms he did. From Dreams to Action. The meaning of opportunity in America has undergone many changes over the years. Since the Declaration of Independence, however, this nation has committed itself to the ideal that everyone in American society deserves a fair chance. Sometimes the nation falls far short of the ideal—but the ideal nevertheless still remains. It is reflected in our family structure, our educational institutions, and our system of government, ft is expressed in the values we hold, and it is exemplified by the leaders we admire. The heroes of our nation—Benjamin Franklin, Susan B. Anthony, John F. Kennedy, Jane Addams, Martin Luther King. Jr., and countless others—have all been individuals who acted on their ideas to create opportunities. Are you a person who can translate dreams into action? Dreamers built America, and dreamers will continue to define the American experience by creating new opportunities. Understanding Our Heritage 1. What past evidence shows that America is a land of opportunity? 2. Do you think that the United States today offers greater opportunities than other nations? Support your opinion with facts. 3. What remains for the United States to do in order to insure equal opportunity for all Americans? 4. What opportunities do you expect to use to improve your life? What barriers may stand in the way? How can you work to realize your dreams despite the barriers? Bacon again went on the march. He burned Jamestown as Berkeley and his followers fled. Months of chaos followed. Indentured servants ran away from their masters. Probably about one hundred colonists died in the fighting. Bacon died of a fever. The leaderless rebellion collapsed as quickly as it began. Eleven hundred troops arrived from England to restore order. Yet the British government sympathized with some of Bacon's complaints. The soldiers brought with them a royal pardon for the rebels. But Governor Berkeley was not a merciful man, and his pride had been stung when he was chased out of Jamestown. Before he was recalled to England, he had twenty-three rebel leaders hanged. Even King Charles was astounded. He remarked, "That old fool has hanged more men in that naked country than I have done for the murder of my father." Bacon's Rebellion was the first popular uprising in the American colonies. It was a rebellion against a government that overtaxed the people yet tried to protect the Indians but did not serve their needs. The rebellion did not succeed. The established wealthy planters remained in control of political affairs. But the)' learned a lesson. Indentured servants had proven dangerous, especially because most of them owned guns. So the planters turned to a different kind of laborer—black slaves. Section 1 Review COMPREHENSION Developing Vocabulary 1. Explain these terms: indigo, Tidewater, Piedmont, barrelheads. COMPREHENSION Mastering Facts 1. Why was North Carolina lumber needed in the West Indies? 2. What effect did indentured servants have on Virginia society? 3. What were three reasons for Bacon's Rebellion? VOCABULARY lineage itrltvins GulkiA Slavery existed in all the English colonies, not just in the South. The Dutch in New Netherland owned slaves, and the English continued the practice after New Netherland became New York. The first African slaves came to Massachusetts from the West Indies in 1638. South Carolina settlers brought slaves with them from Barbados. Even the Quakers of Pennsylvania had slaves. Slavery was different from indentured servitude in three important ways. First, the master of a slave did not own just the slave's labor, as was the case with an indentured servant. The master liter ally owned the slave as a living piece of property, the same way he might own a horse. Second, slavery was for life, not for a term of years. Third, the children of slaves automatically became slaves themselves. An Unplanned Development 'Hie English colonists did not plan to establish the institution of slavery. It developed gradually, but historians are not agreed on when it began. We do know that in South Carolina, Indians were enslaved from the earliest days of the colony. Occasionally, English settlers enslaved Indian prisoners of war. More often, Indians sold captives from enemy tribes to the English. But most of them were difficult to control. Captive Indians had friends and relatives still living nearby. They knew the paths back to their own lands. They had far better knowledge of the fields and forests than the English had. They could slip away easily, and they were hard to find. English slavemasters knew about these difficulties, so they shipped many Indian slaves to the West Indies where they exchanged them for African slaves. From the colonial point of view', Africans made much more satisfactory slaves. Once in the colonies, Africans were completely cut off from their homeland. Also, they were much more used to agriculture than to hunting. So eventually slavery in the colonies became Negro slavery, and most slaves were black Africans. Slavery did not become popular in Virginia until after 1690. At that time there were an estimated 3000 blacks and 15,000 white servants out of a total population of 75,000. But a few blacks were free. They had been freed by their masters, sometimes for faithful service, sometimes because they became Christians, but most often because their masters were not used to the idea of slavery. The African Slave Trade British Dutch [ | Man French ^ Ashanti Portuguese m|songhay Benin O- Equator I-----r------r-----1------1-----1 o *oo aoo taco <eoo 2000 Map Skills Black Africans were enslaved and shipped to America At what Caribbean island did many stop on their way to the Southern colonies ? What country brought slaves to Louisiana? African Immigration Begins The first Africans who arrived in Virginia in 1619 were "sold" to the English settlers. At least a few of these Africans were freed after a term of ser vitude. Only a few more Africans arrived during the next forty years. By about 1660, however, at least some of them were serving for life. The Maryland and Virginia assemblies began passing laws that recognized the existence of this new status. Africans arrived in the American colonies in massive numbers after 1700. Between 1720 and 1760 black people made up about 20 percent of the colonial population. (That was a higher proportion than today's figure of about 12 or 13 per cent.) In the South at least 40 percent of the non-Indian population was black. The African Homeland. African slaves came only from certain parts of Africa. In this respect they were like early European migrants to the New World. Both groups left from the western parts of their continents. Most Africans came from West Africa and the western coast of central Africa. Although they lived near the coast, most Africans were not maritime peoples. Unlike so many of the English, they did not choose to venture far out to sea. They were basically land lovers. Yet among them were many skilled boatmen who operated enormous canoes on rivers and along the coastal waters. The people of West Africa belonged to many different ethnic groups. They spoke more than one hundred distinct languages. Each language group had its own system of government and religion, and each was aware of being a distinct people. Except for a few Islamic Africans, the slaves who came to America were people of the spoken— rather than the written—word. Although their lan guages differed, they shared a common musical style—a similarity of beat and rhythm that served as an important means of communication on slave ships and in the New World. The King of Benin leaves his palace preceded by musicians with pet tigers, Behind ride the nobles. Lineage. There had been large empires in West Africa during the Middle Ages, but they had collapsed before the Western Kuropeans arrived in the 1400s. Most West Africans were living in tribal units somewhat similar to those of the American Indians. They felt that lineage was their most important social unit. A lineage consisted of people who were related to one another by blood and marriage. Often the lineage was thought to include all people descended from a single, mythical ancestor. The lineage included all those relatives who had died and all those yet to be born. For most Africans, one of the worst things about slavery' was separation from one's lineage. Slavery in Africa. Slavery existed in West Africa prior to the coming of Western Europeans. But m African societies, slavery was quite different than in colonial America. There was little plan tation slavery in Africa. Slaves occupied a wide variety of positions, and most of them had legal rights. Some slaves w'ere household workers, while others worked alongside their owner in the fields. Some were soldiers, often making up an elite unit. There were even slaves who served as governors of regions. People became slaves in Africa because they had been kidnapped, or were prisoners of war, or were poor people seeking a protective master. But unlike the American colonies, no one ever be came a slave just because one happened to be black. African rulers and merchants sold slaves to European slave traders. But as slavery became a growing business, African chiefs began to create more slaves. New crimes were invented so more criminals could be sold into slavery. Of course, some slaves were captured directly by European sailors. But such kidnapping was dangerous for Europeans because local Afncan rulers were in good positions to take revenge. For the most part, European slave traders traded with the powerful chieftains of the coast. Europeans did not penetrate far inland and did not even settle on the African coast for long. The Voyage. Conditions on the voyage to America were horribly brutal. Once purchased by a European trader, slaves were herded into the holds of slave ships. Men and women were packed into separate holds. They lay jammed side by side be low deck, often without enough space to roll over. Many died, especially when disease swept the vessel. Some slaves spent months under such conditions. Storms on the Atlantic crossing meant closed hatches and air heavy with the smell of sweat, blood, vomit, and body wastes. The survivors of this ordeal arrived in the American colonies in a state of shock, grief, horror, anger, and bewilderment. Many felt relieved to cs cape the terrible conditions aboard ship. But they found themselves in the hands of white men whose language and ways they could not under stand. Slavery in the Tobacco Colonies In Virginia and Maryland, slaves were sold in small groups, often at the river landing place of a wealthy planter. They were sent off on foot to cleanngs in the woods. There, rows of plants were pointed out to them and familiar-looking hoes were thrust into their hands. Their new "home" was one of several single-room cabins standing at the edge of tobacco fields and cornfields. Usually they were many miles from their owner's house. Their work and their lives were directed by a white overseer, who slept in one of the cabins on the only mattress. By day he beat them when they did not understand his orders or pretended not to. They were almost completely isolated. In Virginia there were few towns, so many of the jobs usually found in towns were done on the plantations. The slaves on these estates, most of whom were Virginia-born, were artisans. Artisans purchase clocks, telescopes, and ship fittings of all kinds. Weather-beaten mates clamber ashore from their longboats on their way to sail lofts and rope walks (the places where ropes arc made). Sail- makers and ropemakers work in buildings that are far larger than the meetinghouse in the farmer's village. There are many items to tempt our farm family. In the shops of grand merchant gentlemen, goods just off the ship from England are offered for sale. There are bells, buckles, brass buttons, books, copper kettles, music boxes, iron nails, and steel knives. There are heads for axes and heads for hoes, (Farmers make their own handles.) There are hinges, pulleys, hooks, and harness fittings. There are glass bottles filled with medicines and scents. There are pomanders (a cloth bag or clay globe containing a sweet-smelling spice), expensive oils, rolls of silks and satins, and rolls of the more humble cloth, linsey-woolsey—a mixture of wool and linen or cotton. Everyone seems to be busy in the town—even the rich. The merchants work long hours. They supervise their account books, write out instructions By about 1700 Philadelphia was the largest colonial city. Through this port flowed a world-wide trade for ship captains, and correspond with their agents in other colonies, the West Indies, and London. Urban Problems There were also urban problems that did not exist in the countryside. For example, by 1700 all the cities had exhausted their local supplies of firewood. T his early energy crisis was met by bringing wood in from greater and greater distances. There was also the problem of crime. Cities had no regular police force, and part-time watchmen tried to keep the peace. Much of the crime was caused by the large temporary population of sailors that filled most towns. There was little sanitation, but generally things were better than in parts of London and Paris. In Europe people in the narrow streets had to keep a sharp eye and ear out. When they heard the warning cry of "gardey loo!" they sprang out of the way to escape garbage descending from windows of houses that loomed up on each side. But gradually, sewers and pipes for drinking water were put under the ground of colonial cities. Fires were a menace because the wooden houses were packed so tightly together. At one time or another every colonial city suffered a terrible fire that wiped out entire sections. Because there were no regular firefighters, citizens organized volunteer fire-fighting units. So great was the fire danger, that as early as 1646 the Massachusetts legislature banned smoking within five miles of any town. A Flood of Human Resources All immigrants had to pass through one of the colonial ports. This gave additional color, liveliness, and interest to the cities. During the 1600s most immigrants came from England, but later they were outnumbered by Africans and people from other European countries. Among the latter were the Germans and the Scotch-Irish. The Germans. The first Cerman immigrants arrived in the 1680s. They came from the western part of Germany. Most were attracted to Pennsylvania by William Penn's successful advertising campaign. Penn sent paid agents into the countryside of western Germany to attract settlers to his new colony. The agents stressed Penn's policy of complete religious freedom and free land. Not surprisingly, the first group of German set tiers were Quakers or members of religious groups with similar views. Soon other religious groups came, including Lutherans and Mennonites. These were hardworking, frugal, and pious people who were against militarism (war-like policies and attitudes) and left Europe to escape it. Most of the Germans were peasants and very poor. Because they could not afford to pay their way across the Atlantic, they sold themselves into indentured servitude. Ship captains bought their labor on one side of the Atlantic and sold it on the other. Actually the ship captains sold only the survivors of the voyage because many passengers died at sea in the holds of the overcrowded vessels. Sometimes the survivors were forced into extra years of servitude in order to pay back the cost of passage of their dead relatives. Many of the Germans took no active interest in Pennsylvania politics. They tended to keep to themselves and often did not even bother to Icam English. They set up German language schools and newspapers. Partly because of their skillful use of fertilizer, they were the most productive farmers in colonial Pennsylvania. From German farms came great quantities of wheat, barley, rye, beef, and huge hams. German cattle produced a surplus of hides which became tanned leather goods or were exported raw to the European market. The Scotch-Irish. By 1700 a much larger group of Scotch-Irish began arriving. T hey came to most of the colonies south of New England. But like the Germans, the great majority landed in Philadelphia. The Scotch-Irish were themselves the descendants of migrants. Their ancestors had been moved by Queen Elizabeth I of England and her successor James I from lowland Scotland to the province of Ulster in northern Ireland. The monarchs wanted to drive out the native Catholic Irish and replace them with the Protestant Scots. Their religious beliefs were much like those of Puritans, but they were usually called Presbyterians, In Ulster the Scotch-Irish had prospered at the expense of the native Roman Catholic Irish. Conflict between the two groups left wounds that have still not healed. But economic depression struck Northern Ireland early in the 1700s. So tens of thousands set off for a better life in America. Many came as indentured servants. In Pennsylvania most Scotch-Irish took up farming in frontier areas. There they soon got the reputation of being quick-tempered, particularly with the Indians. As their numbers grew, many Scotch-Irish, as well as some Germans, moved southward from Pennsylvania into the western parts of Maryland and Virginia. Later they moved still farther south into the backcountry of North and South Carolina. The Scotch-Irish were accepted more quickly by their neighbors than the Germans were, probably because they spoke Eng- lish—though with a distinct accent. A Variety of Peoples. Another large ethnic group were the descendants of the Dutch in New York and northern New Jersey. There were a number of smaller groups as well. French Calvinists fled persecution at home to settle in various American cities. A group of highland Scots as well as a few Irish Catholics settled in North Carolina. A small number of Jews, some from Portugal, settled in such cities as Newport and Philadelphia. Descendants of Swedes and Finns still lived along the banks of the Delaware River. All these different peoples, the forerun tiers of millions more w ho were to come, gave a rich and permanent character to American life. The variety of peoples and religious groups astounded European visitors to the American colonies. Only the New England colonies lacked this wide assortment of peoples. Section 4 Review COMPREHENSION Developing Vocabulary 1. Explain these terms: pomanders, linsey-woolsey, militarism. Mennonites, Presbyterians, chandler, rope walks. COMPREHENSION Mastering Facts 1. What was the largest colonial city in 1700? 2. What were four problems that confronted colonial cities and towns? 3. Where did most German immigrants to America settle? 4. Where did most Scotch-Irish immigrants settle? The Demand for Slave Labor Grows The invention of the cotton gin and the resulting movement into the Old Southwest created an enormous demand for more slave labor. No slaves had been imported since the Revolution. But in 1803 South Carolina legalized importation, and for the next five years Africans flooded into Charleston in unprecedented numbers. In 1808 the twenty-year period of protection of the slave trade, which had been written into the Constitution, expired. Jefferson promptly signed a law banning the importation of slaves. But the law was not enforced very well, and slaves continued to be smuggled into the United States until 1859. More important than the international slave trade, however, was the domestic slave trade. By 1820, as one historian put it, "slaves had become a valuable cash crop." Slaveowners in the eastern part of the South encouraged their slaves to breed as fast as possible, and then sold the blacks they could not use to planters farther west. The trade was handled by people called "soul-drivers." They would buy slaves from a plantation, trade them at auctions, and then send them in "lots"to their new destination. Some slaves were shipped by steamer on the Ohio and Mississippi rivers or along the Gulf coast. Others were driven overland. As with many human migrations, especially forced ones. families were often separated. Young blacks in particular were frequently sold away from their parents to unfamiliar surroundings in the land of cotton. Life on a Cotton Plantation The land of cotton it certainly was. As a British visitor to the Gulf port of Mobile, Alabama, wrote, ** People live in cotton houses and rule in cotton carriages. They buy cotton, sell cotton, think cotton, eat cotton, drink cotton, and dream cotton. They marry cotton wives and unto them are born cotton children. 77 Cotton Planters. Some cotton planters lived a life of luxury and refinement. Their homes were white mansions with great columns supporting w ide verandas. The gardens and grounds were carefully tended. Many of the furnishings came from Europe, and sons were often educated abroad. Tliere was much social activity, with visits between families and huge parties. Even strangers were welcomed with gracious hospitality. But such a life was in the minority. Most planters were tough, hardworking farmers whose living conditions were quite rough. A traveler who was charged one dollar for staying overnight at a plan- A cotton plantation on the Mississippi river Planters used Whitney's gin as well as slave labor, and then shipped the cotton by steamer to all parts of the world Abolitionist Harriet Tubman is pictured (far left) with some ot the slaves she helped to tree Sometimes called "the Moses of her people." she returned to the South many times to lead her people to freedom. Opposition to Abolition There was fierce opposition to abolitionists in the South, The abolitionists were attacking the South's most important social and economic institution. But there was also strong resistance to abolitionists in the North. Prejudice Against Blacks. Many northerners called abolitionists fanatics who were out to wreck the Union. During the 1830s, mobs attacked abolitionist meetings. They burned Pennsylvania Hall in Philadelphia just prior to an abolitionist meeting there. A mob of citizens in Boston threatened Garrison's life. Elijah P. Lovejoy, an abolitionist editor in Alton. Illinois, was murdered by a mob when they attacked his printing press and threw it into the Mississippi River. Why was there such hostility in the North? Apart from the sincere belief that abolitionists were wrecking the Union, there was a more common feeling: prejudice against blacks. Free blacks in the North were subject to all kinds of discrimination. In many states they could not vote or go to school w ith whites. Many blacks could get only the lowest-paying jobs. Many white northerners simply had no interest in a movement to give rights to black slaves. Even some of the abolitionists did not think that blacks could ever be the social and political equals of white people. Slavery Is Declared a "Positive Good. " Before 1830 many white people in the South thought of slavery as a "necessary evil." They would have liked to do away with it, but they could not do so. Slaves, they argued, were property, and men should not have their property taken away without their consent. Also they feared that freed slaves would become wandering bandits who would en danger the lives of all white people. But after about 1830, white southerners' views on slavery changed rapidly. This was partly in response to the increased abolitionist agitation, which infuriated southerners. But a more important reason was that after 1830 the South became increasingly dependent on cotton for its economic prosperity. Cotton production required slaves to cultivate it. The South now could not abolish slavery without suffering what it considered an unbearable economic loss. About this time southerners began declaring that slavery, far from being a "necessary evil," was in fact a "positive good." Blacks in the South were much better off, said the defenders of slavery, than they were in the North. Virginia's George Fitzhugh wrote several books which claimed that northerners practiced "wage slavery" which was far worse than anything that existed in the South. Northern wage earners. Fitzhugh said, were totally at the mercy of their employers. When sick or old, they were simply thrown out of work. Fitzhugh argued that southern slaves were much better off since their owners took care of them in sickness and in old age. It was not long thereafter that southerners began to describe their slaves as happy and contented. Indeed, they described the slaves as loving people who were devoted to their masters. So in the face of a great deal of evidence to the contrary, white southerners firmly decided that blacks were happy in their bondage. They thereby created a myth which did not begin to break down until many years later. Section 3 Review COMPREHENSION Developing Vocabulary 1. Explain these terms: underground railroad. Liberia, extricate. COMPREHENSION Mastering Facts 1. What was the purpose of the American Colonization Society? 2. What was the effect of Nat Turner's rebellion in the South? 3. How did Frederick Douglass help the cause of abolition? 4. Why did southerners say that northern "wage slaves"were worse off than southern slaves? To many people, one of the most disturbing things about the abolition movement was the active involvement of women. Female speakers sat on the same platforms with men. Some, like Lucretia Mott and the sisters Sarah and Angelina Grimke of South Carolina, became famous as eloquent spokeswomen for antislavery. Hundreds and then thousands of women began attending abolition meetings. They raised money, distributed literature, and collected signatures on petitions to Congress. These women met a great deal of opposition. Southern spokesmen denounced the sexually mixed meetings. Many men in the North also thought that women were getting out of hand. A group of New F.nglaw! clergymen announced that when a woman "assumes the place and tone of a man as a public reformer. . . her character becomes unnatural." But that did not stop the women. Many saw the abolitionist cause as one that would help them as well As Abby Kelley Foster said, "We have good cause to be grateful to the slave.... In staving to strike his irons off, we found most surely, that we were manacled [chained] our- selves." Limitations on Women Foster was right. Many laws limited the rights of women. They could not vote or sit on juries. When a woman married, her property became her husband's. Any money she earned, she had to turn over to her husband. She was not even entitled to protection against physical abuse. A husband had the legal right to beat his wife with "a reasonable instrument," which a Massachusetts judge defined as a "stick no thicker than niv thumb." Custom as well as law limited women's rights. Probably most Americans regarded women as weak and intellectually inferior to men. At the same time, they believed that women were morally superior to men. Accordingly, a woman's proper place was in the home where she could guard the family's morals and give religious training to the children. Since these beliefs about women were firmly held, it was especially shocking to hear a woman challenge them. Sarah Grimke, for one, did so as early as 18?8. Speaking about women, she declared that man "has done all he could to . . . enslave her mind" and now he calls her "his inferior." She continued, "All I ask of our brethren is that they will take their feet from off our necks and per mit us to stand upright." Early Attempts at Change Women's first attempts to improve their status were directed to certain areas of immediate con cern. These included education, health, and working conditions in the industrial marketplace. In Education. Until the 1820s, women who wanted a high school education were more or less out of luck. As Sarah Gmnke observed, a woman was considered sufficiently "learned" if she knew "chemistry enough to keep the pot boiling, and gc- ographv enough to know the location of the different rooms in her house." But in 1821 Emma Willard opened the nation's first high school for girls in Troy, New York. The curriculum included mathematics, history, geography, languages, art and music, and English writing and literature, as well as "domestic sciences." Despite tremendous ridicule—"Tliev w ill be educating the cows next," people said mockingly—Willard's school prospered. In 1837 it became possible for women in the United States to attend college. The first women's college. Mount Holyoke Female Seminary, was founded in South Hadley, Massachusetts, by Mary Lyon. That same year. Oberlin College in Ohio admitted four women, thus becoming the nation's first coeducational college. The education of black women was even more limited than that of white women. In 1831 Pru deuce Crandall, a white Quaker, opened a school for girls in Canterbury, Connecticut. One of her pupils, Sarah Harris, was black. The townspeople protested so vigorously against this mixing of the races that in 1833 Crandall decided to have black pupils only. This aroused even more opposition. The following year Crandall was forced to close her school and moved away. In 1851 a white woman named Myrtilla Miner started a school in Washington, D.C., to train black women as teachers. But in general, education for black women had to wait until after the Civil War. In Health. The state of women's health was as poor as the state of their education. Bathing was uncommon, outdoor exercise rare, and as for clothing! "Fashionable ladies wore tightly laced corsets lined with whalebone stays which tended to force the lungs up into the chest cavity, making breath ing difficult and fainting common. They also woa- several petticoats and long skirts that dragged on the floor or street." Elizabeth Smith Miller, who liked to garden, tried to reform women's clothing with a "short dress." This was a dress or skirt that came about four inches below the knee and was worn over loose-fitting pants tied at the ankles, Amelia Bloo mer, publisher of a women's rights paper called The Lily, wrote an article describing the costume and was promptly swamped with requests for sew ing patterns. Gradually the costume became known as "bloomers." But few women had the courage to wear it outside the home. Free-Soilers. The proslavery legislature had indicted those Free-Soilers for treason, so the raiders of Lawrence felt they had legal backing. They burned the only hotel in the tiny town, destroyed several homes, and smashed the presses of a new Free Soil newspaper When Northern newspapers learned about the raid, they called it the "Sack of Lawrence" and exaggerated every detail. In Kansas a single-minded abolitionist decided on revenge. John Brown gathered four of his sons and two other followers. In May 1856 they rode into the small proslavery settlement at Pottawatomie Creek, dragged five men out of their homes, and killed them. Brown claimed that he had God's support for this murderous action. Soon all of Kansas was an armed camp. More settlers moved in from Missouri and other slave states. In the North, abolitionists organized the New England Emigrant Aid Company to assist Free-Soilers who would migrate to Kansas. One of Harriet Beecher Stowe's brothers, Henry Ward Beecher, was a popular preacher with strong antislavery views, lie said that guns would be more useful against slavery than Bibles. Crates of "Bee- cher's Bibles'* began arriving in free-soil Kansas settlements—crates packed with rifles and ammunition. Kansas turned into a battleground on which more than two hundred people eventually died in a miniature civil war. Congressman Against Congressman. The spint of violence spread to the heart of the nation. Late one day in 1856, Senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts was writing at his desk on the Senate floor. He hated slavery and used vulgar lan guage to defend his high principles. He had just finished a speech about "the crime against Kan- sas." He had demanded the immediate admission of Kansas as a free state. I le lashed into Douglas ami Senator Butler of South Carolina, using language sometimes heard in the streets but not on the floor of the Senate. Many people were deeply shocked. Sumner went on with a cruel remark about Butler's speech difficulties, which had been caused by a heart condition. While he was speaking, someone overheard Douglas grumble, "That damn fool will get himself killed by some other damn fool." As Sumner sat writing, a young cousin of Butler approached him. Preston S. Brooks was a representative from South Carolina and he had been driven to fury by Sumner's remarks. 11c held in his hand a heavy cane with a gold head. Sumner did not even notice the approaching man. Brooks waited for a minute while a woman left the back of the hall. Then he rushed forward and began pounding Sumner over the head. Sumner struggled to rise, but his knees were caught under his desk. Soon he was on the floor with blood pouring from his head. In the South, Brooks was cheered for having supported the honor of his family and the honor of the South. In the North, Brooks was denounced as a bully. His action was described as typical of a violent slavcholding society. The entire incident confirmed each section's suspicions about the other. Sumner lived although it took him three years to recover from Ins injuries. In the meantime, his empty desk stood like a silent accusation. Section 2 Review COMPREHENSION Developing Vocabulary 1. Explain these terms: popular sovereignty. Beecher's Bibles. COMPREHENSION Mastering Facts 1. What effect did the Kansas-Nebraska Act have on the Missouri Compromise? 2. What happened as a result of the first territorial election in Kansas? 3. What did John Brown do at Pottawatomie? 4. Why did Representative Brooks attack Senator Sumner? VOCABULARY nouvum Kncmi-Nol/ungs Dunug this violent and dramatic time, other events, equally significant but less startling, were taking place. From 1845 to 1855 a great flood of immigrants came to the United States from Europe Many were from Scandinavia and Germany, but the majority came from Ireland. New' York City was the great immigrant port but Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and New Orleans also received large numbers. Most of these immigrants settled in the free states. More jobs were available there in factories and construction work, and they would not have to compete with slave labor. Most of the Germans and Scandinavians bought farms and settled in the Midwest. The Irish were usually too poor to buy even cheap farmland, so many of them remained in eastern cities. Soon, however, many Irish fol lowed the railroad and canal lines that were spreading through the North. Immigrants Face Opposition In the long run, the immigrants prospered. The nation's economy was vigorous and expanding very rapidly. In 1850 the United States had only one- tenth the number of people it has today. There seemed to be room for everyone who wanted to come. But these new immigrants faced opposition. Nativism. The policy of favoring native-born people over immigrants is called nativism, Nativist sentiment grew rapidly in the 18-40s and 1850s. In the cities the main reason was fear of job coin- petition. Immigrants had to have work and they were desperate. They would work for much less than the native Americans who were, at the same time, trying to get higher wages. But there were other causes of hostility. Anti-Catholicism. Nativists objected to so many immigrants being Roman Catholics. They resented the increasing numbers of priests and nuns, parochial schools, and Catholic colleges. At that time many Americans had grown up in an anti-Catholic tradition as old as the Reformation in England. They believed the pope headed an organization that wanted to wipe out Protestantism and take over the world. They were convinced that Catholics could not understand democracy because they were used to following orders from the pope. As a result, anti-Catholic books and magazines circulated widely. Shops and factories carried "nina" signs—"No Irish Need Apply." On some occasions, mobs turned to violence against Catholics. In Massachusetts one mob burned a convent to the ground. They woultl never have believed that the United States would one day have a Catholic president (John E. Kennedy)—or that in 1979 Pope John Paul II would make a tour of the United Statcsand be warmly welcomed by millions of American Protestants as well as Catholics. German immigrants encountered much less hostility at least on religious grounds—but they were often referred to as "damned Dutchmen." Nativ- ists made fun of their strange-sounding language and their habit of group singing in social halls. Nativists were also suspicious of what they re garded as German clannishness or unwillingness to Americanize. They resented Germans forming their own clubs, organizing German-language schools and churches, and publishing German-lan- guage newspapers. New Parties Develop During the 1840s nativist Americans organized a number of secret societies with such names as the Sons of America and the Sons of '76. They aimed at "protecting" Americans from the threat of Catholic immigration. In the early 1850s many of these societies united as a single national organization, the Supreme Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, Its members were pledged to secrecy about the organization's structure and leaders. If asked, a member was supposed to say, "I know nothing." Soon, members of the organization were being called Know -Nothings. The Know-Not/iing.v. The Know-Nothings decided they could best achieve their aims by en tering politics. They wanted to restrict the flow of immigration. They called for changes in the naturalization laws which would require aliens to wait twenty-one years before they could apply for citizenship. And they pledged to support only white, native-born Protestants for public office. The Know-Nothings were extremely successful at the polls. In 1854 they obtained 25 percent of the vote in New York State and 40 percent of the vote in Pennsylvania. They elected numerous state legislators and governors and at least seventy-five members of Congress. In 1856 they became the American party and nominated cx-Prcsident Millard Fillmore for president on the slogan "Ameri- cans Must Rule America." Why were the Know-Nothings such a success? Two reasons seem especially important. First, na- tivist sentiment was strong and widespread. Second, the American party was stepping into the political vacuum caused by the collapse of the Whigs. It remained to be seen whether the American party would replace the Whigs as one of the national political parties. and water for the workers. In addition, accidents were common, many men were kdled in drunken brawls, and pneumonia and other diseases took a heavy toll. The Chinese Workers. The Central Pacific had its problems, too. The main difficulty was a shortage of labor, for there were few Civil War veterans in California. Then Charlie Crocker, the railroad's general superintendent, decided to hire some Chinese. About 25,000 had come from Canton in 1850 to take part in the gold rush. Crocker's decision was greeted with skepticism. How could men who only weighed 110 pounds move earth and stone? "Did they not build the Chinese Wall," Crocker exclaimed, "the biggest piece of masonry in the world?" And he went ahead with his plan. The Chinese, soon known as "Crocker's pets," turned out to be excellent workers—steady, patient, and brave. Some of the tasks they performed were astounding. In 1866, for example, it was necessary to drive a tunnel through a mountain. The tunnel was only a quarter of a mile long. But the granite of the mountain was so hard that it took twelve hours to chip away eight inches. (Dynamite had just been invented but was not in general use.) The entire tunnel took a full year to dig. And for five months of the year, the work was done with work camps buried under forty feet of snow. Chimneys and air shafts had to lie dug to the surface. Lanterns burned twenty-four hours a day. The Chinese lived and worked "like moles, in dim passages far below the earth's surface." Avalanches made life even more difficult. Hundreds of Chinese were swept away by snowslides and their bodies not recovered until the spring thaw Some were found "with shovels or picks still clutched in their frozen hands." And what did the Chinese receive for their efforts? Less than white workers. The Chinese worked from sunrise to sunset; white workers, eight hours a day. The Chinese earned thirty five dollars a month; white workers, from forty to sixty dollars. The Chinese had to buy their own dried fish, rice, and tea; white workers were fed by the railroad free of charge. A Workers' Due/. The last few months of construction were sparked by a duel between the workers of the Union Pacific and those of the Central Pacific to see which group could lay the most track in a single day. Both sides kept increasing production until finally Casement's men laid 7.5 miles of track in twelve hours. Crocker thereupon promised that his men would lay ten miles in one day. When T homas C. Durant, vice president of the Union Pacific, heard about the promise, he bet Crocker $10,000 that it couldn't be done. To everyone's amazement, it was. And that record has never been broken. Finally, on May 10, 1869, the greatest engineering and construction effort undertaken since the arrival of the first Europeans on the American con tinent was over. The two rail lines were joined at Promontory Point, Utah, and the United States was joined from coast to coast with rails of steel. Traveling on the Transcontinental The greatest adventure Americans could experience during the 1870s and 1880s was to travel across the continent by rail. Just think of all the wonderful things you could see on the eight- to ten-day trip! The Missouri River bridge, which Rail travel—at least tor more affluent Americans—was quite luxurious, as this tram interior shows. Language. One major cultural difference was language. Until the 1880s, most immigrants—ex- cept for Germans and blacks—spoke English. But the majority of new immigrants spoke a variety of languages. Furthermore, they tended to retain their language in the United States. They used it in daily conversation. They shopped only at stores that carried signs in their native tongue. And they read newspapers in their native language rather than English. In 1920, for example, the foreign language press in the United States included 276 German papers, 118 in Spanish and Portuguese, 76 in Polish, 51 in Czech, -16 in French, 42 in Slovenian, and 59 in Yiddish. Religion. Another cultural difference was religion. A majority of the new immigrants were Roman Catholic. Catholics had been coming to the United States since the 1500s. But many of the newcomers, especially those from Italy and what is now Poland, did not care for the predominantly Irish clergy they found in the United States. They preferred national parishes in which priests of their own nationality conducted services. German and Scandinavian Lutherans likewise preferred services in their native languages rather than in English. Then there were the Orthodox Catholics from eastern Europe and the Balkans. Their bearded clergy and their church buildings with onion- shaped roofs were very different from anything previously seen in the United States. Also very different were the Jews. Earlier Jewish immigrants had come mostly from Portugal and Germany. The great majority of Jews who arrived after 1880 came from Russia and what is now Poland, where they had been forced to live in areas apart from the rest of the population. They spoke and read Yiddish, observed religious dietary laws (which included the prohibition of pork and shell- fish), and sent their children to Hebrew school after public school was over for the day. Most of the men did not shave, while most of the women either wore wigs or covered their hair with kerchiefs. Race. The third difference was race. The great majority of Americans were white. To many of them, Chinese and Japanese immigrants did not look like ''real Americans." Melting Pot Theory In 1782 Jean deCrdvecoeur (krev-feur), a French writer living in New York, asked the question. What then is the American, this new- man? He is... a stTange mixture of blood, which you will find in no other country, I could point out to you a family whose grandfather was an Englishman, whose wife was Dutch, whose son married a French woman, and whose present four sons have now four wives of different nations.... Here individuals of all nations are melted into a new race ... whose labors and posterity will one day cause gTeat changes in the world, yy Where Immigrants Came From □ Northern, Central, and Western Europe Q] Southern and Eastern Europe [ | Total Changing Patterns of Immigration 15.4 million 18.2 million 1821-1890 1891-1920 In other words, Americans were becoming a new people, blended from many nations, In 1909 British playwright Israel Zangwill wrote a play called The Melting Pot, which glorified this concept. At the end of the play, Vera and David are looking at New York City. " David: . . There she lies, the great Melting Pot— listen) Can't you hear the roaring and the bubbling? (He points east.)—the harbor wlrere a thousand mammoth feeders come from the ends of the world to pour in their human freight. Ah, what a stirring and a seething! Celt and Latin, Slav and Teuton, Creek and Syrian—black and yellow — Vera: few and Gentile— David: Yes, East and West, and North and South, the palm and the pine, the pole and the equator, the crescent and the cross-bow the great Alchemist melts and fnses them with his purging flame! Here shall they all unite to build the Republic of Man and the Kingdom of God. Ah, Vera, what is the glory of Rome and Jerusalem .. . compared w'itli the glory of America, where all races and nations come to labor and look forward!... (An instant's solemn pause. The sunset is swiftly fading--Far hack, like a lonely guiding star, twinkles over the darkening water the torch of the Statue of Liberty. From below comes up the softened sound of voices and instruments joining in "My Country 'tis of thee." The curtain falls slowly.)^ I The concept of the melting pot was a very ideal, istic one. But it had a price. It called for immigrants to throw away their past, to give up their en| tire history and culture in order to become I Americans. Immigrants and the Cides Another reason the new immigrants created controversy was the fact that they settled mostly in the area north of the Mason-Dixon line and east of the Mississippi River. Half of them were concentrated in just four states: Illinois, Massachusetts, New York, and Pennsylvania. And all of them were concentrated in cities where they were highly visible. In Boston and Cincinnati, for example, more than 60 percent of the population in 1880 either were born abroad or had parents who were foreign-born. In Chicago and New York, the figure stood at 90 percent. By 1890 there were twice as many Irish in New York as in Dublin, while the largest Polish city in the world was not Warsaw but Chicago. Concentration. Why did the new immigrants settle where they did? Because that was where they could cam a living. By the time they reached the United States, the land frontier was closed. There was no more free or cheap land available. The language barrieT made working as farm laborers almost impossible. The cities, on the other hand, were teeming with mills and factories looking for workers. Not only that, as industrialization increased, many new machines and processes were put into use. This lessened the demand for skilled labor while increasing the demand for unskilled labor. Thus, not mean their children lacked character. It only meant that their circumstances and values were different. Helping Each Other Hie new immigrants tried in many ways to ease the difficulties of adjusting to a new life. For example, people from the same village in Italy or Poland or Russia would pool their money to build their own church or synagogue. They formed social clubs where people could meet to talk and read letters from home. The clubs also provided facilities where their sons and daughters could meet young people of similar background. They set up mutual benefit societies that furnished medical treatment and helped with medical costs. They founded orphanages and old people's homes. And they established cemeteries so that they would not have to be buried among strangers. Section 2 Review COMPREHENSION Developing Vocabulary 1. Explain these terms: steerage, culture shock. COMPREHENSION Mastering Facts 1. What problems confronted immigrants on their way to the United States? 2. What special problems did new immigrants face in the United States7 3. Why did children in immigrant families often teach the parents? 4. How did new immigrants help each other to adjust to a new life? Beginning in the late 1870s, demands for restricting immigration to the United States grew increasingly strong. There were several reasons for this development. The Rebirth of Nativism As you have read, the Know-Nothing movement was undercut by the issue of slavery in the election of 1856. During the Civil War and Reconstruction, there were few signs of nativism. Then the old frontiers disappeared, to be replaced by an increasingly urban and industrial society that presented all sorts of new challenges. Just as sectionalism m the 1850s led to feelings of "us against them" on the part of both North and South, so too did conditions in the 1880s lead to similar feel mgs about immigrants. Anti-radicalism. The Haymarket affair of 1886 convinced many Americans that the government was being undermined by wild-eyed foreign radicals. Within a month after Haymarket, the American party was organized in California. Its program called for restricting immigration and pro hibiting aliens from owning real estate. But the party failed to expand nationally and soon disappeared. More permanent were various veteran and fraternal organizations such as the Order of United American Mechanics. Their members were mostly professionals, white-collar workers, small merchants, and skilled mechanics. They were proud of their standing in the new industrial society and weTe very concerned about maintaining it. As a result, they were extremely suspicious of immigrants who supposedly believed in revolution and who, at the very least, would unionize, go out on strike, and generally threaten the status quo. Anti-Catholicism. Along with fears of foreign radicals, there developed a fear of growing Catholic political influence. This was partly due to the prominence of Irish politicians in the governments of such cities as Boston, Chicago, New York, and San Francisco. Another cause of anti Catholicism was the appointment of Cardinal Satolli in 1893 as the first Apostolic Delegate. Such a delegate is a political representative of the pope to the United States. Many Americans regarded that appointment as violating the principle of separation of church and state. And then there was the demand of Catholic parochial schools for a share of public school funds. Catholics argued that they were paying twice for education, once by being taxed for public schools and again by paying tuition for parochial schools. Many Protestants regarded the Catholic position as a foreign attack on the traditional classroom. As a result, a number of secret anti-Catholic societies sprang up pledged to defend the public school system and to oppose Catholic influence in politics. The largest was the American Protective Association, which was organized at Clinton, Iowa, in 1887. By 1894 the APA had 300,000 members. It broke up soon after, however, as a third element in nativism became more important. Anglo-Saxonism. The third element was race prejudice. As sociologist Robert Hunter wrote in 1904: "The direct descendants of the people who fought for and founded the Republic, and who gave us a rich heritage of democratic institutions, This 1893 cartoon makes tun ot those immigrants who, once they were established in the United States, tried to keep other immigrants trom following their example arc being displaced by the Slavic, Balkan, and Mediterranean peoples. . . . This is . . . race- suicide." Or, as Prescott F. Hall explained it, the question was whether Americans wanted their nation "to be peopled by British, German, and Scandinavian stock, historically free, energetic, progressive, or by Slav, Latin, and Asiatic races, historically down trodden ... and stagnant." 'This emphasis on the importance of heredity over environment was especially strong in New England. There the traditional Yankee leadership was being successfully challenged by the Irish. That was bad enough, many Yankees felt. But when they began to consider the increasing number of new immigrants, they became afraid that American civilization would not be able to assimi late the newcomers arid would fall apart. So in 1894, a group of race-conscious "Boston blue- bloods" set up the Immigration Restriction league. The organization began a campaign to keep out the "undesirable classes" from southern aud eastern Europe. The Literacy Test The Immigration Restriction League was reluctant to exclude immigrants for the stated reason of "race." So they came up with the idea of a literacy test. Only immigrants who could read and w'rite forty words, either in their own language or in some other language, would be admitted. In 1896 Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts introduced a bill to this effect. As he stated quite openly, the test would "bear most heavily upon the Italians, Russians, Poles, Hungarians, Greeks, and Asiatics, and very lightly, or not at all, upon English-speaking immigrants or Germans, Scandinavians, and French." Tlie bill passed both houses of Congress but was vetoed by President Cleveland just two days before he left office. In his veto message, Cleveland argued that the literacy test measured opportunity, not ability. Just because people had never had a chance to learn how to read and write did not mean that they were incapable of learning. Besides, Cleveland pointed out, some of the nation's "best citizens" had been illiterate when they ar- nved. It took twenty-one years before the literacy test became law. Opposition to the measure came from several sources. The National Association of Manufacturers did not want to restrict the supply of labor. Immigrant groups—led by Russian Jews, the German-American Alliance, and the Ancient Order of Hibernians—wanted others to have the same opportunity they had had for a better life in America. Also, the gradual movement of Italian, Slavic, and Jewish voters from the Democratic party into the Republican party made anti-restriction a bipartisan matter. Republican President Howard Taft vetoed a literacy test in 1918. Democratic President Woodrow Wilson vetoed a similar bill in 1915. It was only in 1917, after the United States entered World War 1, that Congress overrode a second veto by Wilson and enacted the literacy test. You will read more about the reasons for this in chapter 27. Anti-Asian Legislation The one area in which nativists triumphed was that of Asian exclusion. Between 1882 and 1913, Chinese immigrants and then Japanese immigrants were subjected to restrictive legislation. Keeping Out the Chinese. As you know, Chinese people first came to California during gold-rush days. Later they helped build the nation's first transcontinental railroad, as well as other western roads. When the railroads were completed, the Chinese turned to jobs in farming, mining, and domestic service. Nevertheless, they labored under a cloud. They were not allowed to vote and they could not testify in court. Most Chinese immigrants were men. They did not bring their wives with them because they expected to go back to China someday. Not having a family in the United States, they lived in bachelor quarters, several men to a room, in certain areas where most Chinese lived. These areas of shops, temples, restaurants, and homes were called Chinatowns. Not only did Chinese immigrants live differently from most Americans, they looked different. And it was not just a matter of skin color. At that time, a Chinese man wore his hair in a "queue," or long braid, down his back. Men also wore quilted cotton jackets, cotton pants, aud conical hats. Their dress and hairstyles looked odd to most Americans. Then came the depression of 1873. As economic conditions worsened, anti-Chinese feeling in California grew more intense. The Chinese were disliked because they would work for less than white men. Dennis Kearney, himself a recently naturalized immigrant from Ireland, spearheaded the anti-Chinese movement. lie founded the Work- ingmen's party and made hundreds of speeches throughout the state, each speech ending with the words: "The Chinese must go!" Anti-Chinese feelings increased. The Chinese were often subject to physical attacks. And since they were not allowed to testify in court against white people, they had no legal way of defending themselves. Finally, in 1882, Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act. This prohibited Chinese workers from entering the United States during the next ten years. In 1892 the law was extended for another ten years. And in 1902 all Chinese immigration was indefinitely suspended. In addition, Chi nese already living in the United States were prohibited from sending for their wives. Resisting the "Yellow Peril." In 1886 Japan allowed its people to emigrate for the first time in almost 300 years. Several hundred Japanese men, women, and children began arriving in the United States each year. After the turn of the century, the number rose to several thousand a year. By 1910 there were about 130,000 Japanese, mostly men, in the country. At first, the Japanese settlers were welcomed. As a California newspaper commented: ** These groups of Japanese are of the better class, talk English, and are very anxious to find a permanent home in this state. . . . There is probably much knowledge in the possession of these Asiatics that we could profit from.... They will at all events teach us how to produce teas and silk, some useful lessons in frugality, industry, and possibly politeness. Gradually, however, the same fears about economic competition that had led to anti-Chinese agitation also resulted in anti-Japanese agitation. Newspapers began carrying articles with such headlines as these: Japanese invasion the problem of BROWN MEN ARK NOW IN THE UNITED STATES; and labor; and japanf,sf. sweatshops are a blot on the city. In addition, Japan's victory in the 1904 war with China and again in the Russo-Japanese War of 1905 frightened many Californians. Suppose Japan were to wage war against the United States? Why, the whole country might be inundated with the "Yellow Peril"! The issue came to a head in 1906. A scandal about municipal graft in San Francisco was about to explode. In an attempt to distract the people's attention, the city's political leaders apparently decided to exploit the racial issue. The local board of education ordered all Chinese, Japanese, and Korean children removed from neighborhood schools and segregated in special Oriental schools. Anti-American demonstrations broke out immediately in Japan. Alarmed, President Theodore Roosevelt persuaded the San Francisco authorities to withdraw the segregation order. In exchange, he urged the Japanese government to limit emigration on its own. Under the Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907-1908, Jajian agreed not to issue passports to workers unless they had already been in America or had relatives in this country'. Some 30,000 Japanese had come in 1907; by 1909 the figure had dropped to 3000. In addition, in 1913 the California state legislature passed an Alien Land Law. Since the Japanese and other .Asians were "aliens ineligible for citizen- ship," they were prohibited from owning agricultural land. Not only had the golden door slammed shut; even those who had successfully gotten through found stiff discrimination against them. Section 3 Review COMPREHENSION Developing Vocabulary 1. Explain these terms: prejudice, queue, American party, Workingmen's party. COMPREHENSION Mastering Facts 1. Give three reasons for resentment against Catholic immigrants, 2. Which immigrant groups did the Immigration Restriction League want to keep out? 3. What reasons did President Cleveland give for vetoing the literacy test bill? 4. What restrictions were placed on Chinese and Japanese immigration? On American Heritage Ethnic Diversity The United States is a nation of immigrants. Even the very first Americans, now called Indians, once came here from an "old country.'' Can you name the nationalities that are part of your background? Many Americans take great pride in discovering their ethnic heritage. Over the years more than one hundred ethnic groups have been represented in the United States; ethnic groups refer to groups of people who share a certain language, religion, history, and some physical characteristics. But even though the nation has been settled by people from around the world, most Americans can trace their individual origins to Europe. At the beginning of colonization, the English dominated migration to the New World. Then they were joined by Scotch-1 risli, Germans, French Huguenots, and black Africans. New Immigration Patterns. Around the time of the Civil War, millions of newcomers again swelled the population. Northern Europeans dominated this wave of immigration as Irish, Germans, Swedes, Danes, and Norwegians came by the thousands. Later, in the years around the turn of the century and before World War I, the origins of newcomers expanded to include people from southern and eastern Europe—Poland, Russia, Italy, Greece, Yugoslavia, and Komania- Secause of ethnic diversity, the United States is really a nation of many nations. Since World War II, immigrants have often been refugees. Since the mid-1970s, immigrants from Spanish-speaking nations—Cuba, Haiti, El Salvador, and Mexico—as well as Asians from Korea, Cambodia, Vietnam, and Thailand have filled the roster of new arrivals. A Nation of Diversity. Over the years tens of millions of people have reached American shores and begun new lives. As they held onto what they could of the past, America became a nation of many nations. Immigrants were altered by their new' surroundings, but they shaped their new environment as well. And, because immigration continues to keep the nation in a constant state of renewal, America's family tree of future generations will continue to branch out in many directions. Understanding Our Heritage 1. Where did most immigrants to America come from during the early years of colonization? during the years before World War I? 2. Why have recent years often been described as the age of the refugee? 3. What national groups comprise your background? What aspects of your ethnic heritage arc a part of our national heritage? Hollywood, actor Charlie Chaplin invented his world-famous character of the Little Tramp, a funny-looking little man, pretentious and impish, but warmhearted under it all, There, in 1927, the first major film with sound was produced. It was The Jazz Singer, starring A1 Jolson, and it marked the start of a new age in motion pictures. Challenges to Education American education w'as also a growth industry during the twenties. Its chief area of expansion was in the high school. Until that time, the eighth gTadc had been the end of formal education for most children. High school—even though it was free—meant financial sacrifice, because most children were counted on to work and to provide a share of the family income until they married and established families of their own. Increasing Enrollment. In 1914 only half a million Americans were in high school preparing for college or for better jobs in industry. By 1926 the number had jumped to 4 million. Yet this eightfold increase still accounted for only half the population of high school age. The remarkable increase was due to prosperous times and to higher educational standards for jobs in mass-production industries. If one wanted a good job, one needed a high school education. Increasing Taxes. The greater numbers of high school students meant a steep increase in taxes for taxpayers. School costs doubled from 1913 to 1920, and they doubled again by 1926. The first jump was a result of inflation, but it was a staggering sum nevertheless. In fact, the total cost of American education in the mid-1920s—2.7 billion dollars a year—was half the amount spent on education by all other countries combined! 1'he modern high school appeared during this time. Before, high school was designed primarily for those going on to college. Now it had courses for the entire community. I-argcr student bodies meant wider offerings of courses, including vocational training, shop work, and home economics. Educating Immigrants. A special challengc schools faced in the 1920s was educating children of immigrants. Although schools had been doing that for over fifty years, the period just before World War I saw the largest immigration in the nation's history—dose to a million newcomers a year. Unlike the earlier English and Irish iiiiiui grants, many of them did not speak the language of the country. By the 1920s their children were filling city classrooms. It is a measure of the schools' accomplishment and the students' deter initiation that a higher proportion of such children learned to read and waite than did the children of native-born whites. Expanded News Coverage One result of increased education was a higher readership of newspapers and magazines. Dunng the war, interest in the news had risen. To meet the demand. Time, the first weekly newsmagazine, appeared in 1923 and soon became extremely popular. Newspapers also expanded then coverage, and some brought out huge, magazine-type Sun day supplements. Others bought or opened radio stations. Most of the money for this expansion came not only from higher circulation, for city papers cost only two cents on weekdays and ten on Sunday. The growth w as paid primarily out of the great increases in advertising revenues, of which newspapers got a large portion. Never before had Americans been able to get so much news from so many places. To catch an even wider readership, tabloids were introduced. These w ere half the regular page size and made liberal use of pictures. They were something like the sensationalist yellow press oi the late nineteenth century. They specialized in Cecil B. DeMille s Cleopatra (1934) is an example ot the "epic " film that developed during the 1920s Total 26.72B.000 Harding (Republican) Cox (Democratic) Other Presidential Election of 1920 etssa Map Skills Who won almost all of the Southern states? Who won the election? What was his electoral vote? What was his percentage of the popular vote? What was his party? fort. When the fighting ended, Britain and France expected that some part of that would be written off as a contribution to the common struggle. Not at all. The American government insisted on payment in full. But the bankrupt Allies could raise the money in only two w ays. One was through reparations, (payments for war damages) which Germany had promised to give the Allies. The other was by exporting more goods to the United States. Higher Tariffs. U.S. policy in the 1920s was firmly against either solution. From the first moment of peace, America had urged Britain and France not to press their demands on Germany. Then, in 1922, the United States raised its tax on imported goods to the highest level to date. The Fordney McCumber T ariff Act openly aimed at keeping foreign goods out of American markets. And it did. European exports to the United States fell from $5 billion in 1920 to $2.5 billion in 1922. Since England and France could not sell their products in the States, they were even less able to pay their debts. The Dawes Plan. A series of international conferences tried to cope with the tangle of wartime debts and reparations. American banker Charles G. Dawes and Owen D. Young of General Electric were responsible for the system that emerged. Between 1925 and 1930 American investors loaned about $2.5 billion to the German government and to German corporations. During the same years, Germany paid $2 billion in reparations to Britain and France, who in turn paid $2.6 billion on their war debts to the United States. While this was going on, the United States still officially held that there was no connection between German reparations and Allied war debts. American business sense at the time was outraged that Britain and France would not pay their debts unless they could get the money from Germany. But the war had exhausted and bankrupted the two Allied nations, who had borne much of the war burden. America's unwillingness to lower or cancel their debts led to great bitterness between them and the United States. Limited Immigration Another sign of isolationism that appeared after World War I had to do with immigration. As you know, nativist sentiment had been growing ever since the 1880s, when "new immigrants" from southern and eastern Europe began coming to the Source U.S Bureau o* the Canaua Hatanc* Starts Ncs o* tfm Unm) Sotm Tow 531 United States in large numbers. Nativist feelings were strengthened by the fact that many of the people involved in post-war labor disputes were immigrant anarchists and socialists. In addition, there was less demand for unskilled labor after the war. The railroads had been built, and basic industries such as coal mining, steel, and textiles were well developed. In 1921 the immigration rate, a modest 110,000 in 1919, shot up to 805,000, and Congress decided that the time had come to limit immigration from Europe. (Immigration from China had already been suspended in 1902.) Congress pushed through a series of measures ending with the National Origins Act of 1924. Under this act, the Uuited States established a quota system based on national origins. Each European nation was given a quota of 2 percent of the number of its nationals who were living in the United States in 1890. This discriminated against people from eastern and southern Europe who did not start coming in large numbers until after 1890. The base year was shifted to 1920 under the National Origins Act of 1929, but this change was offset by reducing to 150,000 the total number of persons to be admitted in any one year. As a result, some national quotas were pitifully small. In 1963, for example, the one for Greece was I/537th of the number who applied for permission to enter the United States. In addition, only applicants who might one day be naturalized were allowed to come in. That was an insult to Japan, whose Gentlemen's Agreement with Theodore Roosevelt had been faithfully kept. By ignoring that agreement, the United States wiped out much of the good will that had resulted from the Four-Power Treaty. The "national origins" system was not applied to immigrants from the Western Hemisphere. During the 1920s, about a million Canadians, many of them Catholics, and at least 500,000 Mexicans crossed the nation's borders. Teapot Dome and Other Scandals Before the Harding administration was well into its third year, it began to come apart. And for the same reason as Grant's had nearly fifty years before: graft among the president's friends. In spring 1923 Jesse Smith, an assistant to Attorney General Daugherty, was exposed as a "bag- man." A bagman carries a bribe from the person giving it to the person getting it. The money is often carried in a black bag, hence the name. Banished from Washington, Smith committed suicide in May. Shortly thereafter, Charles Cramer, principal legal advisor of the Veterans Bureau, took his life for similar reasons. Next, it turned out that Charles R. Forbes, the head of the Veterans Bureau, had swindled the country of at least S250 million through kickbacks from contractors building veterans' hospitals. Forbes was sentenced to prison in 1925 for fraud and bribery. Colonel Thomas W. Miller, head of the Office of Alien Property, was also convicted for fraud. In exchange for bribes, he had taken valuable German chemical patents that the government had seized during the war and sold them to American firms for far less than their worth. The most spectacular wrongdoing, however, concerned naval oil reserves. As a result of the conservation movement of the Progressive Era, oil-rich public lands at Teapot Dome, Wyoming, and Elk Hill, California, had been set aside for use by the U.S. Navy. Secretary of the Interior Fall managed to get the reserves transferred from the navy to the Interior Department. He then secretly leased the land to two private oil companies. Soon after. Fall, A cartoon of the time indicating the connection between corrupt practices and the White House Eleanor Roosevelt presenfs a medal ol achievement to the famous contralto Marian Anderson. Indians who wanted to return to traditional tribal life were pleased with the act. Those who had become more "Americanized" felt the act would make it harder for Indians to improve themselves economically. Mexican-Atnericans. Like blacks and other minorities, Mexican-Americans suffered more from the depression than the general population. Since 1920 they had been moving in great numbers to Texas, California, and otlicT parts of the Southwest, increasing the Hispanic population in the region, Mexican-Americans worked most often as farm laborers, an occupation less well protected by federal and state laws than other kinds of work. When the creation of the dust bowl sent thousands of ruined farmers to California, Mexican- Americans found it harder than ever to make a living. Competition among workers drove some farm wages as low as nine cents an hour. Efforts to unionize were often met with legal action and guns. The CCC and WPA were helpful to some Mexican-Americans, but migrant workers could not qualify if they had no permanent address. Family Life The typical or average middle-class family of 19'6 was not on relief. T he family consisted of two adults and their two children. The husband worked outside, and his wife kept house. The family lived in a six-room home or a four-room apartment. Their gross annual income was 51348. Fewer people were getting married. The rate fell from 10.14 marriages per 1000 people in 1929 to 7.8 per 1000 in 1932. The birthrate fell from 19 births per 1000 couples in 1929 to 16.5 per 1000 in 1933. Babies were expensive. The main source of amusement was the radio. By 1931, 29 million families, or 85 percent of the population, owned radios, hi the afternoon were serials portraying romantic adventure and small- town life, such as "T he Romance of Helen Trent," "The Guiding Light," and "Ma Perkins." The main characters in these stories were female. Later in the afternoon, there were adventure stories for children, including "Little Orphau Annie," "The Green Hornet," and "The Lone Ranger." The evening had excellent dramas and variety programs featuring such stars as Bob Hope, Orson Welles, Eddie Cantor, Jack Benny, and George Burns and Grade Allen. For outside entertainment the family usually went to a movie. Stars such as Greta Garbo, Joan Crawford, Marlene Dietrich, and Loretta Young played in dramas that reflected a life of sophistication and luxury. This was done deliberately, because people in pinched economic circumstances got vicarious, or second-hand, pleasure in watching the make-believe frolics on the silver screen. Women in the News In the 1930s women were the most popular movie stars. That was the reverse of the 1960s and early 1970s, when the most popular stars were men. In the thirties women were competing successfully with men in the literary field. Margaret Mitchell's Gone with the Wind sold over 12 million copies and won the Pulitzer Prize for literature in 1937. Other novelists were Pearl Buck and Edna Ferber. Famous short story writers were Dorothy Parker and Katherine Anne Porter. Dorothy Thompson was the most celebrated journalist for a time. Playwright Lillian Heilman wrote some of the most memorable plays to appear on Broadway, and she also wrote movies. Male-dominated fields were also opening up for women. Amelia Earhart became the first female passenger on a transatlantic flight in 1928. In 1932 she flew alone across the Atlantic. In 1937, while were registered, l>ut early in the war the military' stopped drafting men over thirty-eight. Women in the Service. For the first time, women were permitted to volunteer for the armed forces, and about 216,000 of them enlisted. Most joined the Women's Army Corps (WAGS), headed by Texas newspaper executive Oveta Culp Hobby. Others joined the navy, the Coast Guard, or the marines. I hose in the navy and the Coast Guard were given names that translated, respectively, into WAVES and SPARS. The female component of the U.S. Marines was, simply, the Women's Reserve of the Marine Corps. To become a WAC, a woman had to be between twenty and forty-nine years old, have no children under fourteen, and have completed at least two years of high school. WACS served in separate, non-combat units as accountants, bakers, bookkeepers, clerk-typists, drivers, and radio operators. Nurses in the Navy Nurse Corps received sea duty so they could train hospital corpsmen. The Air Force (then part of the army) had a Women's Air Ferry Service (WAFS) that piloted planes across the Atlantic. The WAFS also Hew planes that towed targets for antiaircraft and gunnery practice But despite the hazards of their duty, WAFS were considered civilian government em ployeesuithoiit military status orveterans' benefits. Black Americans. About one million blacks entered the armed forces, and about half of them served overseas. Like women, blacks were segregated in the service, except at army officer-eandi date schools and briefly, as an emergency measure, during the Battle of the Bulge (fought in Europe in December 1944-January 194'i). The navy and the Coast Guard restricted them to non-combat serv ice jobs, such as cooks, messengers, and mess- hall attendants, until almost the end of the war. Nevertheless, some black navy personnel won combat decorations. The Merchant Marine was more liberal: four of its ships' captains were black. One of the army's black units, the 761st Tank Battalion, saw 183 days of combat in Europe. The 332nd Fighter Group, commanded by Colonel Benjamin 0 Davis, Jr., son of the army's first black general officer, flew escort sorties into central Fiurope with the Fifteenth Air Force. Japanese-Americans. Yet another group of Americans who were segregated in the service were These women undergo physical training loaded down with helmets, held packs, and water canteens Nisei, or Americans of Japanese descent. About 17,000 of them enlisted in the armed forces. Some served in the U.S. intelligence service. Others fought in Italy, France, and Germany. The 442nd Regiment, popularly known as the "Go for Broke" regiment, received more decorations than any other American combat unit. Relocating the Japanese Americans I'he performance of the Nisei was especially impressive considering how people of Japanese descent from California, Oregon. Washington, and Arizona were treated during the war. Some 112,000, two-thirds of them citizens, were rounded up by the army and the FBI on the grounds that they posed a threat to the nation's security. Forced to abandon their homes and property, they were shipped to ten hastily built internment camps. The camps were located in the desert regions of California, Arizona, and other western states, and in the swamplands of Arkansas. Except for the men who enlisted in the armed forces, most Japa- ncsc-Amcricans remained in the camps, surrounded by barbed wire and guarded by soldiers, until almost the end of the war. In 1944 the Supreme Court upheld the relocation order in the case of Korematsu v. United Stdtes. Speaking for the majority, Justice Hugo Black argued that the government's action was caused by "military necessity." (Strangely enough, Japanese-Amcrieans living in Hawaii, which contained many military installations, were left alone.) Speaking for the minority, Justice Frank Murphy said the relocation reminded him of the Nazi treatment of the Jews. Historians today agree that the relocation order grew out of more than military necessity. The order also reflected anti Japanese racism. Not a single Japanese-Amcrican was charged with committing a disloyal act, such as spying or sabotage, during the war. And no relocation orders were even considered against people of German or Italian descent After the war, the federal government paid Japanese-Americans $35 million to compensate them for their lost property. The actual value of the property, however, has been put at $400 million. Organizing Workers The need for people in the armed forces and in war industries wiped out the depression's unemployment figure of 7 million Not only that, the work force increased from 46.5 million to 53 million. In addition, by 1944 the average workweek was 45.2 hours. Since union representatives were able to maintain the standard forty-hour week with time-and-a-half for overtime, average weekly wages rose 70 percent during the war years. Union membership grew from 10.5 million in 1942 to al most 15 million in 1945. Limiting Strikes. Immediately after Pearl Harbor, both the AFL and the CIO pledged not to strike while the war lasted. In return, the federal government set up the National War Labor Board to enforce settlements on wages, hours, and working conditions. To enforce the board's rulings, the government could seize a business and operate it In general, most unions kept their promise. Only one-mnth of I percent of working time was Many Japanese-Americans, such as these soldiers (below) shown in Hawaii, served with distinction during World War II. lost during the war because of strikes. However, in 1943 the United Mine Workers went out on strike. Although wages had been frozen the previous year, the miners felt that rising prices and business profits justified a wage increase. FDR promptly seized the coal mines. Congress then passed the Smith-Connally Act over his veto. The act said that unions had to give thirty days' notice before striking; it also said that a strike in an industry being run by the government was a federal crime. Utilizing Women in War Plants. About 2 million women joined or replaced men in the nation's war plants. In all, there were 4 to 5 million women workers by 1943. However, they were under two disadvantages: they received 60 percent less pay than men, and they had little job security. A wartime equal-pav-for-equal-work drive got nowhere. This was partly because of FDR's desire to hold down inflation and partly because the view was still widely held that married women should not work outside the home. Even those supporting families knew they would be laid off as soon as the war was over and servicemen returned to claim their old jobs. Nevertheless, the efforts of women on the assembly line were widely recognized and applauded. One of the most popular songs of the time was "Rosie the Riveter." Banning Discrimination. Other additions to the industrial work force included more than 1 million blacks, as well as Mexican-Americaus and also American Indians who left their reservations to take part in the war effort. In June 1941 President Roosevelt issued an executive order barring racial discrimination in the hiring and firing of workers in plants that held government contracts. The order was to be enforced by a Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC). But the order was issued only after A. Philip Randolph, president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, threatened to arouse the nation's conscience and pressure the government by leading a march of 10,000 blacks on Washington, D.C. Opening up industrial employment to blacks and other minorities had several effects. The movement of black families from the South into northern and western cities continued the change in the nation's racial map that had started during World War l it also led to a series of lynchings and race riots. The worst outbreak took place in Detroit in June 1943. Twenty-five blacks and nine whites were killed, and countless others were injured. Despite the violence, however, the economic standing of blacks improved considerably during the w ar. Organizing Industry and Agriculture Lend-lease and war production ended the depression in American industry. But despite America's great production achievements, there was much confusion, especially in the first years of the war. Some companies were wary of again being branded "merchants of death." Others feared that they would be caught after the war with more production capacity than they could use. As a result, about 85 percent of the new plants needed for war production were built by the federal government. The government then leased the plants for operation to private firms. Allocating Materials. The government also set up a War Production Board (WPB). Its first chief was Donald M. Nelson, a former executive of Sears, Roebuck and Company. The WPB decided which firms would receive raw materials. It told certain companies to convert from peacetime to wartime production. It rationed gasoline in order to conserve oil and rubber. And it organized na- tion-wide drives to collect scrap iron, tin cans, and fats. To aid the WPB, the office of Economic Stabilization was formed and headed by James F. Byrnes. Supervising Contracts. To supervise government buying, the Senate set up a committee headed by Senator Harry S Truman of Missouri. The committee uncovered a great deal of inefficiency and bungling on war contracts, but, although more than $300 billion were spent, there was very little wrongdoing. Senator Truman, as a result of his vigorous work, became a national figure. Increasing Farm Production. Like manufacturers, American farmers outdid themselves in producing for the war. Although the work force declined, improved equipment and greater use of fertilizers, combined with good weather, resulted in a doubling of output per worker. Farm prices likewise doubled. A New Music In popular music, the 1950s brought a change as radical as jazz had been more than a generation earlier. Jazz musicians had turned to progressive jazz; that is, they played a complex and sophis ticated style that was best appreciated in concert or on records. It was no longer suitable for dancing. In 1954 a black singing group called the Chords wrote a hit tune entitled "Sh-Boom." The next year performer Bill Haley and his band, the Comets, recorded "Rock Around the Clock." The music of both records combined country-western, black rhythm and blues, and black gospel singing. Country-western is folk music that is usually played on guitars, fiddles, and harmonicas; its songs often deal with love, crime, and prison life. Rhythm- and-blues stresses saxophone solos. Gospel music evolved out of plantation work songs and Protestant church hymns. The powerful beat, simple lyrics, and deafening volume of the new music appealed to young people. Disc jockey Alan Freed coined the term "rock and roll" to describe it. And in 1956 it became the ideal music of American teen-agers. Its star was a young country blues singer and former truck driver from Memphis named Elvis Presley. In short order, his long playing records and such singles as "Heartbreak Hotel" and "Love Me Tender" were selling in the millions, while his vocal style and way of moving were widely imitated. Section 2 Review COMPREHENSION Developing Vocabulary 1. Explain these terms: videolape, rock and roll, TV spectacular COMPREHENSION Mastering Facts 1. Why were most television programs produced by nation-wide networks rather than local stations? 2. What are the advantages of a videotaped performance as compared with a live performance? 3. What effect did television have on radio? 4. What effect did television have on motion pictures? VOCABULARY state mlfrfxjsuion ii>rmmaBon policy The years after World War II saw considerable progress in the contmuing struggle to end racial discrimination in the United States. Some of the progress resulted from court action, some from the political technique of civil disobedience. Equal and Integrated Education Beginning with the mid-1950s, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) had concentrated its limited resources on winning equal educational opportunities for black Americans. By the mid-1950s the effort resulted in a precedent-shattering decision by the Supreme Court. Early Cases. The first significant challenge of the "separate but equal" doctrine established by Pfessy v. Ferguson (1896) occurred in 1958. Lloyd Caines, a black, wanted to study law at the University of Missouri. Since the state did not have a law school for blacks, it offered to pay Gaines's tuition at a Canadian school. Gaines sued. T he Supreme Court held that since Caines expected to practice law in Missouri, lie was entitled to receive his legal training there. If Missouri did not have a black law school, then it would have to admit Caines to the all-white state university. Over the next fifteen years, the Supreme Court beard several similar cases. In each instance it held that unless facilities were in fact equal, blacks bad to be admitted to all-white schools. A typical case was Sweatt v. Painter (1950). Texas had organized a separate law school for a single black applicant, Herman N. Sweatt. Sweatt refused to attend on the grounds that the school was inferior. The Court agreed and ordered him enrolled at the University of Texas Law School. In another decision handed down the same day, the Court ruled (in McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents) that a black student admitted to a state university could not be compelled to sit. study, or eat apart from other students. The Brown Case. All this was a rehearsal for the 1954 decision in the case of Oliver Brown et al. v. Board of Education of Topeka. Kansas. The case applied not to graduate schools but to the more sensitive area of elementary and secondary education. Oliver Brown, a black resident of Topeka, brought legal action against the school board on behalf of his eight-year-old daughter Linda. She had been denied admission to the all-white elementary school a few' blocks from her house. Instead, she had to cross a railroad yard and then take a bus for twenty-one blocks to an all-black school. The attorney for the NAACP, which represented Brown, was Thurgood Marshall (who later became the first black Supreme Court justice). The case was not a simple one. Decades of law' and custom, as well as the tradition of states' rights, stood on one side. On the other side was the argument that segregating students on the basis of race denied them the equal protection guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment. In this ease, for the first time, the Supreme Court accepted psychological evidence. Leading psychologists submitted studies showing the effects of segregation on black children. A Unanimous Decision. The Supreme Court handed down its decision on May 17, 1954. The opinion was delivered by Chief Justice Earl Warren. He was a recent appointee to the Court, having been active in California politics most of his life. He had served as state attorney-general and governor, and was the Republican candidate for vice-president in 1948. The Court's opinion was unanimous. And it is worth noting that three of the justices—Hugo L. Black of Alabama, Tom C. Clark of Texas, and Stanley F. Reed of Kentucky—were southerners. As stated by Justice Warren, the Court held that ^ To separate [black childrcn| from others of similar age and qualifications solely because of their race generates a feeling of inferiority as to their status in the community that may affect their hearts and minds in a way never to be undone.... We conclude that in the field of public education the doctrine of 'separate but equal' has no place. Separate educational facilities are inherently unequal. 99 In other words, public schools should be integrated. Reaction to the Decision. The Brown case, w'hicli affected 12 million children, has been called the most important event in black history since the Emancipation Proclamation. Blacks throughout the nation greeted it w'ith joy and hope. White southerners were less happy. Public officials in the border states, however, announced they would go along with the decision. But in Virginia and the states of the Deep South, negative feelings were much stronger. The legal doctrine of state "interposition," another name for John C. Calhoun's nullification, was proposed by Senator I larry Byrd of Virginia. Other members of Congress brought forward a manifesto declaring the Brown decision an abuse of judicial power. In Mis sissippi. White Citizens Councils vowed "total resistance." The Ku Klux Klan rose again, and the sale of small arms increased. Virginia passed laws permitting state financing of private schools. After the Brown decision the Supreme Court waited a year to give school authorities a chance to evaluate their situation. Then the Court ordered them to make a "prompt and reasonable start" toward carrying out the decision with "all deliberate speed." School districts in the border states and m large cities throughout the South began admitting a few blacks to all-white schools. But elsewhere there was no change. And in one instance, white resistance led to a major crisis. Resisting School Integration. Governor Orval E. Faubus of Arkansas was seeking a third term. He faced several difficulties. The state had a two- term tradition, and the governor had offended various groups by raising taxes and allowing utilities and railroads to increase their rates. He needed a strong campaign issue. The city of Little Rock had carefully worked out a plan for integrating its schools over a seven- year period. In the fall of 1957. the plan called for nine black students to be enrolled with 2000 white students in the city's Central High School. Suddenly, the night before classes were scheduled to begin. Governor Faubus called out the National Guard and stationed it around the school. The next day, soldiers with fixed bayonets turned the nine black youngsters away. Several days later, a federal court ordered the guardsmen removed. But when the black students again tried to go to class, a white mob created so much turmoil that they were forced to leave. Faced with a virtual revolt. President Eisenhower did not hesitate. As he told the nation. "Mob rule cannot be allowed to override the decisions of our courts." He promptly ordered 1000 paratroopers of the 101st Airborne Division into Little Rock to uphold the law. This was the first Members of the 101st Airborne Division stand guard outside Little Flock's Central High School. When classes began inside, black students were present for the first time in history. time since Reconstruction that the power of the federal government was used to protect blacks in the South. For good measure, Eisenhower also federalized the Arkansas National Guard, thus taking it out of the governor's control. The nine blacks were admitted to Central High School. Most of the federal troops were withdrawn in November, although a few' remained until the end of the school year. In 1958 Governor Faubus, who had won his campaign for rcelection, closed the school. After a legal battle it reopened in 1959 with only three black students enrolled. Integrated Public Facilities Even before Little Rock had shown that the struggle for school integration would be long and difficult, blacks in the South had begun using direct action rather than court cases to bring about change. The shift in tactics was triggered by a black woman in Montgomery, Alabama. Rosa Parks. On December 1, 1955, seamstress Rosa Parks was returning home on a city bus. Tired after a long day's work, she sat down in the front section, which was reserved for whites. A white passenger entered, and the bus driver ordered her to give up her seat, as the law said she must. As Rosa Parks told it afterwards, "For a long time I had resented being treated a certain way because of my race. We had always been taught that America was the land of the free and the home of the brave and that we were all equals." So Rosa Parks said, "No." At the next bus stop she was arrested and later fined ten dollars. Within forty-eight hours the black community of Montgomery had organized a one-day boycott of the city's bus line. It was a complete success, and it set black leaders thinking. There were 25,000 blacks in the city and they made up about 75 percent of the bus company's customers. Suppose they refused to ride the buses until certain conditions were met, such as allowing blacks to sit wherever they wanted to, hiring black drivers for buses in black areas, and instructing white bus drivers to be polite to black passengers. If the bus company lost three-fourths of its customers, surely it would eventually be forced to either agree to the conditions or go out of business. Martin Luther King, Jr. At the head of the association formed to carry out the boycott was a twenty-six-year-old minister named Martin Luther King, Jr. Holder of a Ph D. degree from Boston University, King preached a philosophy called "soul force.'' It was based on the teachings of several people: (1) Henry Thoreau, who believed individuals should refuse to obey unjust laws and had set an example by going to jail rather than pay taxes in support of slavery; (2) Mahatma Gandhi, who had helped his native country of India achieve its independence through non-violent resistance to the British; and (3) A. Philip Randolph, who had urged blacks to organize mass demonstrations. King persuaded his fellow blacks to keep their protests entirely non-violent. "This is not a tension between the Negroes and whites," he told his followers. "This is only a conflict between justice and injustice. We are not just trying to improve Negro Montgomery. We are trying to improve the whole of Montgomery. If we are arrested every day; if we are exploited every day; if we are triumphed over every day; let nobody pull you so low as to hate them." King believed most whites were basically After the Supreme Court decision. Rosa Parks returned to Montgomery, Ala., for an unsegregated ride decent and, when faced by love, would not allow injustice and brutality to continue. The struggle in Montgomery was not easy. Negotiations between black leaders and the bus company broke down early. The boycott continued for more than a year, as blacks walked, rode bicycles, or used a car pool that King organized. Some whites supported the boycott by giving blacks rides or paying taxi fares for their black cooks and handymen. Then the Supreme Court handed down another ruling. Segregation in public transportation, as in public education, violated the Kourteenth Amendment and was unconstitutional. In December 1956, a little more than a year after Rosa Parks had refused to give up her seat, King boarded a Mont gomerv bus and sat down in the front. As he said later, "It was a great ride." Hope for the Sixties The Montgomery bus boycott was a bright spot in the civil rights movement. It had produced an organization, a leader, and a technique. Additional groups, mostly church centered, sprang up and were brought together by King in the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). Tins or ganization was to play a major role during the 1960s. Also significant for the future was the Civil Rights Act of 1957. It was the first such act since Reconstruction, and it was passed only after a leg islative struggle that included a Senate debate lasting sixty-three days. The act set up a Coil Rights Commission and gave the Justice Department the power to file suits on behalf of black citizens who were being denied the right to vote. Black voter registration in the South was 1.2 million in 1956, but it was estimated that throughout the region, at least 5 million blacks were eligible to vote. Mexican-Americans Gain Greater Recognition Another minority that began to develop a stronger political awareness during the 1950s was the Mexican-Americans, or Chicanos. Many Mexicans had become American citizens in the iind-1800s when the United States annexed the Southwest following the Mexican-Ainerican War. During and after World War I, large numbers of Mexicans crossed the border to work in the Cesar Chavez (center) soon to become famous as an organizer and spokesman tor Mexican American farmworkers States. Most of them were either migrant farm la borers in the area's orchards, vegetable farms, and cotton fields or miners and railroad workers. Many came under a legal work contract. But many also crossed the Rio Grande without a passport. But re gardless of how they came, Mexican Americans played a ma|or role in the economic growth of the Southwest. During World War II. many Mexican Americans served in the armed forces When they returned to civilian life, they were determined to do something about the poor conditions under which most of them lived. Clucanos often suffered from discrimination in housing and wages. In addi tion. many were handicapped by the lack of job skills and the inability to speak English well. They wanted better opportunities to become educated and to cam a living. Mexican-Americans were shocked into organized action by an insult to the family of Felix Longoria, a Mexican American war hero killed in the Philippines. The only undertaker in his home town in Texas refused to let the Longoria family use his funeral home because they were Chicanos. The American G.I. Forum was organized to protest this and other injustices to Mexican American veterans. Soon after, Ignacio (eeg-nrih-see-oh) Ijopftt founded the Unity League in California to register Mexiean-American voters and to promote candi dates who would represent them The league also succeeded in having segregated classes for Chicano children outlawed in the state. Similar voter registration groups were formed under various names in Arizona and Texas American Indians Struggle To Survive From the passage of the Dawes Act in 1S87 until 1934, the policy of the federal government toward Indians was one of Americanization. This idea was as old as Jefferson's time Indian tribe's were officially abolished and in 1924 all Indians were made citizens of the United States. That same year, the American Indian Defense Organization was formed. Under the leadership of such people as John Collier, Sr —who later became head of the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs—the organization worked to change the government's policy Reorganizing Indian Affairs. In 1934 the Indian Reorganization Act took several significant steps away from assimilation. On the economic level, Indian lands would no longer be broken up into individual farms but would belong to a tribe as a whole. On the cultural level, the number of boarding schools for Indian children was cut back. Instead, children could attend day schools on the reservations and, hi some cases, even have Indian teachers On the political level, Indian tribes were given permission to elect a tribal council to govern their reservation. One result of the government's new policy was a rapid grow th in the Indian popu lation. In 1943 the National Congress of American In diaris was established. The organization eventually grew to include some 90 tribes containing two- thirds of the nation's Indians. The goals of the Congress were two fold First, it wanted Indians to have the same civil rights white Americans have. Second, it wanted Indians on reservations to be allowed to retain their own customs anil values, even if those were different from the customs and values of mainstream society. For example, Indians generally believe in cooperation rather than competition. No Indian language has a word for Traditional life continues in many Indian settlements. The woman at the left rs straining parts of a prickly pear cactus and will then boil them to make /am. "time," and most Indians do not live by the clock the way most whites do. Duong World War II, some 65,000 Indians left the reservations for military service and war work. As a result, they became very aware of anti Indian discrimination. Then the war ended, and Indian family allotments and wages stopped. At the same time, the general prosperity meant there was greater pressure from non-Indians to get hold of tribal lands, primarily to explore them for mineral deposits. The Termination Policy. In 1953 Congress again changed its Indian policy. The new approach was one of "termination." It was announced that the federal government would give up its responsibility for the Indian tribes as soon as possible. In other words, the reservation system would be discontinued and tribal land would be distributed among individual Indians. In the meantime, tribal leaders would no longer have authority over civil and criminal cases on the reservations. That au thority was given to the states. In line with the termination policy, the Bureau of Indian Affairs began a relocation and job-training program to help Indians move to the city. The termination policy was a failure. Although thousands of Indians left the reservations, they were often unable to find jobs in their new homes. Other Indians lost out when communally owned land was sold at too low a price. Federal medical and other assistance programs were abolished without anything to take their place. The number of Indians on state welfare rolls soared. Indians and whites alike protested vigorously and in 1963 the termination policy was abandoned. Section 3 Review COMPREHENSION Developing Vocabulary 1. Explain these terms: state interposition, termination policy, soul force. COMPREHENSION Mastering Facts 1. What effect did Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka have on public schools? 2 Why did President Eisenhower send federal troops to Little Rock? 3. What were the results of the Montgomery bus boycott? 4. How did the federal government change its Indian policy in 1953? The crowd heard Dr. King deliver an inspiring and memorable address. ** I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed: "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal." 1 have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia, the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave owners will he able to sit together at the table of brotherhood. . . . 1 have a dream that my fonr little children will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character. I have a dream.>> Continuing Resistance Unfortunately for Dr. King's dream, some white southerners stiffened their resistance to civil rights Confrontations at Universities. In 1962 a federal court ordered the University of Mississippi to admit James H. Meredith, a qualified black Air Force veteran. Governor Ross R Barnett refused to allow Meredith to register. Standing at the school door. Barnett cited the doctrine of inter position, that is, putting himself between the fed- Icral government and tiie people of Mississippi. I Ic announced that the states laws on segregation were superior to federal law. Attorney General Robert Kennedy then sent federal marshals to the campus and rioting broke out. The marshals were forbidden to fire their guns. Their only weapon was tear gas. Most of the rioters were not students hut members of the Ku Klux Klan and tiie National States' Rights Party from other southern states. They were armed with grenades, iron bars, bricks, and rifles. Two white spectators were killed, and more than a third of the marshals were injured. Finally, President Ken nedy sent in federal troops to restore order. He also federalized the Mississippi National Guard. The next day, Meredith registered for classes. He planned to major in political science. In June of the following year, 196?, another university confrontation occurred, this time at the University of Alabama. A federal court ordered the school to admit two blacks, Vivian J. Malone and Jimmy A. Hood, to its summer session. Gover nor George Wallace, like Governor Barnett, stood in the doorway as the two students and their escort of federal marshals approached. But after being told that the National Guard had been federalized, the governor walked away. All seemed calm. However, that night, Medgar Evers, an official of A rare lime ol relaxation in a fense period. This group ol "freedom riders'' includes clergymen. professors and students who rode buses in the South to test discrimination laws the NAACP, was gunned down by a sniper in Jack son, Mississippi Violence in Birmingham. The murder of Evers was only one in a series of events that would help bring about yet another change in the civil rights movement, a change from non-violent direct action to black militancy. Two of these events took place in Birmingham. Blacks had been demonstrating against segregation in that city since early April. Almost every time King called for a march, police commissioner T Eugene "Bull" Connor obtained an injunction forbidding it. The blacks marched anyway, were ar rested and later released—and the process began again. On May 2 some 500 blacks, most of them high school students, were arrested for marching in defiance of a court order. ITe next day other students marching in protest were hit by bottles anti brickbats. On May 4 when about 2500 blacks inarched in downtown Birmingham, the police turned fire hoses on them and loosed their dogs. Television cameras carried the scene into millions of living rooms with the evening news. The sight of attack dogs and police brutalizing unresisting people was too much Responsible ltr cal leaders realized that the situation was getting out of hand. With the help of federal officials, plus 5000 not control tToops, they succeeded in quieting things down. Some facilities were desegregated. The resulting peace was short-lived. In September, passions flared again with the opening of school. And on September 15, a black church w-as bornbed, resulting in the deaths of four young black girls w ho w ere attending Sunday school. Federal Actions President Kennedy, like Lincoln a hundred years earlier, approached the civil rights issue with caution. During his first two years in office, he tried to help blacks through executive action only. In March 1961 he set up the Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity to encourage companies with government contracts to hire black employees. In 1962 he asked Congress to enable more blacks to vote by abolishing liter acy tests and poll taxes. Congress passed the Twenty-fourth Amendment, which prohibits a state from requiring a citizen to pay a poll tax in order to vote in a federal election. The amendment was ratified in 1964. In November 1962 Kennedy issued an executive order prohibiting racial and religious discrimination in all housing either built or insured with federal money. After the 1965 Birmingham disorders, Kennedy decided the time had come to seek new civil rights legislation. So he introduced what one historian called "the most sweeping legislation of its kind since Reconstruction." By October the bill had begun to move through Congress. Presidential Election of 1964 cm tCA Map Skills Johnson overwhelmed Goldwater How many electoral voles did Johnson gel? What was his percentage ot the popular vote7 Which slate won by Goldwater was not in the South7 colleges were all given funds. However, the more poor families a school district had, the more money that district's elementary and high schools could receive. In order to receive funds, districts had to show that they were trying to eliminate ra cial discrimination. Medicare. The first major change in the Social Security system since it was adopted in 1935 was brought about through the establishment of Medi care. This program provides hospital insurance and some posthospital nursing care for almost every American once she or he reaches the age of sixty five, it also provides low-cost insurance against doctor bills, laboratory tests, and other medical services and supplies. Homing. Congress appropriated money to build some 240,000 units of low rent public hous ing. It also voted money to help low and inoder ate-income families pay for better private housing A new federal department, the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), was estab luhed. It was headed by Robert C Weaver, the nation's first black cabinet member Hie Model Cities program was likewise designed to direct federal assistance to urban areas that needed it most. About 75 cities were given funds to develop ''model'' plans for rebuilding their slums People living m the slums were supposed to play a role in draw ing up the plans. Appalachia. The Great Society attacked rural as well as urban poverty. The Appalachian Moun tains run through eleven states from Pennsylvania to Georgia. The parts of the states that lie in the mountains arc jointly called Appalachia A hcauti ful area with many natural resources, it was rela tively isolated from the rest of the country Appa lachia m the early 1960s was one of the most poverty-stricken parts of the country So Congress provided money for building highways, setting up health centers, and otherwise developing the region Other Measures. The Great Society did not re strict its fight against discrimination to civil rights As von read in chapter 29, the National Origins Acts of 192-1 and 1929 had established inunigni tiou quotas that discriminated strongly against Poles. Jews, Italians, and other "new immigrants." Iii 1965 near the Statue of Liberty Johnson signed a bill abolishing the national origins system. However, an annual quota of 170,000 immigrants, including for the first time those from the Western I Iemisphere, was set. Within this overall quota, no more than 20,000 persons from any one nation can enter the United States each year. Other legislation had to do with improving the environment. Polluted waterways were to be restored. Smog laden air was to be made cleaner. Only a limited number of advertising billboards could go up along new interstate highways. Safety standards for automobile manufacturers were to be established. Andanotherfederal department waserc- ated, the Department of Transportation. Failures of the Great Society Some of I,BJ's programs worked well. Others fell apart. A variety of reasons may explain why, overall, the programs did not have greater effect. First, although they improved conditions dra matically, they did not meet everyone's needs. Certain social problems were simply too big. Second, some of the programs were experimental and just did not work. Third, a number of the programs were designed to utilize existing local welfare, school, and health departments. But in many cities, the facilities of these departments were rundown and unable to handle the new tasks. Most important of all, money ran out. President Johnson was trying to fight two wars at the same time. He began with a war against poverty, but gradually the war against communism in Asia became more important. Public funds went increasingly to the Vietnam struggle, and the Great Society, like the Johnson presidency, eventually became a casualty. The hie ol Puerto Ricans in New York was the sub/ect ot a very popular musical called West Side Story This is a scene from the movie Section 1 Review COMPREHENSION Developing Vocabulary 1. Explain these terms: Great Society, Medicare, Appalachia, filibuster, COMPREHENSION Mastering Facts 1. How had Lyndon Johnson, while a senator, been able to get legislation adopted7 2. What effect did the Civil Rights Act ot 1964 have on Jim Crow? 3. What did the Supreme Court say in 1964 about the size of congressional districts7 What effect did this decision have? 4 How did supporters of Senator Goldwater view the Republican presidential candidates ol the previous twenty-four years? 5. What changes in immigration were made by the 1965 legislation? VOCABULARY defoliants credibility gap In 1947 President Truman announced the policy of containment: the United States would prevent any further advance of Communist power anywhere in the world. But by 1954 the French in Indochina had been defeated by Communist forces. The country was divided into a North and South Vietnam. The North was Communist. In 1954 President Eisenhower advanced the domino theory and approved direct economic and military aid to South Vietnam. President Kennedy sent 16,000 military advisors into South Vietnam and authorized U.S. helicopters to fly strafing missions against North Vietnam. President Johnson sent more than 500,000 American troops and spent about 525 billion a year in a futile effort to prevent a Communist government in South Vietnam. kept rising. Early in 1979 it readier! "double-digit" levels. That is, it was high enough in certain mouths to indicate an annual rate of 10 percent or more for the year. Such a rate had not been seen since the mid-1970s. Unemployment kept rising too, in spite of a 3.5 million increase in the number of jobs. The work force was growing faster than the job supply. In London, Paris, Berlin, and Tokyo, fears about the United States economy led banks and individuals to shift their holdings from dollars to gold. In times of economic uncertainty many people prefer gold. Kor a few weeks in 1980 the metal sold for over S800 an ounce—ten times its price in the years of America's greatest power. Immigration Increases Throughout the 1970s, the number of immigrants entering the United States continued to rise. By the end of the decade it had reached almost half a million a year. But fewer of them came from Europe. Mexicans. From 1971 to 1977 Mexico led all other American countries, with 438,500 immigrants to the United States. These were legal immigrants. Some unofficial reports put the number of Mexicans entering the United States legally and otherwise as high as a million a year. Asians. The Philippines sent 235,300 immi- grants—more than any other Asian country'. Then, in the 1970s, a new' group came from Southeast Asia. An estimated 300,000 fled from their homelands to escape the Vietnam War and its aftermath. Half of that number found their way to the United States, Cubans. Refugees from Cuba made a great change in the social structure of southern Florida. Soon after Fidel Castro took over the country in 1959. Cubans began coining to the United States. In all, 800,000 arrived during the 1970s, and half of them settled in the Miami area. By the end of the decade they made up 25 percent of the population of Dade County, where Miami is located. The earliest Cuban refugees had among them a number of middle and upper income people. They tended to be well educated, and quickly established themselves in businesses and the professions. In a few years they had transformed Miami from a resort city and haven for retirees to a bustling Latin commercial center. A number of multinational companies set up offices there, and Miami became the focal point for trade with Latin America. In 1980 Castro unexpectedly announced that any Cubans still wishing to move to the United States were free to do so. The floodgates opened, and in a few months 183,390 fled north. They came in small, leaky overcrowded boats that were totally unsuited for ocean travel. Many were the families and friends of Cubans already in the United States, but among the refugees were some undesirable elements that Castro had been eager to be rid of. Some, it was said, had been released from jails and some from mental hospitals. At military bases in Florida, Arkansas, and Pennsylvania, where refugees were temporarily housed awaiting resettlement, riots broke out among impatient younger men. As United States taxpayers were spending hundreds of millions caring for the refugees. these actions were not well received. Not surprisingly, a survey showed that a majority of black and non-Hispanic whites in the Miami area thought the coming of these additional Cubans would be disruptive to the economy and the social structure. Their feelings were based on fear that the newcomers would compete with them for already scarce jobs. Haitians. At the same time as the later Cu bans, another Caribbean people began to enter the United States in considerable numbers—the Haitians. These people were from the island country of Haiti. They, too, were refugees, fleeing from famine, poverty, and from the regime of dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier. Like the Vietnamese and Cubans, the I laitians were "boat people." They came by water on anything that would float. Often they were victimized by unscrupulous ship captains or by pirates. At first the Haitians were not accepted as refugees, since the United States had nominally friendly relations with the government of their native land. But later in 1980, the Haitians also began to receive some assistance in relocating and adjusting to a new life in the United States. The Haitians, like the Cubans, were not warmly welcomed by some groups in Florida because they were perceived as an economic threat. They' competed for jobs and accepted jobs for less pay than other workers. I bis usually happens with new U S. immigrants. Shift of Political Power to the Sunbelt 1970-1980 in Congress occur? Did your state gain or lose? It so, by how much? Population Shifts. At the same time tliai there was an influx of Spanish-speaking people into the United States, there was another movement going on within the country, namely, a gradual shift of population from the so-called "frost belt" to the "sunbelt." Florida, California, and Texas were especially popular. This shift brought more English speakers into contact with those new Spanish-speaking immigrants. (See the map above.) Figures released for the 1980 census confirmed this trend that had been going on for some twenty years. One reason for the shift was the increased cost of heating for homes and businesses jn the North. Another was the attraction of lower living costs and milder weather in the South. There were other reasons that had nothing to do with climate. These had to do with business. The percentage of the country's largest corporations which located in the South nearly doubled between 1965 and 1975. The move continued into 1980 because of the lure of cheaper non-union labor and lower taxes. The Equal Rights Amendment President Carter was a strong supporter of equal rights for women and appointed two women to cabinet positions. Yet the struggle to get an equal rights amendment into the Constitution was still not resolved as the nation entered the 1980s. Betty Friedan and others had organized in 1966 (see chapter 58) the National Organization for Women (NOW). The organization began to push for an amendment to the Constitution to guarantee women "full equal partnership with men" in American life. In 1972 Congress passed, by a two- thirds majority, the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) and sent it, as the Constitution requires, to the states for ratification. The amendment read in part: "Equality of rights . .. shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any state on account of sex." Many people welcomed the proposed amendment. Few doubted that women in the work force should be given the same pay for doing the same Confederacy government established in 1861 by rhe seceding states of the South (331). Confederation alliance of states or nations united for a common purpose (157). Congress legislature of the United States consisting of the Senate and the House of Representatives (163-165. 169-177). Conquistadors Spanish conquerors of the New World (29). Conscription compulsory military service (346). Consecrate to make holy or sacred (351). Conservative believer in established tradition who politically tends to favor individual initiative, unfettered private enterprise, and a minimum of government social action (756-757. 778. 807). Constitution written document ratified in 1788 which outlines the framework of the government of the United Stares and enumerates the rights of American citizens. The Constitution is the basic law of the land (162-166, 168-199). Containment policy course of action advocated by George Kennan which required the United States to block Soviet attempts at expansion anywhere in the world (687-688). Continentals Revolutionary War soldiers who served under George Washington tn the Continental Army (135). Contraband smuggled goods, often weapons and military supplies (543). Convoy system protection of merchant ships from U- hoar attacks which required travel with a large group of destroyers (550). Copperheads northern Democrats who opposed the Civil War, sympathized with the South, anti urged peace (338). Corporation group of people who, through a charter, assume the legal powers, rights, and liabilities of a separate individual. A corporation can conduct business and buy or sell property (413—414, 652-653). Cotton gin machine invented by Eli Whitney which removed seeds from cotton fibers and thus greatly increased cotton production (249). Covenants agreements or compacts (553). Craft unions associations of organized workers which're- strict membership to those skilled in a particular craft (442). Credibility gap public loss of trust in what government leaders claim is happening and what actually is happening; the term became popular during the Vietnam War (762). Creditors lenders to whom money is owed (159). Croix de guerre French military honor awarded for bravery in action (548). Culture civilization of a particular group of people at a given period in history, including their ideas, habits, skills, beliefs, institutions, and so on (14. 22). Culture shock various emotions such as kiss, surprise, and alienation which a stranger first feels at coming into contact with people of different language, dress, and customs (455). Dardanelles Turkish straits connecting the Black Sea to the Mediterranean (686). Dark horse candidate nominee who is not a leading contender bur receives unexpected support, often in response to a stalemate (302). Debtors borrowers who owe money to others (159). De facto segregation separation of races by tradition and custom rather than by law (423). Defected deserted, as in leaving one's country to seek political asylum in another nation (690). Defoliants toxic chemicals that cause leaves to drop off all plants (761). Delegated powers rights exercised by the federal government which are specifically authorized in the Constitution (164). Demobilized released from military service at the end of a war (679). Democracy system of government in which the people hold the ruling power either directly or through elected representatives (423-433). Democrats members of a political party that developed after Andrew Jackson's election as president in 1828. Today the Democrats and Republicans comprise the two major political parties in the United States (260). Demokrashi democratic reforms instituted by General Douglas MacArthur dunng the American occupation of Japan after World War II (673). Depressed areas as defined by the Area Redevelopment Act of 1 % I, regions of the United States where unemployment stood at higher than 6 percent (739). Depression severe economic slump marked by high unemployment, falling prices, and a decline in overall business acriviry (270-271, 274-275. 599-604). Detente easing of Cold War tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union (781). Diplomacy skill in conducting relations between people or nations and reaching agreements (143-144, 517, 671-673). Direct primary process of nominating political candidates by popular election rather than by machine bosses (527). Discrimination to show partiality or prejudice in treatment, especially when directed against the welfare of minority groups (460). Dissenters those who disagree with certain beliefs or opinions; Protestants who disagreed with the Anglican Church, England's established state religion (83). Dixiccrats southern delegates at the 1948 Democratic convention who bolted the patty and established the States' Rights IX-mocratic party (682). Dollar Diplomacy government policy of guaranteeing loans made by business investors to Latin American 821 