A History of The United States Daniel J. Boorstin Brooks Mather Kelley Ruth Frankel Boorstin Ginn and Company Frontispiece: Andrew Wyeth, "The Mill" (Collection ut Walter Anncnbcrg Title page: Thomas Moran, "The (iraml Canyon of the Yellowstone," 1871. Nanonal (Collections of Fine Arts, Smithsonian Institution. U.S. Department of the Interior, National Hark Service. Design: Richard* Bartlett Picture Research: Judy Poe and Picture Research Consultants Maps: 11. Shaw Borst Cover Design: John Martuca/Martucci Studios Front Cover I'lwto: 11. Armstrong Roberts, Inc./M. Uselmann Bach Cover Illustration: David Rose ©Copyright 1986, 1983, 1981 by Ginn and Company All rights reserved Home Office: Lexington, Massachusetts 02173 0-663-37994-6 Prologue i The making of Americans Chapter I What Europeans found: the American surprise 4 Christopher Columbus: Who he was and why he came 4 Before discovery 8 Why Europeans went exploring 12 Spanish adventurers 14 French and English exploration 22 Chapter 2 An assortment of colonies 26 The Spanish Empire 27 A great and victorious England 30 The planting of Virginia 33 The Puritans come to New England 38 Other Europeans in North America 42 The proprietary colonies 43 Chapter 3 New ways in a New World 47 Many kinds of Americans 47 The colonists govern themselves 57 Britain against France 61 2 Forming a new nation 1763-1800 Chapter 4 The road to revolution and victory 68 The British take a collision course 68 Declaring independence 76 I low British power was overthrown 82 Chapter 5 From confederation to nation 93 New state governments 93 The Continental Congress 96 A weak confederation 98 Wriling a nation's constitution 104 The states ratify 109 Chapter 6 The United States begins 114 The nation in the 1790s 114 George Washmgton sets the course 118 Foreign affairs tor a new nation 124 John Adams and the rise of parties 130 _ vn 1800-1840 E pluribus unum: One made from many Chapter 7 Jefferson in power The man and lus policies 139 Buying Louisiana 144 Jefferson, Marshall, and the courts 151 Trouble on the seas 154 Chapter 8 Struggles of a young nation 159 The Warof 1812 159 Madison and Monroe 169 The Missouri Compromise 174 The Monroe Doctrine 176 A national spirit 178 Chapter 9 The Jacksonian era 181 A second Adams in the White House 181 I'he new politics 184 Jackson takes command 189 Banks and money 196 A nation growing and dividing Chapter 10 The nourishing land Drawing the people together 204 The Industrial Revolution 214 America's leading import: people 219 The rise of the West 222 The cotton kingdom 224 1800-1860 Chapter 11 Reforming and expanding An age of reform 229 The abolition movement 235 Westward ho! 238 Texas and Oregon 243 War with Mexico 247 Chapter 12 The failure of the politicians The Compromise of 1850 251 I low the compromise collapsed 258 The nation conics apart 262 The election of I860 266 viii 1860-1890 The rocky road to Union Chapter 1.1 The Civil War A new kind of war 274 The first year. 1861-1862 282 The widening conflict 289 Gettysburg to Appomattox, 1863-1865 Chapter 14 To punish or to forgive? "With malice toward none" 300 Andrew Johnson and the Radicals 304 "Black Reconstruction" 308 The North withdraws 313 The divided South 316 Chapter 15 The passing of the frontier Indian wars and resettlement 320 Seeking gold and silver 326 I he cattle kingdom 331 The farmers' frontier 335 Chapter 16 The nation transformed Railroads and big business 344 Rock oil lights up the world 350 City goods for country customers 353 Buyers' Palaces 355 Things by the millions 357 Labor begins to organize 360 Chapter 17 The challenge of the cities The growth of an urban nation 365 Reformers and self-helpers 373 The spread of learning 375 Bridge-building heroes 378 Going up! elevators and skyscrapers 380 New towns m the country 382 Chapter 18 Politics in the Gilded Age Parties in balance 385 The Democrats come and go 389 The farmers' revolt 394 Our money: gold versus silver 399 ix Democratic reforms and world power Chapter 19 The United States and the world Looking outward 404 Expanding on the seas 407 War with Spain 410 Chapter 20 The Progressive Era Theodore Roosevelt's Square Deal 419 Middle-class reformers 425 Taft in the White House 428 Woodrow Wilson and the New7 Freedom 434 Seeking a world role 437 Chapter 21 The United States and World War I A spark ignites Europe 443 Helping to win the war 451 The home front 455 Losing the peace 461 1890-1920 From boom to bust 1918-1932 Chapter 22 Return to normalcy, 1918—1929 The postwar reaction 468 Searching for the good old days 473 "Keeping cool with Coolidgc" 478 Life in the Jazz Age 482 Chapter 23 The coming of the Great Depression A prosperous nation 487 The big crash 490 Foreign affairs in a gloomy world 496 The election of 1932 498 Depression at home and aggression abroad Chapter 24 "Nothing to fear but fear itself" Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal 504 From recovery to reform 513 The end of the New Deal 520 1933-1945 Chapter 25 Reshaping American life Problems on the farm 524 The problems of black Americans 528 The New7 Deal and women 531 The struggles of 1 abor 533 x Chapter 26 Clouds of war Foreign affairs. 1933-1939 537 The battlefield is everywhere 545 War comes to the United States 550 Chapter 27 A world conflict 554 Mobilizing for defense 554 The "end ol the beginning"—1942 559 Victors' in Europe 564 The war in the Pacific 573 Postwar problems 1945-1960 Chapter 28 Truman: neither war nor peace 582 Beginnings of the cold war 582 Dealing with a new world 587 President in his own right 595 Chapter 29 Eisenhower, moderate Republican 602 The Republicans return 602 Everybody's New Deal 607 The fight for equality 611 Difficulties abroad 615 Chapter 30 Mobile people and magic machines 623 A changing people 623 Everyday life transformed 629 Education and religion 635 Art and the machine 636 Turbulent times 1961-1974 Chapter 31 Years of hope and promise 642 John F. Kennedy wins 642 Learning hard lessons 646 Facing Communist challenges 649 A New Frontier 653 The tragic end 657 Chapter 32 Lyndon B. Johnson—from success to failure 660 Taking the reins 660 The Great Society 664 Black revolt and youth rebellion 667 "The most unpopular war" 672 Chapter 33 The rise and fall of Richard Nixon 678 Electing the President, 1968 678 Nixon's first term 681 The fall 688 The United States looks ahead Chapter 34 A new world of competition The two ideals 698 Women seek equality 706 Spanish-speaking peoples 710 The American Indians 713 New vistas of equality 716 Chapter 35 Changing leaders in Washington Gerald Ford becomes President 720 Jimmy Carter: a campaigner as President 725 The United States and the world 731 New initiatives by Carter 734 Chapter 36 New Directions Kcagan takes charge 740 The changing economy 744 Foreign ailairs 748 The election of 1984 754 Epilogue 761 Appendixes 76$ Atlas ol Today's World 766 Map Skill Exercises 778 Some Facts about Our States 794 Presidents and Vice-Presidents of the United States 795 The Declaration of Independence 796 The Constitution of the United States 802 A Selected List of Museums, Art Galleries, and Historic Sites 838 Glossary Index New ways in a New World During these early colonial years, American ways oflife began to appear. They emerged from how Americans defended themselves in war and governed themselves in peace. Challenged by a New World, they developed their own ideas about government, law, and politics. Still, the British colonists in America considered themselves loyal Britons. In 1763, at the end of the French and Indian War, few people anywhere would have predicted the break that was to come. The next twenty years were a time of surprising change. Before the colonists could realize it, they had made themselves into a new', self-governing nation. How did that happen? To understand how this New World novelty was created, we mast look at the relations of Americans to each other, to England, and to the wars that France and England exported to America. 1. Many kinds of Americans During the seventeenth century the English settlements in America grew slowly. One hundred years after the landing at Jamestown the colonies still held only 250,000 people. Then the 1700s saw iuimi- pinon and a high birthrate create the first Amcri- cin population explosion. The number of people more than doubled every 25 years. By 1765 they counted two and a quarter million. These were no Infer just European emigrants, but a new breed of people, shaped by a New World. Aland of many peoples, rhe people who lived 111 ilic thirteen colonies at the end of the French and Indian War came from many lands. But the population was more English than it would ever be again. Since about 60 percent of all the white settlers had conic from England, it is not surprising that the English language, English customs, English law, and English ways of government dominated the land. Pennsylvania had the most mixed population of all, but even there the English stock made up at least half of the population. What transformed Britons into Americans was that here they had the challenges of living with Africans, Scots, Scotch-lrish, Irish, Portuguese Jew s, Swedes, Finns, Swiss, and even a few Austrians and Italians. This made life here much more interesting than life back home. Of course it made some new problems, but it created new opportunities. These many peoples had come for many different reasons. Most came because they w anted to, some because they were forced. Some, like the Swedes, learned English and became Americans quickly. Others, like the Germans, tried to hold on to their own language and their own customs, even in this New World. Still others, like the indentured servants and many of the blacks from Africa, might West Indies, Brazil, Guinea, and Madagascar. They carried fish to trade for salt from Cadiz, wine from the Azores and Madeira, iron from Bilbao, grapes from Malaga, and oranges from Valencia to ports in England and the colonics. To get oil to bum ni their lamps lor light, whaling expeditions went out on long voyages from New Bedford and Nantucket south to the coast of Brazil and north to the Arctic Ocean. They took rum from New England ports to the west coast of Africa, where they traded it for slaves whom they then took to the Caribbean and sold for sugar, which was then taken north to be made into more rum. This was called "the triangular trade." They were willing to "tryc all ports," as they said, with all kinds of freight. Nothing was too small or too big tor their commerce or their imaginations. In the days before independence when English laws still hemmed them in, enterprising New Englanders had to be smugglers. For them, American independence would be a great relief. It would make them honest, law-abiding traders. But long before the American Revolution, the minds and hearts and pockctbooks of bold New Englanders were attached to the whole world. The Dutch, Germans, Swedes, and Finns who had settled in the Middle Colonies (New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware) had no special ties with England. Their relatives were in their own homelands. For them the ocean was a highway to everywhere. These Middle Colonies had the best-balanced economics of any of the English colonies. A wide variety of products came from the rich soil of their farms. Unlike the southern planters they did not depend on a single staple crop sold in England. They sold their produce to merchants in the thriving cities of Philadelphia and New York. The city merchants in turn sent the produce overseas wherever they could find the best market—no matter what the Navigation Acts said. Family life. Life in colonial America put heavy demands on the family. On the farm, where most Americans lived, labor was in short supply. Every member of the farm family had work to do. Women took care of the cows, hogs, and chickens, and made the butter and cheese. In the fields they were expected to sow, hoc. and reap the corn. They also sewed the clothes, cooked the food, and kept the simple houses dean and neat. A woman had to be a combination farmer, chef, and tailor! In addition to all this the women bore many children. Families with io or 12 children were common, and 22 or more were not unheard of. From poor nutrition and lack of medical care rhe mortality rate was high. Many of the children died young. For the children svho survived, in the back country where there were no schools the mother was their only teacher. What doctors prescribed was more likely to kill than to cure the patient. A sensible person would try to stay out of the hands of a doctor. George Washington died in 1799 after he was bled of two quarts of blood bv leeches and then "dosed to nausea and blistered to rawness." Even Washington's sturdy constitution could not survive that sort of treatment. There were few things women were not expected to do in America. Most women married, and usually they helped their husbands on the farm or in the shop. After their husbands died, the women kept the farms and plantations running. Women also showed their versatile talents as shopkeepers, shoemakers, printers, newspaper publishers, teachers, lawyers, and even as blacksmiths, gunsmiths, and shipwrights. Although women could not hold office and usually could not vote, they took an active interest in politics. One of the most remarkable colonial women was Margaret Brent. A large landholder in Maryland, she ran her own plantation and actually led a force of men to put down a rebellion against the governor in 1646. And when the governor died, she w as made executor of his w ill. She ran his estates and collected his rents. She was also attorney for the proprietor. Lord Baltimore, to take care of Ins affairs in Maryland. Naturally, she thought all this ought to give her the right to vote in the colonial assembly. When the new governor refused to let her have her rightful place in the colonial government, she moved to Virginia, where she made a new home and ran great estates until her death in 1671. Few women were rich enough and willful enough to be as successful as Margaret Brent was in a man's world. The English common law which governed the colonies gave few legal rights to women. I lusbands controlled the family property. In those days, unlike ours, children were not allowed to make up their own minds. Barents message to Congress simply nominating a new minister to France. He would send envoys to deal wnli this sly Talleyrand. Four days after the new [ envoys sailed, the upstart Napoleon Bonaparte Iwcdirew the corrupt Directory. I Napoleon, intent on establishing his power tn I ha nee and Europe, wanted no trouble with the United States. In September 1800, therefore, he I Spied an agreement that ended the treaty of alba nee of 1778, thus freeing the United States from inv obligation to help France in war. In return the United States gave up all claims against France for damages done to our shipping by French cruisers mice 1793- This fair bargain enabled the United Stito to enter the t8oos at peace. The ,4/ien and Sedition Acts, 1798. In 1798 dicn anger against the French had become the most violent, the Federalists took advantage of the situation. They passed a series of laws to suppress Republican opposition and insure power tor their ova party. But, in fact, they misjudged the temper of the nation. Their oppressive measures outraged mint Americans and helped lead to the downfall of die Federalist party. \ Leading Federalists believed—or pretended to believe-that most foreigners who came to the United States joined the Republicans. In the Namraluation Act, then, they extended the time it took to become a citizen from 5 to 14 years. L11 the Mini Art they gave the President at once the power to deport any alien he thought dangerous to the nation's security and then, in time of war, the power to deport or arrest all aliens who came from an enemy nation. The Sedition Act was especially harsh. It provided a heavy fine and a jail term for any person found guilty of "combining and conspiring to oppose the execution of the laws, or publishing false, randalous, or malicious writings against the President. Congress, or the government of the United Sates." These words were so vague and general that the Federalists could use the law to stop public cnucism of the government by their opponents. Thu would spell the end of free representative jurcrmneut. Some Federalist leaders, including Hamilton, acsuily disapproved of these laws that were pushed dirough Congress by extremist members of their patty. John Adams had not promoted the measures, but on the other hand he did not veto them or prevent their use against the Republicans. The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions. The Sedition Act was used to silence Republican writers and newspaper editors who criticized President Adams. For example, Thomas Cooper, who later became president of South Carolina College, wrote a pamphlet in which he said Adams "was hardly in the infancy of political mistake" when he took office. Cooper admitted Adams had not yet interfered with a court of justice, though he implied Adams might still do so. For his writings. Cooper was fined $400 and spent six months in jail. Only ten Republicans were convicted under the Sedition Act. Many other members of that party— but no Federalists—were tried. This attack 011 freedom of speech and the press outraged Republicans. Even some Federalists, most notably John Marshall, w ho was later to become Chief Justice, spoke out against it. If the courts would not defend the people against the Alien and Sedition Acts or other tyrannical measures, who could do so? Madison and Jefferson believed that in this situation the only power able to oppose the federal government was the states. Resolutions passed by the Virginia legislature (and dratted by Madison) declared that each state had the right to judge the constitutionality of measures passed by Congress. The Kentucky Resolutions, which Jefferson wrote, went even further. He said that a state could declare acts of Congress "null and void" and that the rightful response to an unconstitutional act of Congress was "nullification" by the states. The Constitution did not say who was to judge if Congress went beyond the powers granted 111 the Constitution. Madison and Jefferson believed the states had that right. I hc states' rights doctrine they championed would at last be carried so far diat it would lead to civil war. Then it would be clear that the federal government, through its courts, had to be the judge of its own powers. The election of 1800. John Adams w'as proud of wrhat he had accomplished as President. He had a right to be, even though his main achievement was to keep the nation out of war. I Ic hoped, however, that in a second term he could make a more positive record. For bis Cabinet Jefferson selected the ablest men, including the architect of the Constitution, James Madison of Virginia, to be Secretary of State and Albert Gallatin, a brilliant Swiss-born financier I born Pennsylvania, to be Secretary of the Treasury. Following Jefferson's ideas Gallatin insisted on ima economy in government. He introduced a modem budget with specific sums for each item of autonal expense. The amount of money spent on the army and navy was reduced by half, and about *3 percent of the nation's revenue, more than $7 a year, was used to pay off the national debt. The Alien and Sedition Acts, which had expired tf the end of the Adams administration, were not rarwed. A new naturalization act was passed, _..nng the short five-year waiting period for dust who wanted to become citizens. The Bank of the United States was allowed to continue, as was Ijfctmlf But the excise tax that had started the There was not a i's policies from lime of the Federalists. The Burbury pirates. We remained at peace with the nations of Europe during Jefferson's first Whiskey Rebellion was repealed, peat deal to distinguish Jefferse term. Our commerce and wealth increased rapidly. But one foreign problem grew more serious as our commerce expanded. For many years the Arab rulers of the Barbary States on the north coast of Atnea (Morocco, Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli) had sent out pirates to seize ships on the ocean, especially in the Mediterranean Sea, and hold their crews for ransom. The European nations paid tribute to these pirates and kidnappers as a cheap substitute for war. And we had done the same. In the decade 1790—1800 we gave them "presents" amounting to $2 million. Jefferson was determined to put an end to the payments to these racketeers. So in spite of his devotion to peace and economy, he sent naval squadrons to punish the pirates. This was a costly business, and Congress had to impose an extra 2.5 percent tax on imports as a "Mediterranean Fund." But the results justified the sacrifice. The peace concluded with Tripoli in January 1805 discouraged the piratical raids. The other Barbary States continued to ask for payments, though at a lower rate, and after the War of 1812 this problem had to be faced again. In 1815 Stephen Decatur, who had been a hero in the earlier married on in the shop and the household by the labor of the family or individual proprietors who ipprrnriced assistants." But now most manufac- Oinng was being done by a "system of factory labor, compensated by wages and assisted by power." Tbs new factory system had begun to displace the old system of household manufacturing. Before, Americans had made the things they needed in their own homes and for their own use. Now goods were produced in factories and by machines for sale to anybody' willing to pay for them. This Industrial Revolution helped bring about a Transportation Revolution. The same steam power and new techniques that made factories possible also brought the steamboats and the railroads to carry products of farm and factory out to the wider world. The Transportation Revolution reached the thousands of new customers needed to bus the masses of goods now produced in the factories. Wherever canals, railroads, or steamboats went, they provided new customers for farmers, too. IV rise of a new economy. Now fanners began to buy factory-made clothing, furniture, kitchen Bmsils, and all the other output of industrial Amenta. The pioneer family was no longer so isolated. A national economy began to emerge, bch region would specialize in what it could do best The Northeast and the Middle States produced finished goods in their factories, the West pew wheat and corn, while the South specialized in iwton, tobacco, nee, and sugar. The produce of the Sjuth and West flowed to the Northeast, and from (ht region finished goods moved back to the South ad West. The United States, which only a century' before ms mostly an unsettled wilderness, surprised the raid. Suddenly this nation became a strong competitor in the industrial marketplace. The Mintry was lucky in its virgin forests, fertile fields, ad untapped minerals. A stable government fa- wed industry. The growing population was be- eming ever more vaned. People from everywhere irho wire persecuted, restless, or dissatisfied made dr United States their mccca. They were enter- ping and industrious, and they made the country' winger, Thu was becoming a nation of nations. In httopc, national borders and jealous governments lopped the free flow of goods and of people over the land. But not here. The Founding Fathers had designed a great federal nation. They foresaw the need to let people and goods flow from state to state, back and forth across the whole country. "Every- thing new is quickly introduced here," one foreign observer remarked. "There is no clinging to old ways; the moment an American hears the word 'invention' he pricks up his cars," The corporation. The cost of these new factories was usually beyond the means of any one person, or even a partnership of a few people. Vast sums had to be collected. For this purpose a new social invention was at hand. The "joint stock company" had not been invented here, but had already been used in England for just this purpose. "Joint stock" ventures had brought some of the first English settlers to America. Now, when a "joint stock" company was chartered by a state, it became a "corporation." This meant that it had a life of its own and would survive in legal theory even if the shareholders died. The corporation could sue in court and in other ways was like a real person. Shares of stock were sold to numerous investors. Each then owned a "share" in the company. Of course they might lose whatever they had invested. But a clever legal arrangement provided that they could not be held responsible for the company's debts. This was called "limited liability." Hundreds of small investors put in a few dollars each. They could share the profits but still not risk losing large sums if the company was badly managed. In this way, funds were gathered to build a great industrial nation. And not only rich people but small investors, too, could have a share of the profits. Waltham and the factory system. In 1813 Francis Cabot Lowell and his associates in the Boston Manufacturing Company in Waltham, Massachusetts, brought together under one roof, for the first time ever, all the processes for making cotton cloth. This required a large capital investment and a new kind of factory. It was risky- business. Only bold organizers dared to take the lead—just as none but bold men would have built the Eric Canal. Lowell came upon the idea for his factory on a trip to England during 1810—1812 when he visited the cotton textile factories. Soon after his return to the United States, the War of 1812 stopped his importing and exporting business. This gave him 3. America's leading import: people To occupy the land, to build the roads, canals, turnpikes, and railroads, to staff the factories, the United States needed people. It was not surprising, then, that the Ututed States became a nation of immigrants. Rasons for coming to America. While Europe became more and more crowded, America offered open air and cheap land. When families in Europe could not find food or places for their children in shoo I or as apprentices, they naturally thought of America. In Europe, too, it was an age of turmoil. Between the time of the American Revolution and the American Civil War, there were revolutions and dictatorships in France, Spain, Germany, Greece, Italy, and Belgium. And it was an age of floods and famines. There were lots of reasons why people in Europe might want to get away from their old world. The disasters of Europe made refugees by the millions. And there were plenty of reasons why someone "ould want to come lo America. Of course, the old Irgmds started in the early advertising brochures had enticed people to the colonics. These still brought people to the new nation. Now there were loo of new legends—of rich land, undiscovered imncs, and fast-growing cities. And there was the teal-life romance of a new nation with its doors open and its people's eyes on the future. When you had so little to lose, why not go to America? [ Dunng the 1820s only about 500,000 people migrated to the United States. But then the pace (juickcncd. In the 1830s and 1840s, 2.5 million men, women, and children arrived, and in the 1850s. 2.7 million. It was lucky that the United States had so much unfilled land. The overflow of the Old World rould find a place in the New. Peoples who did not know one another or who had fought against one mother could now live side by side. America would be called the "last best hope of earth." The mrv of European hopelessness is a story of Araeri- an hope. In the years between the American Revolution and the Civil War, the two great sources of new Americans were Ireland and Germany. Events in A* countries far across the Atlantic Ocean helped make the United States a world nation. The Irish and the potato famine. Potatoes were the main food of the Irish poor. But suddenly in the fall of 1845 a blight hit the potato crop and spoiled a third of it. In 1846 the blight destroyed the whole crop all over the country. The potato blight continued until 1850. Tens of thousands died of starvation. W eakened by hunger, hundreds of thousands died of disease. Death haunted the land. Even before the famine, the Irish had been coming to America by the thousands. Downtrodden by English rule, they had tried to revolt many times, but they were not able to throw off their English masters. So some Irish had come to America. The United States, in the phrase of the time, was "a sort of half-way stage to Heaven." To many Irish it seemed almost as hard to get here as to reach heaven, because the cost of a steerage ticket across the ocean (between $12.50 and $25) then seemed so high. Letters written back to Ireland made everyone want to come. "This is the best country in the world," wrote one Irish girl from New York City in 1848. One new arrival wrote back with glee that the Irish here "cat the pig themselves, and have plenty of bread to their potatoes." "Every day is like a Christmas Day for meat." And now the Irish came by the hundreds of thousands. Through the port of New York City alone, between 1847 and i860, from Ireland there came over a million. That was nearly half of all the Europeans who landed 111 New York in those years. The Irish in America. But once the Irish had landed in Boston or New York or some other port city, they had very little choice about where to go. Few had the money or the desire to move to a lonely western farm. The fanning they knew in Ireland did not make them lovers of the land. So most of them stayed 111 the port cities of the eastern seaboard where they could enjoy the fellowship of others recently arrived from the old country. Many of those who did move westward in the early years used their strong anns and sturdy backs to dig canals and build railroads. When the digging of the Erie Canal began in 1817, there were not many Irish around. But before it was completed eight years later, the Irish were arnving by the thousands. On the canal they were well known for their strength, courage, and willingness to work. The Metropolitan Mmcuiu of Aft. I lain* Hr triune I'hck hind. I9<1 Many Irish immigrants helped to build the Erie Canal. This lithograph shows the excavation process at Lockport, New York. A horse drives the treadmill that powers the primitive crane. Irish contractors organized teams of their fellow immigrants. When the Erie Canal was finished in 1825, the enterprising and industrious Irish immigrants moved on to help build other canals and then the railroads. They helped bring life to many new western cities. Soon people could say that "of the several sorts of power working at the fabric of the Republic—water-power, steam-power, and lnsh- power," none had worked harder than Irish-power. The Germans emigrate. The other large group of new arrivals in the years before the Civil War was the Germans. Nobody planned it that way, hut whenever and wherever the people of Europe suffered, the United States somehow gained. Over there, 1816 was the terrible "year without a sum- mer." The Rhine River flooded, floating away barns and livestock. Autumn storms uprooted fruit trees. I lunger and misery cursed the farmer. We cannot he surprised then that during the following year about 8000 Germans arrived in American ports. Again in 1829-1830, the winter was one of the worst in the history of Europe. People froze because there was not enough wood to bum in fireplaces. Eood was scarcer than ever, and prices went up. By 1832, more than 10,000 Germans were coming to America in a single year. As suflermg in the German countryside deepened, it became plain that their government was not going to help. Then Germans started coming to America by the tens of thousands. They continued to arrive in vast numbers till nearly the end of the 1800s. In 1854 alone (when Germans were half ol all immigrants to the United States) they numbered nearly 1 quarter-million. The move to America became a craze. Overnight, people would decide to leave Germany, and they would depart the next morning. A 1 3-ycar-old boy with a pack on his had walked 300 miles to the French port of Le I lavre in order to find passage to America. The Germans revolt. Throughout these vean, revolutions were brewing in Germany. In 1815 at the end of the Napoleonic Wars the rulers of Europe met at the Congress of Vienna to shufHc boundary lines and restore the old monarchies. Nearly 42 German states were organized into a loose German Confederation dominated by Austria. Wanting socratic rule and freedom from Austria, students teemed secret societies and studied new constitu- tnns. Peasants refused to pay taxes and roughed up tit officials. In central Europe, Prince Metteriuch, the clever ml calculating Austrian foreign minister, was in duigc. He had seen the terror of the French olutton of 17H9. and he hated democracy, which ^imagined was always government by a mob. He apnized tyranny in Germany. Hut even Metter- nidi could not prevent protests like that in May lip when 25,000 people gathered in a small Goman town to drink the health of Lafayette {the kcroofthc American Revolution) and to demand a itpublic, Mettenuch's policies created a rising Hood of res. By 1848 there was civil war and a fledged revolution in Germany. The land was ■turmoil, and many had to Hee when the rebellion Uhpsed. 11/ political refugees. These political refugees tem Germany were not many—perhaps only a few tkuuii.i But they included some, like the daring iCitl Schurz, who became eminent here and helped build in the United States the democracy they 1 not build in Germany. Back in Germany he _joined the rebel forces against the government. Wien the leader of his movement was put in prison, t the risk of his own life he helped his friend aapt. When the German Revolution failed, Sim? came to the United States. His career Itowtd the whole country. After becoming a fcwvcrin Milwaukee, he campaigned for Lincoln in lltoand fought as a general on the northern side at rsburg. He was minister to Spain, senator from Ifeoun, and then served in the Cabinet as Sccre- arv of the Interior. As the career of Carl Schurz and many other Strtv-lovmg Germans showed, Germany's loss (■America's gain. New Americans from Gcr- ^ built whole cities like Milwaukee, and helped Milwaukee a brewing center tor American They spread all over the country, becoming , teachers, professors, lawyers, doctors, and m They built prosperous businesses. iMam others besides Carl Schurz fought on the 'side hi the Civil War. • Ji A4!r jC ■•hA. /)■ XaMKlCMOy 1^' I /o£S'* " n)4 yi /K,. • A 4G •t/l'I'-W ""/i "/ ,.G/*i"**"**'# The Huntington l ibrary. Sin Minno. Ciliomu The Hags of the United States and Germany decorate the menu cover for a party on March 2, 1899, honoring Carl Schurz. The Germans brought with them some new ideas for schools. They believed in physical education, and many early physical education teachers were German. They persuaded Americans to build gymnasiums attached to schools. Until the Germans came, it was not usual to send children to school before they were old enough to read. The Germans brought over the Kindergarten (a German word meaning "garden for children") where children as young as four years old could Icam by playing. I he idea caught on, and soon there were American kindergartens everywhere. The great migration. In the half-century before the Civil War, although the largest numbers came from Germany and Ireland, immigrants were coming from other places, tots. Thousands came from the Scandinavian countries, from the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, France, Italy, and elsewhere. The nation was growing by a great migration. And these other new Americans, like the Irish and the Germans, worked in factories and on farms. They, too, helped dig die canals and build the railroads which transformed the Umred States from a land of farmers into an industrial giant, a leader of the world. 1. Name some factors that led J million immigrants to enter the United States between 1820 and l8rto. 2. Where did the Irish tend to settle? What part did the Irish play in the Transportation Revolution? 3. What problems in Germany led to heavy emigration? What were some special contributions of the German immigrants? 4. The rise of the West Between 1815 and 1850 the lands west of the Appalachian Mountains became the nation's breadbasket. American workers would eat better than ever before. The tanners ot the Amencan West also ted the factory laborers of Europe. Though the South did not realize it, wheat—not cotton—was king. UMTKD IT T1IF. DEAD OK STEAK SAVK1ATKKC W HF.n RITES, ImwLumm •a ni "■ a, "i ip" ^ ">n 1 iniya* "■■■* t— • — - — • iKgnated with salt! ill AA _ to |V to' - Him 1 -Vk-wrfd c., Ml ■ Ito — W I •< % * *> * .. % Mw •"! " son. THE CLIMATE, MINERALS, ETC, SuU' Ifnionca) Soartv "rl' Wo The moping American. "In the United States," the young French traveler Alexis de Tocqucville noted dunng his visit in the t8jos, "a man builds a house in which to spend his old age, and he sells it before the roof is on." The people of the United States had become Americans by moving irom other lands. They continued to move after they reached the New World. Over the next hill, round the next bend, in the next state, there they hoped to find the will-o-thc-wisp "success." I11 their constant movement these migratory people transformed half a comment. T hey cleared the forest and broke die thick turf of the prairies with the improved steel plows of the Industrial Revolution. They cut the grain with new mechanical harvesters. In 1810 only one American in seven lived west of the Appalachians. By 1840 more than one in every' three lived there. Most of these Westerners still lived on farms in the forest or on the prairies, where I!reckcnridge, Minnesota, olid W.ihpeton, North Dakota, arc at the river junction cited 111 this ad. Bois des Sioux remained only a dream. they grew com and wheat and raised meat for home and market. To serve them and handle their crop, new cities sprang up and began to dot the land. fnsfunf cities. In places where people still aliv. could remember the sound of the Indian war whoop and the shadow of the virgin forest, there sprouted nties. On riverways and the joining of nven appeared Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, St. Louis Loub- ville, Memphis, Minneapolis and St. Paul, Davenport, lX's Moines, Omaha, and hundreds of others On the Great Lakes and at the river entrances to the Lakes, men and women created Rochester, Buffalo Cleveland, Toledo, Detroit, and Chicago. An astonishing crop of cities sprang up quickb 111 tlvr lands west of the Appalachians. think nt themselves as somehow superior to blacks. .V i*ic poor white farmer explained, "Now suppose they was tree, you see they'd all think themselves gixxi as we." The South paid a high price tor slavery. All men and farmers received less tor their labor use of the competition of slaves. Immigrants, lUillg to compete with slave labor, avoided the Smith. The money that might have gone into comic or industry was tied up in slaves. As a result South remained an agricultural community [ "ludi exported crops and imported manufactured This made the whole South —white and black — Itnd of colony of the North. "With us every itndl and pursuit ol life, every trade, profession. Hid occupation, is dependent upon the North, " an uma newspaper complained. "In northern ves- |thc Southerner's| products arc carried to marlin cotton is ginned in northern gilts, Ins sugar mnlicd and preserved by northern machinery; nrctsarc navigated by northern steamboats, . . . W is cleared with a northern axe, and a Yankee vts upon his mantle-piece; Ins floor is swept a northern broom, and is covered with a northern lT, and his wife dresses herself in a northern rag-glass." This was only a slight exaggeration. Him had this come about? I low had the home ifJefferson's small farmer become a backwater? No wonder that many Southerners, looking for someone to blame, decided to make Northerners the enemy. They began to clunk the backwardness of die South had been a product of a northern conspiracy. It seemed that somehow northern businessmen had been able to use the federal government for their own selfish purposes. The government subsidized northern shipbuilding. The tariff protected northern manufacturers so they could charge higher prices to southern planters. Had not the southern states been pioneers in colonial days? They gave die nation its Washington, Jetlerson, Madison. Monroe, and Jackson—its leaders in war and in peace. Now that the United States was prospering, must the South remain a colony within a nation? 1. Why did Southerners turn from calling slavery a "necessary evil" to calling it a "positive good"? 2. What was the "middle passage "? 3. Show how treatment of slaves differed from owner to owner. How did some slaves resist their owners? 4. What were some effects of slavery' on the South? Thi' lively watercolor of slaves dancing on a festive occasion was found in Columbia, Soudi Umliiu. The artist i^ unknown, but the painting was made about 1800. AWn Aldrich Hot krtrllrr Folk Art iVntrt. Willuimhuri^ Virginia ■Kt t. ."ir ■ Miami *sctlnnflt / 20. Regiment ! tPigc. lloluntccrs!! lit Zlnatrn SflNintB : $402 far rbrrubaft its bnn X'irnfl rnllaffrnr^rlrruiini ! 830^ *"r Vrnr IWhrutni ! r SriM "•" riur 'Uiuiuuoi'ilrnunfl tin sttornuo wrrDru kitttt. won We fflauntHhiti tn ben ntnig armafirn Hire I gluts ul Sefigiauiifl brQtnni tom I"ar brr *ii#rrbim9 Jrtrr XVutfrfier folltr ftrfi Mr few 9Trfi> ■nir anfeblifftrn. Irtiwinnigt) Ollier: liter Ilitirrn obrrtialb brr =wbi Wile, u DtbrteitMfir, 7. ftturl. 'WiliBtnrfrr 3 !"Ulc I Inioncil Sourly of Wii"in"n Stile I inimical Soocn of Wjwnrmn Union recruiters published posters in German to attract immigrants. American Indians (top right) "cre photographed as they enlisted m the Union army. The chromolithograph (bclosv) svas part of in ads'cmscmcnt published to urge blacks to volunteer for the Union army. OlK-itfO lltviorujl Sooctv Chapter 15 The passing of the frontier By the time of the Civil War, more than two centuries after the fist colonist arrived in New England, half the nation's land was still nearly empty. T he frontier—a ragged line of settlements from the East—ran through part of Minnesota, along the border of Iowa, Missouri, and Arkansas and then swung westward into Texas. Reaching in from the West Coast there was also a thin line of settlement in California, Oregon, and Washington. Between these two frontiers there were only a few islands of settlers, such as the Mormons in Utah, the miners in Colorado, and the Mexican Americans in New Mexico. Evens the "settled" areas on the edge of the open land, it was often a long way betwees I neighbors. In that vast open space betw een the two frontiers there lay an empire. A land as large as all the rest of the occupied United States. A half-known land at | large as all of western Europe. It had often been passed through by trap hunting furs, miners seeking gold, and settlers hurrying on to Califi Washington, and Oregon. But the highest mountains were still unclimbed,tlx | swiftest rivers still unmapped. During and after the Civil War, the American people pushed into thr unknown. They settled the land even before it was discovered by the explored geographers, painters, and naturalists. And the fact of settlement before discovery allowed Americans to dream big dreams. It fostered an opnmi competitive, booster spirit. It produced a new kind of American. Tk Co-Cetter out there helped find and develop the riches of the new Amcnon empire. New American ways of life were invented by a wide assortment of j Go-Getters—cattle ranchers and cowboys, miners, fanners and their tannlaj l. Indian wars and resettlement Today the Old West is a place of romance—the scene for an exciting book, or movie, or TV program. But for a long time the West between California and the Missouri River was a place to avoid. Until just before the Civil War the uni between the line of settlement in the East aid rlr Rocky Mountains was marked on maps as a "Great American Desert." In 1856 the 1 American Review described the area ol plan*is fining the Great Plains. Neither the railroad aw the Homestead Act was enough to bring Hcnlcinau. Pioneer farming could not really come _ id the Great Plains until the land could be fenced to I keep out the cattle. There was no wood for fences, ■vinous methods, such as the thorny, fast-growing |Uttge orange" hedges, were tried to provide an [pensive natural fence. But you had to wait it seasons till the hedges grew, and they were er quite tight enough. Then in the early 1870s, inswcr was found in barbed wire. People tried kinds ol outlandish designs. There arc still iplcs of at least 100 different kinds of barbed which show us how hard the inventors tried, was true with other important discoveries, people seem to have come up with the right 3 at the same time. The most successful of these an Illinois farmer, Joseph G. Glidden. He d a wire that could be easily manufactured, durable, and not too hard to string on posts. By ) he was making his fortune selling this new . And by 1883 one company alone was out too miles of barbed wire a day! W and "dry farming." Of course fences did solve all the farmers' problems. They still :d water. Even today the lack of water plagues icrton the Great Plains. The water under the plains could be reached only deep wells. When drilling for oil, people d to dig deep for water, too. To bring up the that their steam engines needed, the railroad les used windmills. The ranchers, and soon them the farmers, followed their example. The first windmills could supply only enough tor family use or for the stock. Irrigation of fields was not possible. New methods of wig that preserved the scanty rainwater had to loped to raise crops on the Great Plains. | Thy farming," this was called. Developed by Mormons in Utah, it was a way of keeping and the moisture already in the soil. First the land plowed deep to increase its ability to hold Then the topsoil was firmed so the moisture could not escape. After every rain the stirred the surface to keep a blanket of soil c moisture in the ground. The system needed a large area and big mats It required the tractors, harrows, disks, and fcvawrs turned out in large numbers by factories The Vanishing Western Frontier Settled Area (2 or more people per square mile) See p*|i;e 792 fm map study skill exercises oti this map after the Industrial Revolution. Now fanning, like mining and ranching, had become big business. The growth of the West. Spurred by the discovery of gold, the open land, the Homestead Act, the railroads, and the Hood ol immigrants from Europe, the settlers in the West multiplied. Kansas had a population of 364.000 in 1870; it reached 1,428,000 by 1890. In those twenty years Nebraska grew from 123,000 to 1,063,000; Dakota Territory from 2000 to 540,000. Senator Pcffcr of Kansas noted in the Forum ol December 1889 that "a territory greater than the original area ol the United States was peopled in hali a dozen years." Kansas became a state in 1861, Nevada in 1864, and Nebraska m 1867. I hese were followed by Colorado in 1876, North and South Dakota, Montana, and Washington all in 1889, and Idaho and Wyoming in 1890. And new territories were established: Arizona in 1863 and Oklahoma in 1890. Each of these would become a new state before many decades had passed. Oklahoma had been set aside for the Five Civilized Tribes. In 1834 these unfortunate Indi- ans—the Cherokccs, Chickasaws, Choctaws, Creeks, and Seminolcs—had been forced to move there from their ancestral lands in the Southeast. At first when white "Boomers," as they were called, illegally entered Oklahoma Indian Territory, the army sent them away. When the pressure ol new white settlers became too great, the government purchased some Indian lands and announced that on Apnl 22, 18X9, this land would be opened to homesteaders. At noon a shot was fired, and thousands of hopeful homesteaders who had been held back by troopers rushed across the border tor the new land. When they arrived, they were astonished and disappointed to find that the lands were already occupied by illegal settlers who were "Sooner.'' These had eluded the army guards and staked their claims ahead ol time, leaving the law-abiding bad seekers behind. Ever since then the people ot Oklahoma have jokingly called themselves "Sooners." The sooner and later comers by the evening ot that first day numbered 10,000 in Oklahoma City and 15,000 in Guthrie. The next frontiers would lie in cities, in lactones, and in shops all over America. 1. Identify or explain: Joseph Glidden, Homestead Act, public domain, dry farming, "Sooners." 2. Describe the hardships lacing pioneer farm families on the Great Plains. 3. I low did each of the following influence the development of the farming frontier railroads. Homestead Act, barbed wire, windmills, mechanized farm equipment? 4. Describe population growth m the Great Plains after 1870. These campers are awaiting the signal to join the Oklahoma land rush 111 1889. WcHrm Hntory < nllrctiom. Univrnm of OkUbimu liburv, N<ml new industrial age 1865-1900 Alter the Civil War the United States was as large and varied as all western Europe. Immigrants Irom everywhere would find someplace to feel at home here—on lands not so different from where they had lived in the "Old Country." The English could settle on the rolling landscape of "New" England, the Swedes could farm the flat, snowy stretches ot Minnesota and the Dakotas, and Italians could plant orchards and vineyards in sunny California. Imported people spread across the land. From Chicago to New York was as far as from London to Rome. How could these scattered people become a nation? They would have to invent ways to bring everybody closer together. American know-how came to the rescue. The world was startled to see how' Americans used railroads, telegraph wires, and bridges to bind a vast nation. The nation of many cities remained a nation of many centers. Before 1900, Boston, Philadelphia, and New York—the old capitals of the eastern seaboard— were rivaled by Chicago and St. Louis, Denver and San Francisco. The continent did not yet seem overcrowded when Americans used materials and techniques borrowed from everywhere to send skyscrapers high in the air. For the first time in history, thousands came to live and work m .1 single towering building. I11 American cities, people would be close packed and piled up together as never before. Could so many varied city people still find national leaders to speak for them? As the nation grew stronger and richer, it was becoming more and more citified. Could the voice of the farmer still be heard? Could the families who fed the nation also find champions? Would a nation where everything was becoming bigger still care for the little people? New materials and new methods for using them transformed the nation during the Industrial Age. This detail from an 1895 painting shosvs workers making steel from a Bessemer converter. I kill If lift II Steel troll Congress awarded him a special gold medal in Iy28, it was announced that his inventions had been worth $15,599,000,000 to humanity! But this was only to say that there really was no way of measuring his enormous contribution to American life. By the time of his death at the npe age of 85, in 1931, he had become an American hero—a truly democratic hero because his work benefited every living American. 1, Identify or explain: Centennial Exposition, Eli Terry, William Sellers, assembly line. 2. Why was it important to have standard threads on bolts? J. What is "Scientific Management"? What was Frederick Taylor's role? What fears did it arouse in workers? 4. Describe the career of Thomas F.dison. 6. Labor begins to organize The growth of American business—the development of "scientific" ways of shoveling, of new kinds of stores, of bigger factories, of assembly lines, of huge corporations—transformed the lives of workers. They became cogs in a great machine. No longer were they skilled artisans, controllers of their tools. Instead they were becoming servants of the expensive tooLs of their employers. Workers no longer labored at home or in small groups alongside a boss who was both the owner of the business and their friend. Of course, even in those days they had worked from dawn to dark. But now they started and ended work when the factory whistle blew, and they worked twelve to sixteen hours a day in badly lighted and poorly ventilated buildings. Women and children made up more than half the work force. And the pleasant conditions of the early factories located in the countryside—in places like Waltham and Lowell —had disappeared under pressure of competition. The rise of trade unions. Trade unions had existed for a long time. In the 1790s m New York, Philadelphia, and other cities, certain skilled workers such as shoemakers, printers, and carpenters organized to protect their interests. Hut the prospects for organizing more of the nation's workers were not good. At first the courts held that union were illegal because they were conspiracies, rfn the Massachusetts Supreme Court 111 OwhihomiiwIIh v. Hum (1842) opened the path for unions wta* t| declared that they were |ust as legal as am <mJch club organized to help members for .1 legitim* purpose. Some states followed, but tinny <r| treated strikes, the unions' weapon for survival," illegal. In a few cities the trade unions joined togctkrij federations. But the largest of these, the Nairaal Trades Union, collapsed with the Panic of nr By the time of the Civil War a small numhr il skilled trades—printers, iron molders, hat fionlwu stonecutters, and cigarm ikcrs, among othets-U organized national unions to improve their wito and working conditions. But most Amenta workers were not members of unions. It *"! harder here than in Great Britain, France, andodJ European countries to persuade w orkers to take tkl trouble and the risks of joining a union, fv generally speaking, American workers wercalrcxtj better ofi than those abroad and had more hope<i rising in the world. Even with the arrival ofluJ numbers of immigrants during the 1840s and iho and the increased competition tor |obs, wages mil United States remained above those 111 other iisIb- trial nations. Labor strife. As the size of factories increased jJ more and more businesses became large corpm". tions, the gap between worker and employer gtc* wider. Especially in large cities, it became easuin think of labor as merely a commodity to be brniir at the lowest possible cost. A big company with kc of money could afford to close its factors' wm times were bad and wait tor conditions to imprint But a worker still had to cat every day—in pod times or bad. If workers complained, or wrntaf the job on strike, the company could bring in net workers—strikebreakers. Of course, workers resented this treatment. Tit nation that had recently been a military tank* ground between North and South now became 1 scene of industrial battles between workers and tlx# employers. Large numbers of workers (even nun not organized into unions) were willing to go* strike. They were risking their jobs to unpron their lives. Their aim was shorter hours and beta wages. Workers also wanted more of a fcchnjct The challenge of the cities *n |S73" two years after the fire that had destroyed Chicago, architect Louis Sullivan visited the center of the city. He found it magnificent and wild; a crude extravaganza, an intoxicating rawness, a sense of big things to be done. For "big" was the word . . . and "biggest in the world" was the braggart phrase on every tongue. . . . |Thc men of Chicago | were the crudest, rawest, most savagely ambitious dreamers and would-be doers in the world . . . but these men had vision. What they saw was real. This, too, was the spirit of the years between the end of the Civil War and the turn of the century. It was called the "Chided Age" to describe its vulgar, cheap, and gaudy aspects. But though it was sometimes ruthless, corrupt, and destructive, for the most part it was moving, building, expanding, reforming, and dreaming. The growth of an urban nation ; the years after the Civil War there was not 1 movement westward to settle the Great Hut also another great movement of people the country to the cities. When the Civil itrbegan,only one American in five was living in fly. By 1915. cities held half of all Americans, n i860 and 1915 the nation's rural popula- just about doubled, hut the urban population more than 700 percent. move to the city. The new cities grew ■ in the East, the Middle West, and the Far but they could be found wherever industry developing. The new city-people came from here. I builders sent salesmen overseas to boast wonders ol the American farms anti persuade immigrants from European cities and farms to come settle along their tracks in the West. At the same tune, many American farmers in the East and Midwest were moving away from the land to the city. Behind them in the countryside they left ghost villages. One such village in New England had a population of two inhabitants, one living on each side of the broad street. The abandoned church and the dilapidated schoolhouse were being taken apart for lumber and for kindling wood. Some of the farmers had gone west, but most had gone to the cities. By 1910 more than a third of the people living in American cities had moved in from American farms. Immigrants come to the cities. Of the 25 million immigrants who came to the United States between the Civil War and World War 1, most settled in the Col lection of Mrv Chirk* Pmsdcrp Maurice Prendergast's pen, ink, and watcrcolor, "Madison Square, New York," was done in 1901. I Ils use of Hecks of brilliant color reflects the influence of the French Impressionists. cities. Outside of cities many of them would have felt lonely and lost. They loved the friendly bustle and wanted to be close to people like themselves. And some of them had no choice. They had spent everything to cross the ocean and had no money left for a trip west. Within the big American cities there sprouted little immigrant cities. By t8yo New York City held as many Germans as Hamburg, twice as many Irish as Dublin, half as many Italians as Naples. And besides, there were large numbers of Poles, Russians, Hungarians, Austrians, Norwegians, Swedes, and Chinese. Four out of five Nc* Yorkers either were born abroad or were the children of foreign parents. The Germans and Insi who had come before 1880 were found nan every where m the United States. There wervik lots of Canadians in Boston and Detroit, Polaa Buffalo and Milwaukee, Austrians in Clevclaniud Italians in New Orleans. The urban mixture. Cities were sometimesak-i the nation's "melting pots." Perhaps they dxnf have been called "mixing bowls." The adus ■meruit sometimes became Americanized only Ink But very quickly a whole colony found its ■ecu! place in American life. Just as the new [tutted States had first been made from thirteen lit colonies, now a great nation was being from countless colonics of immigrants. Wherever you came from, you could find a Wiorhood in New York or in the other big cities kt you could feel at home. Whether you were Germany, Italy, Hungary, or Poland, you fedd shop m your own old-country language, buy i old-country foods, and attend a church your old-country services. By i nearly newspapers in German were published in n cities. And there were dailies in French, .Japanese, Polish, Yiddish, and a dozen other ecs. ough these immigrant colonics tried to keep te, they could not stay separate forever. The from different colonies became more and alike. Children went to school and learned They stopped speaking their parents' Ipigc and sometimes stopped going to their Us church. They were afraid to seem itcign. Then, too, a young man from the Italian might marry a young woman whose parents German. In the city, people could not help closer to one another. slums. If the crowds were the joy of the city, mg was the curse. New York —the nation's ft city and busiest seaport and the magnet for world's immigrants—was where the problem worst. And in New York, American know- *, which at the same time was building grand Unm palaces for department stores, produced ttb. >ut unlucky, American invention. This Istlic "tenement house." ; New Yorkers, of course, did not invent the Bra European cities had their streets of ancient pro buildings and cvil-smcllmg hovels where ■poor were tumbled together. But in the years m the Civil War, New York City produced a mind of slum—the tenement-house slum. Most newcomers to the city could not afford to pouch rent. Back m the early years of the 1800s ■poorer people of New York had lived in shacks the swamps at the edge of Manhattan Island, is the tsland filled with people, specially buildings went up for the city's new poor. Sutc I ltstor"cal Society oi W tu omm Immigrant women gather in the market square of a nuddlewcstem town in the 1890s. One (far left) has adopted an Amencan-stylc hat. Tenement houses were buildings six or seven stories high designed to hold the largest possible number of families. They were solid blocks of deep buildings whose inside rooms had no windows or ventilation. There were also helter-skelter buildings of many other kinds. The dumbbell building. Then in 1878, to help find something better. The Plumber and Sanitary Engineer, a builders' magazine, announced a contest tor architects. The editors offered a S500 prize tor the best plan tor tenement apartments tor the poor. The winning plan was the "dumbbell'' tenement. It was called that because the whole building, looked at from above, was thin in the middle and bulged at both ends like the dumbbells used in gymnasiums. This plan had a good deal to be said tor it compared with the plan of the flimsy firetraps that were common before. The dumbbell tenement, usually built of brick, was supposed to be fireproof. It was designed to fit on a narrow lot. On each of the seven floors there were four sets of apart- ments—two in front and two m back. Since the stairway ran up the middle, the front and hack rooms got some light and air from their windows on the street. Many people could be crammed into a small space. TKt Museum of the City of New York On tenement back porches, like those shown in this photograph by Jacob Kus about I 'XX), clotheslines stretched from post to post and front porch to backyard alley. Notice the flowerpots and plant boxes on the railings. The Museum of the C -iiy of New Yo"k 4* The Museum uf the Qiy of Nr* The tenement kitchen was a multipurpose room. It was a second bedroom (top) for nuns poor families, and a workshop (bottom) for others. The sewing machine provided a livelihood for thousands of immigrant families. Boss rule. Under the influx of people and tk pressures of rapid growth, the governments of hj cities broke down. Streets were unrepaired, scuta nonexistent, garbage uncollected. Big cities svert described as the worst-governed units m this democratic nation. In New York City during the dm of Boss Tweed between 1866 and 1871, the cm vrs looted of some S100 million by the boss and In underlings. Other political groups, "rings" as tko were tailed at the time, robbed Philadelphia, ftm. burgh, and other cities. Many reformers blamed this state of affairs on tk immigrant who, they said, was "a furopcan pcisst whose horizon has been narrow, whose moral aid religions training has been meager and false, aid whose ideas of life are low." But Philaddw where 47 percent of the population was native bats of native-born parents, w as as corrupt as New Yuri where 80 percent of the residents were of forest birth or foreign parentage. The immigrant and the politician. Immienr.- did lend to vote for the boss and the followers ofTa political "machine." But this was because tk machine members—often aldermen, or city coun- cillors—provided friendly help. They supplied ■cmmctit jobs and money and advice. A new royal who was arrested for a petty crime could to the alderman of Ins ward to find him a tor to persuade the judge to let him off. The n organized benefit dances. The money tar dance tickets would go to some worker who been crippled at his work or to a widow who no way of supporting her children. The n found doctors for the sick and brought to the poor. He reached into his pocket to a few dollars to needy orphans or to men nganew start in business. He was a one-man Fund. No wonder immigrants voted for kuind for the machine again and again. Tu iisnjipearing frontier. The problems of the iftiliM Age—corruption in government and busies, strikes, and labor violence—worried Ameri- Why was it all happening? One bright E' "Chistorian, Frederick Jackson Tunicr, who had raised in the backwoods of Wisconsin, thought new the reason. The Census of 1890 had mounted that the United States no longer had an seroken line of wilderness frontier. Turner proud the theory that this disappearance of the Wcr explained many of the country's troubles. According to Turner, what had made America Ae Land of Promise w'as not cities but the frontier. Bx free land out west, he said, had also been a Itib valve. In earlier times if a family in an ■mem city wanted a second chance, they could llovc out west. But now that the country was fcng filled up, it was no longer possible to find a ml chance by going out to the edge of civiliza- be Now it you were an unlucky newcomer in a p. there appeared to be no escape. OUwwrs versus Newcomers. For a while it rened that the country might be divided between branm and Newcomers. Oldcomcrs them- feofcourse, had come from immigrant families, their families had been here tor a long time, tong them were the rich and famous. Few of m were crowded into slums. In the older eastern states that still controlled ^rrs, the Oldcomcrs were in charge. They most of those who had money and education ndpower. But the Oldcomcrs did not agree on bum cure the country''s ills. Some tried to help I immigrant learn new ways, but sonic were simply frightened. They wanted to keep the country the way it was. I hey blamed the troubles on the Newcomers. Their answer was to slam the door. Simply because their families had been here longer, they felt that the whole nation belonged to them. At Harvard College a group of New F.ng!and blue bloods thought that their world was coming to an end. Three young men in the class of 1889, Charles Warren, Robert DcCourcy Ward, and Frescott Farnsworth Hall, had been taught by their professors that there was an "Anglo-Saxon" race superior to all others. The race was supposed to be separated from other races not by color hut by their homeland. The "superior" people were supposed to be from England and Germany. And that just happened to be where the families of Warren and Ward and Hall had come from! These young men had been raised near Boston. Their parents were horrified by the hordes of "vulgar" immigrants and especially by those with unfamiliar ways—from Ireland and from southern and eastern Europe. These New England aristocrats said that the nation's problems could be solved by keeping out all people who were not like themselves. Five years after their graduation, Warren and Ward and Hall formed the Immigration Restriction League to persuade Congress to pass laws to keep out all "undesirable" immigrants. In their League they enlisted famous professors and writers. Their real object was to keep out the "new" immigrants— the Newcomers. These "new" immigrants, they argued, were the main cause of the increasing crime, the strikes, and most of the troubles of the country. The literacy test. To keep out "undesirables" they proposed a "literacy test." According to their proposed law persons over fourteen years of age who wanted to come into the United States would have to prove that they could read and write. They did not have to knowr English, provided they could read and write their own native language. At first sight the test seemed harmless enough. Actually it was aimed against people from certain countries, such as Italy and Greece, where poor peasants had no chance to go to school. The Boston blue bloods believed that because Newcomers from such countries were not "Anglo-Saxons" they must be "inferior." si CoHrf Austrian-born J. Kcpplcr's lithograph cartoon from the magazine I'uck shows a group of well-to-do Americans barring the entry of a new immigrant. The Newcomer sees what the Oldcomcrs cannot— the shadows looming behind them ot their own immigrant lathers. But in their proposed law they did not dare list particular countries. t here already' were many people in the United States from those countries. They would be insulted—and they, too, elected members of Congress. Year after year the Immigration Restriction League tried to persuade Congress to pass a literacy test. Hut even when they finally pushed their bill through Congress, they did not manage to make it into a law. One President after another vetoed the bill. President Grover Cleveland called the law "underhanded," because it did not say what it really meant. President William Howard Taft said the United States needed the labor of all immigrants and should teach them to read. President Woodrow Wilson agreed. All three Presidents said the law was un-Amcn- can. The United States had always been "a nation oi nations." It made no sense to keep out people) simply because they had been oppressed. Aniem was a haven for the oppressed. 1 lerc the stamot could find bread, and the illiterate could learn 3 read. In 1917, however, when the war 111 Europe wa frightening Americans, the literacy test finally M enough votes 111 Congress to pass over Presides Wilson's veto. Out on the West Coast, Oldcomcrs feared; Newcomers from Asia. They worried abwt; imaginary hordes that might come across the h- cific. And they had persuaded Congress to piss 1 Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882. Then, in ivr President Theodore Roosevelt without the used any law against the Japanese persuaded thejapanoe government to stop their people from ctmgnttnpj This un-American agreement came to be called the emeu's Agreement." And this became the expression for any agreement to discriminate rut people when you were ashamed to admit tyou were really doing. l Identify or explain: "inciting pots" and "mixing Bowk," dumbbell building, Tweed Ring, political machines, aldermen. Turner's frontier thesis, Immigration Restriction League, Chinese lEduMon Act, Gentlemen's Agreement. I What movements accounted lor the growth of dues after the Civil War? 1" Win did immigrant colonics form in the cities? Why did they lose their separateness? 4. Describe a typical tenement house. hHow did political bosses (a) enrich them- I kIycs? (b) win votes? ' Why and how was a start made on limiting r Chinese immigrants, dressed in traditional dothesand with their hair in long pig-tails, walk down a street in San Francisco's crowded Chinatown about 1880. 1-imtt l ollcvtMn/t jiitoriiu MrvtotK.il Society CuJvct hetum Jane Addams was a kind and gentle woman whose concern for needs newcomers led her to open I lull I louse settlement in Chicago. Many others were later to follow her example. 2. Reformers and self-helpers Not all the Oldcomcrs were frightened. Some became reformers. II the country had too many strikes and too much crime, they said, that could not be blamed on those who had just arrived. It was mainly the fault, they said, of the Americans w ho had been here longest and who had had the most chance to make the country better. W ho had built the cities and the slums where the poor were condemned to live? Who were the members of Congress and the leaders of business and the police officers? It was not the immigrants' fault if the nation was not prepared to receive them. June Addams. One of the most remarkable of the reformers and 011c of the most original Americans of the age was |anc Addams. She was bora with a deformity of the spine which made her so sickly that after graduating from college 111 1882 she had to spend two years in bed. When she was well enough to travel, her wealthy family sent her abroad to study art and architecture. What she really learned in Europe was something quite different. iod for all other officers in all elections on the same terms as men in Wyoming, Colorado, Utah and Idaho m I In- Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley A women's suffrage amendment was sent to a uirrmv defeat by California's voters in 18% jfter a strenuous campaign. an the first progress came on the western frontier, [fen It was plain that new communities depended ■ pioneer women. Why shouldn't they be al- kdtuvotc? Wyoming came into the Union in iKo with women's suffrage. Then other western iibtci gave women the right to vote—Colorado |]|jj}), Utah (1896), and Idaho (l8yrt). Hut the pm-inent stalled, and little progress was made tor [Hn a decade. I Out of the South, too, there came other women tenners. Ida B. Wclls-Bamett, who had been M a slave m Mississippi, became .1 newspaper WCT 11 Iennessee. But when she wrote fearless ■Id exposing the facts about .1 lynching, she was rn out of the state. Then she went to New id City where she helped set up black women's which became the foundation of the National nation of Colored Women in i8yrt, In 1909 (helped to organize the National Association tor the Advancement of Colored People. And in 1913 she established a settlement house in Chicago to help black newcomers from the South find jobs and homes in the big city. 1. How did the settlement houses help the urban immigrants? 2. Describe the work of Frances Willard and Ida B. Wells-Barnett. 3. The spread of learning In the city and on the countryside the public schools helped make Americans. They were free, and the states passed laws requiring all children to attend. There the children of Irish, German, Italian, and all sorts of other families learned and played—and sometimes fought—together. They came to know one another better than their parents knew people from other countries. And some of these young people went on to study at new colleges and learned to become leaders. The schools make Americans. At home many families spoke Polish or Italian or some other language, but in school everybody spoke English. Even if the parents spoke English with a foreign accent, soon the children sounded like other Americans. At home the children taught their parents English and all kinds of American customs. One little girl in New York City who had learned to use a toothbrush brought it home from school. She showed it to her mother, who had been born in a peasant hut m Poland and had never seen such a thing. Her mother, too, was soon brushing her teeth m the American manner. Now many children could go on to the free public high school, which was an American invention. After 1870 these new public high schools spread across the country . By tyoo there were 6000 high schools attended by nearly 520,000 students, more than two and a half tunes the number attending only ten years before. The flourishing schools made the United States one of the world's first literate nations. Thousands of the peasants and poor city workers who arrived from Europe had never learned to read. But in the United States the proportion of people who could The Museum of the 1 ity o( New Vtn Jacob Riis took tins picture of immigrant children saluting the Hag at the Moss Street Industrial School in New York City in the early 1900s. In rural arras the one-room school house was usual. The photograph (below) taken at the end of the |9th century shows pupils from a school near Ulack River Falls, Wisconsin, assembled with their teacher for their annual school picture. read and write steadily increased alter the Civil War. Unfortunately in the South the promising start made during Reconstruction was not followed by the Old Confederates w hen they took office. Growth of the colleges. America had always been a land of hclp-yoursclt liut it was not easy for Newcomers to become leaders. So many respectable institutions remained in the hands of the Oldcomers whose families had been here for a century or more. For example. Harvard College— our oldest college, wfhcre young blue bloods had learned their ideas of Anglo-Saxon superiority—was run by Oldcomers. It was hard even to become a student there if you were not one ol them. New institutions offered the best chance for Newcomers who wanted to become leaders. Among the most remarkable and most American were the scores of new colleges and universities. At the outbreak of the Civil War there were only seventeen state universities. Then, in 1862 an energetic Republican congressman, Justin S. Morrill from rural Vermont, secured the passage ol tit Morrill Act. This act granted lands to the >uw from the public domain—30,000 acres lor cad) of the states' senators and representatives 111 Con- gress— to support new state colleges. In ties "land-grant" colleges students would be taught to be better farmers. The land-grant colleges iko often offered solid courses in engineering, sacun and literature. So here Newcomers, too, found id opportunity to learn. Sutc I fs"tnrical Vmetv trf U xm to the United States direct from Germany. Atter that, all news from Europe was channeled through England, This gave the British a great advantage that few Americans noticed. There were millions of people in the United States who favored the Central Powers because they or their parents had been born in Germany, Austria, or Hungary. And there were more millions like the Irish who were glad to see anyone fight the British, because their own ancestors had suffered under British rule. But even some German Americans did not approve of Germany's actions. Kaiser Wilhelm had made so many warlike statements that many Americans saw Germany as a militaristic nation. Their feelings were confirmed when the kaiser's forces invaded Belgium and his prime minister called the German neutrality treaty with Belgium nothing but "a scrap of paper." The British circulated atrocity stones (some of them true) about how the invading Gennau soldiers mistreated women and children in Belgium. Yet, until 1917 neither propaganda nor sentiment was strong enough to draw Americans to the battlefields of Europe. The problem of neutral rights. There were great commercial advantages to staying out of the war. Over the years the nations of the world had agreed on a set of rules for the use of the seas. By these rales when a war broke out the neutral nations were stil] allowed to trade with both sides. For more than a century the United States, tar from Old World rivalries, had profited from being die great neutral commerce carrier of the world. In 1812 the nation had gone to war against Britain to protect its neutral rights on the sea. Again, in the 1900s, the United States would have to fight for the right to trade with the world. Warring nations, by Internationa] law, were allowed to stop and inspect neutral vessels at sea. This was to make sure they were not ships of the enemy hiding under neutral dags. The warring nations were allowed to seize certain war materials ("contraband"—explosives, guns, and ammunition) even from a neutral ship. They were not supposed to seize other goods carried by neutrals. Before sinking a commercial ship, the attacker had to give warning, to see that the passengers were safe, and do everything else reasonable to save civilian lives. Such rales as these were what people meant be international law. There was no court or police fore to make nations obey. But the rules were mil trailed "law" because so many people believed they to be obeyed. These special rights of neutrals nett called the "freedom of the seas." In 1914. when World War l broke out in Europe these rules were still much the same as they had Iwn for about 200 years. But the navies had tiunsci Most important was a new kind of ship—tix submarine. Its great strength was the powers surprise. At the same time, however, it was thin- skinned and easy to sink, if it surfaced to warn; vessel, one shot from even a small "defensive sm might send the submarine swiftly to the bottom To insist that all warring nations still hid tu follow the old rules would make the suhnunu useless. This would not have bothered Gnat Britain, who had the greatest navy 111 the worii But tor Germany, with its smaller navy, suf might make all the difference. Great Britain intended to use its control of the seas to starve Germany into submission. Tk British government changed or interpreted the nils of war to suit its own needs. It enlarged the Im" contraband to include all sorts of goods-oa] food!—that neutral ships had always been allowed to carry. The British insisted that all neutral ships go into British ports to be searched, The\ kwtS vessels hound tor neutral countries, such as I lofland or Denmark. This was to prevent the cargoes hemp! resold to Germany. I hey declared the NorthSia; military area and filled it with mines—underway bornbs that would explode when any ship uar near. None of this was according to intcrnUMM law. The United States protested. But since Wikai did not want war. he avoided making Ins langiuj! too strong. And when the language of the UtitW States did become harsh, it was softened hy off pro-Itruish ambassador to London. Amhassdir Walter Hines Page was convinced that the Alas must win to save Europe and the world (ran German domination. The British also wndn agreed to pay for all goods seized, so Amenta] merchants were not too concerned. Germany unleashes its submarines. Ciemum could hardly sit still and allow itself to be struck Its submarines, however, could only do their dean the war effort saw "inefficiency in every bureau of the government." Republican senators called for a War Cabinet ol three men. This would make President Wilson a mere figurehead. Wilson fought to keep control and put the mobilization on track. 1 le submitted a bill that gave him wide powers to reorganize the government and expend funds as he wished, liven before the Overman Act giving him these powers was passed in May 1918, Wilson created the War Industries Board. Bernard M. Baruch, a Wall Street financier of great energy and vision, was put in charge. He showed how a statesman of the business world could bring his wisdom to the national service. The job of the War Industries Board was to decide what goods should be produced. It could also set prices for government purchases of supplies. For two years Bernard Baruch was the economic dictator of the country. But he seldom had to use force. He had other means of "persuasion." One- day Baruch was having trouble getting the automakers to cut down on the output ol automobiles. He had them listeu in while he phoned the railroad office to stop train service to their plants. Next he called on the army to seize the auto firms' stockpiles of steel. The automakers promptly gave in. Under Baruch's direction the WIB soon gained control of the industrial war effort. Production went up, waste went down, and criticism lessened. The labor force. The 4 million men enlisted in the amied forces were withdrawn from the nation's labor supply. A million women helped to fill the gap, doingjobs that they had never been allowed to do (nor known that they could do). The war helped them discover themselves as they streamed into mills and factories. They became furnace stokers, managed assembly lines, and wore the uniforms of railroad and streetcar conductors. Some reformers announced that economic freedom for women had at last arrived. They were wrong. After the war, women were asked to leave their jobs as an act of "patriotism" so the men could return. By 1920 the proportion of women in the labor force hail dropped below the level of 1910. Blacks by the thousands moved north to take advantage of the new chances for |obs. After suffering in the South from wages that dropped to as low as 75 cents a day in 1914—1915, they saw the North as a promised land. Within a few years that were more than 75.000 blacks in the coal mines and 150,000 on the railroads. The shortage of labor sent wages up at tbc government and private firms bid against cadi other. To till essential jobs in vital industries, that was a United States Employment Service. "This is labor's war," said AF of L pro idea Samuel Gompers, and he pledged labor's support In return for a promise not to strike, unions would get some direct support from the govcninm Early m Apnl 1918, a National War Labor Boal was created to arbitrate labor disputes. Some tvx cases were submitted to this board. In the fcn instances in which labor refused to accept the decisions, the President used the pressure of pr1-1" opinion to compel workers to return to their jobs. In extreme cases, he took over the plant. Employers, on their part, were forbidden 3 discharge workers tor union activities. Wiicmw possible, the government insisted on reducing the workday to eight hours. As a result ol government support, the membership of labor unions doubled In spite of a 50 percent rise in prices between Ijm and 1918, labor's real income rose 20 percent abow the prewar level. Mobilizing minds. The government also wantal to enlist the minds of the people in the war effort. Millions of Americans had opposed our entry into the war. Some German Americans, natunSy enough, did not want to fight against the landdd their ancestors. Some Irish Americans felt themselves traditional enemies ol the English. Social® j declared that the war was only a capitalist dogf^k Midwest Progressives said the nation should dot* I itself to reform rather than war. And then the: were the pacifists who said that war—only munla under another name—could never be justified. How could the government convert these reluctant citizens? How- could tt whip up enthusiasm tix our friends and hatred tor our enemies? I low coaH I it sell war bonds and keep people hard at work? fix these tasks President Wilson created the Coiiinunrrj on Public Information. George Creel, a journals] was appointed chairman, assigned to "sell the war# | America." I11 May 1917 the Creel (.'on unmet ■ began publishing a daily Official Bulletin of the wr news that the administration wished to mik public. The committee hired professors, wntrn, smb, ami lecturers by the thousands. Their job ns to convince and to reassure Americans that the was a crusade for freedom and democracy. Germans were portrayed as hateful beasts, us "Huns" out to dominate the Western or This effort helped create a war fever with sad Iterdfccts which long outlasted the war. It stirred spy scares and a frantic hunt for traitors, vise sensible Americans now refused to play oven or Wagner. They dropped German from the schools. They turned rrkraut" into "liberty cabbage" and converted nburger" into "Salisbury steak." Hut this anti- tian madness was really anti-American. For ithout the hundreds of thousands of immigrants |pi Gennany the nation would have been much IjOtircr. The United States—"a nation of na- il®"-had been created by people from every: and was enriched by all their languages and nrcs. | Hi tltack on civil liberties. The Espionage Act i WI7 gave the President powers of censorship. It 1 heavy penalties against anyone who handed (information about any place connected with thc 1 defense. To urge resistance to the laws of r United States, to refuse to do military duty, or to r the draft now became crimes punishable by on terms. The Trading with the Enemy Act of |P obliged any newspaper printed here in a l language to furnish the Postmaster General i English translations of everything it published t the war. Tk Sedition Act of 1918 went even further than i infamous Sedition Act of 1798 against which rson and Madison had protested. Eor the 1918 1 imposed penalties on anyone who used "dis- d, profane, scurrilous, or abusive" language at the United States government, flag, or mu- lt empowered the Postmaster General to Ctodeliver mail to anyone who, in his opinion, (using the postal service in violation of the act. With this barrage of propaganda and new laws, am who disagreed in any way with the ncs of the government were hounded and In 1917 more than 1100 striking copper 1 who were members of the radical Industrial m of the W orld were taken forcibly from to New Mexico, where they were interned. IWW leaders were thrown into jail. Eugene V. Debs, the many-time Socialist candidate for President, was sentenced to jail for ten years for denouncing the war in 1918. While still in jail he ran for President in 1920. His sentence was finally commuted in 1921. This was a strange way to fight a war for freedom and democracy. How could the nation improve its war effort if citizens were not allowed to criticize the government or the armed forces? In fact, opposition to the svar was slight and scarcely hampered the war effort. Hut the mania of these times would last even after the war. The virus of witch-hunting and super-patnotism was not easy to cure. t. Identify or explain: Selective Service Act, Liberty' Loans, William McAdoo, War Industries Board, Bernard Baruch, Herbert Hoover, National War l abor Board, Committee on Public Information, George Creel, Espionage Act, Trading with the Enemy Act, Sedition Act, IWW, Eugene Debs. 2. How did the armed services grow? the merchant marine? J. How was industry mobilized for war? 4. I low did the war affect consumers? farmers? women workers? organized labor? 5. How did the government encourage patriotism? What were some results? 6. Describe wartime attacks on civil liberties. 4. Losing the peace When the Germans agreed to the armistice in November 1918, they believed that the peace would lx- generous—and based on Wilson's high-minded Fourteen Points. They were in tor a brutal shock. The Versailles Treaty. President Wilson, announcing that he would go to the Peace Conference in Paris, gave ammunition to his critics. He said his only purpose was to help achieve the goals of his Fourteen Points. They said he was more anxious to be the Preacher to the World than to be the Protector of the United States. No President while in office had ever before gone to Europe. Bomb scares. At the same time there really was an epidemic of terrorism that made many citizens nervous. In Seattle early in 1919 Mayor Ole Hanson had taken measures to break a general strike. Then on April 28, he received a bornb in the mail. It was discovered before anyone was hurt. The next day Senator Hardwick ot Georgia received a package that was opened by his maid, who had both her hands blown off. Later, )6 similar packages were found that had not been delivered because they lacked sufficient postage. These were addressed to such people as Attorney General Palmer, the Postmaster General, the Secretary of Labor, ). P. Morgan, and John D. Rockefeller. Only a month later other parts of the country were shaken by a senes of explosions. One of these damaged the front of Attorney General Palmer's house and killed the person carrying the bornb. The bornbings came to a climax at noon on September irt, 1920. On the corner of Broad and Wall streets in the heart of New York's financial district, the busy lunchtime crowds were blasted without warning. In that worst peacetime bornb- ing in American history, $8 people were killed and hundreds injured. A. Mitchell Palmer pursues the Bolshei'iks. Attorney General Palmer lacked a sense of perspective. Instead of seeing the bornbings as scattered acts by a few misguided terrorists, he imagined dal the very existence of the nation was 111 peril. The strikes, race riots, and bornbings seemed to him "tit blaze of revolution." The whole country, he sad, was infested by Bolsheviks and anarchists. Any alien, he screamed, might prove to Ik a bornb j thrower. And if Palmer could make himself the nation's savior, he might eventually move into tar White House. In November 1919 he had 250 members of dx 1 Union of Russian Workers arrested. Most wen I guilty of no wrongdoing and later had to be I released. In December 249 aliens, whose onlycnat I in .1 majority of eases was that they were anarchTM, I were herded aboard the transport Buford, called the j This dramatic photograph shows the powerful effect of the bornb that exploded at lunchtime on Wall Street on September 16, 1920. The 38 dead and the hundreds of victims needing medical care had been removed by the time the picture was taken. Viet Ark," and shipped to the Soviet Union, timer declared that there were thousands of 'Red," all over the country sworn and trained to at die nation apart. On January 2, 1920, he ordered raids on Communist meetings all over the country. Everyone sbo was present. Communist or not, was rounded | and more than 4000 people were thrown into jul. In all, 556 aliens were deported. Bv now, however, criticism of Palmer was effacing. His illegal arrests were doing more harm f American institutions than were the small groups fnral "Reds' in the country. The ambitious and ijmtcry Palmer was brewing trouble lor millions of menu and patriotic Americans. Following his nmplc, excitable citizens were roused to vent their tus and their hates against any Americans who Itmcd "different." These included blacks, Jews. |miCatholics, along with all reformers. Somehow, tting that the nation had been built by immi- ; Palmer and his followers aimed their blasts t all "foreigners." IE j(ar of foreigners. During the war the 1m- on Restriction League had finally obtained c of the law that every immigrant must be to read to be admitted to the United States (p. . But they were not interested just in literacy, v had strong racial, religious, and ethnic preju- In fact, they wanted to cut down immigra- from Russia, Poland, Italy, and the other of eastern and southern Europe. The had been enriched by the thousands who had here from those countries between 1890 and But the rcstrictionists had an odd theory of own about "superior" and "inferior" races. (pretended that it was a science. Really it was away of dressing up their prejudices. Their tors happened to come from northern and 1 Europe. They liked to think, therefore, all the best people came from there. The tmts included university presidents and by eminent New Englanders. It would manv years to remove the stain they left on our non laws. Hie nation seemed to have forgotten its own I Free immigration had made the United a tree nation. Then in 1921 national quotas (immigrants were introduced. The National Act of 1924 reduced quotas until, in 1929, Culver Future* A 1920 cartoon of an angry Uncle Sam reflects the hysterical fear of "Reds" and anarchists then sweeping die country. only 150,000 immigrants were allowed to enter the United States each year. Ehc quota from each country was based on the "national origins" of the people of the United States 111 1920. This favored northern and western Europe, since the large immigration from other parts had come more recently. The National Origins Act barred all Chinese. Japanese, and other Asians. It is not surprising that in Japan there were "hate America" meetings held on "Humiliation Day," July t, 1924. On the other hand, Canadians and Latin Americans were exempt from the law's provisions. The 1920s saw the first large immigration to the United States of Mexican Americans. The "new" Klan. While the Immigration Restriction League used the laws, another group was using terror and violence to enforce their prejudices. A new Ku Klux Klan appeared in the South and the West. It pretended to be in the old southern tradition to defend the rights of the "best" people. Rut in fact it was led by a collection of roughnecks and human dregs, with some respectable followers, who made a career of harassing blacks. Jews, Roman Catholics, and all "foreigners." Somehow they were able to enroll about 4.5 million "native born, white, gentile Americans." These included many who wanted someone to blame for lack of jobs and many who were worried by the turmoil of postwar Europe. Somehow the Klan came to dominate the politics of several states. To enlist and keep its members, the Klan shrewdly used all sorts of hocus-pocus. They had passwords, marched about in white sheets, and held secret meetings. But they were no laughing matter. They whipped and killed innocent citizens. They burned buildings and brought terror to whole communities. Yet they seldom went to jail for their crimes, because they bullied sheriffs and judges into joining them. The conviction in 1925 of the Indiana Grand Dragon for murdering his secretary marked the beginning of the end of the "new" Klan. The newspapers then began to expose the crimes of the Klan, and respectable Americans avoided it like the plague. Sacco and Vanzetti. Every' epoch of American history has had its martyrs. Their names enter the folklore. John Brown was a willing martyr of the fight against slavery. In this later age Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, rwo Italian-born inimi- grants, became unwilling martyrs in the struggle t" equal justice to all. In 1920 a holdup took place at a South Braincrtt, Massachusetts, shoe factory. A paymaster aid guard were killed. Shortly afterward Sacco aid Vanzetti were arrested. They were both gentle men with no criminal record. But they believed the philosophy of anarchy. They were tried, found I guilty, and sentenced to die. There was no solid evidence against them. It was widely thoughtdut 1 they were really victims of the frenzied feat of radicals and aliens. The belief in the innocence of Sacco and Vanzctn was so widespread that in 1927 the governor of Massachusetts finally had to appoint a committee# review the fairness of their trial. But the committee j itself was loaded with prejudice. The author of its report was I larvard President A. Lawrence Lowell, long an officer of the Immigration Restriction League, who was well known for Ins belief in the "superiority" of the Anglo-Saxon peoples. It"nut surprising that this committee reported that tbctral had been fair. When Sacco and Vanzetti were executed. Bul- lions of Americans mourned. They believed tlut the two gentle Italian immigrants were victims at tear and prejudice. Ben Shahn's grim 19.V)s painting of Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti shows them handcuffed together as they stoically await their fate. Collect ton, Tbt Museum of MoJrrn An, New Yolk Ciift of AMn Aldrich Rockefrflei Regulator)' agencies, like the Federal Trade Commission anti the Federal Reserve Board, were put in the charge ol men who would help the businesses they were supposed to regulate. The FTC urged whole industries to agree on trade policies. Some of these agreements tended to create monopolies. Secretary ot Commerce Hoover also promoted these "fair practice" agreements so that industries could share information on products and markets. Hoover believed that the day of cutthroat competition was over. Now, he thought, the I Vpartment of Commerce should help them cooperate for better products and higher output. The Supreme Court helped this process along. In 1920 the Court ruled that Urn ted States Steel was not a monopoly even though the company controlled 40 percent of the steel industry. This still did not, the Court said, "unreasonably restrain trade." With this green light—and with the help of I loover and the regulator)' agencies—companies all across the laud merged to create larger units. By 1929, only 1289 firms produced three-fourths ot all goods turned out by corporations. In many industries a few big firms were setting prices through trade associations. The Supreme Court still said that these industrial trade groups were not restraining trade. And the country prospered. Most Americans were doing better. The price of shares on the stock market was going up rapidly. The economic picture looked promising. The farm problem. There were a few areas that were slow' to recover after the war. The textile, leather, and soft coal industries were weak. Blacks, Indians, and Mexican Americans still had little share in American prosperity. I he obvious big problem was the distress on the farms. Now no one could ignore this problem, because the farmers had learned to speak up. Fanners were growing poorer while much of the rest of the country was grow ing richer. It seemed that the more they produced, the less they were paid for their crops. At the same time their clothes, their farm implements, their fuel, and the other products they had to buy were going up. 1 heir taxes were rising. When the farmers demanded help, they did get higher tariff' protection. But this did little good. High tariffs on farm products could not keep prices tip when there were surplus crops. Now the farmers demanded more direct mi Senator McNary of Oregon and Representative Haugen of Iowa devised a scheme to use government money to save the farmer from the fra market. The idea behind their complex plan was® keep up the price of staple crops regardless of whtt happened to other prices. The federal government would buy the surpluses that would have driven down farm prices if they went on the open market The government then would either hold the produce until the market for it improved or it would sell the produce abroad. I he MeNary-HaugenbiS failed to pass Congress in 1924 and 1926. In tie next two years it did pass, bur Coohdgc vetoed it each time. "Farmers have never made monev, he said. "I don't believe we can do much about it," The election of 1928. Near the end of his fourth year in office, Calvin Coolidgc announced (inone of Ins longer speeches), "I do not choose to run tor President in 1928." In his place the Republic* named the able and ambitious Secretary of Commerce, Herbert Hoover. The Democrats nominated the "Happy tt'ir- rior," Alfred E. Smith. Smith had made a superb record as governor ot New York. He had bet* opposed by many bigoted Democrats from the small towns and from the South who feared that 1 Catholic President would he only an agent ol the Pope. But this time they W'erc not strong enough to deny him the nomination he deserved. Party platforms were not important tn As election. Instead it was what the candidates sconcd to stand for. A1 Smith, w ith his New York EastSdc accent, his browrn derby and cigar, and his Bonus Catholic religion, was the image of the big city City people liked his call tor the repeal ot Prohib- tton and the return of liquor control laws to die states. Hoover, on the other hand, seemed to stand tor big business, for small town and rural Amcna and for Protestantism and Prohibition. Prohibition and Smith's Catholic religion were the chief issues of the campaign. Smith met tie religious issue squarely. 11c said that hts devotionB his church meant as well devotion to the Comtrai- tion and the principle ot separation ot church and state. But Ins nomination stirred up much prejudice and fear, especially in the rural South an! Middle West where the new Ku Klux Klan had been strongest. Whuut t Muuum of Amcraun Art. N*'" York William C. ('aimer's 1934 painting "Dust. Drought, and Destruction" shows the ravages wrought by the great dust storms ol the 1930s. The tami has been abandoned, the windmill has (alien, the tree has died, and the wind swirls the soil away through the air. Many families whose fields grew only dust gave |l They loaded their old cars with what they wlJ carry and left the land where they had been ■rtl. The "Hivver" that Henry Fort! had in- Kotcd no longer carried them to a holiday in Lu Now instead it took them on their desperate ■stt'or a better life —anywhere. They moved in |0directions, without a clear destination and with D'.al plan. The "Okies" from Oklahoma and the "Allies from Arkansas headed west. A third of a ■lionpeople from those states and from Texas, the Boos, Kansas, anti Nebraska hit the road, fkmunds ended up in California as migrant ■ms picking fruit and vegetables and living in mkl camps. Their hard journeys and their teniisl lives can never be forgotten, for they Bum the long-suffering heroes of John Stcin- ki'i powerful novel. The Grapes of Wrath. The mild climate and the legend of its golden land made California the number one goal of the migrants. In lyjy that state tried to stem the tide by passing a law forbidding poor migrants to enter. But two years later the Supreme Court declared the law unconstitutional. A quarter-million Mexicans seeking work went to California during the ty30s. Other Mexicans, along with Filipinos, Okies, Arkies, and other migrants—at least another 100,000— moved north into Colorado, Wyoming, and Montana to work in the sugar beet fields. But, unlike the Okies, they had no Steinbeck to tell their story. Conserving the land. FDR's own experience had shown him the need for soil conservation. The land on Ins ancestral estate at Hyde Park, New York, had been worn out by centuries of unscientific farming. act for dinner in a small clubroom. Now they ■nlcd a large hall. Eleanor Roosevelt thought that women could humanize government. The aim of the New Dbl. as she saw it, was to promote "the general ness of the working man and woman and their es." Women had something special to offer. Tktwncimic inequality of women. Still, during ■oc years women were usually given jobs that considered "women's work"—as teachers, , clerks, nurses, and textile workers. They seldom put in supervisory position*. Though percent of the schoolteachers of the nation were cn.in superintendent positions they were only 5 percent. One-third of all graduate degrees were arded to women, yet they made up only 4 nt of the college professors. Even when they every same work, women often were paid less Pd men. In those depression days of widespread uncm- wyment, many Americans—including leading cn—feared that women would take jobs from This would increase the unemployment of traditional family "breadwinners." Florence congresswoman from California, declared, (Omen's place is not out m the business world ang with men who have families to sup- Secrctary of Labor Frances Perkins agreed. While women were heartened by the examples i Eleanor Roosevelt, Frances Perkins, Mary' Bethune, Mary Dewson, and others like ion the national scene, they still had a long road 1 toward economic equality. fcnON REVIEW ntify: Mary Dewson, Frances Perkins, 'rcncc Allen. jHow did Eleanor Roosevelt help women *kvc political influence? did the depression affect job prospects for JtThe struggles of labor cNcw Deal hoped to enlist the help of organized to improve the lot of "forgotten Amen- *-blacks, women, immigrants, the poor, gh section 7a of the NR A, and then by the cr Act and its National Labor Relations Board, the government lent its support to the attempts of workers to organize. The growth of the AF of L. Loss of jobs had cut union membership after the Croat Crash. Then the unions began to recover in 1934. But they were still unable to organize the great mass-production in- dustries—steel, autos, rubber, textiles. The AF of L was a federation of craft unions and so was better suited to the past than to the future. Its ways of dunking were not adapted to a world of vast factories, of power-driven machinery, and mass production. The Carpenters' Union, for example, had grown by moving from the construction trades into any industry that dealt with things made of wood and finally anything "that ever was made of wood." In this way—and by expanding into many new and smaller fields—the AF of L had reached a membership of 3.5 million by 1936- The birth of the CIO. Some union leaders were not happy with the craft approach. They felt that the age of crafts had gone out with the horse and buggy. John L. Lewis, the massive, shaggy-browed leader of the United Mine Workers, believed that the industrial world of the 1900s required a new kind of labor organizanon. The American Federation of Labor, led by Samuel Compels and William Green, had organized the aristocracy of American labor. They believed that the skilled workers in the old crafts—carpenters, plumbers, and bricklayers— could only lose if they threw in their lot with the millions of unskilled workers in factories and mines. Lewis had begun working in the mines when he was 16. Even after he became a high union official he never forgot that he was a miner. And he was confident that if labor was to become a great power and defend its interests it would have to organize in a new way. Unions would never get into the steel mills or auto plants if the company had to deal with a dozen craft unions. Each union would want what was best for its own members. Lewis said that a single union should bargain for all the workers— skilled and unskilled—in a giant industry. There should be one industrial union for steel, not a dozen or more craft unions. The AF of L had never organized the steel industry. For it did not fit into the old craft pattern. Now Lewis wanted to unionize the WkJt Work! John L. Lewis, shown here after a trip down into a mine, was the tough and charismatic le.uler.ot the CIO in the 19.30% steelworkers because steel nulls were the largest single users of coal. Their owners also owned coal mines. In 1935 the Committee for Industrial Organization (later the Congress of Industrial Organizations) was formed by Lewis. I lc was joined by other labor leaders who agreed that American labor needed a new approach—Sidney Hillman of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers. Charles Howard of the Typographical Union, and Thomas McMahon of the Textile Workers. This "CIO" quickly changed the direction of American labor organization. At first the founders said they only wanted to advise the AF of L on how to organize the giant industries. Hut the conservative leaders of the AT of L resisted these efforts. In 1937 when the CIO leaden and their members were expelled from the AF of L, the CIO declared its independence and became an important new force in American life. The CIO quickly stepped up its efforts. In lyj? alone production was halted by 4740 strikes. That winter the workers themselves invented an ingenious new weapon that worked for a short while. When they went on strike, instead of leaving the factory they simply stayed there and sat down at their machines. They refused to work or let others work. They had food brought in and slept on the factory floor. They said that since it was their work that made the factory valuable, the factory really partly belonged to them. Hut the Supreme Court disagreed, and in 1939 "sit-down strikes" were banned. Of course, the strikers did not always simply sit down. And employers sometimes hired private police who were reckless of the rights and the lives of workers. Outside the Republic Steel plant m Chicago ten striking workers were killed. From these struggles tame a new era for labor unions in the United States. During 1937, General Motors, Chrysler, U.S. Steel, and many smaller steel companies as well as Firestone Rubber. General Electric, and some major textile firms signed CIO contracts, Unions would play a strong new role in American industrial life. As never before, workers would look to them to hear their grievances and protca their rights. The power of factory' owners ova their workers was much reduced. Through the NLRB, the federal government supported the unions. Challenged by the success of the C HO, the Af ofi swung into action to expand its membership. Between 1936 and 1938 membership 111 all unions increased from 4 million to 6 million. Soon hg labor would face big business. New union members. The membership of die old-line craft unions of the AF of L had been mostly Americans of the older immigration—English. Scots Germans, Irish, and Scandinavians. Out of fear mil from prejudice these unions commonly excluded the later comers front southern and eastern Europe in addition to blacks and women. The new CIO unions welcomed all these groups with their theme song, "Solidarity Forever." Women found new openings in the factorv because the CIO began to recruit workers without United IntctiutHHLil Photo Employees at a General Motor. Corporation plant in Flint, Michigan, sat down by their machines m IW in the nation's first sit-down strike. They were seeking recognition of their new CIO union, the United Automobile Workers, and their tactic prevented the company from running the plant with strikebreakers. They won their demands, but the sit-down strike was soon declared illegal. mard to sex. Within a tew years nearly a million ■omen joined the unions. Hut even in the unions touch were not yet quite equal. For example, the liberal Amalgamated Clothing Workers soil al- ined women to be paid less than men tor the same pork. The unions themselves showed dramatic nges. The International Ladies Garment 'Markers Union, whose members had been largely isti at the end of World War I, now in the '-igjos was nearly half Italian. Before 1940 ;"unv of its members were Puerto Ricans. By ng their doors the unions had the power to opportunity for new immigrants and the idnldrcn of immigrants. I The labor movement continued to harbor large pkfts of prejudice. 1 Respite the example of the .certain unions—especially in building trades— nued to exclude blacks, Puerto Ricans, Mexi- and others whom they considered "dif- t" Fann laborers, migratory workers, and domestic servants remained outside the ranks of organized labor. Neither the unions nor the New Deal could bring an end to unemployment. Even after the mobilization for war in 1940 had provided thousands of new jobs, there were still 6 million out of work in 1941. Not until 1943 would the nation reach full employment. 1. Identify: John L. Lewis, Samuel Gompers, William Green, CIO, Sidney I fillman, sit-down strikes. 2. How did an industrial union differ from a craft union? 3. I low did some employers try to break strikes? 4. What gains did American labor unions make in 1936-1938? 5. What groups formerly left out of unions made big gains through the efforts of the CIO? 'quarantine" of the aggressor nations. But for the lent he could do little more to help the free itions of Europe. Americans had not forgotten senseless slaughter in the First World War. re and more Americans said, "Never Again!" ic were becoming pacifists, saying they would ergo to war for any reason. Still others became tionists," hoping to fence off the New World, rally enough. Americans who had come from \ or Germany did not like the idea of fighting iinst their old homeland. Americans of Irish nt remembered the English tyranny over their id. A few people even became American Nazis. Some historians argued that if the United States ki really been neutral during World War I, our nition would not have had to go to war at all. Might the world have been better, they asked, if the inked States had remained at peace? The seeds of [he world's problems, they said, were planted in 'Vorld War I. Perhaps a neutral United States luight have prevented the follies of the Treaty of ■Versailles. Some sensational hearings presided over I tySenator Gerald P. Nyc of North Dakota seemed Ifcihovv that arms manufacturers and bankers had I id us into the war for their own profit. The obvious answer seemed to be to pass a law'. ■ICongress had the power to declare war—why I could not Congress simply declare peace? Why I (Wild not strong, clear "Neutrality Acts" keep as Cl? Some thought that the United States irion of the Philippines might involve as w ith m m the Pacific. In 1934 the Iy dings-McDuiSe provided for the independence of the Philip— in twelve years. Early the next year, Roo- dt recommended to the Senate that we join the World Court, which had been set up by the League (filiations. But isolationists feared that even the fidvisory opinions" given by the Court might draw |ioiuo the battlefields of Europe. I As war clouds gathered, Americans' fond hopes |w neutrality grew ever stronger—and more futile. Acti were passed in 1935 and again in 1936 to (print Americans from sending arms to the natioas rxir. Americans were warned that they- traveled Bilicir own risk on the ships of nations at war. [When the Spanish civil war broke out in 1936, the tiiitv laws were extended to bar shipments of to cither side. But this hurt only the Spanish publicans. Franco was already receiving all the mas lie needed from Hitler and Mussolini. I >anu l Bttbop, St Lmn &ur-77ntc> As world war approaches. Uncle Sam sleeps and is tied down by opponents of involvement. The isolationists came up with still another "neutrality" law in 1937. This permitted sales to belligerents, but only "cash-and-carry." A country at war had to pay cash for tts goods before the goods left our shores. And the country at w-ar had to carry the goods in its own ships. The law embargoed munitions and also allowed the President to extend the embargo to other exports. The isolationists believed that at last they bad passed a !awr that would keep the United States out of war. Still, some isolationists sought an amendment to the Constitution that would prevent Congress from declaring war without first submitting the question to a popular vote. A poll of the American people in 1937 showed that 75 percent favored such an amendment. President Roosevelt was strongly opposed. He warned that "it would encourage other nations to believe that they could violate American rights with impunity." And the House refused to submit the amendment to the states. Neither President Roosevelt nor a dozen acts of Congress could block the world's drift toward war. In January 1938, FDR suggested a world conference Hoping to start life anew, a family returns to its farm near Bromberg, Poland, ill November 1939 after Nazi bornbings have left it in rums. ent' from their own factories. By a vote of 12-11, iic isolationists in the Senate Foreign Relations ummittcc put oft any changes in the law until the Kxt session of Congress, which was to meet in jiiuurv iy40.' CfflfinHinjf problems with Japun. Meanwhile, Jolv 26, 1939, the State Department moved Kiinst the Japanese war machine. Japan was told 1! in six months we would end the Japanesc- Umcncan Commercial Treaty of 1911. This freed bligrcss to stop the sale of war materials to Japan. Japanese had been invading China with amis ghunthc United States. And the Japanese were d by news that their new ally Nazi Gcr- m\ had made a sudden alliance with Japan's old nv Russia. For a time Japanese expansion in was slowed. IVirnws to Europe. In Europe the attempts to ■prase Hitler seemed only to whet his appetite for Sort conquests. He had risen to power by telling the German people that Communist Russia was their prime enemy. Now he shocked the whole world when he announced a nonaggression pact with Stalin in 1939. The secret terms gave Germany western Poland, while the Soviet Union was free to take Finland, Estonia, Latv ia, eastern Poland, Bessarabia (in Romania), and Lithuania. The Nazis believed that in this way they would protect themselves against war on two fronts. In return Russia would gam a buffer zone against Germany— and a temporary assurance against attack. Throughout the summer of 1939 Ffitlcr demanded that Poland return to Germany certain districts containing people of "German blood." Poland, bolstered by Bntain and France, stood its ground. Then on September 1, without warning. Hitler invaded Poland. Two days later England and France declared war on Gcmiany. Then Stalin's armies marched into Poland from the east on September 17, Within tw'o weeks, on September 29, brave, long-suffering Poland was divided between the two tyrants. h [iltimrsf Americans are interned. Japanese and berkans of Japanese ancestry had long faced pcruinnation on the West Coast. Alter Pearl Ibitxir their situation became much worse. For no bod reason, other citizens blamed them for what Ar Japanese militarists had done and even began to wpcct that they might be helping the enemy across pc Pacific. Western politicians and frightened litary men pressured FDR to remove them from : coastal states. President Roosevelt gave in. Hv in 11042, under the excuse ot national security, Japanese Americans were rounded up. was no evidence that these Americans were yal. They were forced to sell their homes and Messes on short notice and at sacrifice prices. Dry then were confined in camps, watched by Bird guards, and treated as if they were dangcr- Not until after the presidential election of 4did the government change its policy and begin case these innocent citizens, pite this humiliating treatment, 1200 men cored from the camps to serve in the United armed forces. In a segregated unit these ers in the 442nd Regimental Combat Team fought heroically in Italy- Another Japanese American battalion was recruited from Hawaii, where there was no internment because there were so many Japanese. In time of war it is harder than ever for a free nation to preserve its freedoms. Defending the country becomes a matter of life and death. Dissenters are open to the charge ol being traitors. This is a true testing time of democracy. In World War II, except for the disgraceful treatment of Japanese Americans, the nation's record was far better than it had been in World War t. Women and the war effort. The need for workers opened economic opportunities for women. Now, instead of being dissuaded from taking jobs as they had been during the depression, they were urged to go to work. Six million women joined the 12 million already in the labor force. T hey took on a wide variety of jobs and surprised the men who had said they were too weak and delicate to be lumberjacks, blast furnace operators, stevedores, or blacksmiths. They proved that they could handle ail these jobs. And they also operated complex Ordered to leave their homes and businesses on short notice by order of the United States government, bewildered Japanese Americans wait in Los Angeles for a train to take them to an internment camp. Ltbriry of Cungrcn 0 to form a single government. Hut neither of had been willing to compromise. When ting broke out between them, the United States backed Chiang. Mans Americans who did not t to see communism come to China still were y lukewarm supporters of Chiang. They saw as another dictator and disliked the corruption his government. Hut his fall and the loss of land China to the Communists seemed one defeat for the U nited States. rise of McCarthy. At tins moment a clever unscrupulous politician began to play upon the and helplessness felt by Americans. It was hard lain how the strongest nation in the world had rd such a pass. Was this the fault of traitors c the United States? Joseph R. McCarthy, iiblican senator from Wisconsin, gave them the iver they wanted to hear. On February 9, 1950, 1 speech in West Virginia he charged that the Department was infested with Communist j. He waved a piece of paper on which he said listed their names. His charge, repeated over over, increased the alarm. Even after srthy was unable to find a single Communist the State Department, many troubled Anieri- 1 still listened to him, McCarthy became the gest political power in the country outside he major party leaders. Even Presidents feared shim. fin# the United States. Members of C011- too, seemed panicked by the internal threat •which there was so little proof. Hut most of all S wanted to prove that they were not soft on mutism. In 1950 Congress passed the McCar- Stcrual Security Act. It required Communist 'Communist-front'' organizations to register the Attorney General. These included groups wire not Communist at all but which, it was ed, might harbor some Communists. Of e, it was impossible in practice for any large "ation to prove that it had no Communists. ' suipect groups had to provide membership lists financial statements. Membership in the must party itself was not made a crime, but writ of Communists in defense plants was klcn. Ill case of an internal security emer- i, the act gave the President sweeping powers Wind up and detain anyone who might even possibly commit espionage or sabotage. President Truman vetoed the McC'arran Act. I Ic said that it was worse than the Sedition Act of 179s (p- 03) and that it took a "long step toward totalitarianism," But the law was passed over his veto. Using the excuse of "internal security." in 1952 Congrcss passed a new immigration law, the McCarran-Walter Act. Again Truman vetoed the bill, but again it was passed over his veto. The law kept the quota system, which favored immigrants from northern and western Europe. It provided a complicated and insulting system of loyalty checks for foreigners who wished to visit the United States, It also gave the Attorney General the power to deport immigrants for being members of Communist and Communist-front groups even after they had become citizens. The law did include one small victory for the American tradition. It finally allowed Asians living in the United States to become citizens and set a quota permitting about 2000 to enter the country each year. The fears of Communist subversion were heightened by the arrest of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg and Morton Sobell. on the report of Klaus Fuchs that they had passed key secrets about the atomic bornb to the Russians. In March 195 • the Rosen bergs, after a lengthy trial, were sentenced to death for a crime "worse than murder." Sobell was sentenced to 30 years. The Rosenbcrgs were executed in 1953. As with Sacco and Vanzctti back in the 1920s, many citizens doubted that the Rosenbcrgs were guilty'. Or they believed that even if they were guilty, the nation was not well served by inflicting this drastic penalty 111 peacetime. Civil war in Korea. Troubled by these problems at home, Americans soon discovered that from the other side of the globe the Soviets could find ways to threaten the American peace of mind. Civil war exploded in Korea in June 1950. Korea was an ancient country (the size of Mississippi and Indiana together) on a peninsula in East Asia, opposite Japan. Its borders touched Communist China and the Soviet Union. It had been annexed by Japan in 1910 and was surrendered to the Allies in 1945. At the end of the war Russian troops had moved into the country as far as the 3ifth parallel. American troops had freed the country south of that line. Korea was supposed to be united under a government chosen by free elections ordered by the Constitution back in 1787 knew that the growing nation would need up-to-date bets about the moving population. So they established the federal census (Art. I, sec. 2), requiring the national government to count the population every ten years. Then the members of the I louse of Representatives could be reapportioned according to the changes. As the census became more detailed, the public amid use this information to plan the water supply and roads and schools. Businesses could build factories where workers would be living. They could predict the size of the market for their product. The Bureau of the Census (now in the Department of Commerce) became an American institution. It has gathered all sorts of bets about our people. And demographers even invented ways to estimate the changes occurring between the regular decennial (every ten years) census. The nation grows. After World War II the United States experienced a "population explo- sion." When the Great Depression finally ended, people had more money to support a family. And then when veterans returned home at the war's end, the birthrate increased. But this was not just the normal increase after any war. The population soared so fast that even expert demographers were astonished. In 1940 there were 132 million people in the United States. During the decade of the 1930s our population had increased just 7-2 percent—the smallest proportionate increase in the nation's history. By 1950 there were 151 million, an increase of 14.5 percent over 1940. Between 1950 and i960 the number of people went up even faster—by 18.5 percent—to a total of over 179 million. This was mainly due to the high birthrate. At the same time, refugees from war and nazism and communism swelled the number of immigrants coming to the United States from 1 million during the decade of the 1940s to 2.5 million in the 1950s. By the end of 1950 one person w as being added to the nation every twelve seconds. This explosive growth was equal then to another Richmond, Virginia, every' month and a whole Maryland every year. It put strains on cities and states, which were forced to build bigger hospitals, to hire more police and firefighters, and especially to add new schools to cope with the large numbers of children. P.IOI0 Koch/Photo Rctonfcn I luring the 1950s. our population increased so rapidly that experts said we were in the midst of a "baby boom." Slowing the boom. During the 1960s the population boom began to slow down. Still the natron grew by 13.5 percent, which meant adding nearly n million people to make a population of 203 million by 1970. The nation now had twice the number of people it lud only 50 years before. By the end of 1972 the baby boom was over. The Census Bureau reported then that American women were not having quite enough babies to keep the population steady. But the many male and female babies born during those years of population explosion would grow up and 111 ume have their own children. Moving west, north, and south. Liven while the rate of growth of the American population changed, federal aid to elementary and high school education. 1 ic put them there because he knew it would be hard to get them passed. Perhaps he could push them through in the afterglow of his triumph at the polls. And he did! Medical insurance ami aid to education. The Medicare bill, which he signed into law in July 1965, hid been changed by Congress. It provided even rider protection than I B) had asked. Citizens over received low-cost hospital insurance financed by ;n increase in the Social Security payroll tax. It they wished, they could have medical insurance tor doctors' bills and other out-of-hospital expenses with the government paying halt the cost of the insurance premium. Another part of the law, called Medicaid, offered federal grants to states that wanted to set up their own plans to help needy people below 'lie age of 6$. The first limited program of medical aid for the needy aged had been enacted in 1950. It helped only those who were not receiving Social Security payments. It had been greatly expanded in 11/0 to cover all older people who were not able to meet their medical expenses. These earlier medical id plans were now superseded by Medicare and Medicaid. The President's next message to Congress asked St.) billion for aid to education, "the key which can unlock the door to the Great Society." Past jitlcmpts to give federal aid to education had been topped by the religious issue. The Constitution (First Amendment) forbade Congress to make any law "respecting an establishment of religion." If I Congress gave federal funds to "parochial I schools "—those supported by a particular church— ■ Aid this violate the Constitution? President |ohti- I tun sidestepped the issue. He offered aid to a school Ick'Hy according to the number of its students I whose families had annual incomes below poverty I level. No school could receive aid unless it obeyed ■be laws against segregation. I Tosignthe Elementary and Secondary Education I Act. l.BJ went back to the one-room schoolhouse m Bonrwall, a mile from his birthplace in Texas, I ikre he hail gone as a boy. I Ic knew how to make lit ceremony into a warm human drama. Present lirrr were his first teacher and also seven Mexican Ijrocncans who had attended the school in Cotulla, I cm, where he had taught before graduating from A flood of bills. President Johnson had chosen the right strategy. After these two controversial bills passed so easily, his others found clear sailing. The list of important laws passed by the 89th Congress was eye-popping. It covered the nation. There were laws to beautify the highways (supported by his wife. Lady Bird) and laws for clean air. There was a law to insure truth til packaging. The Appalachian Regional Development Act gave to the poverty-stricken mountainous region stretching from Pennsylvania to Alabama and Georgia S1.1 billion for highways, health centers, and industrial development. The cities, too, received their share. The Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965 aided construction of a quarter-million units of low-rent public housing. "Urban Renewal"—the clearing of slums and rebuilding of cities—received S2.9 billion. The rents of low- and moderate-income families were subsidized. Congress created a Department of Housing and Urban Development. To head the department Johnson named Robert C. Weaver, the first black in the Cabinet. The following year. Congress established the Department of T ransportation. The Immigration Act of 1965 abolished the quota system. Each year 120,000 persons could conic from Western Hemisphere lands. Another 170,000 could be admitted from all ocher nations, but not more than 20,000 of these could come from any one country. Families of people already in the country, skilled workers, and refugees had priority. Congress voted billions for the war on poverty—and for exploring outer space. LIiJ\ program offered something for nearly everybody. The power of books. Presidents bad great power. But so did authors. R ache! (arson, a slight, modest woman, graduated from Johns Hopkins University and became a famous marine biologist. Her poetic books about the oceans and the seashore introduced Americans to the wonders of life in the unpolluted sea. Then in 1962 she published Silent Spring—a block-basting book on a most unlikely subject. She showed that pesticides—especially DDT—were damaging the environment more than anyone suspected. The poisonous new chemicals used to wipe out destructive insects were passing through the food chain—from the insects to the birds who ate the insects. Birds were dying from the poisons Ill tlm book wc have traced the progress, over the centuries of American history, ol efforts to widen opportunity. We have seen the rise of the American public school, the free public high school, the wonderful growth of American private colleges and state and land-grant public universities. It would take a long time to make opportunity equal for all Americans. There would never be perfectly equal opportunity, even with a whole system of free education for all. There would always be differences between families. Naturally some parents would be more anxious than others tor their children to go on with their education. And, of course, better-educated parents m homes where there were lots of books would be able to give their children a head start in the competition. Still, a great deal could be done to make [opportunities more equal. In the southern states where slavery had flourished and where blacks continued to be treated as second-class citizens, the public schools were not often equal for all. And in big cities m the North, segregated black neighborhoods tended to leave their children at a real advantage. When the Supreme Court of the United States in i<>54 oudawed segregation in the public schools, it took a big step to insure that educational opportunities would be more equal. The n/>2 law 7111st segregation in federally funded public housing helped. After the anti-poll tax amendment to dir Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) finally adopted ill i<X>4 and the Voting Rights Vt was passed in 1 "X"S, blacks in the South were able to use their votes to elect officials who would protect thru rights and improve their opportunities. The wars after World War II saw these and other strenuous efforts to fulfill the American dream of equal opportunity. Immigrant problems and immigrant inequality. The blacks were not the only Americans whose opportunities hail not been equal. Every immi- nt group had suffered discrimination when it val on these shores. They all had their painful lenis. They had been cut out of the best Is, the best colleges, the best neighborhoods, the best jobs. With only a few exceptions, rc had been no civil rights laws or constitutional thncnts passed to protect them. In fact, as wc seen (p. 371), some of the most respectable. richest, and best-educated Americans actually formed organizations purposely to discriminate against new immigrants. When the Irish came here in the 18+osas refugees from the potato famine and from religious persecution. they were treated as intruders by some of New England's oldest residents. Factories and offices needing employees displayed the sign saying, "No Irish Need Apply." The Know-Nothing party, beginning as a secret society 111 New York City in 1X49, organized discrimination against Catholics and immigrants. Its special targets were the new Irish Americans and the many German Americans who had been moving into the Middle West. Hatred against Catholics was again organized in 1X87 m a group th.it called itself the American Protective Association. Us members poured slanders on the thousands ol recent Italian and Polish immigrants. In 1X94, when the Hood of immigrants came from central, eastern, and southern Europe, many leading Bostonians (whose parents had immigrated some time before) joined with professors and university presidents from Harvard. Wisconsin, and California to form the powerful Immigration Restriction League. Among the groups most discriminated against were the Jews. Seeking refuge from ghettos and persecution in Germany, Poland, and Russia, Jews brought with them a tradition of learning and a reverence tor books and education. Many were eager to pursue their studies in the best universities and medical schools. But the best universities, like Harvard, set up shameful restrictive quotas, which deprived Jews of their equal chances. Chinese, Japanese, and Korean immigrants, too, suffered more than their share of discrimination— simply because they also wanted their full opportunities as Americans. The school board in San Francisco even tried to force their segregation in the public schools until President Theodore Roosevelt made them stop. At the dawning of the twentieth century there were 70 million people in the United States. Of these, more than 10 million had themselves been born in Europe, and more than one-third of all Americans—26 million—had at least one foreign- born parent. Although people boasted that this was a nation of immigrants, nearly every kind of immigrant at some time had suffered some sort of discrimination! The social disease of discrimination, as we have seen, lasted violently into the modem century. In the 1920s the Ku Klux Klan, along with its hocus-pocus and its costume of white sheets, dared to target its terror against Catholics, Jews, and blacks in the South and the Midwest. During World War II, FDR gave in to panic and put thousands of innocent Japanese Americans into concentration camps. When the able Al Smith ran lor President in 192K, he lost votes merely because he was a Catholic. And when John F Kennedy was nominated for President in i960, political leaders wondered whether the time had yet come when a Catholic could be elected. Prejudice and discrimination, then, were not the monopoly of any one part of the country nor of anyone period. Perhaps they would never be entirely cured. But the United States had made a good start. The traditional American open door policy at home gave refuge to oppressed peoples from the whole world. The Civil War against slavery, the Emancipation Proclamation, and the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth amendments to the Constitution were long-overdue steps. In World War 11 the United States had fought the discrimination, birbarism, and racial superstitions of the Nazis. Now Americans were ready again to move ahead. Civil rights laws, supported by Presidents of both parties ever since Truman, declared that the Amcn- an conscience had been newly awakened. In our laud the twentieth century would lx- another oentury of progress for human equality. Busing for school integration. Righting past wrongs was not easy. Americans loved speed. They expected to accomplish in a few years w-hat I elsewhere had required centuries. And Americans, . too, had a faith that laws could cure almost anything. By the Eighteenth Amendment and the laws against alcoholic beverages, Americans showed that they believed laws could cure the social ills of drunkenness. In that they were disappointed. But could laws speedily cure discrimination? After Albert Einstein fled to the United States in 1933 to escape Nazi anti-Semitism, Ben Shahn made this painting of the white-haired physicist arriving here. I An ftcMNOTr, NY EDfl Urr'Aivl/SttHk. Boston To bring about racial balance 111 northern schools, students were sometimes based from one neighborhood to another. Congress and the states passed new laws and set up new commissions. It was discovered that the problem was more complicated and deeper rooted than it seemed at first. Programs to cure past ills also created new problems. One example was busing. After the decision of the Supreme Court in 1954 outlawing racial segregation 111 public schools, various means were tried to comply with the law. Often neighborhoods wrcrc racially segregated. It seemed that the only way to provide "racial balance" in classrooms was to bring pupils from one neighborhood to another. This was costly. City children had been walking to their neighborhood schools. So parents were annoyed to see their children taken in bases to schools all the way across town. In the South legal segregation had ceased by the late 1970s. Then the age-old system of separate public school systems lor the races came to an end. But racism survived in the form of private schools that white parents set up to avoid integration. 3. Spanish-speaking peoples During these years of civil rights movements, other groups that felt themselves discriminated agaiast organized for equal rights. After women and blacks, the largest such group was the Spanish- speaking people, or I lispamcs. Their population was growing at such a rate that demographers predicted they would be the largest minority in the United States by the year 2000. They had come troin many places and at many different times. Some of their ancestors came to America with the Spanish conquerors 111 the century after Columbus, and their families have lived here for more than 400 years. Others emigrated to the mainland United States from Spain, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and other Caribbean islands, as well as from Latin American countries. The Mexican Americans. Three-fifths of all the Spanish-speaking people in the United States are Mexican Americans. They arc both the newest of the new immigrants and the oldest of the old. The ancestors of many of them settled in the Southwest and California in the 1600s and 1700s (p. 28). These early settlers were followed over the years by millions of others. By 1980 there were at least 7 million Mexican Americans in the United States, and thousands more were entering the country every year. By far the largest number of them have continued to settle where their first settlements lay—in California, Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, and Texas. Their language and their culture give a special rich flavor to the food and shape the music and architecture in the whole region. Many Mexican Americans are descended from the intermarriage of Spanish and Indian peoples. They proudly trace their heritage all the way back to the great Aztec and Mayan civilizations. They generally call themselves by a variety of names: Mexican, Mexican American, Chicauo (a form of Mexico no), mestizo, and sometimes just La Razo (meaning "the people"). Conservative and hardworking, the Mexican Americans are almost entirely Roman Catholic in religion, with strong family tics, and they cling to the Spanish language. Although originally a rural people, now. like the whole nation, they are largely urban. Fully 80 percent have settled together in city neighborhoods, which they call harries. From the very beginning the differences of religion, language, skin color, and culture between the Mexican Americans and other Americans (whom they call "Anglos") created conflicts. Each group tended to view its way of doing things as superior. But Anglos were the majority and controlled the government, courts, and schools. Mexican Americans were often discriminated against Great numbers of them ended up 111 the lowest- paying jobs where no training was needed. The rise of a "Broion Power" movement. The Mexican Americans organized their own groups to voice their needs For example, the thousands of veterans who had fought for the United States in World War II formed the Mexican G.l. Forum. Then, 111 the tumultuous 1960s, Mexicans began to speak out more loudly. During the 1960s there developed a Chicane or "Brown Power" movement. Among its most outspoken leaders was Reics Lopez Tijerina, or £/ Tig re. Born in Texas, he led a fight 111 New Mexico for the return of the lands he said the Anglos had stolen from the original Spanish-speaking settlers But many of the more conservative Mexican Americans, like Senator Joseph Montoya of New Mexico, disapproved of Tijerina's radical program. And instead of the name "Chicano," which some of the young had begun to use as a symbol of pride, they preferred to be simply Americans. Another leader was Rodolfo "Corky" Gonzales of Colorado, f le was a former prizefighter and, fur a short time, director of a war-on-povertv youth program. I11 1965 he founded the Crusade fur Justice in Denver, which aimed to build Chicano pride by giving them jobs and social services in their own communities. Organizing farm laborers. Many Mexicans and Mexican Americans worked as poorly paid farm laborers. Some, called hraccros (a Spanish word meaning laborers), came north under contracts to work in the fields. Others entered the coumrv illegally by slipping across the long and difficult-to- patrol border between Mexico and the United States. They were called "wetbacks" because seme of them swam or waded across the Rio Grande Farm workers had always been the most difficult laborers to organize into a union. Since thc\ came to work only for a season, and w ere spread across the countryside, it was bard to bring them together for meetings. Hut the shrewd and eloquent Cesar Chavez decided to try, and he had remarkable success. Me had worked as a fa mi laborer himself, hi 1962 he began to organize the migrant laborers— brown, white, and black—into a union. In 1965, when 900 Filipino grape pickers in another union went out on strike, Chavez's union decided to go out, too. The following year, the two unions merged to form the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee. Chavez, like Martin Luther King, Jr., believed in nonviolence. Me firmly insisted on following this course throughout the long years of the strike against the owners of vineyards in Delano, California. This won him public support from church groups, from other unions, and from political leaders like Robert F. Kennedy. A brilliant publicist, Chavez organized an effective nationwide boycott of California grapes. When some of his followers resorted to violence, he protested by fasting for 25 days—and badly injured bis health. But nonviolence prevailed. Finally, the opposition of the vineyard owners started to (nimble. In 1970, after five years, many of them ugned contracts with Chavez's union. He had actually organized farm laborers into a union and won better pay and working conditions. Chavez had done what had been thought impossible. Chavez himself stayed out of politics, but other Mexican Americans won high office. Both New Mexico and Arizona have had Mexican American governors. Other Mexican Americans have been elected to the Senate and the House, or have become mayors of large cities, like Henry Cisneros of San Antonio, Texas, and Federico Pena of Denver, Colorado. President Nixon appointed a Mexican American woman, Romana A. Banuelos, to be Treasurer of the United States. And President Carter appointed Lconcl Castillo as Commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service. Put'rfo Rico and the Puerto Ricans. The Puerto Ricans were different from other Hispanics because ill of them were citizens of the United States before they arrived on the mainland. The special relation between Puerto Rico and the rest of the United States allowed them to go back and forth to their home island at will. The island of Puerto Rico had been visited by Columbus m U93, even before any Spaniards had I >jnict S Brody/Stock. Bouoo Cesar Chavez organized migrant workers in California into a union and led them in a long, successful strike against vineyard owners. come to mainland America. When Columbus arrived, the Arawak Indians were already there. During the colonial period the island was settled by- Spaniards and by black slaves imported from Africa. The land and the climate were ideal for raising sugar cane. And from the sugar was made the famous Puerto Rican rum. In tSyft, after the Spanish-Amcrican War, the United States took over the island. One of FDR's braiwnisters, Rexford G. Tug- well, was sent to Puerto Rico as governor in 1941. There he worked with Luis Munoz Mann, a poetic and inspiring Puerto Rican political leader, and rhev produecd "Operation Bootstrap." This was a program to improve agriculture and attract industry to Children in New York City patiently wait for an approaching Puerto Rican Day parade the island. In i <>47 the island began electing its own governor. Munoz led the way toward a special "Commonwealth" status lor Puerto Rico within the United States. When the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico was proclaimed on July 25, 1952. Munoz became the first popularly elected governor. The following years showed how the resourcefulness and intelligence of people might make up for the lack of other natural resources. Under the ingenious "Commonwealth" plan, Puerto Ricans were given powers of self-govern- ment like those of citizens of the states. Puerto Rico is represented in Congress by a resident commissioner who can speak but has no vote, except in committees. Puerto Ricans do uot pay federal income tax on money earned in Puerto Rico, and they do not vote in national elections. By 1970. with the aid of "Operation Bootstrap," Puerto Rico had the largest per capita income in Latin America. Still, Puerto Rican incomes were low by comparison to the mainland United States. After World War II, unemployment on the home island led thousands of Puerto Ricans to move to the mainland. In the 1970s about one-third otall Puerto Ricans—1.5 million —were living in die continental United States. Ot these about one-halt lived in New York City, w here many worked in the garment trades. The city now held more Puerto Ricans than the island capital ot San Juan. Though they were citizens, in other ways they svere immigrants and suffered many of the problems ot earlier immigrants. Since tlicv spoke another language and felt strange, they formed their own neighborhood* where the signs were 111 Spanish. Strangers, without the advantages of money or education, they. too. joined the American quest for equal opportunity. Despite the cordial political relations between the Commonwealth and the rest ot the United States, many Puerto Ricans on the island were not satisfied. Some agitated for independence so that Puerto Rico could he a separate nation. Othcn wanted Puerto Rico to become a state m the Union. Still, in election after election the majority of Puerto Ricans voted to keep the unusual Commonwealth status. Meanwhile, Puerto Rico, with its delightful tropical beaches and its Spairah- crican flavor, became a favorite vacation spot tor thousands from the mainland. And Puerto Ricans were enriching the culture ot the United States, Lrough such figures as the violinist Jose Figueroa and the actor Jose Ferrer. d new migration. Throughout its history the iuted States lias served as a refuge tor people mg turmoil and repression at home. Alter Fidel srm seized power in Cuba in 1959 and began to ate a Communist state, over half a million indent fled to the United States. Many went on •>settle in other lands, hut nearly 400,000 chose to lam here. A substantial proportion settled in [Florida, especially in and around Miami. Some of these newcomers dreamed ami planned ly (or the day they could return to their homc- ml. lint others became Americans and began a life. I he Cubans who came to the United States were urally well educated, and over two-thirds were ned tor white-collar jobs. I lardworkiug and bilious, some ot them soon rose to head hanks businesses. Large sections of Miami became lost as Cuban as Havana itself. T his first wave licfugecs was joined in 19X0 by over 100,000 more Cubans who fled when Castro suddenly allowed [(satisfied citizens to leave. Again the United Wo served as a haven and a laud ot opportunity. Identify sir explain: Chicano, l.o Roza, barrios, Joseph Montoya. Rodolfo Gonzales, Luis Munoz Marin, Operation Bootstrap. L What chief groups make up the Spanish- speaking peoples ot the United States? Locate their major areas of settlement. How did Cesar Chavez work tor greater (quality tor Mexican Americans? How does the status ol Puerto Ricans difler tram that ot other I lispanics m the United States? What event brought many Cubans to this 1 country? American past came home to roost. It was one thing to give all Americans an equal chance for education and tor jobs today. That was difficult, but not impossible. It was quite another thing to try to undo history. This problem arose in regard to the very first Americans. They were here, of course, centuries before the first Europeans or Africans. As the United States grew, their own cultures had not prospered. American Indians w ere not immigrants, were not settled in big cities, and could not vote. They had little appeal for politicians. In colonial times and for much of the iHoos, newer Americans considered them simply part of the wilderness to be cleared away. Later they were treated as "wards" ot the government and put on reservations. These were usually on land that nobody else wanted. Then during the 1900s their numbers grew. Though in 1900 they totaled less than a quarter- million. by the end of the 1070s they were over 1.3 million. Not until the Sny der Act of 1924 were all Indians born in the United States admitted to full citizenship. The Indians had been the victims of varying whims of United States officials. Under FDR in 1934 there was an Indian "New Deal," which aimed to halt the sale of Indian land, to restore mlui land-holding, to rebuild the tribes, and to promote tribal culture. In a bold move FDR appointed outspoken and combative John Collier, the executive director of the American Indian Defense Association, as head o( the Bureau ol Indian Affairs. From that position, between 1933 and 194s, Collier fought to enable the Indians both to preserve their old ways and to participate fully in American life. During World War II, 25,000 American Indians served in the armed forces. They felt they had earned their right to be full-fledged American citizens, with fully equal opportunities. But after World War II, the Native Americans still had the least education, the lowest incomes, the highest unemployment, the worst health, the shortest life expectancy, and the highest suicide rate ot any large- group m the country. 4 The American Indians cr World War II when Americans tried once in to make opportunities equal, injustices of the Termination and relocation. In the 1950s, under President Eisenhower, the federal government's policy toward the Indians changed once again. Congress enacted laws for a new program called 713 