United States Conquering a Continent Winthrop D. Jordan - Leon F. Litwack Richard Hofstadter-William Miller-Daniel Aaron Sixth Edition United States Conquering a Continent Sixth Edition Volume I Winthrop D. Jordan-Leon F. Litwack University of Mississippi University of California, Berkeley Richard Hofstadter- William Miller-Daniel Aaron Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 Library of Congress Cataloginy-in-Piibllcation Data The United States Includes bibliographies and Index Contents: v 1. Conquering a continent—v, 2. Becoming a world power / Leon F Lit walk 1. United Slates - lltston I. Jordan. Wtnthrop I) II latwaek. Leon F. E178 1.U5532 1987b 973 86-25126 ISBN 0-13-938374-3.v 1) ISBN 0-13-938432-1 (v 2; let al. | Editoriiil/pi'ocltietion .supervision: Mars Hartloni Cover and interior design: Jayne Conte Manufacturing huyer: liny Keating Acquisitions editor: Steve Dolphin Photo research: Barbara Selnilt/. Photo editor: l.orinda Morris Cover photo: Upper and Lower Bay of N.Y.i undated Lithograph by Currier At Ives. Credit The Granger Collection. © 1987, 1982, 1976, 1972, 1967, 1957 by Prentice-Hall, Inc. A Division of Simon & Schuster Englewood Cliffs. New Jersey 07632 Photo credits p. xvt The Granger CoUecUon, p 18. Ntrw York Historical Society; p. 4*1. Independent** National Histum. Park Phil Pa, p 66. New York Historical Society, p 8*1, New York Historical Society, p 106. Copyright Yalt* University Art Gallery. p 126. Independence National I Intone Park. Phil . Pa . p 148 New York I listoncal Society p. 168. Alan P Kirbv Collection. Lafavertc Collegc. p, 188. The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Gift of Lyman G. Blooming dale 1901. p 214. The Boatman * National Bank of St laxiiv p 236. Cincinnati Art Museum, p 260. San Jar into Museum of Hi&torv Association; p 282. The Historic New Orleans Collection; p 302. Hie Metropolitan Museum of Art. Purchase, 1941 Joseph Pulitzer Bequest; p 322, Kennedy Galleries, Jm 40 W 57th Si , New York. N.Y.. p. 346. New York Historical Society; p. 370. Collccllan of Jay P Altmayer. Mobile, Ala All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form or by any means, without permission In writing from the publisher. Primed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 Prentice-Ilall International (UK) Limited. London Prentice-Hall of Australia Ply Limited. Sydney Prentice-Hall Canada Inc., Toronto Prentice-Hall Hispanoamericana, S.A.. Mexico Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited, Neu Delhi Prentice-Hall of Japan, Inc., Tokyo Prentice-Hall of Southeast Asia Pte. Ltd,, Singapore Editora Prentice-Hall do Brasd. Ltda , IIto de Janeiro •/ m7b v,/ MAPS AND CHARTS xi WORDS AND NAMES IN AMERICAN HISTORY xiii A NOTE OF INTRODUCTION xiv Chapter 1 _____________________ The First Americans 2 Technology in the Eastern Woodlands 2 Nature and Society 3 The Old World Meets the New 4 The Norsemen 4 European Expansion 5 Portugal Takes the Lead 7 The Spanish and French in America 7 Christoforo Columho 8 Chapter 2____________________ Changes in England 20 Virginia: The h irst Colony 20 The Colony Grows 21 Bacon's Rebellion 22 Puritan New England 23 The Spanish and the Indians 9 The French 11 The English in the New World 11 The Reformation 12 England versus Spain 12 Frobisher and Gilbert 13 Raleigh's Roanoke 14 Summary 15 Suggested Readings 16 Puritan Ideology 23 Pilgrims in Plymouth 24 The Commonwealth of Massachusetts Bay 25 The Dissidents of Rhode Island 26 Connecticut, New Hampshire, and Maine 27 iii Puritans unci Indians 28 New England's Economy: Trade 29 The Dutch Beachhead 30 The Proprietary Colonies 31 Maryland 31 Carolina 32 New Jersey 34 Pennsylvania arid Delaware 34 Building an Empire 37 The Mercantile System: Theory and Practice 37 The Navigation Acts: Regulation and Enforcement 38 Problems of Enforcement 39 The "Glorious Revolution" 40 New Imperial Regulations 41 Summary 42 Suggested Readings 42 Chapter o________________ Patterns of Population 46 The Population Explosion 4(i Specialization of Labor 47 The Young and the Old 48 Non-English Immigrants 48 The Germans 48 The Scotch-I rish 49 The West Africans 50 Classes and Life Styles 53 Tidewater Gentry 53 Buck Parts of the South 54 The Middle Colonies 55 New England 56 Family Farms 57 Colonial Cities 58 Colonial Politics 61 Governors and Assemblies 61 Consensus and Conjlict 62 Summary 63 Suggested Readings 64 Chapter 4-_______________ Religious Convictions 68 Established Churches 68 The Great Awakening 68 Effects of the Great Revival 69 The Awakening, Blacks, and Slavery 70 Many Protestant Religions 71 The Enlightenment 72 The End of Witchcraft 72 The World of Isaac Newton 72 John Locke: Social Scientist 74 Benjamin Franklin: The Enlightened American 74 Science in the Colonies 76 A People of the Written Word 77 4 People of the Printed Word 79 Struggle for a Protestant America 80 The Threat of New France 80 The Founding of Georgia 80 Louisburg as Citadel and Symbol 81 Summary 82 Suggested Readings 82 Chapter 5_________________________ Victory Over the French 86 The Ohio Country 86 The Albany Cotigress 86 Fruits of Victory 87 New Imperial Measures 88 Writs of Assistance 89 Problems in the West 89 Discontent in Virginia 91 Troops and Taxation 91 The Sugar, Currency, and Quartering Acts 91 The Stamp Act Crisis 92 The Townshend Acts 95 Deepening Crisis 96 Trouble in Massachusetts 96 The Boston Massacre 97 Relative Quiet 98 Toward Concord and Lexington 99 Tea and the Intolerable Acts 99 The First Continental Congress 100 War 102 Summary 103 Suggested Readings 104 Chapter (l_____________________ Toward Independence 108 The Second Continental Cotigress 108 Early Fighting 109 The Question of Loyalty 110 The Declaration of Independence 111 The Loyalists 113 War—and Peace 114 Strengths and Weaknesses 114 Fighting in the Middle Colonies 115 Saratoga and the French Alliance 117 War in the South 119 The Treaty of Paris 120 Social Changes 121 Slavery 121 Churches. Property, and Women 122 Summary 124 Suggested Readings 125 Chapter 7___________________ The State Constitutions 128 Power to the Legislatures 128 Fundamental Power of the People 128 Bills of Rights 128 The Articles of Confederation 129 Strengths and Weaknesses 129 The Problem of Land Claims 130 Foreign Affairs 130 Financial Problems 132 Congress and the Private Economy 132 Congress and the Frontier 133 The Northwest Ordinance 133 Shays' Rebellion 134 I'he Constitution 135 The Constitutional Convention 136 Fundamental Assumptions 137 Two Compromises 138 The Executive 139 Toward Sovereign Power 139 A Government for the Ages 140 Ratification 142 Antifederalist Arguments 142 The First Ratifications 142 Virginia and New York 142 Ratification: An Appraisal 145 Summary 145 Suggested Readings 146 Chapter 8________________ I'he New Government at Work 150 The Bill of Rights 150 The Judiciary 150 The Executive 151 Problems of Finance 152 Hamilton's Funding Plan 152 Madison's Discrimination 153 Assumption 153 The National Bank 153 Early Crises 154 Party Polities 155 Four Politicians 155 v Organizing 156 Foreign Affairs under Washington 157 Citizen Genet and the Neutrality Proclamation 157 Neutrality: Profits and Problems 158 Jay's Treaty 159 Pinckney's Treaty 160 The Election of 1796 161 The Adams Administration 161 Foreign Policy 162 The Alien and Sedition /lets 163 The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions 164 The Election of 1800 164 Summary 166 Suggested Readings 166 Chapter 9_________________ Jefferson in Power 170 Cleaning House 170 Struggles with the Judiciary 172 Jefferson and the West 173 The Louisiana Purchase 174 World Politics: The Napoleonic Wars 175 Freedom of the Seas 176 James Madison: The War of 1812 176 The War on Land and Sea 179 The Hartford Convention 182 The Treaty of Ghent 183 Postwar Anglo-American Relations: The Monroe Doctrine 1 S3 Trade and Territory 183 The Spanish and Indians 184 Latin America and the Monroe Doctrine 185 Summary 186 Suggested Readings 187 Chapter 1 0_______________ The lira of Good Feelings 190 Boom, Bank, and Bust 190 The Marshall Court 191 The Missouri Compromise 192 An Kxpanding Economy 193 Fishing and Lumbering 193 Expansion: The Fur and China Trades 195 The Santa Fe Trail 196 The Rise of the Middle West 196' The New Cotton Empire 198 Transportation and Trade 199 The Steamboat 199 New Roads 200 The Canal Boom 201 Internal Improvements 201 New York City's Spectacular Rise 204 The Industrial Revolution 205 First Factories 206 The Entry of Big Capital 206 Women and Industrial Labor 207 Summary 211 Suggested Readings 212 Chapter 1 1 ________________________ The Beginnings of the New Polities 216 Expanding the Electorate 216 Restricting Blacks 216 National Elections 217 The Election of 1824 218 John Quincy Adams in OJfice 219 Jackson's Election 220 Old Hickory in the W hite I louse 221 The Spoils System 222 The Rights of the States 222 The Cherokee Indians 222 The Webster-Hayne Debate 223 Nullification 225 The Bank War 227 Van Buren Carries On 230 The Election of 1840 231 The Jacksonian Legacy 232 Summary 234 Suggested Readings 234 Chapter 1 2 The Anti-Masonic Party 227 President Jackson versus President Biddle 227 To the Panic of 1837 228 Jacksonian Politics without Jackson 230 Critics of the Jackson Presidency 230 American Qualities 238 Restlessness, Money, and Violence 238 Equality, Individualism, and Cooperation 238 Revivalism, Sectarianism, and Anti-Catholicism 239 Writers and Poets: A National Literature 241 New York and New England Writers 241 Poe 242 Emerson and Transcendentalism 243 Thoreau 244 Whitman 244 Hawthorne and Melville 245 Formal Culture and Education 246 Fine Arts in the Jacksonian Age 246 The Age of Orators 247 The Popular Press 247 Public Schools 249 Education for Girls and Women 250 Colleges and Lyceums 251 Ambiguity 252 Temperance 253 A One-Woman Crusade 254 Communitarians 255 Abolition 256 Summary 258 Suggested Readings 259 Chapter 13____________________________ Demographic Change 262 The Growth of Cities 262 The Dynamics of Population Growth 262 Immigration 263 American Women 265 The Declining Birth Rate 265 Women's Proper Sphere 266 The Agricultural Revolution 269 Westicard Expansion 269 Growing Markets and Production 270 The Business of Mechanized Farming 271 Agricultural Revolution in the East 272 Transportation and Trade 272 Foreign Trade 272 Domestic Commerce 273 The Clipper Ship Era 274 The Great Lakes versus the Great Rivers 275 Triumph of the Railroad 275 Northern Industry 277 The New Economy 277 4 Spirit of Invention 278 An Age of Iron 279 Summary 280 Suggested Readings 280 Chapter 1 4___________________ W hite People of the South 284 Southern Farmers 284 The Planter Class 285 Black People of the South 286 The Slave's Outer World 287 The Slates' Inner World 289 vu Slave Resistance and White Response 290 The Plantation Economy 291 Secondary Staples 291 King Cotton 293 The Values of Southern Whites 294 Commitment to White Domination 295 Limitations of the Reform Spirit 295 The Proslavery Argument 295 Education and Literature 297 Southern Women, White and Black 298 Summary 300 Suggested Readings 300 Chapter 1 5 MANIFEST DESTINY AND SLAVERY 303 The Canadian Border 304 On to California 314 The Caroline Affair 30-1 War Against Mexico 315 The "Aroostook War" 205 A Divided People 315 The Creole Incident 305 The Fruits of Victory 316 The Webster-Ashburton Treaty 306 The Question of Slavery 317 Texas 306 Slavery in the Territories 317 The Lone Star Republic 307 The Election of 1848 318 Annexation 309 The Compromise of 1850 318 The Far West 309 The Election of 1852 322 The Oregon Country 309 Summary 322 A Peaceful Solution 311 Suggested Readings 323 The Mormons in Utah 313 Chapter 1 6 I'he Failure of Compromise 326 Lincoln's Election 338 Slavery Comes Home to the North 326 The Deep South Moves Out 339 The Kunsas-Nebraska Act 329 A Federal Vacuum 340 "Bleeding Kunsas" 331 Final Failure 341 A Neiv Party Alignment 331 Lincoln's Inaugural 341 Buchanan's Ordeal 334 Fort Sumter Falls 341 The Election of 1856 334 The Upper South and the Border Dred Scott 335 Decide 343 The Lincoln-Douglas Debates 336 Summary 344 John Brown's Raid 337 Suggested Readings 345 Toward Separation 333 Chapter 1 7 CIVIL WAR 347 Enemies Face to Face 343 Soldiers and Supplies 348 The Confederate Government 350 Lincoln and the Divided Nation 350 The Struggle for Richmond 352 Early Battles 352 "All Quiet on the Potomac" 353 War in the West 354 The Peninsular Campaign 355 Second Bull Run and Antietam 357 War on the Home Fronts 358 The Confederacy in Wartime 358 mm The North iti Wartime 359 Women in a Semi-Modem War 360 The Emancipation Proclamation 361 To Appomattox 362 The Long Road to Gettysburg 362 Grant Takes Command 364 The End in Sight 366 Lincoln's Death 367 Summary 368 Suggested Readings 368 Chapter 18______________________ The Defeated South 372 Aftermath of Slavery 373 Lincoln's Plan 375 The Radical Plan 376 Johnsonian Restoration 377 The Radical Congress 378 The Fourteenth Amendment 379 The Reconstruction Acts and Impeachment 379 The Election of 1868: Grant 380 Radical Reconstruction: Legend and Reality 381 Radical Rule in the South 383 The End of Reconstruction: The Shotgun Policy 387 The (Irani Presidency 389 The First Term: The Great Barbecue 389 Grant's Second Term: Disenchantment 390 The Election of 1876: Hayes 390 The New South 392 The Economics of Dependency: Agriculture 393 The Economics of Dependency: Industry 394 A Closed Society: Disfranchisement, Jim Crow, and Repression 396 Summary 398 Suggested Readings 399 #' * i 1 V ff \ y'/■ s / fa / / ■iWif' fVT^L 111 HUflvv :f'}. ?' -" ."";,|S'"-j| ► i •" ■' BSaKSHHa® Jf • - bfo* jtu^Sg W>' ■ f .,: 41 S^f JR? w' 13f X/, /jfcl Sy JNL ;Wj i < 1 L\->>-. a. K mLi. '- B B n Chapter 1 The first people who migrated to this part of the world came from Asia. They came, probably in search of big game, somewhere between 15,000 and 40,000 years ago. They traveled on foot in small groups at several times when lower sea levels exposed an ancient land bridge between Asia and North America at what is now the Bering Strait. As thousands of years went by, they fanned out over North, Central, and South America. This geographic dispersion resulted in the development of hundreds of dilferent languages and a wide variety of physical characteristics, social organizations, and levels of technology. For thousands of years they remained in isolation as melting icecaps put the ancient land bridge under three hundred feet of water. Then, five hundred years ago, came a remarkably sudden burst of immigration by sea from Western Europe and Western Africa. At first that immigration was largely Spanish, but then other Atlantic nations began to take an interest in what Europeans called a New World. People from Portugal, France, the Netherlands, and the British Isles began to arrive. They brought with them—against their will—many different peoples from Africa. From about 1500, therefore, the history ol North America was no longer isolated from developments in the Old World. At that time Western Europe was developing a new, dynamic economic system: commercial capitalism. The Atlantic nations of Western Europe were becoming more centralized than before, usually under powerful new monarchs. They developed strong international rivalries that greatly affected events in America as well as Europe. At the same time, the great Western Christian church was split by the Reformation; for several centuries hostility between Roman Catholics and Protestants shaped rivalries among nations. When Europeans migrated to the New World, they had a profound and usually disastrous impact on the descendants of the original settlers—the Indians as the Europeans called them. Some of this impact was cultural and technological. But the most important result was that European diseases took an appalling toll among the Indians. In its early phases, European migration to America resulted in one of the most drastic drops in population over a large area that humankind has ever experienced. In turn, however, the Indians influenced European and African settlement in various ways. They did a great deal to reshape Old World agricultural practices, patterns of settlement, and military tactics. So did the New World environment, especially the climate and such natural resources as precious metals, timber, fish, fur, and plants. Historians have used a good many terms to describe this sudden burst of migration from the Old World to the New. It was called a "discovery" by Europeans, despite the fact that Christoforo Columbo died in the stubborn conviction that the lands he had seen on his voyages lay just off the coasts of China and Japan, and despite the fact that other Europeans had touched American shores five hundred years earlier. Recent writers have referred to the "invention" of America, assuming that Europeans needed to find a different sort of world in order to understand their own. The coming of the Europeans has also been called an "invasion" of the Indians' lands. Finally, it should be borne in mind that Indian America was settled not just by Europeans, but by Africans as well. ■ Little is known about the long history of the original American immigrants. Much of the available evidence is archeological and has literally been dug up. Some is geological; it is known, for example, that at a time when Indians were spearing mammoths in New Mexico, northern New England was covered with ice. There are written materials from a few Indian cultures, including the famous calendar of the Aztecs in Mexico, but most Indian peoples used oral tradition rather than writing. Much of what is known about these people comes from the early reports of European explorers and conquerors, reports that have to be treated with great caution in order to screen out the prejudices and lack of comprehension of the observers. Five hundred years ago, the peoples of the New World were as various as those of the Old. They spoke some twelve hundred different dialects and languages, and they varied enormously in appearance, dress, customs, technology, and political organization. Some went about nearly naked, clad only around the waist with animal skin, and used stones and shells as tools. Some produced stunning works of art in gold or silver, constructed highways, and built enormous pyramids of stone. Some lived on nuts and berries, others cooked food in baskets of reeds or bark, or in clay pots. Some dwelt in cities comparable in size to those of Europe; others roamed as nomadic hunters. Some were governed by "divine" kings; others knew no greater authority than their own family. Traditionally, historians have concentrated on the "high civilizations" of Mexico and Peru—the A2tec, Maya, and Inca—but for the history of the early United States, it seems more appropriate to concentrate on the peoples who lived along the North Atlantic coast. Technology in the Eastern Woodlands Indians arrived along the Atlantic seaboard relatively late in the long process of settling the American continents. In the region stretching from what is now' Georgia to Maine, eastern woodland Indians shared many common characteristics. Secota. an unfortified village in the Carolina Coast, as drawn by John While. {Reproduced by courtesy of the Trustees of the British Museum) •> Succotash is a mixture of boiled com and lima or butter beans. The dish, still commonly served in New England, is actually much older than the first arrival of English Puritans there. It was a staple of the New England Indians, and the word itself comes directly from the Algonkian word for the mixture. For the Indians there it was an obvious combination, since they planted both beans and squash in their cornfields. It is now realized what a clever agricultural practice this was. for the leaves of the bean and squash plants shaded out the growth of weeds, and the com stalks provided natural poles on which the bean plants could climb. The succotash mixture provided a nutritious dietary base. One can even buy frozen succotash in some markets today, though not nationwide. though with considerable variations. Anthropologists usually divide them into three large groups, principally on the basis of language. The Algon- kian tribes who lived from Canada to North Carolina and as far west as the Great Lakes became, for the early English migrants, the "typical" Indians. Farther south and west were several large groups who spoke Muskogean languages: the Choctaw, Chickasaw, Creek, and Seminole. The Cherokee in Georgia were similar in living habits but appear to have been a more recently arrived group who spoke a dialect of a third language, Iroquoian, which prevailed in the area around the eastern Great Lakes. Those Iroquoian peoples were probably also relative newcomers, having come from the Mississippi Valley into what is now upstate New York and neighboring parts of Canada. All these people shared common cultural characteristics, but climate plus available food and housing made for important differences. .Although they had several technological skills Europeans lacked, lack of other skills put them at a severe disadvantage when they were confronted by the Europeans. The Iroquois and Algonkian had developed a highly efficient means of transportation at a time when roads in most parts of the world were inferior to the highways of ancient Rome. The Indian elm and birch-bark canoes were brittle, but they had the great advantage of light weight for portages between lakes and streams. Hollowed-out logs were also used, but more often on the ocean. Many of the coastal Indians fished with great efficiency in shallow waters, using nets and weirs. They did not, however, go into deep water, for they had not developed sails. All the eastern w'oodland Indians grew corn (maize) and various kinds of squash, pumpkins, and beans. And of course they hunted deer and bears, which provided clothing as well as food. and they trapped and hunted a variety of smaller animals unknown in the Old World, such as beaver, opossum, and raccoon. Hunting was done with bows and arrows, which in skillf ul hands were as accurate as European muskets and much more rapid firing. They also used tomahawks in warfare. The Muskogean carried, in addition, spears and shields woven from bark and vines. Their housing usually consisted of bent poles covered with thatch or hides; the word wiguam is the Algonkian term for "house." Metalworking was unknown; stones and shells served as weapons and tools. .And these peoples lacked three technological advantages widely used by Europeans: the wheel, the plow, and draft animals such as oxen and horses. Nature and Society Eastern woodland Indians lived closer to nature than Europeans did, though of course Europeans then lived much closer to nature than we do now. They still kept time by the sun or moon or walking distances, in an age when Europeans were increasingly using clocks and calendars. The Indians had a close psychological rapport with animals and even with trees and mountains; many tribes believed that animals had souls. Their religious faiths reflected their strong ties with the natural surroundings. Most—perhaps all—believed in a high god, a single deity superior to other deities. These less powerful spirits were often identified with specific animals, vegetation, or places. The same affinity with nature was reflected in the way they thought about their societies. Many tribes considered themselves to be divided into clans, groups of people thought to be related to one an- migrants to the new world other, and these clans were often identified by such names as wolf', bear, deer, and beaver. The Indians were strongly attached to their land, which they felt was theirs by reason of tradition and use, not because they "owned" it. The land almost seemed to own them. This way of thinking was very different from the one that prevailed in Europe, where various groups of people staked out their own turf by means of national boundaries and carved up those spaces among individuals who "owned" land as "real estate." The gap between these concepts about land was to prove an enduring source of conflict between Indians and Europeans in America. The soc ial and political organization of the tribes varied considerably, but it is impossible today to describe them accurately, largely because early Europeans tended to talk about Indian societies in terms based on their own experience. European observers expected to find kings, nobles, and commoners, and they became confused when they discovered that such categories did not fit. There was similar confusion about the different Indian groups, which the English variously called "na- tions," "tribes," or simply "sorts," It is clear, however, that there were at least a hundred Algonkian tribes; sometime groups of them were shaped into confederacies by forceful leaders. The famous League of the Iroquois in upstate New York came about because live tribes fashioned a sophisticated, powerful, and remarkably enduring political alliance. Each tribe sent a specific number of representatives to a central council for decisions about war and diplomacy. The Iroquois fascinate historians and anthropologists because of the unusual strength of this confederation and also because of other distinguishing aspects of their society; their "longhouses," huge wigwams occupied by four to six families; their reputation as fierce warriors; their reliance on communal interpretation of individual dreams; and the powerful influence of Iroquois women, who farmed while their men hunted and warred and who chose which men would lead them in both war and peace. Among all eastern Indians, political leadership depended on maturity, wisdom, and forcefulness much more than on heredity or the accumulation of wealth. The division of labor between these Indian men and woman was even more rigid than it was in Europe at the time. Men hunted, trapped, and fished; in short, they concentrated on getting animal resources. Women cleaned and processed animals and did almost all the farming and preparation of food. Men went to war. but women did more than half the labor that provided food, clothing, and shelter, The woodland Indians were no more peaceful than Europeans: They fought frequently against each other, more for sport and manhood than for territory. By European standards, casualties were low. Silence and surprise were the usual methods of attack. Many tribes practiced ritual torture of captives and/or formal tribal adoption. Their style of peace resembled their style of war; Europeans were struck by their quiet dignity in diplomatic negotiations. They spoke with brief eloquence, weighing their words with confident assurance that those few words would seal whatever agreement was being made. People from the western part of the Old World discovered Indian America at least twice, but the first discovery had little effect. The impact of the second was momentous, in Europe as well as America. In both instances, "America" was not discovered as a whole; rather. European navigators stumbled onto particular landfalls without the slightest notion that they had found two "new" continents. The Norsemen The Norse contacts with America took place about a thousand years ago. Bold Norwegians had long been settled in Iceland; from there they pushed westward along the steppingstone islands of the North Atlantic. In about 980 they established tiny settlements near the southern tip of Greenland. In the thirteenth century some four thousand were living there, but for unknown reasons they lost contact with Europe in the second half of the fifteenth century and died out for lack of food and supplies. Yet that thrust westward had gone further. In 986 Biami Heriulfson set sail from Iceland to join his father, Heriulf, in Greenland. By mistake his course was too far south. He missed that island and ended up cruising along a shore he was sure could not be Greenland because it was "a flat and wooded country" and had no mountains of ice. He was, in fact, running along the coasts of Baffin The World Known to Europeans in 1492 Island and Labrador, but he did not land because he was aiming for Greenland. Although Hi am; was the first European we know of who saw American shores, Leif Ericsson was the first to set foot on American soil. Sailing westward from Greenland in the same boat Biarni had used, he landed on Baffin Island and then made his way south down the coast of Labrador. At last the voyagers came ashore at a place they called Vinland "in accordance with all the good things they found in it." There has been much conjecture about the location of this spot; some people have claimed that Leif got as far south as Massachusetts or even Virginia. But the site has recently been pinpointed to be L'Anse aux Meadows on the northern tip of Newfoundland. Archeological evidence there shows conclusively that Norwegians established a fishing colony which lasted for several years. This original European discovery of America remained unknown except in some obscure old Norse sagas until the nineteenth century. Some people have made claims for earlier contact with Indian America—by ancient Phoenicians from the Mediterranean, by black Africans, and even by Pacific Islanders. None of these claims is totally improbable, but all are very far from firmly established. Much more to the point, if such contacts did occur, they had no widespread effect. The voyages of Christopher Columbus did. European Expansion There is no easy explanation for the sudden wanderlust of Western Europeans in the fifteenth century. Various factors contributed to their thrust overseas, which we might label as economic, political, technological, and demographic. For centuries Europeans had traded with the peoples of southeastern Asia for highly valued commodities that could not be found or grown in Europe, among them jewels, silk, and spices. (Spices improved the taste of food and, in an age without refrigeration, preserved meat and disguised its taste when rotten.) That trade was carried on over thousands of miles across the Indian Ocean, through the Middle East, over the Mediterranean Sea to the ports of southern Europe, and then overland to the north and west. At the western ports of entry, the trade was controlled by the merchants of Venice and other city-states in what is now Italy. As time went on, merchants in the western parts of Europe grew more and more discontented with migrants to the new world o o >• 7. Voyages of Exploration the problems of this trade: high prices, piracy, too many middlemen, and lack of reliability. At the same time, new financial practices developed in Italy were beginning to spread north and west: double-entry bookkeeping of financial records, pooling of capital among several individuals or families, rudimentary banks, and the use of Arabic rather than Roman numerals in account books. Politically, the monarchs of Western Europe were becoming more successful in their struggles with powerful feudal warlords. Geographic areas that are now single countries, like France, Portugal. and Spain, were then collections of separate provinces and dukedoms. During the fifteenth century, monarchs consolidated their authority over larger territories, and it was these powerful new monarchies that became the modem countries of Western Europe. Many historians summarize these developments as the rise of nation-states. A third development in European society was just as complicated but much less dramatic. Trade with the Ear East had resulted in knowledge of both gunpowder and the compass. Although neither of these Chinese inventions had an immediate impact on methods of warfare and navigation, in the long run they helped give Europeans a sense of mastery over other peoples and the sea. Also important to overseas expansion were hundreds of small improvements in ship design. Taken together, these improvements enabled Europeans to build vessels that could handle ocean swells without capsizing, he steered by workable rudders, and l>e propelled entirely by sails, without the need for oars. The demographic change that helped set off expansion was the result of a disaster. In the fourteenth century Europe was struck by bubonic plague, a deadly infection carried by infected lice on rats. The Black Death swept away about a third of Western Europe's population. Even though it damaged the economy, the tragedy raised the economic and social status of the agricultural laborers (serfs) w'ho survived, because it meant that their labor was in great demand. The notion that people were bound to the land began to break down. People grew' restless and no longer assumed they had to stay where they had been born. Portugal Tak es the Lead These four factors interacted in various ways in different parts of Western Europe, but together they produced a mood of adventure. Early in the fourteenth century, Italian, Spanish, and French sailors began to explore the west coast of Africa in search of a way around that continent. They came upon and occupied the Canary Islands, then the Madeiras, and then the Azores. But it was the Portuguese, after 1420, who began the systematic- collection of geographic information that enabled them to transform the Atlantic into a path of adventure and commerce. And it was they who first brought enslaved blacks back by sea from Africa to Europe in 1442. In 1420, Prince Henry the Navigator set up his great maritime research institute at Sagres on Portugal's southernmost tip, "where the two seas, the Mediterranean and the Great Ocean, fight to- gether." There, until his death in 1460, he conducted a laboratory in astronomy, cosmography, mapmaking, ship and sail design, and instruments of navigation. Some of his most valuable information came from returning sailors and ship captains who were making longer and longer voyages down the western coast of Africa. Prince Henry's work was crowned in 1488, many years after he died, when Bartholomeu Diaz at last rounded the Cabo Tormentoso (Cape of Storms) at Africa's southernmost tip, opening the first all-water route from Europe to the Indies. The king of Portugal was so impressed by this fact that he renamed that treacherous neck of land the Cape of Good Hope. Nine years after Diaz's voyage, a flotilla of four Portuguese ships under Vasco da Gama sailed for India from Lisbon and returned in triumph in 1499, laden with spices and jewels. Da Gama's voyage meant the end of Levantine (Middle East) supremacy in the Oriental trade, the eclipse of the Italian merchants, and the decline of the Mediterranean. The Portuguese, moreover, soon drove Muslim merchants and pirates from the Indian Ocean itself, reduced their strongholds at the sources of supply for Oriental goods, and established a Far Eastern empire of their own that lasted, at least in fragments, almost to our day. While the Portuguese were attempting to reach Asia by sailing south and east, a singleminded man decided to attempt the same goal by sailing directly west. He came upon a puzzling barrier on that route, and died dejected because he had not found Japan and China. By his own standards Columbus failed, but in doing so he laid the foundation for an enormous and extremely profitable migrants to the new world Columbus's belief that he could reach the Orient by sailing westward was backed by Paolo Toscanelli. a scholar who sent Columbus this map of the world in 1481. (Windsor, History of America, vol. II, 1886) Spanish empire in America, Through his exploits, Spain claimed control over most of the two American continents. Other European nations refused to accept that claim, so soon European rivalries found a new field of battle in America. Christoforo Columbo The son of a tailor, Christoforo Columbo was born in Genoa, one of the major maritime Italian city- states. At an early age he turned to the sea and became an experienced navigator and shipmaster. His private dream was of reaching the Orient by sailing westward, lake most educated people, he believed that the world was round, but he grossly underestimated the size of the globe by discounting the quite accurate estimates of ancient Greek scholars. For live years, he pleaded for financial backing at the courts of the monarchs of Spain, England, France, and Portugal. He was turned down everywhere. In 1492, a dramatic event changed the minds of the jointly reigning Spanish monarchs. King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella. For centuries the Spanish had struggled to expel the Muslim conquerors who had invaded their land from North Africa. They finally succeeded in 1492. Immediately they moved to expel other non-Catholics, Christoforo Columbo. (The Metropolitan Museum of Art, Gift of J. Pierpont Morgan, 1900) particularly the Jews, whose wealth had helped finance the long wars against the Moors. The Spanish had conducted their campaigns as a religious crusade, and now Ferdinand and Isabella were willing to help spread Christianity elsewhere, as Columbus promised to do. They were also eager for profits from trade with "the lands of India," or the "Indies" as the Far Fast was called. So they agreed to back the eccentric sailor who insisted he could reach the Indies by sailing west. Columbus was given the title (as he carefully rioted) of "Admiral-in-Chief of the Ocean Sea and Viceroy and Perpetual Governor of all the lands and mainlands that I should discover." On August 3, 1942, Columbus's expedition set sail from the little Spanish port of Palos aboard three vessels, the Nina, the Pinta, and the Santa Maria, After stopping at the Canary Islands off the coast of West Africa, Columbus set a course due west. He had calculated that he was on the same latitude as Cipangu (Japan), which was regarded as the richest part of "the lands of India." The crew, mostly Spanish, did not fully trust their Italian captain. He, in turn, doctored the ship's log by underestimating the daily mileage of his little fleet. Having doubled all records for ocean sailing beyond sight of shore, Santa Marta's crew7 mutinied The (toredom of an endless voyage strained the nerves of sailors made idle by the easy passage. Columbus managed to quiet the crew' by promising to turn back if no land was sighted within three days. Then, just past 2 a.m. on October 12, Pinta's lookout called, "Ticrra! Tierra!" "To the first island which 1 found," Columbus later wrote to Ferdinand and Isabella. "I gave the name San Salvador, in remembrance of the Divine Majesty, Who had marvelously bestowed till this." The inhabitants of the island called it Guanahani. Columbus called them Indians on the assumption that he was on the outskirts of the Indies. Soon, "1 found very many [other] islands," Columbus added in his letter to Ferdinand and Isabella, "filled with innumerable people, and I have taken possession of them ail for their High- nesses, done by proclamation and with the royal standard unfurled, and no opposition was offered to me," After a few months of exploring the Caribbean, Columbus left some of his men behind on the large island of Hispaniola and set out for Spain with a few gold nuggets and several "Indians" to prove the success of his venture. None of the Indians survived the voyage. Columbus made three more trips to the New World. His search on these visits was for a passageway through the barrier beyond which, he remained certain, must lie Japan. He found no such passage. Not until Ferdinand Magellan's men sailed around the world in the service of Spain (1519-1522) did the truth become known about the enormous distance of the westward passage to the Far Fast. Upon learning of Columbus's great discoveries, the Pope proceeded to divide up the newly discovered world between the Spanish and the Portuguese, In 1494, in the Treaty of Tordesillas. Spain and Portugal agreed on the specific boundary separating their territories. In effect, Portugal received the Orient and Spain the New World, except for the region that became Brazil. In 1500, on a voyage around Africa to the Orient, a Portuguese captain, Cabral, was blown off course and found himself on a New World shore which he promptly claimed for his native land. Cabral's discovery became known as Brazil. But the Portuguese took little interest in the New World for another half century. Soon after Columbus's first triumphant return, Spain encouraged other mariners to occupy this New World claim, search out its limits, convert its inhabitants, and seize its wealth. One of the first to sail under Spanish colors was Amerigo Vespucci, a native of the Italian city, Florence. In 1497 he began a series of voyages on which he explored the coastline southeast from Mexico all the way to Brazil. Ten years later, a German geographer first called the New World "America" in his honor. The Spanish and the Indians Long before other Atlantic nations offered a challenge, Spain had established a vast empire in the New World. Small numbers of Spaniards occupied the largest Caribbean islands: Cuba, Hispaniola. Puerto Rico, and Jamaica. Led by Hernando Cortes, the Spanish went on to conquer the Indian civilizations in Mexico. Francisco Pizarro began the occupation of Peru in 1528. In both regions the Spanish found fabulous sources of gold and silver. Other Spanish explorers wandered through Florida, die lower Mississippi Valley. and the North American Southwest, but they were discouraged by not finding precious metals in those regions, The Indians of the Caribbean Islands—the Arawaks and Caribs—were relatively primitive in technology and political organization, although they had mastered the art of interisland boating. The first European drawings of these Indians migrants to the new world European Imaginations conjured up visions of Indian cannibals. The New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox, and Tilden Foundation) showed them eating human flesh. They may or may not have been cannibals; what is certain is that the Arawaks told the Spanish that the Caribs, their enemies, were. On the mainland of Mexico and Peru, the Spanish found densely populated, advanced civilizations, genuine empires with powerful kings, highway systems, enormous temples, and stunning works of art in silver and gold. Until recently, the success of the small numbers of Spanish explorers has been explained largely in terms of their superior boldness and technology. The Spanish conquerors were indeed brutal, but the Aztecs in Mexico were themselves conquerors of earlier peoples and practiced ritual human sacrifice and perhaps cannibalism as well. The Spanish advantage was mainly psychological. Many more Indians were overawed by Spanish firearms than were killed by them. And the Indians also were amazed by the sight of men on horseback, who they thought were single animals. In recent years, however, it has become clear that the Spanish had one enormous advantage of which neither they nor the Indians were aware. O'er hundreds of centuries, most of the peoples of the Old World had developed partial immunity to certain diseases unknown in the New World. Within fifty years of first contact with the Spanish, the Indians of Hispaniola nearly died out. In Mexico the Indian population appears to have dropped to something like 10 percent of its previous level, Measles and especially smallpox w ere probably the two chief killers. Whatever the diseases, it is clear that no society can survive when it loses 90 percent of its people in one or twro generations. U n- wittingly the Indians had their revenge, for Columbus's sailors introduced syphilis into Europe. But that disease did not kill masses of people in a short period of time. In the New World, the political and social consequences of disease were profound. Many Indian societies were virtually destroyed. Depopulation was largely responsible for the demand for slaves from the Old World to work the fields and mines of the New. Starting about 1522, the Spanish began importing slaves from Africa. Though they too died in large numbers, the /Africans had had sufficient One of the few Indian texts about early contact with Europeans described the reaction of the Spanish conquerors to gifts of gold sent by Montezuma, King of the Aztecs: Then Motecuhzoma dispatched various chiefs. Tzihuacpopocatzin was at their head, and he took with hint a great many of his representatives. They went out to meet the Spaniards in the vicinity of Popocatepetl und Iztactepctl, there in the Eagle Pass, They gave the "gods" ensigns of gold, and ensigns of quetzal leathers, and golden necklaces. And when they were given these presents, the Spaniards burst into smiles; their eyes shone with pleasure; they were delighted by them. They picked up the gold and fingered it like monkeys; they seemed to be transported by joy, as if their hearts were illumined and made new. The truth is that they longed and lusted for gold. Their bodies swelled with greed, and their hunger u as ravenous: they hungered like pigs for that gold. They snatched at the golden ensigns, waved them from side lo side and examined every inch of them, They were like one who speaks a barlmrous tongue: everything they said was in u barbarous tongue. Some European settlers thought the heavy mortality among the Indians was a sign that God favored die cause of European setdement. Edward Johnson, an early settler and historian of Puritan New England, expressed this view in "The Wonderful Preparation the Lord Christ by His Providence Wrought for His People's Abode in this Western World." Speaking of the New England Indians before the arrival of the Puritans, he wrote; "There liefell a great mortality among them; the greatest that ever the memory of father or son took notice of, desolating chiefly those places where the English afterward planted; sweeping away whole families, but chiefly young men and children, the very seeds of increase. , . . Their wigwams lie full of dead corpses, ... By this means, Christ, whose great and glorious works throughout the earth are all for the benefit of his churches and chosen, not only made room for liis people to plant, but also tamed the hearts of these barbarous Indians" contact with Europeans across the Sahara Desert to acquire partial immunities themselves, so they did not suffer the drastic mortality rates of the Indians. But they too had a measure of revenge, for many European slave traders died from tropical diseases. The dimensions of this human tragedy, then, were enormous and bitterly ironic. The French Except in Brazil, the Spanish claimed a monopoly on the entire New World, one that was endorsed by the Pope. Yet other Christian nations refused to recognize Spain's exclusive jurisdiction. The French were the first to challenge it. In 1524 another Florentine, Giovanni da Verrazano, sailed westward in the service of the French king along the coast of North America. He was looking for a passageway to the Far East. Ten years later, the French monarch sent Jacques Cartier on a similar mission in search of what had become known as the Northwest Pas- sage—not because it was expected to run northwest, but because it was supposed to be in the north and to run directly westward to the Indies. Cartier hit upon the mouth of the St. Lawrence River, and he was able to sail so far up that stream he was convinced that he had found the route to the Orient. But then, at the site of modem Montreal, he came up against rapids that prevented further progress to the west. Despite his disappointment, he was impressed by "the immense numbers of people in Hochelga" and by "their kindness and peacefulness." The Spanish showed little interest in the northern voyages, hut they were deeply concerned by a french setdement in Florida that was uncomfortably close to the shipping lanes of their treasure ships from Peru and Mexico. They wiped it out and confidently built Fort Augustine on the northeast coast of that region. From there they sent missionaries farther north, but established no permanent settlements. Although as early as the 1540s Vdsquez de Coronado had explored as far north as present-day Kansas, it was the French and not the Spanish who gained control in North America. In the early seventeenth century, under the leadership of Samuel de Champlain, French explorers established outposts at Quebec, Montreal, and various other points along the great gateway to the interior of the continent, the St. Lawrence River. Then they pressed on through the regions of the Great Lakes and the Ohio and Mississippi valleys. The French also established setdements at New Orleans and Biloxi on the Gulf of Mexico, and at St. Domingue, the western end of the island of Hispaniola. Most French settlements in the Midwest were not really towns; they were forts and trading stations, aimed primarily at serving the fur trade. Many French fur traders married Indian women and adopted Indian ways. French fanners were widely scattered and remained sufficiently few in number to take very little land from the Indians Thus the French avoided conflict with the nadve inhabitants, unlike the Spanish and unlike the English. Among the Atlantic nadons of Europe, England and the Netherlands lagged behind Portugal, Spain, and France in taking an interest in the New World. In the sixteenth century, the Dutch were still fighting for national unity and independence from the Spanish. They established no claims in North America undl 1609, when Henrv migrants to the new world Hudson, an Englishman in the employ of a Dutch trading company, sailed up the river which he named for himself. The first English claim was established much earlier along the northern coast by two voyages sponsored by King Henry VII in 1497 and 1498. But the expeditions led bv John and Sebastian Cabot provoked little interest in England, and for more than seventy-five years the only Englishmen to see American shores were summertime fishermen. This delay had two important consequences. During the latter half of the sixteenth century, the economies of England and the Netherlands were becoming committed to commercial capitalism, much more so than the economies of the other Atlantic nations. Thus the English and Dutch settlements in America in the early seventeenth century were financed largely by private merchants rather than by royal wealth. Fully as important, by the time they attempted to establish colonies in America, the Dutch and the English had become Protestants and were locked in bitter opposition to the supporters of the Roman Catholic Church. The Reformation The Protestant Reformation began in Germany in 1517 when Martin Luther publicly denounced the Catholic Church for selling pardons for sins. Luther contended that people could be saved "by faith alone," not by outward observances, charity, and good behavior—mere "good works." He went on to claim that Christians must acquire faith directly from the Bible, the Word of God. Luther's assault on Catholic hierarchy and doctrine triggered more than a century of religious war in Europe. Eventually religious divisions came to coincide roughly with national boundaries. Spgin and Portugal remained Roman Catholic, as did France, except for a strong minority of Protestants called Huguenots. England, Scotland, the Neth erlands, and the Scandinavian countries became Protestant, The reformers were not a united group. Protestants in France, the Netherlands, and Scotland followed the doctrines of John Calvin, a French refugee who established a religious government in Geneva, Switzerland. Calvin stressed human helplessness in the face of an all-powerful God. He also emphasized the doctrine of predestimition. the idea that God. from the beginning of time, had decided the eternal fate of every individual— whether he or she was to be saved or damned. Calvin also sought to eliminate from Protestant services the forms and ceremonies of Roman Catholic ritual, and he insisted that all members of the religious community must constantly examine the condition of their souls. Although peop4e do not earn their way into Heaven by good deeds, diligent labor in their job or "calling," Calvin taught, was often a sign ofredemption. It seemed to Calvinists that God would favor communities that were committed to His ways. Calvinist ideas began to seep into England in the middle of the sixteenth century . By then, however, the English nation had already broken away from the Roman Catholic Church. In the 1530s Henry VIII had become entangled in marital problems that involved both the Pope and Spain, whose monarch was rapidly becoming the defender of Catholicism. Henry established a national English church with himself as Supreme Governor and confiscated the vast landholdings of the monasteries. Two short reigns followed Henry's death— one Protestant, the next Catholic. Then Queen Elizabeth, monarch from 1558 to 1603, tried to achieve a compromise between the nationalized Protestant Church of England, still partly Catholic in ceremony and doctrine, and the growing number of English Calvinists who demanded further reform of the national church Kngland versus Spain Queen Elizabeth became the champion of Protestantism against the Catholic Counterreformation being mounted by Spain, She secretly financed Dutch Protestants in their wars against the Spanish and eventually sent English troops into the Netherlands to help them. She also quietly invested in voyages of English ship captains who wanted to raid the Spanish treasure ships bringing back gold and silver from Mexico and Peru. In 1577, even though the two nations were supposedly at peace, she backed a brilliantly successful expedition led by F rancis Drake, who sailed through the Strait of Magellan, raided Spanish ships and settlements along the western coast of South America, touched at California, which he claim for England as "Nova Albion," and returned to England in 1580 after having circled the world. In Plymouth harbor Elizabeth knighted Drake on the deck of his ship, the Gulden Hind. Elizabeth rather deviously assured the Spanish ambassador that she had no hostile intentions toward his country. Drake's exploits helped establish a tradition among European nations, which lasted until the middle of the eighteenth century, that they could war against each other in the New World while remaining at peace in the Old- As the common phrase went, "No peace beyond the Line." For a generation England and Spain held onto a shaky peace, but in 1588 the Spanish mounted a massive attempt to invade England. The famous Spanish Armada was probably the largest naval force ever assembled up to that time. The population of England was less than half of Spain's. But the Spanish fleet was hit by gale winds and the guns of the English ships. The result, for the Spanish, was a disastrous defeat. For the English, it was a glorious victory for the cause of Protestantism and the English nation. The war with Spain dragged on until 1604, but the defeat of the Armada established England as a major power. As such, it began to think more seriously about challenging its international rivals in the New World. Frobisher and (Jilbert English interest in America was not merely a matter of challenging Catholic Spain. In the 1550s London merchants began to organize joint stock companies for trading overseas with Russia, Africa, and the Levant (the Middle East). In the 1570s a new Cathay (China) Company financed three voyages led by Martin Frobisher to find the Northwest Passage. Frobisher sailed directly west below the southern tip of Greenland and then northwest until he came on the enormous, forbidding island of Baffin not far below the Arctic Circle. Finding further passage blocked by ice and barren land, Frobisher brought back to England several tons of ore that glittered with specks of gold. When tested it proved to be pyrite, or "fool's gold," and for years piles of the ore lay blocking one of the interior gates of the Tower of London, Another Englishman was dreaming about a more promising destiny for his country in America. Sir Humphrey Gilbert was the first Englishman to see the New World as a place where profit could be had by permanent settlement rather than by setting up trading posts. He organized two expeditions. Virtually nothing is known about the lirst one in 1578, but in the summer of 1583 he set sail with five ships and reached Newfoundland with four. Migrants to the new world There he found a little community of European fishermen who for years had been drying fish in the summer. He took possession of the land in the name of Elizabeth, and then sailed south in search of a more favorable climate. But winter was beginning to close in, and his ships (now reduced to two) were running short of supplies. On the return voyage they ran into a storm, and one of the vessels was lost. Sir Humphrey Gilbert was last seen sitting in the stern of a ten-ton fishing boat reading a copy of Thomas More's Utopia. Raleigh's Roanoke Gilbert's mantle fell to his half-brother. Sir Walter Raleigh, a dashing, impulsive favorite of Elizabeth. Raleigh had no trouble in getting a royal charter to Sir Walter Raleigh. (By courtesy of the National Portrait Gallery. London) found a colony in America. In 1584 he sent out an expedition with instructions to explore much farther south along the coast. The men came back with glowing descriptions of the land around Chesapeake Bay, which Raleigh called Virginia after the unmarried queen. The next year he equipped an expedition which included an artist. John White, who made superb paintings of the Indians, and Thomas Cavendish, who later lie- came the third European to sail around the world. They settled on Roanoke Island in Albemarle Sound. The men were frustrated in their search for gold and for a water passage to the Pacific, so when Sir Francis Drake stopped at the colony the next year on his way back from robbing Spanish gold in the West Indies, the Roanoke settlers returned with him to London. Raleigh wras as persistent as he was impulsive: In 1587 he sent out a large expedition of 120 people, which for the first time included women. Virginia Dare, the first English child born in America, was the grandaughter of the group's leader, John White. Leaving his family in the colony, White returned to England to help arrange for supplies. But because of the Spanish Armada and the war with Spain, every English vessel was pressed into service. When a supply ship finally reached the colony in 1590, all the settlers were gone. To this day, no one knows what happened to them. Marked by bad luck, unrealistic expectations, lack of financial resources, and the ongoing war with Spain, English colonizing efforts seemed to be going nowhere. Yet in the closing decades of the sixteenth century there were significant changes in England that may in the long run have been more important than all these early expeditions. More and more capital was accumulating in the hands of English merchants. The transfers of land that began with Henry VIII's seizure of the monasteries helped trigger a process by which some people were gaining great wealth and others were being thrown off the land altogether to become the roving "beggars" of Elizabethan England. The mood of the English people was becoming nationalistic. Defeating the Armada did nothing to diminish this feeling. One man captured this mood so well that he became known as the "trumpet" of English colonization. Richard Hakluyt was a friend of Gilbert and Raleigh, a clergyman, and a propagandist for overseas expansion. In 1584 he set forth a comprehensive case for English settlement in the New World. In the 1590s he capti- MIGRANTS TO TtlF. NEW WORLD vated a wide audience with his The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques, and Discoveries of the English Nation. Yet clearly it would require more than this kind of pleading to make English colonization in America a success. The necessary ingredients for successful "planting" in America did not become obvious until the English found them in the next century by a process of trial and error, greed and faith. European voyages of exploration and discovery had by the late fifteenth century reached the Americas, which until then had known only Asian immigrants. This new expansionism was motivated by desire for the trade and wealth on which the new economic system of commercial capitalism was based, as well as by political rivalry. The latter, in turn, was based on the religious conflicts that had grown out of the Protestant Reformation. The most important immediate effect of this "inva- sion" by Europeans of the New World was the destruction of the native populations living there; they died by the thousands of diseases to which they had no resistance. These "Indians," as the Europeans called them, were extremely varied in language, culture, and appearance. Their societies and political organizations ranged from the sophisticated empires of the Aztecs and Incas MIGRANTS to the new world to the simple family or tribal groupings of nomadic hunters. The woodland Indians of the Atlantic seacoast lived primarily by hunting, fishing, trapping, and simple agriculture. Political organization was based on tribes or nations, and sometimes on confederations of alliances of a number of tribes. These societies were remarkably "classless"; there were leaders, but leadership was based on age and merit, not birth. Although we say Christopher Columbus "discovered" America, it had actually been known to Europeans much earlier. The tenth-century Scandinavians who found and settled Iceland and Greenland also made their way to Labrador and Newfoundland. But it was not until late in the fifteenth century that economic, political, and technological development made long sea voyages and large-scale colonization both possible and desirable. Portuguese navigators were the first to venture out in search of a sea route to India and the Far East. They sailed south and east around the southern tip of Africa to find the route to the "Indies." Then Spanish and later French and English explorers tried to reach the "east" by sailing west. When Columbus landed in the Caribbean, he thought he was near Japan. The Pope divided the world between the Spanish and the Portuguese in the Treaty of Tordesillas. The Spanish got the New World except for Brazil; the Portuguese got Suggested Readings The emergence of expansionist Europe and the beginnings of the thrust overseas are the subject of R. Reynolds, Europe Emerges: Transition toward an Industrial World-Wide Society. 1660-1750 (1961); see also D. Whittlesy, Environmental Foundations of European History (1949). An important and stimulating recent work is I. Wailerstein, The Modem World System: Capitalist Agriculture and the Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century (1974). J. Hobson, Imperialism: A Study (1902), places the European invasion of the New World in a broader context. C. Verlinden, Beginnings of Modern Colonization (1970), emphasizes the medieval antecedents to European expansion. There is extremely interesting material in C. Cipolla, European Culture and Overseas Expansion (1970); and R. Davis, The Rise of the Atlantic Economies (1973), covers the fifteenth through the eighteenth centuries. The matter of the Norse voyages has long been controversial, Perhaps the best start may be made with W, Washburn (ed.), Proceedings of the Vinland Map Conference (1971); C. Sauer, Northern Mists (1968); and E. Pohl, The Viking Settlements of North America (1972). the Orient. By the time the English, the French, and the Dutch realized the potential of Spain's new possessions, the Spanish had built a huge overseas empire and extracted from it enormous amounts of gold and silver. It was not until 1534 that Cartier found the St. Lawrence River and Canada for the French, and even then the French settlements were really trading outposts that did not greatly disturb the Indians. The Dutch did not arrive until 1609, when Henry Hudson discovered the river that bears his name. The English had actually come earlier, in 1497 and 1498, but it was seventy-five years before they attempted to establish a settlement. Martin Luther's challenge of the supreme authority of the Catholic Church in 1517 started centuries of religious conflict in Europe. As a result, Spain, Portugal, and France became loyal supporters of the Pope: England, Scotland, the Netherlands, and Scandinavia were split among various Protestant denominations. The defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 made England a major maritime power; its merchants were by this time eager to share in the rewards of overseas trade. But the first attempts to establish English settlements in North Amer- ica—in Newfoundland in 1578 and 1583, and at Roanoke, Virginia, in 1584 and 1587—all failed. It would take much trial and error before the English would find the right formula for overseas empire in North America. Easily the best survey of the subject is C. Gibson. Spain in America (1966), which contains a good bibliography. See also the same author's The Aztecs under Spanish Rule: A History of the Indians in the Valley of Mexico. 1519-1810 (1966). J. Hardoy, Pre-Columbian Cities (1973), has an informative text and magnificent pictures, A complex and fascinating subject is dealt w ith by M. Momer, Race Mixture in the History of Latin America (1967). J. Parry, The Spanish Seaborne Empire (1966) is a vivid account. A beginning may be made on other European nations in the New World with two works by C. Boxer: Race Relations in the Portuguese Colonial Empire, 1415-1825 (1963), and The Dutch Seaborne Empire, 1600-1800 (1965). For the French, see W. Eccles, France in America (1972). The superb prose of Francis Parkman is still worth reading in this connection. There is an excellent selection in The Parkman Reader (1955), edited by S. Morison. During the past twenty years there have been numerous works published on the Amerindians, most of them great improvements over older studies. Probably the best survey is II. Driver, Indians of North America (2nd ed., 1970). This may be supplemented with G. Willey. An Introduction to American Archaeology, Vol. I, North and Middle America (1966), and with R. Underhill, Red Man's America: A History of Indians in the United States (rev. ed.. 1971). A useful colla- Iwration between anthropologists and historians is E Leacock and N, Lurie (eds.). North American Indians in Historical Perspective (1971). For further citations, see the splendid bibliographical essay in W. Washburn, The Indian in America (1975). The discovery of the New World by European voyagers has received loving attention from several distinguished historians. S. Morison's Admiral of the Ocean Sea (2 vols., 1942) remains one of the great biographies of American history. Morison, who was both a sailor and a superb stylist, capped his long historical career with European Discovery of America: The Northern Voyages (1971); and European Discovery of America: The Southern Voyages (1974). A fine survey of European maritime expansion, especially good on the significance of ship design, is J. Parry, The Age of Reconnaissance (1963), Several other works whose titles are largely self- explanatory are well worth looking at: See D. Quinn, England and the Discovery of America, 1461-1620; From the Bristol Voyages of the Fifteenth Century to the Pilgrim Settlement at Plymouth: The Exploration, Exploitation, and Trial and Error Cobnization of America by the English (1974); J. Axtell (ed.). The Indian Peoples of Eastern America, A Documentary History of the Sexes (1981); A. Rowse. The Expansion of Elizabethan England (1955); and H. Baudet, Paradise on Earth: Thoughts on European Images of Non-Europeans (1965). A different perspective is offered in R. Brown, Historical Geography of the United States (1948). There is an enormous body of works on the Reformation in England and in Western Europe as a whole. Partly because of differing religious perspectives, no single study stands out as the place to begin A bibliography that focuses on the English Reformation is found in R. Lockyer, Tudor and Stuart Britain, 1471-1714 (1964), MIGRANTS to tuaUy it grew by means of luck, fortitude, and faith. Only a few years before, a plague carried by European fishermen had wiped out many Indians in southeastern New England. Those the English met were wary but not unfriendly. The new settlers were greatly aided by Squanto, an Indian who had been to England, lie and several other Indians showed the Pilgrims how to plant com. Squanto also served as a translator between the Pilgrims and Massasoit, the chief sachem of the region. Characteristically, Bradford described Squanto as "a special instrument sent by God" for the good of the English settlers. Six years after they landed, the Pilgrims were able to buy out their financial backers with shipments of lumber and furs. That purchase virtually cut their connection with England. After ten years on their own, with new towns scattering southward and onto Cape Cod, the Pilgrims adopted a system of elective, representative government, very much in the spirit of the original Mayflower Compact. Each town sent representatives to the central government at Plymouth. Still, only those orthodox in religion and wealthy enough to rank "freemen" were given the vote. Until 1691, when their little towns were ab- bed into the Massachusetts Bay Colony, the Pilgrims led an independent existence, sustained by fish, fur, lumber, and religious faith. They were, as one of their friends in England wrote, "the instruments to break the ice for others." The Commonwealth of Massachusetts Bay Unlike the Separatist Pilgrims, most English Puritans intended to remain within the Church of England. By the late 1620s, however, many had grown discouraged about the future of their movement. The new king, Charles I, tried to suppress their preachers. This made some Puritans toy with the idea of emigrating to America in order to establish a holy commonwealth of their ow n. In 1629 a wealthy Puritan lawyer, John Winthrop, led a successful effort to establish a company with rights of settlement in New England. Winthrop became the first governor of the Massachusetts Bay Company, Hie company's charter from the king resembled those granted to other trading companies, except that it did not specify the company's official residence or place of administration. This was an unusual omission and may well have been deliberate on the part of Winthrop and his friends. In any event, when these Puritans migrated in 1630 John Winthrop (1588-1649). His strength and determination are clearly shown in this portrait, painted belore he immigrated to America. (Massachusetts Historical Society) they took their charter with them, thereby transferring the entire enterprise to New England. As the Reverend Cotton Mather later explained, "We would have our posterity settled under the pure and full dispensation of the gospel; defended by rulers who should be ourselves." The Great Migration began in 1630. By the end of that year, a thousand selected settlers had landed in Massachusetts. Moving outward, from Boston, these Puritan families laid out other little towns. Migrants kept coming, and by the end of the decade, about 15,000 persons had crossed the Atlantic. This large migration sustained the prosperity of the colony; there was no "starving time" in Massachusetts. Eew of the Puritan settlers were very wealthy, but many of them were able to pay for their own passage, with enough savings left over to support themselves for the first few months. The earlier setders prospered by selling food and other articles to the newcomers. The arrangement worked very well as long as immigration lasted. But about 1640 the Great Migration came to a halt when civil war broke out in England. Massachusetts faced its first economic depression. Yet the colony escaped disaster because, as Winthrop wrote, "the Lord was pleased to open up a trade with the West Indies." After ANi OVERSEAS EMPIRE The meetinghouse of the Third Church of Boston (1669), the largest to be built in seventeenth-century New England. (From William Burgis, "View ol Boston1722. New York Public Library) only a dozen years of settlement, Massachusetts found its economic prosperity resting not on any single staple crop, but on overseas trade with other colonies and with England. The quest for a suitable form of government proved more difficult. The colony had control over its own charter and thus was able to act like an independent republic while acknowledging allegiance to the king. But it was not at all clear w hich settlers should control that government. Winthrop and other Puritan leaders, convinced that most settlers were not truly godly persons, struggled to keep control in the hands of the Puritan elite. They never thought Puritan ministers should rule the holy commonwealth, though they often turned to them for advice and support. They simply assumed that any truly godly community should be governed by thoroughly orthodox Puritan men. This leadership was challenged from two directions. The leaders were, as a group, wealthier than the other setders. So their control of the colony was resented for both religious and economic reasons. Other men of lesser religious and economic status began grumbling about their rights. As freeborn Englishmen, they argued, they had the right to participate in government. After all, they had done so at home in England, if only by being allowed to vote. They had no wish to allow servants or the poor to vote, and they agreed that the wicked and irreligious should be excluded. But they balked at being governed by a handful of self-appointed gentlemen on the governor's council. There was a quiet but very real struggle for power between these two groups. After about fifteen years, a series of compromises w as hammered out. Most adult male members of the churches would lie idlowed to vote. A representative legis- lature—the General Court—would be divided into two houses. The smaller upper house would be made up of relatively wealthy men. The larger lower house would consist of humbler representatives, with each town able to send two of its own. The governorship would remain an annually elective office. This workable compromise was possible because so many of the settlers shared a common belief in English liberties and Puritan values. The firmness of that ground is apparent in the fact that John Winthrop was elected governor almost every year until his death in 1649. The Dissidents of Rhode Island The rule of orthodox Puritans in Massachusetts was also challenged by two outstanding but very different individuals: Roger Williams and Anne Hutchinson. Roger Williams was a Separatist minister who migrated to Massachusetts in 1631. He was greatly admired for his piety and talents, but he soon began to irritate the authorities with alarming ideas. Williams announced that the settlers had no just claim to land unless they purchased it from the Indians. Williams also insisted that the government had no right to interfere in religious matters, not even the right to punish violations of the Sabbath. Most Puritans thought such proposals both absurd and dangerous. And much as they liked him. Massachusetts authorities were unwalling to tolerate his preaching. So in 1636, Roger W illiams was banished from the colony. In the dead of winter, Williams tramped southward through the snow to the headwaters of Narragansett Bay. For a lime he lived with the Narragansett Indians and even took the trouble to learn their language—one of the few English settlers ever to do so. Soon he was joined by sympathizers from Massachusetts. They established the town of Providence, which became the center of a new colony, Rhode Island. In 1644, during the English civil war, Williams went back to England and successfully obtained a charter for his new settlement from a sympathetic Puritan Parliament. Rhode Island's charter provided for a government similar to that of Massachusetts, but it contained unusual provisions that reflected Williams's personal views. All Christian groups were allowed to worship as they pleased, without any interference from the government. Even men who were not members of any church were permitted to vote. In these matters, Rhode Island remained unique among the colonies for many years. The other early challenger of the authorities in Massachusetts, Anne Hutchinson, was a quick- witted and forceful person who jolted that colony even more than Williams had. She began discussing Sunday sermons with an ever-widening circle of admirers and announcing her conclusion that most ministers in the colony were wrong about the process of salvation. She publicly claimed the ministers were wrongly preaching that proper outward behavior could be a sign of salvation. She also announced that saints who had been saved were under no obligation to obey the outward laws of God. These unorthodox views, known to theologians as Anlinomianism, attracted a considerable follow- ingin the colony. The authorities were alarmed by the threat she posed to the social order, and they brought her to trial in 1638. At first she defended herself well before a frustrated court, but she made one fatal mistake. When asked where she obtained her unorthodox ideas, she replied that she had heard from God "by an immediate voice." Most Puritans believed that God no longer spoke directly to individuals but only through His holy word, the Bible, and that the only proper interpreters of the Bible were educated ministers. The court banished Anne Hutchinson from Massachusetts. She moved with her family and numerous supporters to Rhode Island. Several years later she migrated westward, where she was killed by Indians—a brutal end several Massachusetts leaders interpreted as a positive sign of God's providence. Connecticut, New Hampshire, and Maine In the meantime, orthodox Puritan settlers were venturing far from the cluster of towns around Boston. Some moved northward onto land between the Merrimack and Kennebec rivers claimed by Massachusetts and also by several wealthy individuals in England. After considerable confusion about boundaries and land titles. New Hampshire emerged as a separate Puritan colony with a governor appointed by the king. The coastal land to the northeast, known as the district of Maine, remained part of Massachusetts. Other Puritans left Massachusetts in favor of the fertile lands of the lower Connecticut valley. The Reverend Thomas Hooker led the first sizable In many ways the population of the English colonies in America was unique. The number of people grew faster, probably, than anywhere else in the world. This rapid growth had a deep impact on the colonial economy and the nature of colonial society. In addition, the English colonies attracted a great many non-English peoples. By the time of the American Revolution, colonists of English descent made up only slight more than half the entire population. The Population Explosion At the end of the (Ireat Migration in 1640, the non-Indian population of the colonies was about 27,000. This figure includes all the English colonies along the Atlantic seaboard, as well as New Netherland, but not the English colonies in the West Indies. It does not include Indians, because no one knows how many Indians there were. Today, 27,000 people would make a very small town; modem football stadiums hold about three times that number. By 1700 the non-Indian population in these colonies was nearly ten times as large, about 250,000. This rapid growth continued during the eighteenth century. No other European setdements in the New World grew as fast. Though this increase David. Joanna, and Abigail Mason posed for their portrait by an unknown itinerant painter in Massachusetts about 1670. (The Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, Gift of Mr. and Mrs. John D. Rockefeller 3rd) was remarkable, we still need to bear in mind that 250,000 is about the population of a medium-sized city in the United States today. Put another way, the town that Roger Williams founded—Provi- dence, Rhode Island—today has nearly as many people as lived in all the colonies in 1700. There were several reasons for the rapid increase. One, of course, was the founding of new colonies; each new' colony offered more land, and more land attracted more settlers. Another was the continued migration from England to the older colonies. Some of these people returned to England, but most stayed in America. In addition, the birth rate in the colonies was considerably higher than that in England. Probably this was largely because of the relative ease of obtaining land, which enabled couples to marry younger and therefore to have more children. Parents on farms found children useful, since they could be put to work at an early age. Most parents assumed that their children would get land of their own when they grew up, so a large family—five or six children was the average—seemed to have advantages rather than disadvantages. Rapid population growth also reflected a relatively low death rate. After the early years of settlement, the death rate in the American colonies was far lower than in England. This difference was caused partly by large cities like London. Two and three hundred years ago, large cities killed off people much faster than they produced them. Crow ding encouraged the spread of disease, especially because the drinking w ater in almost all cities was badly polluted by garbage and sew'age. In 1700 London was the largest city in the world. By comparison, Boston, New York, and Philadelphia were tiny towns. And because they were so much smaller, they had far fewer urban problems. Even though the death rate in the colonies was lower than in Europe, it was far higher than it is today, especially among babies and young children. There were no effective cures for disease; no one knew that germs even existed, let alone how to kill them. The American colonists had a higher death rate in the early years of settlement than later on. Virginia remained an especially unhealthy place for fifty years. Overwork, malnutrition, and bad treatment made the typical Virginia laborer s life a short one; but two diseases took the greatest toll: miliaria (from mosquitoes) and typhoid fever (from polluted drinking water). After about 1650 the health of the Virginia colonists improved considerably. The reasons are not entirely clear, but the death rate dropped and population began to increase rapidly. Charles Willson Peale (1741-1827), Family Group, 1773. {The New York Historical Society) By contrast, the New England colonies were more healthy from the beginning. It was largely for this reason that early Massachusetts had a far larger population than Virginia. New England, and later the Middle Colonies of New York, New Jersey. and Pennsylvania, had one of the lowest death rates in the entire world. Another brake on population growth in the colonies was the proportion of women and men. In early Virginia, most settlers were male. Since the number of children in any society depends upon the number of voung women, not the number ot men. Virginia's early grow th was far slower than New England's. The English migration to all the northern colonies was usually by entire families. Single settlers were more common in the southern colonies. As the years went by, children born >n America became a larger and larger part of the Population. Because male*} and females were horn in about equal numbers, the proportion of men and women in the population gradually evened °nt, and fewer men remained unmarried. This was an important development, for married men tend to settle down and to think more about security and less about adventure. The American colonies "ere becoming "settled" in more ways than one. Specialization of Labor 1 he population explosion in the American colonies had several important effects. It stimulated economic growth and helped raise the standard oi living, since a growing population meant more mouths to feed and a growing market for farmers. A small settlement could afford only to cultivate food and make clothes and shelters. A larger one could support a greater variety of jobs. As an example, let us take John, a young shoemaker who arrived in Massachusetts as part of the Great Migration of the 1630s. He had little money, hut was a skilled bootmaker. He settled in the little town of Hingham outside Boston. With the help of his neighbors, he built a glorified hut which he called a house. In turn he helped his neighbors at the same task, and together they constructed a meetinghouse to serve as a church and as a meeting place for the voters of the town. But John had to eat; so he had to farm. His neighbors, including the minister, did the same. Yet John remained a shoemaker at heart, for he was better at his craft than at raising squash and corn. He used his little remaining cash to buy- some leather. In his spare time, our shoemaker lovingly made some boots, which he sold to his neighbors. There were more and more of them as time went by. They paid him in food and firewood more often than in cash, but eventually he was able to stop farming, sell his land, and move to Boston. Once in town, John bought a small house and hung out his sign—a piece of wood in the shape of a boot. One room in his two-room house was his place of work and his retail store. Boston was growing from a village into a real town, and could Ptfc COLONIAI. PEOPLE A Shoemaker prospers by his trade. (American Antiquarian Society) no longer feed itself. Nearby farmers drove their wagons into town with food and firewood for sale, and they were happy for the chance to buy John's boots. There were more and more of them every year. John died at his workbench of a heart attack, reasonably secure in the knowledge that he had laltored hard at his calling. That, at least, is the way he would have looked at it. We would call it increasing specialization of labor, fueled by population growth, The Young and the Old The high birth rate also shaped early American society by making it very youthful. Today, fewer than half the people of the United States are under the age of thirty. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, half the people were under the age of sixteen. This youthfulness had several important effects. Obviously, only a relatively small number of men could take part in politics and government. It also meant that the military power of the colonies was relatively small. The colonists did their best to meet the situation by setting the age for service in the colonial militias between sixteen and sixty. People often referred to the "men and boys" of colonial armies. The youthfulness of the colonial population had an even more important result: the absence ot a large group of people w ho were too old to work. Some people lived to be seventy or eighty, but not many. Elderly people assumed they should work until they died or became too feeble. The age of sixty-five had no particular meaning, and no one thought about "retirement." Most people did a full day's work from about age twelve on, unless they were disabled. This situation contrasts sharply with today, when the United States has a very large group of old people w'ho either do not or cannot work. They are supported partly by savings front their working years and by the social security and welfare systems. But as a group they are not self- supporting; they are supported by younger people who can and do w'ork. The colonists did have large numbers of dependent children. But we also have such a large group today, despite a lower birth rate, This is because people today do not do much productive work until they are eighteen or even thirty, and the law at least supposedly prevents them from working before the age of sixteen. In the colonies, a much higher proportion of the population engaged in productive work, and the group of nonworking dependents was relatively small. So many people working made for economic growth and a rising standard of living. NON-KNGLISn IMMIGRANTS In the early years of the eighteenth century, social conditions in western Germany and northern Ireland created a large pool of discontented people who were willing to migrate overseas. The Palatines (as Americans called most Germans) and the Scotch-Irish (as those hum the province of Ulster in northern Ireland were called) made up by far the largest groups of newcomers. However, by far the largest group of non-English immigrants came from West Africa, and of course they came against their will. The Germans Continuous German immigration began in 1683. when small groups of Mennonites and Quakers -48 established Germantown, near Philadelphia. During the next three decades other radical German Protestants founded Pennsylvania towns such as Bethlehem. Lititz. and Nazareth. These early immigrants were mainly well-educated people who paid their own passage, brought property from the Old World, and bought land on their arrival. They built substantial communities where many original buildings still stand. All the radical sects were opposed to domination of the church by the state, a position that took its most extreme form in their refusal to bear arms. They also refused to swear oaths, a fact that annoyed and concerned British administrators of the Navigation Acts and other officials. Along with the sects, many German Lutherans and German Reformed Calvinists also settled in Pennsylvania early in the eighteenth century. These denominations, with Lutherans predominant. were by far the most numerous of the German-speaking immigrants to America. They were usually called "church people." Most of them, too poor to pay their way to America, came as redemptioners, one of the many Conns of white servitude. The indentured servants who were first shipped to Virginia and Maryland early in the seventeenth century had made contracts with the joint stock companies or proprietary agents abroad. They agreed to work in the colonies in exchange for passage across the Atlantic. Redemptioners of the eighteenth century sold themselves to ship captains or "soul brokers" in European ports. In 1750, Gottlieb Mittelberger warned Germans about the voyage to America: "There is on board these ships terrible misery . . . stench, fumes, horror, vomiting . . . fever, dysentery . . . heat, constipation, boils, scury, cancer, mouthrot. . . from old and sharply salted food and . . . foul water, so that many die miserably." On one ship arriving in Philadelphia in 1745, only 40 of 400 passengers survived. As many as a third of the redemptioners may have died at sea. Sometimes the survivors were forced into extra years of servitude to pay back the cost of the passage of their dead relatives. Once in America, the redemptioners' contracts were sold to the highest bidders. Since the healthiest were sold first, ship captains kept the sick and °ld on board until their contract was sold or they died Parents were often for&d to sell their children into service. The usual term was from four to seven years, at the end of which the servant was to receive "f reedom dues," usually 50 acres of land, tools, and clothing. The evidence suggests that these dues were often withheld or, when granted, that the servant sold off the land for a small amount of cash. Not surprisingly, runaways were frequent. German immigration reached its high point between 1749 and 1754, when over 5000 Germans arrived in American ports each year, most in Philadelphia. Although many of the church people tried to learn English ways, others held to their own language and traditions. The Pennsylvania Germans became celebrated throughout the country for their rich gardens and orchards, their sturdy bams and well-tended livestock. German artisans developed the famous long rifle, first manufactured in Lancaster and later adopted and improved by frontiersmen everywhere. Yet many English Pennsylvanians became concerned about the fact that more than one-third of the colony was German and that the colony might be becoming a New Germany. The Scotch-lrish The large number of German immigrants in the eighteenth century was exceeded by the so-called Scotch-lrish. Their ancestors were the lowland Scottish Calvinists who moved to Ulster early in the seventeenth century. James 1 deliberately encouraged this migration in order to strengthen Protestantism in Ireland. At first they prospered as farmers and artisans. After 1696, however, new Navigation Acts hurt the economy of Ireland. Then, in the early years of the eighteenth century, British absentee landlords started doubling rents. The people of Ulster began leaving in thousands. Poverty in Ireland, as in England, helped fill the prisons with debtors. In time of war. male prisoners were often thrown into the army. But when poverty and unemployment spread during periods of peace, as it did after the Peace of Utrecht in 1713, something was needed to empty the jails. The common penalties of "burning in the hand and whipping" were inadequate. As a substitute, thousands of English and Scotch-lrish debtors were shipped to Maryland and Virginia to work in the tobacco fields. A Treasury decision in 1716 to pay merchants for transporting them overseas created a powerful special interest in the practice. Paying passengers probably accounted for no more than one in ten of the Scotch-lrish immigrants. The rest, like most of the Germans, obtained their passage by signing indentures. Many landed in Philadelphia or in nearby Newcastle, Delaware. As they continued to arrive by the thousands each year and indentures expired, they moved beyond the Germans on Philadelphia's western frontier, across the Susquehanna to the Cumberland Valley. Here mountain passes led southwest to Maryland, western Virginia, and North Carolina. This course took them along the outer rim of a smaller number of Germans who had earlier moved in the same direction. The West Africans The first Africans brought to the English colonies were sold by a Dutch shipmaster at Virginia in 1619, the same year the first legislative body met in America. Whether these early arrivals were treated as slaves for life or servants for term is uncertain, but they were never regarded as just another kind of settler. After 1640 in Virginia and Maryland, some of the Africans and their children were being enslaved for life. By 1660, a pattern had clearly emerged: "Negroes" (a term borrowed from the Portuguese-Spanish word for "black") customarily were lifetime, hereditary slaves. They were forbidden to bear arms, and—a crucial, enduring, and often overlooked distinction—Negro women were routinely put to work "in the fields." White women generally were not, nor would they ever be. Head of a Negro, by John Singleton Copley. By 1780, some 600,000 slaves worked the lands of fhe south. (The Detroit Institute ot Arts, Founders Society Purchase, Gibbs-Williams Fund) African Origins of the Slave Trade At the same time, about 1660. the legislatures of Virginia and Maryland began to enact laws to permit, and even require, the status of slavery for Africans, and Africans only. The irony was that the English, who prided themselves on being the freest people of all Europe, hammered out in the New World the legal framework for slavery. By the early 1770s, complex slave codes had been enacted in the southern colonies. Yet the system was not watertight. At least a few Negroes were "free," no matter how much they might otherwise be degraded. From the beginning, race and slavery never matched completely. The general pattern, however, rapidly became clear. There were not a great many blacks in the Chesapeake colonies until about 1700. From then until the Revolution, they were imported in huge numbers into the tobacco colonies and South Carolina. A relative trickle reached the middle and northern colonies. From 1720 to the American Revolution, Africans and Americans of African descent constituted some 20 percent of the mainland colonial population, a far higher proportion than before or since. The West African migration to the British mainland colonies was a very small part of the slave trade to the New World. Between 9 and 12 million slaves were brought to the Americas during the 350 years of the slave trade. Ninety percent went to tropical America; according to the best current assessment, only some 350,000 arrived in North America. The cruelty of this forced migration has usually and perhaps rightly drawn attention away from its enormous significance. Brutality began with war- Charles Calvert with a slave boy. painted in Maryland in 1761 by John Hesselius. (The Baltimore Museum of Art: Gift of Alfred R, and Henry G. Riggs, in Memory of Generae Lawrason Riggs) time capture or kidnapping or conviction for a crime. Warfare among various African tribes was the most common cause of enslavement, but sometimes European raiding parties attacked Africans directly. During the marches to the sea, often for hundreds of miles, many died or were killed. On the coast, survivors were chained, herded into open stockades, branded, and segregated by age and sex. The greatest shock of all was perhaps the sudden, enforced separation from familiar surroundings, the awful sight of the great, pounding ocean, and the tall-masted vessels that rode offshore with such seeming grace and confidence. (It seems small compensation for anyone then or since for us to discover that mortality among European slave trade sailors was even higher than among the victims. ) Despite the careful organization of the trade on the African coast, vessels frequently rode offshore for weeks before finding a full load or a favorable wind. Slaves rebelled most often during these periods, sometimes with complete success. On the high seas some captives threw themselves into shark-infested waters. What Europeans saw as Treatment of African slaves, as illustrated in an eighteenth-century treatise on Methods of Procuring Slaves": {a) 'Manner of yoking slaves1 when marching to port; (b) mouthpiece and neck brace with hooks, to prevent escape when pursued in the woods; (c) dealer branding recently purchased slaves; (d) plan for stowing slaves below decks for the long sea voyage, {Library of Congress) TME COLONIAL people The musical instrument the banjo—and the word itself—came to the United States and to other parts of the New World from West Africa. A few banjoes may perhaps have been brought across the Atlantic aboard slave ships, but knowlege of the instrument and the skill to construct it most certainly did. There are many references to the banjo (variously spelled) as early as the mid-eighteenth century. Thomas Jefferson referred to it in 1784: "The instrument proper to them [the blacks) is the Banjor, which they brought hither from Africa." The original version had five strings (as most still do) and depended on a small drum for its reasonance, unlike the wooden box of the European guitar. Since West African music made such extensive use of drumming, the combination of strings with a drum was a natural development. After generations of homemade construction and strumming on slave plantations, the banjo was taken up by whites in their blackface minstrel shows in tire 1830s. Throughout American history, and probably in Africa, the instrument has customarily been played by men rather than women. suicide was actually a thoroughly rational action, since many West Africans believed that Europeans were cannibals and that only through death and spiritual remigration could they return to their homeland. Slave traders announced their sales in newspaper advertisements and broadsides like this one, from Soulh Carolina. Note the imbalanced sex ratio among the slaves in the cargo. (Amer- ican Antiquarian Society) Cbttrleft own, July -yth, 1769 OiiThursday the third Day d August next* Ninety-Four |j Thirty-nine Men,Fifteen Boys, 7 Twenty-four Women, andjj7| Sixteen Girls. In theBrigantineDEMBi a,Bran as Bare, Mailer, from Si err a- Leon, by lz7|KSiltrii T A >:■ \ > Cf1 | t Britain was one of the last of the Western powers to enter the slave trade on a commercial basis, but the British came to dominate the trade in the eighteenth century. Of the relatively small number of slaves who were sold to the mainland colonies, at least 85 percent came directly from Africa. The remainder came from the Caribbean islands, usually after staying there for only a few weeks. Because males were in greater demand, they greatly out numbered the female slaves. In addition, like servants from the British Isles, the African migrants tended to be young, many of them in their teens. We will never know the exact nature of the cultural contact between the English colonists and their slaves. Both sides seem to have survived the shock. Africans and their immediate descendants learned English manners and language rapidly— because they had to. The English who came in day-to-day contact also became to some extent bi- cultural. Africans and their children learned to accommodate themselves to powerlessness. English masters and their children learned a new role of great personal power. For obvious reasons, historians know more about the white side of this equation than the black. We know the whites saw blacks as enemies. and there is nothing to suppose that the reverse was not the case. The tyranny that resulted was self-reinforcing. As the slave system developed in the early years of the eighteenth century, it tightened the bonds on the personal and civil freedom of whites and blacks alike. But it was blacks who suffered the chains of slavery. In Virginia and Maryland, "new Negroes" from Africa were normally put "into the ground" on a "quarter" of some sixteen people and one overseer. far from the larger home plantation of the actual owner In the Chesapeake colonies, many men of the second and third generations were trained or permitted to practice as "tradesmen" or skilled laborers on the home plantations, which served as commercial and manufacturing centers because there were no large towns. In South Carolina and Georgia, the rice plantations contained larger numbers of Africans and fewer whites. This heavy concentration in the coastal low country of South Carolina and Georgia meant that Africans were able there, as nowhere else in America, to preserve many of the cultural patterns and languages they had known in West Africa. That style and the resultant language (known usually as Gullah) survives there to this day. During the eighteenth century the English settlements were turning into more mature societies. They became much more diverse in terms of ethnic makeup, and differences in their economies made for differences in social organization. Although most colonists still farmed, or had servants and slaves to farm for them, an increasing number moved to urban areas. All the colonies maintained social distinctions among people, an arrangement which at the time seemed perfectly ordinary and proper Tidewater Gentry Throughout the colonial period, most of the white population of tidewater Virginia and Maryland and of adjacent parts of North Carolina was of English extraction. Here, although com and other food crops continued to be grown, the production and export of tobacco was the main focus of economic activity, along with land speculation. Led by a small elite group, the Chesapeake planters kept close ties with Britain and copied the manners of its aristocracy. The Carters, Lees, Byrds, Randolphs, and Fitzhughs of Virginia, the Carrolls, Dulaneys, and Galloways of Maryland lived in great Georgian mansions. They filled the well-proportioned rooms with the finest imported furniture or hired astisans to carry out the designs °f foreign cabinetmakers. Contemporary' artists painted the Chesapeake gentry in all their imported finery. A few planters owned large libraries with books m several languages, although learning and schools were not emphasized. In 1693 William and Mary College, endowed by the estabbshed Anglican church, opened in Williamsburg, Vir- ®n'a, which was soon to become the provincial the Robert Carter of Nomini Hall, Virginia. (Painting by Joshua Reynolds; Colonial Williamsburg Photography) capital. But few students spent more than a year there. Some planters sent their sons to England for their education, but those who profiled from the opportunity often did not come back. The Chesapeake gentry were an outdoor people, fonder of fox hunting, horse racing, and partying than of learning. The Chesapeake planters had to take the management of their plantations seriously. But they seemed driven to keep up the good life, or at least the appearance of it. Land, which represented their greatest wealth, was also their downfall. "Such amazing property," observed Philip Fithian, a tutor to the Carters, "no matter how deeply it is involved in debt, blows up the owners to an imagination which is visible to all." They "live up their suppositions," a Londoner remarked, "without providing against calamities and accidents." From the 1730s to the 1750s, when the price of Virginia tobacco soared, rising profits made the planters' land more valuable. The Chesapeake gentry enjoyed a golden age. Yet few could long keep up the high life, the expenditures for clothes, carriages, body slaves, mansions, parks, and wine. Eventually, the debts for imported goods grew too high. To those who crashed, the West was a refuge or a new springboard to success. It also fed ideas of empire among such Virginians as young George Washington. Colonial newspapers served as the most important public tie among the colonies. Their circulations were small by modem standards. Many backwoods farmers rarely saw one, even If they knew howr to read. Yet newspapers were passed from hand to hand and read aloud at crossroads stores. They served as a vital network of communication among a relatively literate people. And as time went on, that communication link became more and more vital to their interests. The ideas of the Enlightenment were downright intoxicating. They suggested to many Americans that they had only to continue what they were already doing in order to achieve a better society. Yet Protestant Americans saw their future in rather special terms. The Threat of New France As time went on, the English settlements occupied more and more territory. Indians east of the Appalachians were drastically reduced in numbers and in power as they moved westward or suc- combed to disease. To the north and west lay the French settlements, forts along the St. Lawrence Valley, the southern Great Lakes, and the Mississippi River all the way to New Orleans. French Catholic missionaries and fur traders had established friendly relations with the Indians, for the fur traders did not take the Indian land. They often lived in Indian villages and had children by Indian wives. French royal officials tried to encourage settlement by farmers, but they were not very successful. In 1760 there were only about 60,000 French people in all of New France; the British colonists numbered nearly 1.5 million. English numerical superiority was partly balanced by the weight of Indian power. Whenever there was war between England and France, the colonial French encouraged their Indian friends to raid English settlements. The balance of power between the French and British in North America was also affected by the fact that a large proportion of the French colonists were males of fighting age. In contrast, the British colonies had many more women and children. New York became the crucial battleground because it included the only water-level break in the Appalachian mountain chain. Fortunately for the English, the Iroquois Confederacy controlled the Mohawk Valley. To the north and west of the Iroquois were the Hurons. The French had long ago befriended the I lurons, without knowing that they were traditional enemies of the Iroquois. Thus the English were able to make alliances with the Iroquois against their common enemies, the Hu- rons and the French. When William of Orange came to the English throne, he brought with him an old feud with Louis XIV of France. From 1689 to 1713 there was almost continuous war between England and France, which by this time were the two most powerful nations in Europe. Europe remained the main scene of the conflict, and neither country sent troops to their colonies. But the English and French settlers in America sent raiding exped- tions against each other, and Indians became involved in most of this fighting. By and large, the English won. When the wars finally ended in 1713, the Peace of Utrecht gave important new American territories to the British. The French ceded the rich island of St. Christopher (St. Kill's) in the West Indies, and recognized British claims to the territory around Hudson Bay. The British also acquired the peninsula of Nova Scotia (previously known as Acadia), which New Englanders had captured. The French acknowledged the Iroquois as British subjects and their territory as British domain. The Founding of Georgia For twenty-five years after the Peace of Utrecht there was no further warfare between Great Britain and France. But the southern border of the mainland colonies remained in dispute with Spain, and the British moved to strengthen their position in that region. They did so by founding a new colony, the last of the thirteen that later became the United States. In 1732 General James Oglethorpe and several other English gendemen obtained a royal charter for a new colony to be located south of the Savannah River. The charter gave Oglethorpe and the other "trustees" the right to govern the colony for twenty-one years. Thereafter the colony of Georgia would have a royal governor. Two reasons prompted the establishment of the new colony. The British government wanted a military outpost for defense against the Spanish in Florida. Oglethorpe was interested in setting up a place of refuge for those who had been imprisoned for debt. The Georgia trustees laid down certain rules they Added to Georgia 1763 Georgia and the Carolinas hoped would help realize both aims: Landholdings were limited to 500 acres; rum and brandy were banned, since farmers and militiamen ought to be sober; slavery was prohibited not because it was WTong, but because it would weaken the colony as a military outpost. Most of these plans for the new colony fell through. The trustees did support settlement of some debtors from England, but they were soon outnumbered by land-hungry men from South Carolina and other established colonies. The trustees withdrew their ban on rum in the face of protests. Planters from South Carolina brought in slaves, bought up large tracts of land in the low country, and began planting rice. By the time Georgia became a royal colony in 1752, it was a small copy of its neighbor to the north. The Geor- Pa assembly simply copied many of South Caro- mta s laws. Rice and slaves dominated the colony. StiU. at the time of the American Revolution Geor- had fewer people than any of the other thirteen colonies, _________________' ____________ l-°uisburg as Citadel and Symbol Shortly after the founding of Georgia, war broke 0UI again in Europe. From 1739 to 1748 Britain 'J'as at war, first with Spain and then with France. 1 first there was little action in the American NEu ways oh thought colonies. Rumors about possible invasion swept some cities, but they all proved false. Then, in 1745, something truly amazing happened. For years, the famous fort of Louisburg had stood on Cape Breton Island as the sentry for the St. Lawrence River. Louisburg was the gateway to New' France, and it was heavily fortified. That year, Massachusetts and other New England colonies sent milita and sailors to assault Louisburg. To almost everyone's surprise, the expedition succeeded. The victory fired the colonists' imagination. They had proved their own strength. Colonial leaders (especially in Massachusetts) began to think in grander terms. Some began to predict that all of New France would eventually fall to Anglo-American power. Here would be a stunning triumph for British-Americans and for the cause General Sir William Pepperell. the victor ot Louisburg. (Library of Congress) in London proposed efficiency, officials in the colonies smelled attack. They had grown so attached to self-government that they were inclined, as a British statesman told the House of Commons, to "sniff the approach of tyranny in every tainted breeze." Writs of Assistance Rumblings of serious trouble in America were heard even before the end of the French and Indian War. From the start of the war, colonial merchants, witli characteristic disregard for British policy, had traded with the enemy in Canada and in the West Indies. In 1760 Pitt's ministry ordered colonial governors to make greater efforts to enforce customs regulations. In Massachusetts, the center of illegal trade, royal customs collectors needed help to search the premises of merchants suspected of smuggling. They applied to the Superior Court of the colony for writs of assistance that would allow them to use police constables. Writs of assistance had been in common use for a long time, both in Britain and America. Authorized by acts of Parliament, they had to be re: newed each time a new sovereign came to the throne. When George II died in 1760, new writs had to be authorized in the name of George III. Some Massachusetts merchants took this opportunity to criticize the whole practice. They hired as counsel a brilliant but eccentric young Boston lawyer named James Otis. Early in 1761, Otis appeared in court and delivered an astounding attack on these writs. John Adams, who was there, recalled years later: "Otis was a flame of fire!... he hurried away everything before him." Although the speech itself has been lost, we know that Otis rested his case on broad principles derived from John Locke and the Commonwealth writers. He claimed that the writs violated the people's rights of property, and that an act of Parliament contrary to natural law must be regarded as void. Parliament had no legal right, he said, to violate natural law either in Britain or in America. Otis lost his case, and the writs were issued. But men in other colonies soon joined in the protest against their legality. And despite the pleas and threats of imperial customs officials, colonial judges often refused to grant them. Otis had established an important precedent, moreover, by basing his argument on the bedrock of natural rights. Problems in the West So long as France owned Canada. Americans were forced to rely on Britain for protection. The defeat of France removed one menace, but it failed to settle the colonists' relationship with the Indians. Established fur traders in the thirteen colonies and in Canada wanted the West permanently reserved for Indian hunters and trappers. Newly influential land speculators, on the other hand, were urging settlers to go west; they wanted the Indians cleared out or "pacified." Both sides had powerful friends in Britain. Colonial land speculators were particularly active in Pennsylvania and Virginia, and their claims often conflicted with one another, as well as with those of rivals abroad. Benjamin Franklin represented a group of wealthy Pennsylvanians interested in lands along the Ohio. One of the Virginia enterprises was promoted by George Washington, whose Mississippi Company, formed as a successor to the old Ohio Company, had its eye on thousands of acres at the junction of the Ohio and Mississippi rivers. During the war, fearful of British expansionism. most of the northwestern Indian tribes had IIIt-. MAKINGS OF REVOLT chosen to ally themselves with the French. The victory of the British renewed their anxiety. Goaded by French traders who talked of the return of French power to North America, Indians in New York and Pennsylvania launched an attack on British forts. They were led by the Ottawa chief Pontiac. With the objective of sweeping the entire white population into the sea, Pontiac's followers destroyed seven of the nine British garrisons west of Niagara. Soon after news of these attacks reached London, the government issued the royal Proclamation of 1763. It set boundaries for three new royal colonies: Quebec, East Florida, and West Florida. Most other western territory'—from the Alleghenies to the Mississippi and from Florida to 50° north latitude—was reserved for the Indians. The Proclamation excluded all white fur traders, land speculators, and settlers. It was intended as a temporary measure to give Britain time to work out a permanent western policy, but it aroused the anger of the colonists. No proclamation issued thousands of miles away could keep speculators and frontiersmen out I Many colonists agreed with George Washington when he urged that the Proclamation of 1763 be I disobeyed: "I can never look upon that proclama- 1 tion in any other light . . . than as a temporary expedient to quiet the minds of Indians. . . ,* v person, therefore, who neglects the present opportunity of hunting out good lands, and in some measure marking and distinguishing them lor his own (in order to keep others from settling them), will never regain it." Washington practiced what he preached. I le and other land speculators sent agents into the Ohio Valley to stake out claims. Opposition to the Proclamation of 1763 grew so strong that within a few years the British revised their western policy. They made a series of treaties with the Indians to give the speculators room. In each case the treaties pushed the map of English control farther westward, and before long the paper fence was in shreds. Every extension of the boundary line touched off new bursts of speculation. In 1768 the first settlers to penetrate the Blue Ridge barrier occupied the Watauga Valley of North Carolina. In 1769, having made his first trip west two years before, Daniel Boone crossed the future Wilderness Koad through the Cumberland Gap into Kentucky. In 1775, he guided the first group of permanent settlers to the bluegrass region. As Americans moved deeper into the West, awav from older centers of power, they became more and more determined to control their own destinies. Discontent in Virginia Britain's new policies caused strong resentment in Virginia, one of the most populous of all the colonies. By concentrating on one money-making crop, tobacco planters had depicted their best soil; cheap lands in the west seemed their only salvation, But land policy was only one source of planter discontent. British merchants served as middlemen for everything the planters bought or sold abroad, and British shipowners charged high rates for carrying the planters' produce and purchases across the ocean. As the return from their lands dwindled, the planters' debts mounted. Thomas Jefferson once estimated that Virginia planters owed at least £2 million to British merchants and observed that these debts "had become hereditary from father to son. for many generations." Many planters grew concerned about their inability to finance their own agricultural expansion. Troops and Taxation The worst problem raised by the French and Indian War was taxation. Britain's long, costly struggles for empire had boosted tax rates so much that bv 1763 British landowners were turning over about a third of their income to the government. Now the British had to face the cost of protecting their expanded possessions. Several bureaucrats estimated that 10,000 troops were needed for the colonies, and Parliament felt that the colonists should share the cost of their own protection. There was also a more sinister motive behind the British plan to station regular troops in America. War veterans could be taken care of and a large army maintained without the distrust that would come if it were on home soil. As things turned out, colonial Americans had strong suspicions about what was then known as "a standing army at home." The colonists had long since learned to manage their finances without British interference. They began to demand that the British solve their own financial crisis. For one tiling, the colonies had piled up a war debt of £2.5 million. In addition, by Pitt's estimate. British merchants made profits of at least £2 million a year on colonial commerce. Such profits seemed to Americans, and to Pitt himself, to be "tax" enough. The very prosperity that made the colonists fair game to the British had given them the self-assurance to stand against Parliament. The Sugar, Currency, ■and Quartering Acts The task of handling postwar problems of imperial government and finance fell upon the ministry of George Grenville, who got his appointment chiefly because of his reputation as a fiscal expert, Grenville discovered that the American customs service cost four times as much as it was collecting. The Molasses Act of 1733 had imposed a duty of 6 pence per gallon on foreign-made molasses. Everyone knew that New England merchants were importing vast quantities of relatively cheap molasses from the French sugar islands without paying any duties. Grenville thought he saw a way of stopping the smuggling and increasing revenue. His instrument w as the Sugar Act, which he pushed through Parliament in 1764. The Sugar Act actually reduced the duty on foreign molasses, from 6 pence to 3. Previously merchants had been bribing customs officials at about 1 pence per gallon. Now bribery would be less profitable. In addition, the Sugar Act placed duties on many other essential imports. Finally, it provided new mechanisms of enforcement. Violations of the Sugar Act would be tried in admiralty courts. Previously the colonists had successfully steered most smuggling cases into colonial courts with juries. The local people on those juries had l>een understanding, and acquittals were easy to obtain. Now violators would have to deal with courts presided over by unfriendly judges sent from England. The Sugar Act provisions alarmed colonial merchants, and they and other colonists found the title and preamble downright ominous. Its official title was the Rev enue Act, and the preamble stated that its purpose was to raise money in the colonies. Previously all taxes laid by Parliament had been passed for the purpose of regulating trade. Tit*. MAKINGS OF REVOl.T replace him as minister to France. After he had been in France the two months allowed to foreigners, the French police notified Pinckney that unless he got a permit to remain, they would arrest him. Pinckney fled to Amsterdam in a rage. When news of Pinckney's treatment reached Philadelphia, Adams (now president) had to deal with Federalist demands for war with the French. Adams refused to give in. Without asking the French government, he decided to send a three- man mission to Paris to persuade the French to end their raids on American shipping. When Talleyrand, then Foreign Minister of France, refused to negotiate until the Americans had given a brif>e of $250,000 to three subordinates, the mission collapsed. In their reports home, the American envoys referred to Talleyrand's three subordinates as X, Y, and Z. When the reports became public, an uproar broke out among both parties over the so-called XYZ dispatches, during which someone is said to have cried, "Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute." Congress did vote millions for the expansion of the army and navy in 1798 and 1799; it also created a separate Navy Department and repealed all treaties with France. To the disappointment of Hamilton, who wanted to lead it into battle, the new army grew very slowly. Adams himself saw little use for land forces in fighting for the freedom of the seas. He was also reluctant to burden the country with needless expense. The new Navy Department, on the other hand, prompdy pushed to completion three well-armed frigates then under construction, produced twenty other ships of war, and sent hundreds of American privateers to prey on the French. In 1798 and 1799, an "undeclared naval war'' raged with France. American ships, operating mainly in the Caribbean, took almost a hundred French vessels and suffered serious losses themselves. Hamilton's friends in the cabinet and Congress, meanwhile, were pushing the expansion of the arrny so hard that many people suspected a plan to use it against domestic as well as foreign enemies. 1 heir suspicions were confirmed in February 1799, when troops were sent once more to western Pennsylvania to put down a rebellion led by John Fries against the collection ofthe new taxes t° pay for the army. The Hamiltonians even persuaded Washington, only a few months before his death, to take nom- 'nal command of the army once again. This step helped push Adams, much against his inclination. to name Hamilton as next in command and effectively in charge. But Adams would go no further; he refused to ask Congress to make an official declaration of war against France. The Alien and Sedition Acts At the time of Adams's elecdon, Madison had written to Jefferson: "You know the temper of Mr. A. better than I do, but I have always conceived it to be rather a ticklish one." One thing Adams quickly became "dcklish" about was the Republican taunt that he was "President by three votes." Other attacks on him and his administradon aroused him, early in the summer of 1798, to lash back at his opponents. Many of the most vocal were recent immigrants, including Albert Gallatin, the Swiss banker who became Republican leader of the House when Madison redred. The English radical Thomas Cooper, who had come to America in 1794 and soon proved himself a vigorous Republican pamphleteer, was another. Adams suspected a number of recendy arrived French intellectuals of engaging in espionage. Most offensive of all, perhaps. were the defeated fighters for Irish freedom who brought to the United States their hatred of Britain. Nor did Adams forget American-born Republican journalists. Adams might easily have gotten over his anger if extremists in his party, in 1798, had not pushed through Congress four laws known as the Alien and Sedition Acts. The first was a Naturalization Act that raised the residence requirement for American cidzenship from five to fourteen years. The second, the Alien Act, empowered the president, even in peacetime, to order any alien from the country and to imprison any who refused to go. The third, the Alien Enemies Act, permitted the president to jail enemy aliens in wartime. No arrests were made under either alien act, but they did frighten hundreds of foreigners from the country. The fourth measure was the Sedidon act. Its key clause provided severe fines and jail penaldes for anyone speaking, writing, or publishing "with intent to defame ... or bring into contempt or disrepute" the president or other members of the government. That its purpose was to gag the Republican opposition until after the next presidential elecdon was evident in the provision continuing the act "in force until March 3, 1801, and no longer." federalist era test against these conditions. From the start, big business, with the aid of die government, made it hazardous for workers to join these alliances. Until 1842 labor unions were frequently declared by the courts to be "conspiratorial combinations." In a trial of Pittsburgh cordwainers in 1815, the artisans were found guilty of "combining to raise wages" and the Court Recorder wrote of the verdict: ", . . it is most important to the manufacturing interests of the community' for it puts an end to these associations which have been so prejudicial to the successful enterprize of the capitalist in the western country." Neither court decisions nor coercion could prevent laborers from organizing. Economic depressions, however, slowed the labor movement considerably during the first hall'of the nineteenth century. In the 1819-1822 depression, 40,000 laborers were thrown out of work in Philadelphia and New York alone. Budding labor unions were crushed, and no relief for the unemployed was offered by the government. It was not until the late 1820s that labor revived, with the movement for a ten-hour day. In Philadelphia the first citywide federation of labor, the Mechanics' Union, emerged out of this struggle for shorter hours. Carpenters, masons, stonecutters, hatters, tailors, riggers, stevedores, cabinetmakers, cordwainers, and other workers joined to secure their "right, derived from their creator, to have sufficient time in each day for the cultivation of their minds and for self-improv- ement." Through strikes and labor solidarity among the different trades, the ten-hour day was eventually won by workers in most eastern cities The first recorded strike of factory' workers was conducted by children in 1828. The mill owners in Paterson, New Jersey, tried to change the dinner hour from twelve to one. The children went out on strike, "for fear," said one observer, "if they assented to this, the next thing would be to deprive them of eating at all." The militia was called in to break the strike. Soon after, the other large group in the textile mills, working women, went on strike, and 400 of them paraded through the streets of Dover, New Hampshire. For Yankee "young ladies" to take to the streets required courage in a period when any kind of public activity was thought to disgrace a woman From 1833 to 1837, labor organizations, particularly those of artisans, grew at a rate not to be matched again in the century. Trade unions grew from 26,000 members to 300,000 during that period. In New York City nearly two-thirds of the workers were organized, and unions were beginning to move west to Buffalo, St. Louis, and Pittsburgh. During these four years there were over 170 strikes. Wage earners who had never before been organized—including seamstresses, tailors, bookbinders, and shoemakers—formed unions and went on strike. Women textile workers were again in the forefront of the labor struggle. In 1834 a thousand or more Lowell girls walked out in protest against a 15 percent wage cut. "One of the leaders," reported the Boston Transcript, "mounted a stump, and made a flaming . .. speech on the rights of women and the iniquities of the 'monied aristoc- Small textile factories employed women and children drawn from tire poorest farm families in an area. They could be paid less, and they were thought to be more obedient than men. Children were especially cheap to hire, and their small, thin hands could fit easily into the narrow slots of the machines. But the mill children had to be swift and careful, or the machines would grab their fingers or their hair and a bit of scalp. The children worked twelve and thirteen hours a day, rarely seeing their families, much less the sun. The older ones had to watch over the younger ones to make sure they did not fall asleep on the job. Such miserable conditions were pointed to with pride by the mill owners. They were keeping the children out of trouble, teaching them the value of money and the virtue of hard work. This "educa- tional" program actually provided high profits for the new entrepreneurs and abject poverty for many New England families, whose sole support became the scanty wages of their children. Cheap child labor in many cases put the father out of a job. In 1820, half the factory workers in America were children, earning 33 to 67 cents a week. stay of their miserable diets. The blight brought famine that was only partly relieved by massive emigration to America. In the following decade, about 1.3 million Irish fled to the United States. Though bred to the land rather than urban life, they were usually too poor to move inland from the coastal cities where they landed, though some traveled west as laborers with canal and railroad- building crews. An only slightly smaller wave of immigrants came from Germany, driven by religious and political persecution and by poverty. Some 940,000 Germans arrived, many of whom settled in midwestem cities such as Cincinnati, St. Louis, and Milwaukee. During that same decade, immigrants from Britain numbered about 375,000. Thousands of Scandinavians also came, along with smaller groups of Dutch, Swiss, Belgians, French, and Czechs. All told, between 1844 and 1854 almost 3 million immigrants braved the Atlantic crossing. That figure amounted to three-fifths of the total immigration into the United States between 1815 and the beginning of the Civil War in 1861. The great majority of the newcomers avoided the South. Many were young, unmarried adults, which helps account for the rising age of the American population. Others came in family groups, among them independent, outspoken middle-class businessmen, lawyers, doctors, scientists, and journalists. They brought new skills, new learning, and new styles oi leadership. The majority, however, were peasant famifies. Irish Roman Catholics usually remained in northeastern cities, especially Boston and New York, in 1855, more than half the population of New York City was foreign-born. The Germans, often led by their old-country pastors. tended to settle in the Midwest, though some established communities in the western parts of the South, especially in Texas. By 1860. 30 percent of the population of Wisconsin and Minnesota was foreign-born. Because so many people participated in this migration, it is hard to generalize about their experiences. Most of them endured a voyage across die Atlantic that normally lasted more than a month. They slept and ate below decks in foul weather, though when the wind and seas were lair they could stand on lurching decks, bracing themselves on the rails, and watch the unmarked white tassels of the endless waves that accompanied their passage from a familiar way of life toward one of unknown promise. That promise usually differed from their expectations. On the wharves, as they got their shorelegs back, these newcomers were often victimized by hucksters of all kinds who gave false promises of immediate food, housing, jobs, and hundreds of acres of farming land somewhere in the West—all for a price. It is scarcely any wonder that the newcomers were confused and found it hard to make their way. It is no wonder that these European peasants huddled into city tenements, trying to reestablish their old communal ties, or did the same, with better luck and better leadership, in the rural West. In the cities especially, they were greeted with outright hostility. They found it hard to get jobs. Often they saw the notice: "No Irish Need Apply " In turn, the Irish came to look down on free blacks. The new immigrants actually squeezed out many blacks, even from the dirtiest and lowest-paying jobs. And the Irish were not segregated or refused transportation on public streetcars. In large part the Irish met hostility because they were Roman Catholic. The United States was becoming a nation of even greater religious and ethnic diversity than ever before. Despite their traditional tolerance of such diversity, native-born Americans had long prided themselves on being a Protestant Christian people. Hostility to Roman Catholicism was so widespread that it eventually formed, as we will see later, the basis of a major political movement. The Declining Birth Rate In the early 1800s, American women began to bear fewer and fewer children. The birth rate began to drop slowly but steadily until well into the twentieth century. Without immigration, the rate of population growth would have slowed appreciably. This dropping birth rate partially accounts for the rising median age of the population, though the immigration of so many people in their late teens and early twenties also contributed to the phenomenon. The birth rate dropped fastest in the cities, but it dropped in rural areas as well, in the South as well as the North. It declined faster among native- born than immigrant Americans. There seems to have been no marked increase in completely childless families, though there was a slight rise in the proportion of spinsters or "old maids"—women who never married at all. But that statistical creature, the average mother, was having fewer children; six in 1800, five in 1860, and four in 1900. But these facts do not do much to explain the causes of this new and obviously important social development. Those causes appear to have been linked with changes in the economy and especially with changing roles, expectations, and values among American mothers. These changes seem to have affected middle- and upper-class women more than the ranks of the poor. Though historians have only recently taken an interest in the matter and are not in complete agreement about it, the evidence suggests that American women felt pressure to limit the number of their children and, with or without cooperation from their husbands, were taking deliberate steps to do so. One important pressure came from the changing economic role of the family. In the more crowded eastern rural areas, large numbers of children were more a burden than a benefit if there was not enough land to divide among them as they grew to maturity. This was especially the case in New England, though the use of children in the cotton mills helped offset rural overcrowding. In the larger cities, children could not contribute to the productive chores that normally went with farming. Indeed they could easily become an economic burden, especially as the school year lengthened for those who could go to school. In the society as a whole, westward migration played a part in making young children seem a drag on a family's fortunes. Pulling up stakes for months of hard traveling did not make two- and four-year- olds seem much of a welcome asset. Prevailing new ideas and values about motherhood also played a part in this development. During the revolution there was a perceptible shift toward a popular view that motherhood was a domestic, hearthside role, that "the Mother" of a family carried the heavy burden of shaping the early educational, religious, and moral development of the children in order to prepare them for their roles as citizens of a virtuous republic. Here, as they so often do, economic changes dovetailed with changing values. With an increasingly complex and commercial economy, the father's work was more often separated from the home. If father was more often away, whether marketing the products of his farm or at the shop, then mother's role at home took on added importance. A growing body of popular literature emphasized what has been called a "cult of domesticity" for women. Writers like Lydia Maria Child churned out books of advice for homemakers. Male physicians published advice manuals warning of the dangers of repeated childbirth. In fact, the dangers were not new and indeed they were very real, but the suggestion that wives avoid having too many children was new. The term birth co?itrol had not yet come into use. The phrase would have shocked most Americans of this era, but in fact various folk methods toward that end were being practiced. What is especially striking is that delil>erate "birth control" came before—and not as the result of-—either public advocacy of the practice or any technological or medical innovations. The first little books that suggested and talked around, more than about, the practice were published in the early 1830's. Dr. Charles Knowlton, an English physician, published Fruits of Philosophy in 1831. Its appearance in the United States is often cited as the first American birth control manuaL It is clear that some couples were starting to fear the conse- j TERRITORY ^ 9 i, A ..it C"——Jl. --- \ ~--t 1 ^ f-~—| UNI • ' ---- i la 1 Leu than 2 inhabitant! par square mile 2 17 inhabitant! per square mile 1B-89 inhabitant! per square mile 90 and over inhabitants per square mile \/' Population Density, 1860 depression that followed the crash of 1837, foreign trade had fallen to a point well below the level of the early years of the republic. In 1843, combined imports and exports were only SI25 million. 1 hen began an almost continuous rise to a record $687 million in 1860. In almost every' year during this period, imports exceeded exports. Eighty percent of the half- billion dollars in gold taken from the California mines before 1857 was sent abroad to make up the difference. The increasing export of western wheat and flour helped keep the imbalance within reasonable limits. The revival of foreign trade greatly affected the Pace of immigration. Without the vast fleets that sailed the Atlantic between Europe and America, millions of newcomers to the United States in those years could never have found passage to the New World. Seventy-five percent of American commerce and an even greater proportion of the ^migrant traffic was carried in American sailing ships The average westward crossing by sail from Liverpool, England to New York took about thirty- hve days. Steamships, which had been used since 1838, could make this crossing in the 1850s in ten to fifteen days. But they remained undependable and excessively costly to operate. As late as 1899, ocean steamships carried sails for auxiliary or emergency power. Domestic Commerce In the fifteen years before the Civil War, American domestic commerce outdid even the record foreign trade in volume and rate of growth. The vitality of foreign trading contributed to this development. The mere collection at American ports of commodities for export generated business for home carriers. Similarly, the need to distribute imports added to the demand for domestic transportation. But domestic commerce was far more than a part of foreign trade. As the American population grew, the home market expanded. As different regions began to specialize in particular commodities, the need for exchange increased. Exchange was made easier by the gold being mined in California and by the improved credit facilities of the most of its southern following joined the Democrats. Many northeastern Know-Nothings moved to the new Republican party. That party came into being almost spontaneously in 1854. No single leader or group can claim credit for its organization. One firm principle brought its members together: the determination to keep slavery out of the tern lories and the conviction that Congress had the right to do so. Besides northern Know-Nothings, Free Sobers Hocked to the Republicans. So did "conscience Whigs"—those whose dislike of slavery was so strong they had refused to join their party's condemnation of the Wilmot Proviso. Northern Democrats who rejected all further compromise with the South also joined, as did abolitionists and a considerable number of German immigrants. Although the Republicans opposed the extension of slavery, no more than a small minority had any interest in the well-being of blacks. North or South, blacks remained outside the land of opportunity. Most Republicans wanted free soil—not freed slaves—and the advancement of the common white man, rather than the welfare of the black. Nativist sentiment resulted in a short-lived political party in the 1850s, but hostility toward foreign Cath- obcs was considerably older. In Boston in 1837 a group of firemen pushed some mourners in an Irish funeral procession. The results were described by a man whose sympathies were with the Yankee firemen. The ranks of the Irish were gradually thin ned by the arrest of some of their more prominent members, who were carried off to jail amid loud shouts.... Finally the Irish gave up the contest just in time to save themselves from the bayonets of the [militia], several companies of which were ordered to the scene. .. . During the conflict the firemen demolished several tenements, throwing furniture, provisions and children into the street. Featkerbeds were ripped open. . , . The east wind wafted the feathers all over the city, causing such a shower as might have been taken, at a little distance, for a snow-storm. A large number of persons were badly injured on both sides, but the Irish suffered most severely. . . . There is not the least doubt that the riot originated in the assault upon the firemen. . . . Much prejudice and ill blood had, for several yeurs, existed between the fire department and the Irish. . . . It cannot be expected that the members of the fire department will look passively on and see their brethren assaulted, or their "machines" overturned. Tilt UNION COMES APART 