E 178.1 .G7b Gordon, Irving L., Review text in American history * * ... m" * i a r* n t) Review Text in American History (1988 Edition) Dedicated to serving our nation's youth When ordering this book, please specify: either R 47 P or REVIEW TEXT IN AMERICAN HISTORY 315 Hudson Street / New York, N.Y. 10013 D. HIDEN RAMSt * LfHHAHW Books by Irving L. Gordon American History, Second Edition American Studies: A Conceptual Approach Review Text in American History Review Text in World History World History, Second Edition Copyright © 1088. 1086. 1084. 1083. 1981, 1980, 1970, 1077, 1973,1971,1970, 1968 by Amsco School Publications, Inc. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without written permission from the publisher. Printed in the United States of America Part Page 1. Developments in the Old World Lead to the Discovery of America .. 1 2. Europeans Explore and Settle in the New World .............. 4 3. The Colonists Develop Distinctive American Practices.......... 16 4. The Colonists Fight the American Revolution and Cain Independence ........................................................... 28 5. The Critical Period Leads to the Creation of a More Perfect Union 46 1. The Constitution Divides and Separates the Powers of Government 56 2. Executive Power Shall Be Vested in a President................ 65 3. Legislative Power Shall Be Vested in Congress................. 78 4. Judicial Power Shall Be Vested in the Courts.................. 88 5. The Constitution Protects Rights and Liberties................ 90 6. The Constitution Is a Living Document........,............. 96 1. The Federalists Guide the New Government..................... 108 2. The Democratic-Republicans Take Control and Concentrate on Foreign Problems'................................................. 118 1. The War of 1812 Is Followed by a Temporary Upsurge of Nationalism ............................................................ 127 2. The Jacksonian Era Furthers Democratic Reforms............... 136 iv v Part Page 3. The Rise of Sectional Interests Suppresses Nationalism and Leads to Disputes...................................................... 140 4. The Young Nation Expands Across the Continent.................. 149 5. Slavery and Sectional Crisis Lead to Civil War................. 155 6. The Civil War Marks the Triumph of Nationalism.................. 168 7. An Embittered South Is Brought Back Into the Union............. 178 1. The Frontier Influences American Development................... 191 2. The Farmer Struggles to Increase His Share of the National Income 199 3. Conservation Protects the Nation's Resources................... 221 4. Big Business Becomes the Dominant Influence in Our Economy .... 231 5. The Government Concerns Itself With the Business Cycle and Public Finance ........................................................ 251 6. The Worker Struggles to Increase His Share of the National Income 265 7. Foreign Trade Furthers the Welfare of the Nation............... 292 1. The American People Come From Many Lands..................... 305 2. Blacks Strive to Attain Their Civil Rights................... 315 3. The American People Face Problems Arising From Population Trends ....................................................... 338 4. The American People Create a Rich and Varied Culture......... 361 1. The Republicans Dominate the Post-Civil War Period (1869-1885) 380 2. Seesawing Election Results Reflect a Period of Turmoil 11885-19011 384 3. The Progressive Era Marks an Upsurge of Reform (1901-1921) .. 391 4. The Republicans Dominate the Post-World War I Era (1921-1933) 404 5. The Democrats Introduce the "New Deal" and Then the "Fair Deal" (1933-19531 .................................................. 411 vi CONTENTS Part Page 6. Americans Choose as Leaders Both Republicans and Democrats (1953 to the Present)....................................... 425 1. Introduction 462 2. The United States Undertakes a Policy of Imperialism 464 3. The Good Neighbor Policy Replaces Imperialism in Inter-American Affairs 478 4. The United States Pursues National Interests in the Far East 485 5. The United States Becomes Involved in World War I 495 6. The United States Is Torn Between Isolation and International Cooperation (1919-1939) 506 7. The Allies Win World War II 512 1. The United States Takes an Active Part in the United Nations 525 2. The United States Faces the Communist Challenge 548 3. The United States Promotes the Economic and Military Strength of the Free World 559 4. The United States Faces Problems Throughout the World 573 5. Scientific Developments Become a Matter of International Concern 641 6. Summary: Russian-American Relations Follow a Fluctuating Pattern ............ ....................................,....... 655 Index........................................................... 665 to cancel the 1778 treaty of alliance. Adams lost popularity with pro-war Federalists at home, but he restored the peace. While the crisis with France was at its height, Federalist partisans in Congress secured the passage of four laws, known as the Alien and Sedition Arts. Some Federalists claimed that the laws were meant to protect the United States from alien agitators. However, the chief purpose of the laws was to weaken the Democratic-Republican party. 1. The Naturalization Act increased from 5 to 14 years the time required for immigrants to become American citizens. The Federalists wanted to lengthen the naturalization process since most immigrants, upon becoming citizens, voted for Democratic-Republican candidates. 2. The Alien Act empowered the President to deport any alien whom he considered dangerous to the United States. The Alien Enemies Act authorized detention of enemy aliens in time of war. Although not used by Adams, these two laws caused some aliens to leave the country and frightened others to refrain from speaking out against the Federalists. 3. The Sedition Act provided fines and imprisonment for any person who uttered or wrote "false, scandalous, and malicious" statements against Congress or the President. Even Hamilton disapproved this law, and many people considered it a violation of the First Amendment. Nevertheless, the Sedition Act remained in effect and was used to bring to trial and convict ten Democratic-Republican printers and editors. Instead of weakening the Democratic-Republican party, the Alien and Sedition Acts actually strengthened it. Many people felt that the Federalist party threatened their civil liberties. Democratic-Republican leaders took advantage of the situation to gain votes for their party. At the urging of Madison and Jefferson, the state legislatures of Virginia and Kentucky passed resolutions condemning these acts as unconstitutional. The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions presented the state's' rights doctrine, claiming that (1) the federal government was created by the states to serve as their agent, and (2i state legislatures could declare laws of Congress unconstitutional and therefore null and void. Madison and Jefferson intended these resolutions primarily as campaign documents for the 1800 Presidential election. Nevertheless, the idea of nullification was to plague the United States until the supremacy of the federal government was conclusively established by the Civil War. factory owners turned to new labor-saving machines. Labor was also scarce in the West. Fanners eagerly turned to new farm machinery to increase their productivity. 8. Wasteful Agriculture. Since land was so easily available, frontiersmen were not mindful of the need for conservation of soil and forests. They cut down trees senselessly and cultivated the land unwisely, destroying its fertility. Turner stated that the close of the frontier, ending the era of cheap or free land, caused many of the prohlcms that face us today. 1. Labor. Discontented factory workers no longer had the "safety valve" of easily available land in the West. These workers therefore remained in the industrial East and turned to labor unions to improve their conditions. The struggle between capital and labor now intensified. 2. Immigration. Immigrants could no longer easily acquire farms. More of them now crowded into the cities and competed for jobs in the factories. Americans began to demand restrictions upon immigration. 3. Conservation. With the close of the frontier, the American people awakened to the need for conservation. Farmers realized that they had to take better care of their land. Timber and mining companies came to the same realization about their resources. Federal and state agencies started projects to conserve the nation's soil, water, timber, and other natural resources. 4. Imperialism. American capitalists, who had looked to the frontier for raw materials, markets, and investment opportunities, now began to look elsewhere. As a result, the United States embarked on a program of economic and political imperialism in the Caribbean, Central and South America, and the Far East. Many historians believe that Turner exaggerated the importance of the frontier. They claim that Turner ignored the following facts: (1) American democracy was fostered by our democratic heritage from England and by the demands of workers in the industrial East for a voice in government. (2) England developed a democratic form of government without the existence of a frontier. (3) The Southwestern frontier, settled by cotton planters, developed neither democracy nor nationalism. (4) The frontier did not serve as a "safety valve" for many Eastern factory workers, since they lacked 7. The 1980's: Crisis on the Farm. Hard times began to affect, some farmers in the late 1970's and spread across the country in the 1980's, Farm exports declined sharply, to about $29 billion in 1985. The reasons for falling revenue included (a) a United States embargo on food exports to the Soviet Union after Soviet troops invaded Afghanistan in 1979, (b) a "green revolution" that en abled developing countries such as India and Thailand to step up food production dramatically, (c) growing competition from other food-exporting areas, especially Europe, Canada, Australia, and Argentina, and (d.) an unfavorable exchange rate for the dollar that made our products more expensive in many countries. Although President Reagan responded to farmers' complaints by ending the embargo on sales to the Soviet Union in 1981, Soviet purchases remained far below' previous levels. With falling demand, the prices received by United States farmers also dropped. Farmers who had borrowed heavily in the prosperous 1970's often found themselves unable to keep up payments to banks and other lenders. Many farmers went bankrupt, losing their land and even their homes. The crisis touched many parts of the nation's economy: manufacturers and dealers of farm equipment, grain traders, bankers, and rural merchants. a. The Farm Act of 19H1. While the Reagan administration that took of fice in 1981 championed free enterprise, it did not act immediately to abolish farm subsidies. The Farm Act of 1981 was essentially a renewal of the 1977 act. b. The Food Security Act of 1985. The 1985 act set the nation's farm policy on a sharply different course. Abandoning the traditional goal of keeping crop prices high, the act sought to lower crop prices in order to make United States farm exports more competitive on the world market. The 1985 act called for (1) sharp cuts in the loan rates for major crops, (2) a guarantee of minimum payments (up to $50,000) to help farmers who were hurt by falling prices, and (3) a freeze on target prices in 1986 and 1987 and slight reductions from 1988 to 1990. Since market prices are closely affected by interest rates for farm loans, the cuts in rates helped to lower the cost of food for buyers in the United States and other countries. Farmers were eligible to receive "deficiency payments" to make up the difference between market prices and target prices. In return, they had to accept restraints on the amount of land they kept in production. Supporters of the 1985 act argued that in the long run it would (1) help re duce government interference in free-market forces, (2) reduce production enough to let farmers' incomes rise to acceptable levels, and (3) encourage in efficient fanners to leave farming. Critics said that the law would (1) favor large farmers and farm corporations, (2) imperil the family fann that many see as the backbone of United States rural life, and (3) be extremely costly. So many farm ers signed up for the support programs under the 1985 law that government farm expenditures in fiscal 1986 soared to a record $25.6 billion, significantly higher than predicted. With many farmers still suffering serious difficulties, a new battle opened in Congress over ways to resolve the farm crisis. Part 1. The American People Come From Many Lands Except for the Indians, all Americans are immigrants or the descendants of immigrants. During the colonial period, settlers came by the thousands. From the end of the American Revolution to today, some 45 million people have migrated to our shores. 1. Economic. European farmers were discouraged as they tried to reap an adequate crop from small and worn-out lands. Farmers were driven from the soil as the Agricultural Revolution brought about a change from subsistence to large-scale commercial farming. European city workers were disheartened by low wages, and many workers faced unemployment as the Industrial Revolution hastened the use of machines. Immigrants looked to America as a land of opportunity, where fertile lands could be acquired at little or no cost and where the expanding economy provided steady employment at decent wages. 2. Political. Most European governments were controlled by the upper classes, and the common people had little or no say in political matters. Immigrants looked to democratic America, where the ordinary' citizen had a strong voice in the government. 3. Social. European society was characterized by rigid class distinctions, few- educational opportunities for the lower classes, and discrimination against religious minorities. As World War I approached, most governments required young men to serve terms of compulsory military service. Immigrants looked to America as a land of equality, where they could rise in social status, provide an education for their children, practice their religion without fear, and be free of compulsory military service. Immigrants were the uprooted, having left their friends, relatives, and native lands. Being poor, most immigrants came in the most undesirable sections of ships, where conditions were often crowded and unsanitary. In the United States, they faced the hardships of having to adjust to a new language and culture. Nevertheless, they were eager to seek their new homeland. 1. Major Periods of Immigration a. To the Age of Jackson (1783-1830). At first, immigrants came in a slow hut steady stream. Immigration increased as travel became easier with the close of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815. During the years 1821-1830, 143,000 immigrants came to the United States. h. To the Beginning of the Civil War (1831-1860). In the next three decades, immigrants came in rapidly rising numbers: 1831-1840 : 600,000: 1841-1850: 1.700.000; 1851-1860 : 2,600,000. Most of these immigrants came from Ireland and Germany. The Irish, long denied self-government by England, received their main stimulus to migrate in the 1840's, when they were afflicted by a potato famine. Germans who had migrated for economic reasons were joined, after the failure of the Revolution of 1848, by German liberals and intellectuals, who came to escape political persecution. c. To the Close of the Frontier (1861-1890). After being temporarily slowed by the Civil War, immigration again began rising, from 2,800,000 in the years 1871 1880 to 5,200.000 in the years 1881 1890. Immigrants after the Civil War were attracted by the claims of agents and by advertisements of steamship companies and land-grant railroads, and by "America letters" of praise sent by earlier immigrants. Immigrants continued coming from England, Ireland, and Germany. Farmers came from the Scandinavian countries of Sweden, Norway, and Denmark to look for abundant and fertile soil. 2. Americans Welcomed Immigration. Most Americans considered immigrants an asset to our growing nation. Immigrants represented (o) workers for factories, mines, and railroads, ib) farmers for Western lands, (c) consumers for the products of agriculture and industry, id I men of special abilities, talents, and skills, and (e) military strength for the nation. Americans took pride in their country's tradition as a haven for the oppressed. Emma Lazarus expressed the feelings of most Americans in her poem "The New Colossus," which is inscribed on the base of the Statue of Liberty in New York Harbor: "Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free." 3. Early Opposition to Immigration: The "Know-Nothings." Some Americans disapproved of the Irish and German immigrants for taking jobs away from native Americans, for failing to assimilate into American society, ami mostly just for being Catholic. By the 1850's nativist (anti-foreign) and anti-Catholic groups had formed a number of societies, the most influential being the Know-Mot kings. This society was so called because its members, pledged to secrecy, answered "1 know nothing" when asked about the society. The Know-Nothings purported to defend Protestantism against Catholicism and sought to restrict immigration. To further their goals, they ran candidates for political office. Despite initial political gains, the society soon died out, as Americans rejected religious intolerance and concentrated upon the problems of slavery and sectionalism. 4. "Old Immigrants": Characteristics. Historians have traditionally referred to the Europeans coining before 1890 us the "old immigrants." They originated chiefly from northern and western Europe: Great Britain. Ireland, Germany, Holland, France, and the Scandinavian countries of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden. They arrived while the frontier was still open, and many settled on farms in the West. It lias been claimed that, since these "old immigrants" possessed customs and traditions similar to those of Americans, they adjusted easily to American ways of life. 1. "New Immigrants": Characteristics. Historians have traditionally referred to the Europeans coming after 1890 as the "new immigrants." They came in greater numbers than immigrants had ever come before. From 1901 to 1910 some 8.800.000 persons entered the United States. Unlike the "old immigrants," the "new immigrants" originated chiefly in southern and eastern Europe: Italy, Greece, Austria-Hungary, Serbia, Rumania, Russian Poland, an<l Russia. They arrived when the frontier was closed and therefore settled chiefly in the cities as factory workers. It has been claimed that, since the "new immigrants" possessed customs and traditions different from those of Americans, they experienced difficulty in adjusting to American ways of life. 2. Typical Migratory Groups. Italians, Serbs, and Greeks fled poverty. Peoples in the despotic Austro-Hungarian and Russian Empires fled heavy taxes and, as World War 1 approached, compulsory military service. Jews in Russia and in Russian-controlled Poland had long been forced to live in special districts, called the Kale of Settlement, and had been subjected to educational restrictions and to legal and economic discrimination. They now fled Czarist-inspired outbreaks of anti-Semitic violence, called pogroms. 3. Opposition to Immigration. Many Americans disapproved of the "new immigrants," arguing as follows: (a l With the frontier closed, there was no more free or cheap land for immigrants. (6) American industry had sufficient workers, and "new immigrants" competed with and took jobs away from native Americans. Tins argument was emphasized by labor unions, (c) The "new immigrants" were difficult to Americanize. They had little education. They settled in large cities, creating their own ghettos, and felt no need to learn American ways. Their ghettos were becoming breeding places of disease and crime, (d) Some people* argued that the "new immigrants" were physically anti mentally inferior to the "old immigrants." This was known as the "theory of Non lie supremacy." 4. In Defense of the "New Immigrants." (a) The "new immigrants" assimilated as well as hail the Irish and German "old immigrants." Critics of the "new immigrants" forgot that the Germans, too, had clung to their native tongue and that the Irish had been impoverished and uneducated. The Irish and the Germans had also been accused of being clannish and of not assimilating quickly into the American Protestant society, (b) The "new immigrants" who flocked to the cities were joined by native Americans who moved in from the farms. Both groups contributed to the urban problems of slums, disease, and crime. Again, critics of the "new immigrants" forgot that the Irish, too, had settled in the cities, (c) The "new immigrants" provided the additional workers needed by our growing industry. Furthermore, they stimulated industrial growth by enlarging the domestic market for goods. (d) Reputable scientists rejected the theory of Nordic supremacy as false. (e) The "new immigrants" contributed greatly to American life. 1. The Chinese Exclusion Act (1882) began the prohibition of the immigration of Chinese. The law was passed following agitation and riots on the West Coast against cheap "coolie" labor. The prohibition lasted until World War II. 2. The Gentlemen's Agreement (1907) contained a promise by the Japanese government, to deny passports to Japanese laborers seeking to migrate to the United States. Negotiated by President Theodore Roosevelt, it followed anti-Japanese race riots in California, and local and state laws discriminating against Japanese immigrants. In 1924 Congress unilaterally ended the Gentlemen's Agreement by prohibiting all Japanese immigration to the United States. 3. The Literacy Test Act (1917) required immigrants to be able to read English or their own language before entering the United States. This act was passed over a veto by President Wilson, who insisted that literacy indicated not mental ability, but merely that an immigrant had received the opportunity to go to school. As World War I ended, Americans withdrew emotionally from world affairs, and their isolationist sentiments reinforced their opposition to immigration. Americans experienced a "Red scare," occasioned by the 1917 Communist seizure of Russia, and feared that foreign radicals would infiltrate the United States. The Ku Klux Klan added its voice to demand protection of "white Protestant America." Congress passed the following: 1. Two Emergency Immigration Acts, in 1921 and in 1924, began the sharp curtailment of immigration from outside the Western Hemisphere. The 1924 act also contained regulations constituting the 1929 National Origins Plan. 2. National Origins Plan of 1929 a. Precisions. This plan (1) permitted no more than 150,000 immigrants from outside the Western Hemisphere to enter the United States per year, (2) allotted each country a quota in proportion to the number of persons in the United States having that national origin according to the census of 1920, (3) granted each eligible nation at least 100 immigrants per year, (4) placed no restrictions on immigration from the Western Hemisphere, and (5) prohibited all immigration from Asian countries. (After World War II, most Asian countries received a quota of 100 immigrants per year.) b. Effects. The National Origins Plan, coupled with the Depression of 1929, sharply curtailed immigration. From 1931 to 1940, a total of only 530,000 immigrants arrived at our shores. Most quotas remained unfilled. After World War II, Europe contained many millions of refugees, nr displaced persons, including <11 survivors of the German concentration camps, especially Jews, anti-Nazi Germans, and anti-Nazis of nations overrun by Germany who wanted to start life anew, far from Europe, (2l slave laborers, chiefly eastern Europeans, who had been forced to work in Germany during the war and who refused to return home to Communist rule, and (3) escapees from Communist rule in eastern Europe. The plight of the refugees touched American sympathies. Congress passed several Displaced Persons Acts which by 1956 allowed into the United States some 600,000 refugees above the yearly immigration quotas. McCARRAN-WALTER IMMIGRATION AND NATIONALITY ACT OF 1952 1. Provisions. The new law (a) restated the National Origins Plan by setting a limit of 154,000 immigrants per year and by granting each country a quota based on the 1920 census, (b) allowed each Asian country a quota, usually 100 immigrants per year, (c) required the careful screening of immigrants to keep out security risks, and (d) eased the procedures for revoking the citizenship of recently naturalized citizens who joined Communist or Communist-front organizations and for deporting undesirable aliens. President Truman vetoed the McCarran-Walter Bill as "repressive and in- humane,'' but Congress overrode the veto. Later, Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson all requested a revision of our immigration laws. 1. Provisions. For countries outside the Western Hemisphere, the law (a) abolished the National Origins Plan, (6) established a quota of 170,000 immigrants per year, (c) set a limit of 20,000 immigrants per year from any one nation, and (d) provided standards for admitting immigrants according to the following preferences: (1) close relatives of United States residents, (2) scientists, artists, professional people, and skilled and unskilled workers needed to fill labor shortages, and (3) refugees from Communist rule and from natural calamity. For countries in the Western Hemisphere, the law introduced for the first time a quota of 120,000 immigrants per year and, by the 1976 revisions, subjected them to the same provisions as for other immigrants—a limit of 20,000 per year from any one nation and the same standards of admission. 2. Significant Changes, (a) This law replaced the National Origins Plan, stressing race and nationality, by a preference system emphasizing family relationship, value to the United States, and motive for migrating, (b) It ended the favored position of north and west European nations, and placed them on an equal footing with other countries. Fewer immigrants have come from Great Britain, Ireland, and Germany, (c) It permitted an increase in the number of immigrants from Asia, Africa, and southern and eastern Europe. More immigrants have come from Taiwan, the Philippines, Italy, Greece, and Portugal, (d) The law reduced the number of Western Hemisphere immigrants, which had been about 150,000 in 1965. As countless refugees fled from their native countries—such as Cuba, Haiti, Ethiopia, Somalia, Uganda, Afghanistan, and Vietnam—Congress enacted the 1980 Refugee Act. It (1) defined refugees as people outside their native countries who are unwilling to return because of fear of persecution (this definition did not limit refugees to Communist-ruled nations only); (2) increased the number of refugees to be admitted annually to 50,000—in addition to the existing special programs for Indochinese and Cuban refugees; (3) empowered the President to admit additional refugees in emergency situations; (4) to administer the law, established the position of United States Coordinator of Refugee 4fairs. 1. Provisions, (a) The law barred employers from hiring illegal immigrants. The law established civil penalties of $250 to $ 10,000 for each illegal immigrant hired. It provided for criminal penalties of up to a $3,000 fine and six months' imprisonment for employers who showed a "pattern or practice" of hiring illegal immigrants. (6) The law made it illegal for an employer to discriminate against legal immigrants, (c) The law offered legal status, or amnesty, to immigrants who could prove that they had entered the United States illegally before January 1,1982, and had resided here continuously since that time. For five years, such people (with certain exceptions based on age, disability, and pregnancy) would not be eligible for welfare, food stamps, and many other government benefits. (d) The law offered amnesty to illegal immigrants who had worked in the United States for at least 90 days between May 1985 and May 1986. (e) The law opened the way for people who benefited from the amnesties to become United States citizens, (f) The law provided for the admission of up to 350,000 immigrants for seasonal farm work in the fiscal years 1990 to 1993, if a shortage of seasonal workers existed, (p) The law set aside $1 billion a year for four years to help state governments provide public assistance, health care, and education to people who benefited from the amnesties. 2. Significance. The 1986 act concluded a six-year effort to satisfy the competing demands of widely varying interest groups—notably employers, His- panic-rights groups, and financially pressed state officials. The act grew out of a concern among many people that illegal immigration had grown to unacceptable levels. Estimates of the number of illegal immigrants in the country in 1986 ranged upward from the official guess of between 3 and 5 million. By granting amnesty to many of the illegal immigrants already here and tightening controls against further illegal immigration, officials hoped, in the words of President Reagan, to "regain control of our borders." 3. Criticisms, (a) The Chamber of Commerce of the United States argued that the bill would be a burden on employers. First, employers might be subject to fines if they hired persons who held forged citizenship documents. Second, employers might face lawsuits from legal immigrants or citizens who charged discrimination in hiring, (b) Some people argued that illegal immigrants should be punished rather than granted amnesty, (c) Other critics argued that the act would encourage job discrimination. They said that employers who were worried about the penalties for hiring illegal immigrants might refuse to hire legal immigrants and citizens of Hispanic ancestry. Each group of immigrants faced discrimination at the hands of native Amer- icans—themselves descendants of earlier immigrants. Those immigrants who settled in cities and sought factory work were particularly affected. (1) Economically. They were the last to be hired, kept at the poorest jobs, and the first to be fired. (2) Socially. They were confined to ghettos and slums; excluded from the better hotels, restaurants, and clubs; and often refused admission to institutions of higher learning. Nevertheless, by displaying ability and determination, these immigrants achieved success and entered the mainstream of American life. 1. Cultural. The immigrants brought the cultural heritages of their native lands to America. With time, certain features of these heritages died out while other features survived. The surviving features can still be seen in such aspects of American life as our foods, music, literature, sports, and language, all of which reflect a variety of contributions by immigrants. Perhaps most important, the cultural and religious diversity of immigrants promoted a spirit of toleration among most Americans. Because the United States successfully absorbed different peoples and heritages to form an American nationality and culture, the United States has been called a melting pot. 2. Economic. The immigrants were eager for honest, useful work. Immigrants from each nation found employment in many industries. Nevertheless, many groups have become identified with specific industries. Scandinavians farmed the land. Irishmen and Italians built canals, railroads, and bridges. Jews worked in the garment industry'. Poles and other Slavs, as well as Hungarians, mined coal and iron ore, and labored in the steel mills. The immigrants increased the demand for the products of agriculture and industry', thereby further encouraging American economic growth. Also, by coming to the United States in especially great numbers during times of business expansion, immigrants served to prevent any shortage of labor. 1. British. Alexander Graham Bell, inventor of the telephone; steel magnate and philanthropist Andreu' Carnegie; physician ami surgeon William W. Mayo; labor leader Philip Murray; chemist Joseph Priestley. 2. Chinese. Architect Ieoh Ming Pei; theoretical physicists Chen .Xing Yang and Tsung Dao Lee; writer Lin Yutang. 3. French. Gunpowder manufacturer Eleutkere DuPont, whose company evolved into today's giant chemical concern; architect Pierre Charles L'En- fant, who provided the basic design for the city of Washington, D.C. 4. German. Governor John Peter Alt geld of Illinois; optical equipment manufacturers John J. Bausch and Henry Lomb; engineer and designer of the Brooklyn Bridge, John Boebling; civil service reformer Carl Srhurz; electrical engineer Charles Steinmetz. 5. Irish. Magazine publisher Peter F. Collier; light opera composer Victor Herbert; educator Thomas Hunter; sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens. 6. Italian. Mother Frances X, Cabrini (later sainted), founder of orphanages and hospitals; atomic scientist Enrico Fermi; opera composer and lyricist Gian-Carlo Menotti; symphony orchestra conductor Arturo Toscanini. 7. Jewish. From Austria—Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter; musical comedy composer Frederick I.oewe. From England—labor leader Samuel Gornpers. From Germany—physician Simon Baruch; t heoretical physicist .4/- bert Einstein. From Hungary pediatric physician Bela Schick; atomic scientist Edward Teller. From Russia—musical comedy composer Irving Berlin; radio and television executive David Samoff; microbiologist Selman lYaksman, discoverer of antibiotics; motion picture producer Harry H'arner. 8. Russian. Choreographer George Balanchine, director of the New York City Ballet; airplane designer and manufacturer Igor Sikorsky, inventor of the helicopter; com|>osor Igor Stravinsky. 9. Scandinavian. From Denmark—automobile magnate William Knudsen, President of General Motors; writer and social reformer Jacob Biis. From Norway football coach Knute Rockne. From Sweden—engineer John Erics- son, designer of the ironclad warship Monitor. 10. Yugoslavian. Scientist and inventor Michael Pupin; symphony orchestra conductor Artur Rodzinski. 1. Which was an important cause of immigration to the United States in the 1840's? (1) the Napoleonic Wars (2) changes in our immigration policy (3) revolulions in Europe (4) completion of the first transcontinental railroad. 2. Which event had the most immediate effect upon immigration to the United States? (1) the defeat of France by Prussia in 1870-1871 (2) the potato famine in Ireland (3) the Crimean War (4) the gaining of independence by Belgium. 3. In which period did the largest number of immigrants enter the United States? (1) 1789-1810 (2) 1840-1860 (3) 1870-1890 (4) 1890-1910. 4. The United States had a liberal immigration policy during most of the 19th century because (1) many Congressmen were foreign-born (2) the population of the United States remained constant (3) there was a shortage of labor in the United States (4) prosperous times in Europe discouraged immigration to the United States. 5. In the latter part of the 19th century, a liberal immigration policy was generally opposed by (1) Eastern manufacturers (2) land speculators (3) labor unions (4) railroad companies. G Where ran an expression of the philosophy of I he United .States concerning immigration be found? (1) in Washington's Farewell Address (2) on the base of the °*-itue of Liberty (3) in the Clayton Act (4) in the Gettysburg Address. 2. Urbanization by States and Cities. The most highly urbanized states, with over 85 percent of their populations living in urban areas, are California, Rhode Island, New Jersey, New York, Maryland, Connecticut, Florida, and Massachusetts. The most rural states, with over 70 percent of their populations still living in rural areas, are Wyoming, South Dakota, Idaho, Vermont, Montana, and Mississippi. Our six most populous cities are New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Philadelphia, Detroit, and San Francisco. 1. Industrial Revolution. As industries arose, workers congregated about the factories. These workers added to existing city populations or created new cities. Because urban dwellers needed food, clothing, entertainment, and professional services, still more people came to the cities. 2. Social and Cultural Attractions. Many people were attracted to cities by social and cultural facilities: colleges and universities, theaters and movies, symphonies, libraries, and lecture forums. 3. Improved Transportation and Communication. The railroads, telegraph lines, and telephones that served the cities enabled the city dwellers to (a) obtain foodstuffs and other essentials, (6) distribute the products of city factories throughout the land, and (c) conduct business transactions quickly and efficiently from a central office. 4. Decreasing Farm Population. Farmers and farm laborers were driven from the countryside by the (a) drabness and hardships of farm life, (6) low agricultural prices and difficult times, especially following the Civil War and again following World War I, and (c) increased mechanization and growth of commercial farming. 5. Immigration From Europe. During the 19th century, some "old immigrants" settled in cities. After the close of the frontier in 1890, the "new immigrants" settled chiefly in cities. These urban settlers found jobs in city factories and other businesses. As newcomers unfamiliar with American culture, they preferred to live among fellow immigrants who spoke their native tongue. Ethnic groups congregated in special city sections, thereby forming ghettos. 6. Migration of Blacks and Hispanics a. Blacks. In the 20th century, blacks left the rural South for urban centers. Some blacks moved to cities in the South, but more moved to cities in the West and North. By 1980, blacks in large numbers inhabited America's most populous cities. b. Hinpanics. By 1980 Puerto Ricans lived in and about New York City. Mexican-Americans resided mainly in the cities of the Southwest and West. Cubans settled in the Florida cities of Tampa and Miami. 1. Corruption and Political Machines. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, city "bosses" ruling political machines dominated and victimized a considerable number of cities They corrupted city governments by selling justice in local courts, giving city franchises and contracts to businessmen in return for presents and favors, and filling city jobs with unqualified political henchmen. Most political machines were eventually ousted from power through the combined efforts of reform leaders, crusading newspapers, and an aroused citizenry. In the early 20th century the muckraker Lincoln Steffens did much to make the public aware of corruption in city government by his book The Shame of the Cities. Today, although occasional cases of corruption among city officials are still disclosed, bossism does not present nearly the problem that it did at the turn of the century. 2. City-State Relationship. City governments are "creatures of the state." They were created by state-granted charters and exercise powers as enumerated in these charters. Some cities complain that the state docs not grant them sufficient home rule. Cities that do not have home-rule charters must obey state directives on local problems and must secure permission from the state legislature to widen their powers over such matters as transportation and taxation. Many cities, including New York City, also complain that the state treats a city unfairly by collecting more money in state taxes from the city's residents than the state returns to the city in the form of sendees and state-aid funds. 3. Demands for More City Services. Cities have faced demands from their inhabitants for more and better services. City aid is especially needed in ghettos occupied'by disadvantaged Negroes and other minorities. As a result, cities have expanded their facilities in recreation, education, housing, transportation, welfare assistance, and public health; and city expenditures have soared. 4. Decrease in the City Tax Base. Especially since the end of World War II, middle-class and upper middle-class families have left the cities for more 2. Beginnings of Civil Service Reform. Hayes antagonized the regular, or "Stalwart," Republicans by trying to curtail political patronage: dismissing unneeded and incompetent employees; forbidding officeholders from being assessed political contributions; and naming as his Secretary of the Interior the Liberal Republican advocate of civil service reform, Carl Schurz. 3. Hayes' Anti-Labor Acts, (a) Hayes employed federal troops in 1877 against the railroad strikers. (6) Hayes vetoed a Chinese exclusion bill, claiming that it violated our treaty with China. He was condemned as favoring cheap "coolie" labor. The Bland-Allison Act (1878), passed over Hayes' veto, provided that the government purchase and coin a limited quantity of silver. 1. Election of 1880. The Republican convention, split between rival factions, turned on the 36th ballot to a compromise candidate, Ohio Congressman James A. Garfield. The Democrats nominated a former Union general, Winfield S. Hancock. The campaign was undistinguished as to issues, but the Republicans were well organized and expended heavy funds. Despite a very slim lead in popular votes, Garfield won easily in the electoral college. 2. Assassination of Garfield (1881). In office less than four months, Garfield was fatally shot by a disappointed officeseeker. He was succeeded by his Vice President, Chester A. Arthur. 3. Arthur as President (1881-1885): The Office Makes the Man. Though he had been a machine politician, Arthur rose to the responsibilities of his office by maintaining an able and honest administration. He began modernization of the American navy by constructing steel warships; fought corruption; and strongly supported civil service reform. (1) The Chinese Exclusion Act (18821, passed after revision of our treaty obligations with China, suspended the immigration of Chinese laborers. (2) The Pendleton Act (1883) set the basis of our present federal civil service system. Part 4. The Republicans Dominate the Post-World War I Era (1921-1933) 1. "Golden Twenties": Booming Business. Following a brief depression in 1920-1921, the American people entered upon an era of prosperity. Corporations grew bigger as executives constructed new plants and concluded mergers. Enterprising businessmen ventured into new fields: automobiles, chemicals, radio, and movies. Output and profits increased, as did employment opportunities and wages. The American economy enjoyed widespread public confidence. 2. Flaws in the Business Boom. Not sharing in the general prosperity were a number of "sick" industries, such as coal mining and textiles. In addition, agriculture experienced overproduction, and railroads faced competition from newer means of transportation. Furthermore, consumers found their purchasing power not rising sufficiently to absorb the increasing output of goods. Finally, many Americans, seeking to "get rich quick," speculated excessively in real estate and in the stock market. 3. Great Depression (Beginning in 1929). In late 1929 the values of stocks fell abruptly. This stock market crash signaled the onset of the Great Depression. Production, prices, and profits declined sharply, as did wages and employment. The mood of most Americans veered swiftly from confidence to despair. 1. New Nativism. As an outgrowth of the "Red Scare" of 1918-1920, a new nativist. anti-foreign movement arose. The most notorious group, the Ku Klux Klan, which had been revived in 1915, grew in membership and spread bigotry against minority groups: foreigners, Negroes, Catholics, and Jews. However, by the late 1920's, the influence of the Klan declined, as the American people recoiled against the Klan's lawlessness, corruption, and intolerance. 2. Prohibition Era. With the ratification of the Eighteenth Amendment in 1919, the United States inaugurated nationwide prohibition. Instead of improving American life, prohibition provided profitable opportunities for criminal syndicates, encouraged bootleggers and speakeasies, fostered alliances between gangsters and corrupt politicians, and bred public disrespect for the law. In 1933 the Twenty-first Amendment repealed prohibition. a balanced budget; instead, Congress approved the Gramm Rudman-Hollings Act of 1985 calling for automatic, across the board spending cuts in several steps if necessary to balance the budget by 1991. (See page 261.) (6) Tout Reform. The President and Congress worked out a bipartisan tax reform bill that made sweeping changes in the federal income tax system. Un der the Tcur Reform Act of 1986, basic tax rates were simplified and reduced, and many deductions and tax breaks were eliminated. (See page 258.) (7) Pollution Control President Reagan and Congress compromised on a measure to expand the pollution control program dealing with toxic wastes and on an act to protect the nation's underground water supply. (8) Drugs. President Reagan and Congress created a major new program to fight the battle against illegal drugs. (9) Immigration, The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 offered amnesty to illegal immigrants who had lived in the United States for more than four years and barred the hiring of illegal immigrants. (See page 311.) (10) Farm Subsidies The Reagan administration tried to trim government farm programs. Nonetheless, government spending on farm programs reached record levels as farmers suffered a prolonged crisis. Under the Food Security Act of 1985, the government paid higher subsidies to farmers while holding grain prices down in an effort to boost grain exports. (See page 217.) (11) Supreme Court Appointments President Reagan appointed new members to the Supreme Court—Sandra Day O'Connor, the first woman Jus tice, in 1981, and Antonin Scalia in 1986. The President elevated Justice William H Rehnquist to the position of Chief Justice upon the retirement of Warren Burger in 1986. ft. Foreign Affairs (1) Soviet Union. President Reagan took a hard line against the Soviet Union, calling it an "evil empire." He sharply stepped up defense spending, and called for a massive new space-based defense system—the Strategic Defense Initiative, or "Star Wars." In 1985 and 1986 President Reagan held face-to face talks with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. Both the President and Gorbachev made far-reaching arms-control proposals. (2) Poland. When Poland's Communist leaders imposed military rule in 1981, President Reagan criticized both Poland and the Soviet Union. He imposed limited economic sanctions on both countries. (3) El Salvador and Nicaragua The Reagan administration took extensive measures to oppose what it called Communist expansionism in Central Amer ica. It stepped up aid to the government of El Salvador battling leftist rebels. Accusing Nicaragua's Sandinista government of supporting the Salvadoran guerrillas, the United States organized a force of Nicaraguan guerrillas (known as contras) to oppose the Sandinistas. Critics in Congress argued that United States policies were too confrontational and might lead to war. occupation of Vera Cruz and the pursuit of Villa into Mexican territory. They further feared "Yankee imperialism" and American economic power. During World War I Mexico was unfriendly toward the United States. In turn, many Americans disliked the actions of the Mexican government. American Catholics protested Mexico's seizure of Church lands and the closing of parochial schools. American oil interests objected to Mexico's nationalization in 1938 of all foreign-owned oil properties. 6. The Good Neighbor Policy (Since 1933). President Franklin D. Roosevelt acknowledged Mexico's right to seize the oil properties but demanded lair compensation for the foreign investors. Mexico complied with this request. The friendly conclusion to this dispute improved Mexican-American relations. In World War II, Mexico was a firm ally of the United States. 7. Mexican-American Relations Today a. Energy Supplies. In the 1970's, Mexico discovered huge new deposits of natural gas and oil. Mexico became the leading supplier of United States oil imports. b. Economic Troubles. Mexico's economic prosperity, fed by the oil boom, lasted until the early 1980's, when its economy plunged into recession. Declining oil prices in the mid-1980's made the recession worse. Mexico st rug- gled to keep up payments on its massive foreign debt, which in 1986 passed the S100 billion mark. Officials voiced concern that the economic troubles in Mexico would lead to increased illegal immigration into the United States. c. Illegal Immigrants. In the mid 1980's, United States immigration officials were taking more than one million Mexicans a year into custody at the border with Mexico and deporting them as illegal immigrants. Many other Mexicans crossed the border illegally without, being detected. Mexicans made up by far the largest portion of the officially estimated 3 million to 5 million illegal immigrants living in the United States. (Other estimates put the figure much higher.) Illegal immigration had become a major source of friction between the two nations. Many in the United States argued that Mexican "illegals" were tak- ingjobs away from American citizens, depressing wages, and adding to welfare costs. Mexicans, on the other hand, argued that the immigrants benefited the United States economy by taking jobs no one else wanted and provided a "safety valve" for Mexico's political and economic woes. Mexican officials argued that the United States should have negotiated with Mexico on the issue of illegal immigration rather than dealing with it through the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. (See page 311.) d. Illegal Drug Traffic. United States officials claim that Mexico has become a major source of the illegal drugs entering this country. e. Assembly Plants in Border Towns. Taking advantage of Mexican wage rates that are much lower than United States rates, many American businesses have set up assembly plants just across the border in northern Mexico. naval power unless for aggression. No agreement was reached; soon afterwards Japan started a new naval race. 3. The United States Joins in International Pacts a. Nine-Power Treaty at the Washington Conference (1921-1922). The United States, Japan. Britain. France, and five smaller nations agreed to support equal trading rights in China and to respect China's independence, thus reaffirming the Open Door Policy. b. Kellogg-Briaiul Pact (1928). Frank Kellogg, American Secretary of State, and Aristide Briand, French Foreign Minister, proposed a pact to settle all disputes peacefully and to outlaw war "as an instrument of national policy." Most nations, including Germany, Japan, and Italy, signed this idealistic statement, also called the Pact of Paris. c. Failure of International Pacts. In the 1930's militarist Japan. Fascist Italy, and Nazi Germany all violated the Kellogg-Briand Pact. Japan also violated the Nine-Power Treaty. Without provision for enforcement and without restraining action by the other signatories, these agreements proved worthless. 1. Hefusal to Join the World Court. The World Court was established bv the League to settle disputes between nations according to international law. Despite the requests of four successive Presidents—Harding, Coolidge, Hoover, and Roosevelt—Senate isolationists managed to keep the United States from membership in the World Court. They insisted that the World Court was a "back door" into the League. 2. Immigration Restrictions. Congress passed a series of immigration laws reversing our "open house" policy and drastically limiting admissions. Congress thus expressed American sentiment for fewer world contacts—an aspect of isolationism. 3. High Tariff Policy. Congress restored high import duties and in 1930 passed the highest rates ever. By such protectionism, Congress reflected the isolationist view in economic matters. 4. Insistence Upon Repayment of War Debts. During World War I the European Allies—mainly Britain. France, and Italy—had borrowed $10 billion from the United States. Thereafter, the Allies suggested that the United States cancel the war debts because they (a) had spent the money, chiefly for American war materials, to secure victory for the United States as well as for themselves, (6i could not repay as long as America's high tariffs made it difficult for them to secure dollars, and (c) could not repay unless they chief lie planned the overall war strategy: first beat Hitler, then Japan. He met with top Allied leaders in several wartime conferences. On the home front, Roosevelt established an array of government agencies to direct the economy toward winning the war. b. Economic Mobilization. (1) The War Production Hoard (WPB) ordered military equipment, shifted peacetime plants to war production, set up priorities for raw materials, and built new plants, most notably to produce aluminum and synthetic rubber. During the war years, total industrial production almost doubled. i2> The ll'ar Labor Hoard (WLB) settled labor- management disputes, permitted wage increases to help offset the rising cost of living, and endeavored to prevent strikes. With a few exceptions, unions adhered to their no-strike pledge. (3i The li ar Manpower Commission (WMC) trained workers and channeled them into essential industries, supervised the Selective Service system, and recruited new workers, including several million women. (41 The Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC) encouraged maximum use of labor by combatting racial and religious discrimination in employment. (5) The Office of Price Administration (OPA) com- batted inflation by imposing price and rent ceilings and by rationing scarce consumer goods, such as sugar, meat, shoes, and gasoline. From 1939 to 194.5 the cost of living rose about 30 percent, far less than during World War I. c. Civil Liberties. Except for the forced removal of Japanese-Americans from the West Coast to interior relocation centers, civil liberties survived the war strains. Compared to World War I, the nation experienced less war hysteria. The press and the people remained free to criticize the government, and vigorous debate marked the Presidential election of 1944, in which Roosevelt won a fourth term. d. Wartime Finances. The federal government greatly increased corporate and individual income tax rates and for the first time taxed individuals in the low-income brackets. The number of taxpayers rose from 8 million to almost 55 million. The government introduced a pay-as-you-go system by which employers withheld (deducted in advance) the estimated tax from each worker's paycheck. The government also raised and expanded excise taxes. Of the total war cost of $330 billion, taxes provided one-third. The rest, the government borrowed through the sale of war bonds. From 1940 to 1945 the federal debt rose from less than $50 billion to over $250 billion. e. Military Manpower. With draft boards under the Selective Service system providing most of the recruits, the armed forces enrolled 15 million Americans. At peak strength the army totalled 8V2 million men, the navy 3% million, and the marines half a million. To release men for frontline duty, women's branches—Army Wacs, Navy Waves, and Women Marines—took over necessary noncombat duties. 