JAMESTOWN IS SETTLED                                                       
King James 1 of England issued a charter to the London Company             
(later known as the Virginia Company) to establish a colony in the New     
World. In 1607 this group of merchants planted the first permanent         
English settlement in America, at Jamestown, Virginia. It was located      
near the mouth of the James River, which empties into the Atlantic.        
(See map, page 31.)                                                        
EARLY HARDSHIPS                                                            
At the start, everything went wrong with the venture. Interested           
chiefly in finding gold, the first colonists did not concern themselves    
with planting crops or building homes. The site chosen for the settlement  
was swampy and unhealthful. As a result, more than half of the settlers    
died of famine and disease during the first seven months. Indians added    
to the hardship of the colonists by their frequent attacks upon the        
settlement.                                                                
To Captain John Smith, an adventurer and soldier, goes the credit for      
saving the colony. He took command of the settlement and demanded          
that all able-bodied men perform some work, such as building homes         
and planting crops. He also succeeded in obtaining food from the           
Indians. Because of an injury. Smith returned to England in 1609.          
Without his leadership, the colony almost perished. That winter was        
known as the “starving time.”                                              
FACTORS LEADING TO THE COLONY'S SUCCESS                                    
Although fresh supplies and additional settlers were sent to jamestown,    
the colony remained on the verge of failure until several important        
changes t<x>k place.                                                       
1. Land Is Given to Settlers. One of the main reasons for the lack         
of early progress was that the colonists were merely employees of the      
London Company. All property, including land, belonged to it. Under        
the governorship of Sir Thomas Dale, interest in agriculture was stimulated
by allowing settlers to obtain tracts of land as tenant farmers. A few     
years later the colony allotted settlers larger farms outright. Now that   
the colonists could raise their own crops and enjoy the fruits of their    
labor, they worked harder and the colony began to thrive.                  
2. Tobacco Cultivation Is Started. Planter John Rolfe introduced the       
cultivation of tobacco, a product acquired from the Indians. He also       
developed a methcxl of curing the tobacco leaf to make it commercially     
acceptable. Meanwhile, smoking was becoming fashionable in England,       
and the colonists began to raise tobacco on a large scale to meet the     
increasing demand. In 1617 Virginia exported 20,000 pounds of             
tobacco. Within the next 10 years the figure jumped to 500,000 pounds.    
The labor needed to work the tobacco fields was first supplied by         
indentured servants. These were poor persons who were eager to settle     
in the New World but had no money to pay their passage. They agreed       
to work without wages for a period of years for anyone who paid their     
way to America.                                                           
In 1619 the first black Africans arrived as prisoners aboard a Dutch      
ship and were purchased by the settlers as indentured servants. Later,    
to meet the evergrowing need for labor on the expanding tobacco           
plantations, other Africans were brought over and sold to the colonists   
as slaves.                                                                
RELATIONS WITH THE INDIANS                                                
At first, the Indian chief Powhatan sought to drive out the colonists.    
Legend has it that John Smith was captured by the Indians and was         
about to be slain when the chiefs daughter Pocahontas intervened and      
saved him. In 1611 Pocahontas married John Rolfe, the tobacco planter.    
Thereafter, until Powhatan’s death, there was peace between the colonists 
and the Indians. When the Indians broke the peace in 1622 by massacring   
nearly 350 people, the settlers fought back and finally drove the Indians 
from the area.                                                            
REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT BEGINS                                          
The colonists hail little voice in the affairs of government until 1619,  
when the Virginia Company permitted them to form a representative         
assembly. Called the House of Burgesses, it was composed of two delegates,
or burgesses, f rom each settlement in Virginia. The House of Burgesses   
was the first elective legislature in America. Only male landowners,      
however, could vote.                                                      
VIRGINIA BECOMES A ROYAL COLONY                                           
In 1624 James 1 revoked the company's charter and made Virginia a         
royal colony. The king now appointed the governor and the council---      
as the upper house of the legislature was called. The colonists, however, 
continued to elect the members of the lower house---the House of          
Burgesses.                                                                
GROWTH OF VIRGINIA                                                        
With the arrival of farmers and craftsworkers, and women and              
children, Virginia grew steadily. Settlements spread from the banks of    
the James River to the York and Rappahannock rivers. Restless pioneers    
began to leave the coastal area for the inland region, pushing the        
frontier westward. Bv 1650 the population of Virginia was 15,000. In      
1685 it was 60.000.                                                       
Williamsburg, a settlement north of Jamestown and the site of die         
College of William and Mary, became the capital of Virginia in 1699.      
It remained the political, cultural and social center of Virginia until  
1780, when tire capital was transferred to Richmond.                     
(Williamsburg is a fascinating tourist attraction today. Its streets, its
homes, its shops---even the dress of the men and women employed in       
Williamsburg---have been restored in the spirit of colonial times. Wil-  
liamsburg provides an authentic and vivid picture of life in the Old     
Dominion, as colonial Virginia was known.)                               
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
RELIGIOUS REFORMERS CRITICIZE THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND                      
In the 16th century the Anglican Church was made the official Church     
of England. Everyone was requit ed to support it. Persons who attended   
any other religious services were subject to fines and imprisonment.     
Nevertheless, many English people criticized the prat tires and orga-    
nization of the Anglican Church. One group, the Puritans, wished to      
simplify, or “purify,” the church from within. Other reformers, called   
Separatists, broke away completely and set up independent churches that  
were more in keeping with their beliefs.                                 
SEPARATISTS SEEK A REFUGE                                                
To escape persecution, a number of Separatists fled to Holland, where    
religious freedom was permitted. Hut they were not happy there because   
the country was foreign to them, and they wished to raise their children    
in an English environment. After some years, they decided to seek a         
new home in America.                                                        
THE PILGRIMS FOUND PLYMOUTH COLONY                                          
A small group of Separatists received permission from the Virginia          
Company to settle on its land in the New World. They obtained financial     
backing for their venture from a group of English merchants to whom         
they pledged all the profits that the colony would earn in its first seven  
years.                                                                      
Thirty-five Separatists, calling themselves Pilgrims, and about 65 other    
English men and women set sail for America on die Mayflower in              
September, 1620. Blow n far north of their original destination by heavy    
storms, they finally sighted the coast of New England. Here the weary       
travelers decided to settle, rather than continue southward to Virginia.    
In December, 1620, they landed at Plymouth, Massachusetts, and              
established a settlement. (See the map on page 34.)                         
MAYFLOWER COMPACT                                                           
Before landing, the colonists faced the need to establish a government      
of their own. They were now outside the limits of Virginia and were         
not subject to the regulations of the Virginia Company. The Pilgrim         
leaders drew’ up the Mayflower Compact, which 41 adult males signed,        
pledging to enact just and equal laws for the common good and to abide      
by these laws.                                                              
This agreement was one of the earliest expressions of self-government       
in America.                                                                 
EARLY HARDSHIPS AND THE FIRST THANKSGIVING                                  
The colonists suffered greatly during their fust winter at Plymouth.        
Shelter was inadequate, disease was widespread, and food was scarce.        
Fortunately, neighboring Indians were helpful. Massasoit, an Indian         
chieftain, made a treaty of peace with the Pilgrims that was maintained     
for many years. Two Indians, named Squanto and Samoset, showed the          
Pilgrims how to grow corn and where to hunt and fish.                       
In the fall of 1621 the Pilgrims set aside a day of thanksgiving for        
the year’s blessings. They invited the Indians to join them in a celebration
of peace and plenty. This festival became know n as the first Thanksgiving. 
DEVELOPMENTS IN PLYMOUTH COLONY                                             
John Carver, the first governor of the colony, died soon after the          
Pilgrims landed at Plymouth. He was succeeded by William Bradford,          
who governed wisely for many years. Under his leadership: (1) Each          
adult male acquired land of his own. Earlier in the colony’s history all    
the land had belonged to the community and had been worked in               
common. (2) The Pilgrims repaid the merchants who had sponsored             
their undertaking, thus achieving financial independence.                   
Plymouth Colony. though successful, remained small. In 1691 it was          
merged with Massachusetts Bay Colony. Plymouth is important as the          
first permanent English settlement in New England.                          
PURITANS ESTABLISH MASSACHUSETTS BAY COLONY                             
In 1628 a small group of Puritans, led by John Endecott, settled at     
Salem. Like the Separatists at Plymouth, these Puritans came to the New 
World to escape religious persecution. The following year influential   
Puritans in England formed the Massachusetts Bay Company and            
acquired the rights to a large tract of land in New England. Under the  
company’s sponsorship, over 1,000 Puritans came to the Massachusetts    
Bay area in 1630, settling in and around Boston. John Winthrop, an able 
and wealthy Puritan, became the first governor of the Massachusetts     
Bay Colony. Boston was made the capital.                                
A PURITAN COMMONWEALTH IS ORGANIZED                                     
The harsh laws enforced against critics of the Anglican Church led      
to a “Great Migration" of Puritans from England. In the next decade     
about 20,000 Puritans came to New England.                              
The Puritan Church became the official church of the Bay Colony.        
All residents were compelled to support it. Those who criticized it were
threatened with banishment. Only male church members were permitted     
to vole or hold public office. The clergy wielded great political power 
as governmental advisers. They also supervised the daily lives of the   
people and demanded that everyone live according to Puritan beliefs.    
PURITANS SETTLE CONNECTICUT                                             
Many persons were dissatisfied with conditions in the Bay Colony and    
sought new homes in the wilderness. A leader in this movement was       
Thomas Hooker, a Puritan pastor in New Towne (Cambridge) who            
disapproved of the harsh rule of the colony’s leaders. In 1635 a small  
group of his followers migrated to the fertile Connecticut River Valley 
and settled Hartford. Hooker led the rest of his supporters there the   
following year. Other settlers from Massachusetts founded Wethersfield  
and Windsor. Farther south, in lower Connecticut, Puritans from         
England settled in and around New Haven.                                
FUNDAMENTAL ORDERS OF CONNECTICUT                                       
In 1639 Hartford, Wethersfield, and Windsor joined forces and           
formed a unified government. They drew up a constitution with           
provisions for (1) electing deputies to a legislature, (2) choosing a   
governor, (3) limiting the terms of oilice of public officials, and (4) 
assuring fair taxation. This document, called the Fundamental Orders of 
Connecticut, was the first written constitution in America.             
THE CONNECTICUT SETTLEMENTS ARE UNITED                                  
Until the 1660’s the settlements in lower Connecticut functioned        
tndependendy as New Haven Colony. In 1662 King Charles II united        
all the towns of Connecticut into a single colony.                      
RHODE ISLAND IS FOUNDED                                                 
Roger Williams, a young Puritan minister in Salem, believed in freedom  
of religion and advocated die separation of church and state. His       
outspoken views so angered ihe officials of the Massachusetts Bay Colony    
that they brought him to trial and banished him to England. Williams        
fled and spent the winter among the Narragansett Indians. The follow ing    
spring, other colonists from the Bay Colony joined him. He purchaseci       
land in the Narragansett Bay area f rom the Indians and in 1636 founded     
Providence.                                                                 
Anne Hutchinson also came to Rhode Island after being banished from         
the Bay Colony for criticizing the Puritan Church. With her followers       
she settled at Portsmouth. Other colonists from Massachusetts founded       
Newport and Warwick. After receiving a charter from England autho-          
rizing them to establish their own government, the four settlements         
f ormed a unified colony known at fit st as Providence Plantations and later
as Rhode Island.                                                            
                                                                            
RELIGIOUS FREEDOM IN RHODE ISLAND                                           
Under Roger Williams. Rhode Island adopted the principle of com-            
plete separation of church and state. The government was prohibited         
from passing laws restricting religions liberty or imposing religious        
qualifications for voting or officeholding. As a result, people of all faiths
were attracted to Rhode Island, and the colony prospered and grew.           
Rhode Island was the first American colony to guarantee all its people       
religious freedom. This policy has since become a fundamental principle      
of American democracy.                                                       
NEW HAMPSHIRE IS SETTLED                                                     
In 1622 John Mason and Sir ierdinando Gorges acquired the tights to          
a large area in northern New England. Several years later their holdings     
were divided. New Hampshire going to Mason and Maine to Gorges.              
Starting in 1623, both men established a number of small trading posts       
and fishing stations. Soon settlers from the Bay Colony Itegan to migrate    
northward into these areas. Massachusetts then annexed both New              
Hampshire and Maine. It retained control of New Hampshire until              
1679. when the king granted New Hampshire a charter that made it a           
separate royal colony. Massachusetts retained Maine until 1820.              
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
LORD BALTIMORE BECOMES PROPRIETOR OF MARYLAND                                
George Calvert, the first Lord Baltimore, was a prominent Catholic           
noble and a friend of King Charles I. Seeking a haven for Catholics,         
who were being persecuted in England, he obtained from the king a            
tract of land to found a colony. He died shortly thereafter, and the         
grant passed to his son. Cecilias Calvert, the second Lord Baltimore,        
became the first individual proprietor, or owner, of an American colony.     
As proprietor. Lord Baltimore personally owned all the land and could        
assign, sell, or rent it as he saw fit. He was empowered to levy taxes,      
establish courts, and control church matters. However, he could make         
laws only with the advice and consent of the freemen of the colony.          
MARYLAND IS SETTLED                                                          
In 1631 a settlement was established at St. Mary's, near the mouth of        
the Potomac River. Leonard Calvert, brother of the second Lord               
Baltimore, became the first governor. The colony prospered from the          
start. I he settlers were industrious and maintained friendly relations      
with Indians living in the area. Food was plentiful, and the climate and     
soil were well adapted to the cultivation of tobacco, which soon became      
an important source of income.                                               
MARYLAND PROVIDES RELIGIOUS FREEDOM FOR CHRISTIANS                           
Although Maryland was established as a refuge for Catholics, Chris-          
tians of ail denominations were welcome there. People from Virginia          
and New England, as well as from England, flocked to the colony.             
Before long. Protestants outnumbered Catholics. To prevent religious         
disputes and to protect Catholics against discrimination. Lord Baltimore     
in 1619 successfully urged the passage of a Toleration Act. This law         
provided that all Christians should be f ree to worship as they pleased.     
Although toleration in Maryland was limited to Christians, this act       
was nonetheless an important step toward religious liber ty in America.   
THE MASON-DIXON LINE RESOLVES A BOUNDARY DISPUTE                          
After the settlement of Pennsylvania, Maryland and Pennsylvania           
quarreled over the boundary between the two colonies. The dispute was     
finally settled in 1767, tvhen two English surveyor s, Charles Mason and  
Jeremiah Dixon, were called in to determine the actual boundary line.     
The Mason-Dixon Line later became famous as the boundary between          
the free states and the slave states.                                     
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
THE CAROLINAS ARE SETTLED                                                 
In 1663 King Charles 11 issued a charter to eight nobles to settle the    
region south of Virginia. I hese individuals received the same proprietary
rights as Lord Baltimore enjoyed in Maryland. The area assigned to        
them was called “Carolina”---named in honor of a former English king,     
Charles 1. (Carolus is Latin for Charles.)                                
Ten years earlier, in 1653. settlers from Virginia had begun to move      
into present-day North Carolina, establishing farms in the vicinity of    
Albemarle Sound. 1 his settlement became part of the new colony. Other    
people were also attracted to Carolina. From Europe came French           
Huguenots, Germans. Scots, and Scotch-Irish. Anglicans, as well as        
Quakers and other dissenters, came over from England. In the northern     
part of Carolina, the settlers produced tobacco and naval stores (tar and 
turpentine); in the southern part, they grew rice and indigo. The main    
port and largest city in Carolina was Charles Town (now Charleston),      
founded by die proprietors in 1670 in the southern part of their gram.    
NORTH AND SOUTH CAROLINA ARE SEPARATED                                    
The Carolinians grew dissatisfied with proprietary rule, and there        
was constant friction between the elective assemblies and the governors.  
I he English government became displeased with the proprietors because    
of the frequent disorders that broke out in Carolina and because of the   
proprietors' failure to maintain law and order. Opposition from both      
the colonists and the mother country led the proprietors to surrender     
their charter to the crown. In 1729 North Carolina and South Carolina     
bet aine separate royal colonies.                                         
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
NEW NETHERLAND BECOMES NEW YORK                                           
The English had long been irritated by the presence of the Dutch in       
New Netherland. (1) England viewed the area as part of its North          
American claim, which was based on Cabot's explorations. (2) New          
Netherland was a barrier separating New England from the English          
colonies to the south. (3) 1 he Dutch, in violation ol English trade laws.
were carrying on extensive trade with the English colonies. (4) English     
merchants were envious of the profitable Dutch fur trade with the           
Indians. (5) England w ished to gain control of New Amsterdam, which        
had one of the finest harbors on the east coast of North America.           
When Chat les II became king of England, he granted New Netherland          
to his brother James, the Duke of York. In 1664 an English fleet sailed     
to New' Amsterdam and demanded the surrender of New Netherland.             
Governor Stuyvesant wanted to resist. But the people refused to support     
him, and he was forced to surrender without firing a shot.                  
hi honor of the Duke of York, the English changed the names of the          
colony of New Netherland and of the tow n of New' Amsterdam to New          
York. Beverwyck, die town that had grown up around Fort Orange,             
was renamed Albany. Wiltwyck became Kingston.                               
NEW YORK ACQUIRES A REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT                               
lhe Duke of York administered the colony’s affairs through an               
appointive governor and council, and he denied the people represen-         
tation in the government. When the colonists protested, lie appointed       
Thomas Dongan governor and authorized him to call a representative          
assembly, l he assembly met in 1683 and drew up a Charier of Liberties      
and Privileges.                                                             
The document provided for the creation of an elective assembly,             
f reedom of worship, and trial by jury. Dongan’s charter w as short-lived,  
however. When the Duke of York became King James II in 1685, he             
voided the charter anti abolished lhe legislature. Representative gov-      
ernment was not restored until 1691, after James II had been over-          
thrown.                                                                     
PART OF NEW NETHERLAND BECOMES NEW JERSEY                                   
l he region between the Hudson and Delaware rivers had been a part          
of New Netherland and was inhabited by a scattering of Dutch and            
Swedish settlers. When the Duke of York took possession after lhe           
Dutch surrender, he gave the area to two of his friends. Sir George         
Carteret and Lord John Berkeley, lhe new proprietors named their colony     
New Jersey. They encouraged colonization by promising settlers liberal      
grants of land, representative government, and freedom of religion.         
English Puritans and Quakers, as well as Scots, Scotch-Irish, and           
Gentians, flocked to New Jersey, and lhe colony grew rapidly.               
A group of Quakers purchased Berkeley’s proprietary rights to the           
section known as West Jersey. Another group of Quakers and some             
non-Quakers acquired Carteret’s province of East Jersey. In 1702, when      
the proprietors sin rendered their governmental powers to the king, the     
two provinces of New Jersey were united into one royal colony.              
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
 THE QUAKERS LOOK TO AMERICA FOR REFUGE                                    
 The Society of Friends was a Protestant sect that arose in England in     
 lhe middle of the 17th century. Its members were called Quakers because   
their leader, George Fox, had once warned a judge to “tremble and            
quake at die word of the Lord.”                                              
Maintaining that an “inner light” was a person’s spiritual guide, the        
Quakers saw no need for formal church rites or ceremonies. They              
believed that all people are equal in the eyes of God, and refused to        
remove their hats or bow down before anyone, no matter how high his          
or her rank. They considered slavery evil. Believing that war is sinful,     
they refused to fight or serve as soldiers.                                  
Persecuted for their beliefs both in England and in many of the              
American colonies, the Quakers dreamed of establishing a colony of           
their own where they could live according to their principles.               
WILLIAM PENN EMBARKS ON A 'HOLY EXPERIMENT''                                 
As a young man, William Penn, the son of a wealthy English admiral,          
became an ardent Quaker. In 1681, in payment of a large debt that            
Charles II owed his father, Penn obtained a grant of land in the New         
World. In honor of Admiral Penn, the king named this vast region             
Pennsylvania (“Penn’s woods”).                                               
Penn planned to establish a proprietary colony w here people of all          
creeds and nationalities would live together peaceably, where everyone       
would be equal before the law-, and where all would enjoy freedom of         
speech and religion. He viewed his venture as a “holy experiment.”           
The first settlers arrived early in 1682 and founded the city of             
Philadelphia (a term meaning “brotherly love”) at the junction of the        
Delaware and Schuylkill rivers. Before the year ended. Penn arrived to       
take charge of his colony, and 23 shiploads of colonists came over.          
PENNSYLVANIA GROWS AND PROSPERS                                              
Under William Penn’s guidance, Pennsylvania expanded rapidly and             
became one of the largest and most successful of the English colonies.       
1. Large Immigration. Penn’s liberal attitude toward self-govern-            
ment, land purchases, and religion attracted many Europeans to the           
colony. Among the settlers were English and Welsh Quakers, Irish             
Catholics, Scotch-Irish Presbyterians, and German members of several         
different religious groups (ancestors of the Pennsylvania Dutch of today).   
The colonists were industrious, skilled, and thrifty. As setdeinents spread  
northward and westward along the Delaware, Schuylkill, and Susque-           
hanna rivers. Pennsylvania became a region of prosperous farms and           
villages. Philadelphia, its capital, became the largest city in the colonies.
2. The Great Law of Pennsylvania. To guarantee a responsible                 
and democratic government, Penn drew up a constitution that became           
known as the Great Law of Pennsylvania. It provided for (a) a governor       
to be appointed by the proprietor, (ft) an elective legislature, (c)         
religious freedom, (d) protection against unfair trials, (e) reasonable      
punishment and humane treatment for wrrongdoers, and (/) the edu-            
cation of children.                                                          
3. Friendly Relations With the Indians. Penn dealt fairly and                
honorably with the Indians of Pennsylvania. He paid them for their           
lands and negotiated a treaty that bound the settlers and Indians to live   
in peace “as long as the sun and moon give light.” He kept his promises     
to the Indians and maintained friendly relations with them as long as       
he lived.                                                                   
PENNSYLVANIA ANNEXES DELAWARE                                               
When New Netherland fell to the English, the section that had been          
New Sweden also became the property of the Duke of York. He renamed         
the area Delaware.                                                          
To provide Pennsylvania access to the sea, the Duke ceded Delaware          
to William Penn. Delaware remained a part of Pennsylvania until 1703,       
when it was permitted to set up its own legislature. Until the American     
Revolution, however. Delaware was administered by the governor of           
Pennsylvania.                                                               
                                                                            
                                                                            
THE LAST OF THE THIRTEEN COLONIES IS FOUNDED                                
James Oglethorpe, an influential member of Parliament, received a           
charter from King George II to establish a colony between South             
Carolina and Florida. In honor of the king, the colony was named            
Georgia. It was to serve (1) as a refuge for imprisoned debtors who         
wished to get a fresh start in the New World, and (2) as a barrier to       
Spanish expansion northward from Florida.                                   
In 1733 Oglethorpe led a small band of settlers to Georgia and              
founded Savannah. Few ex-prisoners came to Georgia, but poverty-            
stricken people from the British Isles, oppressed Swiss and Germans,        
and pioneers from Carolina did settle there, and the colony grew.           
GEORGIA BECOMES A ROYAL COLONY                                              
Georgia's governing body, a board of trustees, sought to make Georgia       
a colony of small, independent farmers. The trustees limited landholding    
and forbade the use of slaves. These policies, though well intentioned,     
were opposed by the colonists. They w ished to expand their landholdings    
into plantations and to acquire slaves to work the land. In 1752 the        
trustees turned over their charter to the crown, and Georgia became a       
royal colony. Plantations and slavery soon developed into major insti-      
tutions in Georgia s economy.                                               
                            Identification Test                             
1. Because of my Quaker practices. I was dismissed from Oxford University. I
asked King Charles 11 for a grant of land in America as payment of a large  
debt he owed my father. Here 1 granted the settlers a measure of religious  
freedom and treated the Indians fairly.                                     
2. 1 was an English noble and a Roman Catholic. When the English government 
persecuted people of mv faith. 1 founded a colony where Catholics could     
worship freely. Its largest city was named after me.                        
4. Different Races and Nationalities. European whites constituted        
80% of the population of colonial America, and African blacks 20%.       
Nine-tenths of the blacks were slaves.                                   
Settlers of English origin comprised the largest group in the colonies.  
Germans, Scots, Scotch-Irish, Irish, and Dutch were also found in large  
numbers. There were smaller groups of Swiss, French Huguenots,           
Swedes, Welsh, Spaniards, and Belgians.                                  
Note: All the population data above excludes the Indians. The various    
Indian tribes inhabiting colonial America did not view themselves as     
English subjects but as independent nations.                             
EDUCATION                                                                
Educational facilities were limited, and most children did not advance   
beyond the “three r’s” (reading, ’citing, and ’rithmetic). Pupils learned
their letters by means of a hornbook. This device consisted of a sheet of
paper mounted on a board and covered by transparent horn to protect      
it against wear. The hornbook contained the alphabet, the Lord’s Prayer, 
or verses from the Bible.                                                
The most widely used textbook in colonial days was the New England       
Primer. This book taught the alphabet, reading, and religion by means    
of rhymed sayings, such as:                                              
In Adam’s Fall                                                           
We Sinned all.                                                           
                            Thy Life to Mend                             
                            This Book Attend.                            
The Cat doth play                                                        
And after slay.                                                          
AN UNDECLARED WAR IS FOUGHT WITH FRANCE (1798-1800)                         
Although war was not officially declared, a number of naval battles         
were fought in the next two years between American and French vessels.      
The tiny U.S. Navy gave a good account of itself, capturing more than       
80 French ships against the loss of only one American vessel. Faced         
with the prospect of a full-scale war with the United Slates, the French    
government let it lx* known that it was ready to receive the U.S. minister  
and negotiate a settlement. President Adams then sent another group         
of envoys to France. A satisfactory agreement was reached, thus bringing    
the undeclared war to an end.                                               
                                                                            
                                                                            
ALIEN AND SEDITION ACTS (1798)                                              
While the French crisis was at its height, the Federalist-dominated         
Congress passed a series of harsh laws known as the Alien and Sedition      
Acts. (An alien is a resident who is not a citizen; sedition means treason.)
these acts (1) raised the residence requirement for citizenship from 5      
to 14 years, (2) empowered the President to imprison or deport any          
alien considered dangerous to the nation’s peace and safety, and (3)        
made it a crime for any person to publicly criticize the government or      
its officials.                                                              
The Alien and Sedition Acts aroused a storm of protest. Recent              
immigrants (many of them pro-Democratic-Republican in outlook)              
feared the threat of deportation and resented their inability to acquire    
citizenship for 14 years. Citizens everywhere objected to the restrictions  
on freedom of speech and press. Ten Democratic-Republican editors           
and printers were fined and imprisoned for publishing articles critical     
of the government.                                                          
Although the Federalists defended the Alien and Sedition Acts as            
necessary war measures, the acts’ apparent aims were to (1) strengthen      
Federalist control of the government, (2) weaken the power and              
influence of the Democratic-Republican party, and (3) curb political        
opposition.                                                                 
                                                                            
                                                                            
KENTUCKY AND VIRGINIA RESOLUTIONS                                           
The legislatures of Kentucky and Virginia passed resolutions (1798---       
1799) declaring the Alien and Sedition Acts unconstitutional and void.      
The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, written by Thomas Jefferson and      
James Madison respectively, slated: (1) The states created the national     
government. (2) The powers of the national government are strictly          
united to those expressed in the Constitution. (3) Each slate has the       
right to judge for itself whether Congress has exceeded its constitutional  
powers. (4) A state need not obey an act that it considers                  
unconstitutional.                                                           
These principles formed the basis of states' rights, a doctrine that the    
South later used to oppose high tariffs and defend slavery.                 
responding with the great people of his time; advising his successors in    
the White House; and planning die design, construction, and curriculum      
of the University of Virginia.                                              
JEFFERSON AS PRESIDENT                                                      
Jeffersons inauguration was the first to be held in Washington, D.C.,       
then a village of unpaved streets and unfinished public buildings. An       
advocate of simplicity, Jefferson did away with much of the formality       
and pomp introduced by the Federalists. He pm an end to the weekly          
receptions and stately balls held by his predecessors.                      
The following were some of the significant events of Jefferson’s two        
terms in office: (1) The .Alien and Sedition Acts were either repealed      
or allowed to expire, and those who had been imprisoned under these         
laws were pardoned. (2) T he residence requirement for citizenship was      
lowered to five years. (3) All excise taxes, including the one on whisky,   
were repealed. (4) Under the expert financial guidance of Albert Gallatin,  
Jefferson’s Secretary of the Treasury, federal expenses were cut and        
the federal debt substantially reduced. (5) The United States Military      
Academy at West Point was established (1802). (6) The importation of        
slaves was prohibited (1808).                                               
The most significant event of Jefferson’s administration was the            
acquisition of Louisiana.                                                   
                                                                            
                                                                            
THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE 11803}                                              
                                                                            
BACKGROUND                                                                  
Louisiana, the enormous territory lying between the Mississippi River       
and the Rockies, was ceded to Spain by France after the French and          
Indian War. New Orleans, at the mouth of the Mississippi, dominated         
the river route that was a natural highway for frontier farmers of          
Kentucky, Tennessee, and the Ohio Valley. It was comparatively easy         
for the Westerners to float their produce down the Ohio River into the      
Mississippi to New Orleans, and from there to transship goods to            
markets in the East and in Europe. To haul their crops overland through     
the wilderness and across the mountains was virtually impossible.           
Therefore, in 1795, the United Stales obtained from Spain, by the           
Pinckney Treaty, the right to navigate the lower Mississippi and to         
deposit gtxtds in New Orleans.                                              
AMERICA PURCHASES THE TERRITORY FROM FRANCE                                 
Hoping to restore the French Empire in North America, Napoleon              
forced Spain to return Louisiana to France in 1800. Two years later the     
American right of deposit in New Orleans was withdrawn. Faced with          
the loss of their outlet to Eastern markets. Westerners appealed to         
President Jefferson for help. Fearing Napoleon's presence at the nation’s   
back door and aiming to help the frontier farmers. Jefferson authorized     
Robert Livingston and James Monroe to negotiate the purchase of New         
Orleans from France.                                                        
              Part 1. Immigrants Contribute to the Nation's                
                          Growth and Greatness                             
AMERICA, A NATION OF IMMIGRANTS                                            
I Except for Native Americans (Indians, Eskimos, and Aleuts), every        
person in America today is either an immigrant or the descendant of        
an immigrant. From the arrival of the first English settlers at Jamestown  
in 1607 to the landing of uprooted and homeless refugees from Europe       
and Asia in the years after World War II, America has been a land of       
refuge and opportunity.                                                    
The earliest settlers came to the New World chiefly to flee religious      
persecution or to seek their fortunes. Later immigrants came to escape     
famine, poverty, and religious and political oppression; to work on        
railroadsand canals and in mines and factories; and to farm the- Western   
lands. But whoever they were, wherever they came from, each brought        
something to contribute to America's diversity and greatness. Today,       
the United Stales is the sum of all these different parts.                 
Note: Unlike other immigrants, most African blacks came to this            
[country involuntarily---as slaves. For more than 250 years, black slaves  
 were deprived of the benefits and opportunities that other Americans     
 enjoyed. After emancipation and a period of painful readjustment, they   
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
 entered the mainstream of American society.                              
 OLD” IMMIGRATION                                                         
 Until the 1880’s most immigrants to the United States came from          
 Northern and Western Europe. This "old" immigration consisted mainly     
 of people from England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, Germany, and the       
 Scandinavian countries. The potato famine in Ireland (1845---1847)       
 brought hundreds of thousands of Irish to America. 1 he unsuccessful     
 revolution of 1848 in Germany started a great migration of Germans       
 Io America’s shores. After the Civil War, large numbers of Scandinavians 
 tame to settle the Western fat inlands. Between 1820 and 1890 more       
 titan 12.5 million people from Western and Northern Eurctpe migrated     
 lo this country.                                                         
 NEW IMMIGRATION                                                          
 Beginning in the 1880’s, large numbers of immigrants f rom Southern,     
 Central, and Eastern Europe came to America. This “new" immigration      
 consisted mainly of people from Austria-Hungary, the Balkan states,      
 Italy, and Russia (including Poland). They came lo the United Slates lo  
 improve their living conditions, to secure better-paying jobs, and to    
 escape religious persecution. 1 hey settled mostly in the large cities.  
Before 1882, America opened its gates to all who wished to come.           
The country was underpopulated. People were needed to dig canals;          
build railroads; populate the West; and work in mills, mines, and          
factories. While the country was expanding, it easily absorbed a great     
number of immigrants. As time passed, however, many Americans              
believed that immigration should be restricted because:                    
1. There was no more free land in the West.                                
2. Immigrants were willing to work for low wages, thereby threat-          
ening the jobs and the wage scale of American workers.                     
3. Illiterate immigrants became easy prey for corrupt politicians.         
4. It was difficult for many of the newcomers to become Ameri-             
canized. They continued to speak their own language and lived apart        
in communities of their own.                                               
Starting in the 1880’s, steps were taken to limit the flow of people       
from abroad. Laws were passed to keep out criminals, paupers, and          
insane and diseased persons (1882). Immigrants were required to pass       
a literacy test (1917). Migration from the Orient was curtailed by (1)     
t he Chinese Exclusion Act (1882). which prohibited the entry of immigrants
from China, (2) the Gentlemen’s Agreement by which Japan agreed to keep    
its laborers from migrating here (1907), and (3) a ban on all Japanese     
immigration (1924).                                                        
                                                                           
NATIONAL ORIGINS QUOTA LAWS                                                
After World War I, Congress passed the Emergency Quota Act of 1921.        
This was a temporary measure designed to stem the tide of immigrants       
who began to pour into the country from the war-scarred countries of       
Europe. It set a maximum quota of immigrants to be admitted each           
year, and it limited the number of people permitted from each country.     
Limiting immigration and selecting immigrants on the basis of national     
origin became permanent policies with the enactment of the Immigration     
Quota Law of 1924 and the National Origins Act of 1929. The latter         
provided that immigration into the LInited States from outside the         
Western Hemisphere be limited to 150,000 persons a year. A formula         
was worked out that fixed a quota of immigrants from each country in       
Modern America Emerges 279                                                
proportion lo the number of people of that national origin living in the  
Uniled States in 1920. No limits were placed upon immigration from        
Canada or the independent countries of Latin America.                     
The McCarran-Walter Act (1952) continued the national origins quota       
system but removed the ban against the immigration of Chinese,            
Japanese, and other Asians. (The act also set up screening procedures     
to prevent the admission of radicals seeking to overthrow the U.S.        
Government. In addition, it empowered the Attorney General to deport      
immigrants who joined a Communist organization after their arrival in     
this country.)                                                            
DISPLACED PERSONS AND REFUGEES ARE ADMITTED                               
1. The Displaced Persons Act (1948). This law and several later           
extensions authorized the admission to the United Stales of more than     
IHO.OOO Europeans outside the regular immigration quotas. These           
people, displaced as a result of World War II. included survivors of      
German concentration camps, war orphans, and Eastern Europeans            
who had fled from their homelands when Communists took control.           
2. The Refugee Relief Act (1953). This law and later extensions           
allowed escapees from Communist persecution in Hungary, Cuba, and         
Indexhina, as well as refugees fleeing f rom political oppression in other
countries, to enter the United States in numbers above the established    
quotas. These special programs have enabled more than 600,000 people      
to make new homes for themselves in America.                              
3. Refugee Act of 1980. With (he passage of this law, Congress               
approved the adoption of a systematic plan for the admission and             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
settlement of refugees who are of special humanitarian concern to the        
United States. The number of refugees to be admitted each year would         
be determined by the President, after consultation with Congress.            
NATIONAL ORIGINS QUOTAS ARE ABOLISHED                                        
Many Americans thought that limiting immigration on a basis of               
nationality was unfair because it discriminated against many national        
groups. At the urging of President Lyndon B. Johnson, Congress passed        
the Immigration Act of 1965, which (I) abolished the national origins        
quota system, (2) limited immigration from countries in the Western          
Hemisphere to 120,000 a year, starting in 1968, (3) raised the annual        
limit on immigration from other countries to 170,000, with no more           
(han 20,000 to be admitted each year from any one country, and (4)           
granted admission priority to immigrants who have close relatives in         
the United States, or who are refugees from communism, or whose              
skills and talents are needed in this country.                               
HOW AN ALIEN BECOMES A U.S. CITIZEN                                          
To become a naturalized citizen, an applicant must be:                       
1. Al least 18 years of age.                                                 
2. A lawful resident of the United States continuously for five years.       
(Short periods of absence from the country are permitted.) For husbands      
or wives of citizens, the period of residence is usually reduced to three    
years.                                                                       
3. A person of good moral character and a believer in the principles         
of the Constitution.                                                         
In order to acquire citizenship, an applicant must:                          
1. File a petition for naturalization.                                       
2. Demonstrate the ability to read, write, and speak everyday English.       
(Exceptions: persons physically unable to do so, and persons over 50         
years of age who have resided in the country for 20 years or more.)          
3. Demonstrate a knowledge and understanding of die fundamentals             
of United States history and government.                                     
4. Present two reliable U.S. citizens to serve as witnesses to the           
applicant's character, residence, and loyalty.                               
5. Renounce allegiance to one’s former country and take an oath of           
allegiance to the United States.                                           (
Naturalized citizens have die same rights as native-born citizens and       
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
may hold any public office except that of President and Vice President.    E
Children born to foreign parents living in the United States are            
considered native-born citizens. Foreign-born children under 16 become      
citizens when both parents are naturalized.                                F
TERMS RELATING TO IMMIGRATION                                              H
Alien. A person living in a foreign country and not having rights of         
citizenship.                                                                 
                                                  Modern America Emerges 281
                                                                            
Americanization. The process of acquainting immigrants with Amer-            
ican democratic ideals, customs, and traditions; teaching them the           
English language; and helping them adjust to the American way of life.       
Citizen. A person either born or naturalized in the United States. An        
American citizen owes allegiance to the United States, receives protection   
[torn it, and enjoys all the political tights granted by the Constitution.   
Emigrant. A person who leaves a country to settle elsewhere perma-           
nently. As seen from the country of departure, that individual is an         
emigrant.                                                                    
Immigrant. A person who comes to one country from another to                 
settle permanently. As seen from the country of arrival, the newcomer        
is an immigrant.                                                             
Immigration Quota. The number of persons from each foreign                   
country permitted entry into the United States each year.                    
Literacy Test. When applied to immigration, this is a test given to          
determine whether aliens can read and write their own language. When         
applied to citizenship, it is a test given to determine whether they can     
read and write English.                                                      
Melting Pot. A term applied to a society in which many nationalities         
and cultures have been f used into a common product, as in the United        
Slates.                                                                      
 Naturalization. The process by which an alien becomes a citizen.            
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                 CANADIAN                                    
James J. Hill---built the Great Northern Railroad from Lake Superior         
to Puget Sound (1890); earned the title “Empire Builder" for his role        
in the development of the Northwest.                                         
                                 CHINESE                                     
1. .M. Pei---architect who designed many impoi taut buildings in the         
United States and abroad, including the East Building of the National        
Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C.                                           
An Wang---physicist who in the 1950’s formed an electronics firm in          
the United States that soon was known worldwide for its word                 
processors for offices.                                                      
Chien-shiung Wu---physicist who in 1957 helped disprove the widely           
held law of the conservation of parity.                                      
                                  DUTCH                                      
Louis Adamic---writer: author of The Native’s Return (1934), My America                
(1938). and From Many Lands (1940).                                                    
Michael Pupin----physicist and inventor; pioneered X-ray research and                  
development; invented numerous electrical devices to improve long-                     
distance communication by telephone; wrote a Pulitzer prizewinning                     
autobiography. From Immigrant to Inventor (1923).                                      
Nikola Tesla---inventor; applied principle of rotating magnetic field,                 
1 which he discovered in 1881. to invention of alternating current                     
motor and to Tesla coil (transformer); developed an arc lighting                       
system and an alternating-current power transmission system.                           
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
1. The process by which an alien becomes a U.S. citizen is called (o) con-             
| scription (b) immigration (c) naturalization (rf) registration.                      
2, Which statement is true of the immigration policy of the United States              
E toward the end of die 19th century? (a) Restrictions were placed on                  
[ Mexican agricultural workers, (A) Quotas were assigned to European                   
I countries, (c) Criminals, paupers, and diseased and insane persons were              
I excluded, (d) Japanese immigration was limited.                                      
I 5. An important reason why the United States did little to restrict immigration      
| during most of the 19th century was that (a) immigration from Europe                 
I was relatively small (b) Congress lacked the power to pass restrictive laws          
I (c) labor unions favored immigration (d) there was a continuing need to              
I expand the labor force.                                                              
1 Which was a basic reason why few immigrants settled in the South during              
I the period 1800-1860? (a) fear of carpetbaggers (b) unfamiliarity with               
I farming (c) competition with slave labor (d) restrictions imposed by the             
I federal government.                                                                  
                                                                                       
Ip Which event occurred FIRST? (a) negotiation of the "Gentlemen’s Agree-              
I mein" (b) passage of the National Origins Act (c) passage of the Chinese             
 | Exclusion Act (d) passage of the Displaced Persons Act.                            
I|i In the early 20th century, immigrants from Southern Europe to the United           
I States settled chiefly (a) in small towns along the Gulf of Mexico (b) in            
I the cities along the east coast (c) on the farmlands in the North and                
I Northwest (d) on the farmlands of the Far West.                                      
■ ' Which law permitted Asians to enter the United Slates under the quota              
I plan? (a) Immigration Quota Law of 1924 (b) National Origins Act of                  
I 1929 (c) Displaced Persons Act of 1948 (<■/) McCarran-Walter Ac t of 1952.           
■i The Immigration Act of 1965 (a) excluded immigrants on the basis of                 
I racial background (6) abolished the national origins quota system (c)                
I permitted unlimited immigration from countries in the Westei n I lemisphere          
I (tf) forbade further immigration into the United States.                             
■1 The largest number of immigrants came to the United States (a) before               
I 1870 (b) between 1870 and 1889 (c) Ix'tween 1890 and 1919 (d) since                  
I 1920.                                                                                
■1 Naturalized citizens may hold any of the following public offices EXCEPT            
 Five years later, as the agreement of 1930 was nearing its expiration        
 date, a second London Conference was held. Whereas the earlier               
                                                                              
 agreement had allowed Japan a navy roughly two-thirds the size of            
 those of the United States and Great Britain, Japan now demanded             
 naval equality. When its demand was rejected, Japan withdrew from            
 the talks, and (he race for naval superiority resumed.                       
 DOMESTIC AFFAIRS IN THE POST-WAR YEARS                                       
                                                                               
HIGHLIGHTS OF HARDING S ADMINISTRATION                                         
In the presidential campaign of 1920, Governor James M. Cox of                 
Ohio, a Democrat, opposed Senator Warren G. Harding of Ohio, a                 
Republican. Harding called for a “return to normalcy,” a slogan that so        
appealed to war-weary Americans that they voted him into office by a           
landslide.                                                                     
During Harding’s term: (1) A separate Veterans’ Bureau (later called           
the Veterans Administration) was established to supervise the various          
I federal programs of aid to the nation’s ex-soldiers. (2) A Bureau oj the     
Budget (now known as the Office of Management and Budget) was                  
I Healed to coordinate federal expenditures and receipts, thus making          
I government operations more businesslike. (3) The Fordney-McCumber            
Tanff Act reversed the tariff policy of the Wilson administration by           
I raising tariffs to a new high level. (4) The Emergency Quota Act oj 1921     
I sharplv limited immigration into the United States. (5) The Washington       
I Conference was held.                                                         
I Harding’s administration was marred by a series of scandals involving        
I several of his appointive officials. (1) Secretary of the Interior Albei t   
I Fall received large bribes from oil operators for leasing government oil     
I reserve lands to them under particularly favorable terms. For his part       
I in litis Teapot Dome Scandal, Fall was fined heavily and sentenced to jail.  
I (2) The head of the Veterans’ Bureau and the Custodian of Alien              
I Property were imprisoned for defrauding the government of huge sums          
I of money. (3) The Attorney General was charged with receiving bribes         
I and failing to prosecute grafters, and was forced to resign his office.      
I COOLIDGE SUCCEEDS TO THE PRESIDENCY                                          
I When Harding died suddenly in the summer of 1923, Vice President             
■Calvin Coolidge of Massachusetts succeeded him. After completing              
I Harding’s term, he ran for President in his own right in 1924 and was        
■returned to office by a huge majority.                                        
I Coolidge believed that “the business of America is business.” He             
I opposed government interference with private enterprise. He worked           
I to reduce the public debt, to lower the cost of government, and to cut       
I lues. During his term, immigration was further restricted, a Soldiers’       
■ Bonus Ait was passed (over his veto), and the Kellogg-Bria nd Pact was       
Sped.                                                                          
The following were some of the causes for the t rash of 1929 and the       
depression that followed:                                                  
1. Overproduction. The prosperity of the Twenties had made busi-           
ness owners too hopeful. Industry had expanded too rapidly anti was        
producing more goods than it could sell.                                   
2. Underconsumption. The purchasing power of American con-                 
sumers was not great enough to buy all the goods being produced.           
(Farmers in particular were unable to purchase their share of America’s    
industrial output because det lining farm prices reduced their income.     
Foreign countries were unable to buy American gtxsds because of war        
debts, reparations, and tariff barriers.                                   
3. Unsound Financial Practices. Banks made unsound personal and            
business loans ami ditl not receive full repayment. Brokers sold stock     
on too small a margin anti thus encouraged widespread speculation.         
Consumers made unwise purchases on the installment plan and were           
later unable to complete their payments.                                   
HOOVER TRIES TO FIGHT THE DEPRESSION                                       
Even before the stock market clash. Hoover proposed ami Congress           
passed the Agricultural Marketing Act. It was designed to stabilize farm   
prices by keeping surpluses from the market. A $500 million fund was       
setup for the purchase of surplus crops. The plan failed because the       
| farm depression was too severe and the resources of the fund were too    
touted.                                                                    
I When the rest of the economy was hit by the depression, Hoover at        
first was optimistic over, the prospects of an early recovery. As the      
^depression deepened and became worldwide, however, he took the            
following steps: (I) The Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) was      
[established to make emergency loans to financial institutions, life insur-
ance companies, and railroads. (2) A limited program of federal public     
works was started. (3) States and local communities were encouraged to     
undertake similar projects and to obtain loans for this purpose from       
I the RFC. ( I) Payments of war debts and reparations owed to the United   
I States by foreign governments were suspended f or one year. Such a       
suspension of debts is called a moratorium. Hoover hoped that this         
I moratorium would relieve the financial plight of European nations and    
I enable them to buy more goods from the United Stales.                    
OTHER DEVELOPMENTS                                                         
I Tariffs on imports were further increased by the Hawley-Smoot Tariff     
Ikl. Foreign nations retaliated by raising their tariffs, and American     
[exports suffered a sharp decline. Also during Hoover's administration:    
111) The National Origins Act limiting immigration went into effect. (2)   
■The Twentieth ("Lame Duck") Amendment was adopted. (3) The United         
■States participated in the London Conference on Naval Disarmament         
In 1930. (4) The United States issued the Stimson Doctrine, declaring its  
■imposition to Japan s seizure of the Chinese province of Manchuria.       
b. Although the Civil Rights Acts of 1957 and 1960 had given the          
uwe to many Southern blacks, about 2 million blacks in seven states       
were still prevented from exercising their right to vote by the use of    
literacy and character tests. Ihe Voting Rights Act of 7965 suspended     
such tests and authorized federal registration of volets in states and    
localities where less than 50% of the voting-age population was registered
or had voted in the 1964 election. (See page 303.)                        
I he Civil Rights Act of 1968 prohibited discrimination in the sale       
oriental of houses and apartments. (See page 305.) It also (1) provided   
severe penalties for persons convicted of intimidating or injuring civil  
rights workers, and (2) made it a federal crime to travel across state    
lines or to use interstate communications for the put pose of inciting a  
riot.                                                                     
5. Education. The Elementary and Secondary Education Act (1965)           
established a comprehensive program of federal aid to public schools.     
ESEA also provided some assistance to parochial and private schools.      
(See page 295.) The Higher Education Act extended additional federal      
aid to college students and to institutions of higher learning.           
6. Immigration. The Immigration Act of 1965 ended the policy of           
limiting admission to the United States on the basis of national origin.  
(See page 280.)                                                           
7. Transportation. Some 30 federal agencies dealing with (ravel by        
air. rail, highway, and water were grouped into a Department of Trans-    
(1966).                                                                   
EFFECTS OF THE VIETNAM WAR ON THE NATION                                  
The most serious foreign problem troubling the nation during John-        
sons administration was the war in Vietnam. What had begun in 1950        
;ts a minor program of aid to the French in Indochina became after        
1965 a major American commitment. It involved half a million troops,      
I billions of dollars in expenditures, and the threat of “total” war with 
I Communist China and the Soviet Union.                                   
I Most Americans supported the view that the United States had an         
I obligation to help South Vietnam preserve its independence. Neverthe-   
I less, there was growing concern over the ever-increasing escalation of  
Ithe war, the assumption by U.S. troops of the main burden of the         
I fighting, and the rising cost in American lives and money. As time      
I passed and the war became stalemated, more and more people came to      
■ believe that it had been a mistake to involve U.S. troops in Vietnam.   
I Opponents of the war organized peace demonstrations and signed          
■ petitions demanding a halt to the bombing of North Vietnam. In          
I addition, many political leaders of both parties publicly voiced their  
I concern over the administration’s war policies. T he change in the pub- 
I it's attitude toward the war caused Johnson’s popularity to decline     
I Sharply.                                                                
I The war also created a serious split in the Democratic parly, as two    
[longtime critics of Johnson’s Vietnam policies challenged the President  
[for the party’s nomination in 1968. Each of these men, Senator Eugene    
OTHER DOMESTIC ISSUES                                                         
1. Immigration. Thousands of foreigners were entering the country             
Begallv each year seeking employment and better living conditions. To         
curtail the influx of illegal aliens. Congress passed the Immigration Reform  
md Control Act of 1986. It required employers to verify the citizenship       
tutus of job applicants; prohibited the hiring of illegal aliens; and         
offered legal status to several million aliens who had entered the United     
Slates illegally bef ore January 1. 1982, and had lived there continuously    
since that lime.                                                              
2. The Environment, (a) In 1986 Congress approved a fivefold                  
 expansion of the program to clean up abandoned hazardous waste              
[dumps. It authorized spending 39 billion for this purpose over a live-       
|it.ir pericxl; required the Environmental Protection Agency to set           
[tundards of cleanliness; and imposed a new tax on corporations and           
[ on crude oil and motor f uel to help finance the program. The tax           
I monev would l>e placed in a special toxic waste “Superfund." (b) The        
| ('ban Water Act. passed in 1987 over Reagan’s veto, provided $18 billion    
Ito state and local governments (over a seven-year period) for the            
■instruction of sewage treatment plants, and allocated an additional $2       
| billion for other programs to clean up the nation’s water supplies.         
I 3. Water Projects. A $16.3 billion program to conserve and develop          
I the nation's waler resources was approved by Congress in 1986. The          
I fist major water projects bill in 15 years, it provided federal financ ing  
■ for hundreds of harbor-dredging, flood-control, and other waterway          
Inprovement projects throughout the country. It also required local           
I immunities to pay part of the costs of these programs.                      
I 4. Drugs. Responding to national concerns about drug abuse. Con-            
fess passed the Omnibus Drug Act (1986). It increased federal penalties       
■for drug crimes and allotted $1.7 billion for anti-drug enforcement,         
Itducation, and treatment programs.                                           
I 5. Social Security. With the Social Security System paying out more         
■tan it was taking in, Congress took steps to reverse the trend and           
Inure that the system would lx- able to meet its obligations for years to     
Itane. To generate more revenue, the new law passed in 1983 (a)               
■■posed higher ScK'ial Security payroll taxes on working people, (b)          
[required middle-income and upper-income retirees to pay taxes on half        
Irftheir Social Security benefits, (c) extended payroll taxation to etn-      
fevecs of the federal government, and (//) alter the year 2000, raised        
feage at which retired workers could draw full benefits (from age 65          
486 United States History                                                 
6. Retirement. To end age discrimination in employment. Congress          
in 1986 abolished mandatory retirement at age 70 for most workers.        
Exceptions included police officers, fire fighters, tenured university    
faculty, and high corporate executives. People in these categories would  
not come under the protection of the new law until 1994.                  
7. Japanese-American Reparations. “To right a grave wrong," the           
President signed legislation in 1988 extending apologies to the 120,000   
Japanese---.Americans who had been forcibly removed from their homes      
on the West Coast during World War 11 and placed in internment            
camps. The bill also established a $1.25 billion trust fund to pay $20,000
tax-free Io each surviving internee.                                      
8. Other Reagan Proposals. Many key items on Reagan’s political           
agenda failed to win congressional approval. These included the adop-     
tion of a plan to allow tuition tax credits to parents who send their     
children to private schools; and passage of constitutional amendments     
to (a) outlaw abortion, (b) allow prayer in public schools, (c) require a 
balanced federal budget, and (rf) giant a President the power to veto     
individual items in appropriation bills.                                  
DEMOCRATS REGAIN CONTROL OF THE SENATE                                    
During the first six years of his administration. Reagan enjoyed the      
support of a Republican-controlled Senate. In the 1986 congressional      
elections, the Democrats won 20 of the 34 senatorial contests, thereby    
increasing their representation from 47 to 55 seats and wresting control  
of the Senate from the Republicans. They also strengthened their hold     
on the House. When the 100th Congress convened in January, 1987,          
the Democrats occupied a majority of the seats in both houses.            
FOREIGN DEVELOPMENTS                                                      
1. Grain Agreement With U.S.S.R. Reagan lifted the embargo on             
grain shipments to the Soviet Union that Carter had imposed in 1979       
after the Russians invaded Afghanistan. He claimed that the embargo       
had hurt American farmers but had not harmed the Russians, since the      
latter could obtain all the grain they needed from Canada, Argentina,     
and other sources. In 1983 Reagan negotiated anew, five-year agreement    
with the U.S.S.R. for the purchase of American grain. It stipulated that  
the United Slates would not embargo grain shipments during the life       
of the pact.                                                              
2. Korean Airline Massacre. When a South Korean passenger plane,          
en route from Alaska to Seoul, flew off course over Soviet territory, a   
Russian fighter jet shot it down (1983). All 269 on board, including 61   
Americans, died when the airliner plunged into the Sea of Japan. I he     
tragedy aroused a storm of criticism around the world. In a nationally    
televised speech, Reagan denounced the Soviet Union for what he called    
"the Korean Airline Massacre.” Congress unanimously adopted a reso-       
lution condemning “this cold-blooded attack” as “one of the most          
infamous and reprehensible acts in history.”                              
