 NATION                                                                   
                                                              OF NATIONS  
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                             A NARRATIVE  
                                                                 HISTORY  
                                                OF THE AMERICAN REPUBLIC  
 VOLUME II: SINCE 1865                                                    
                                                     james west DAVIDSON  
                                                      WILLIAM E. GIENAPP  
                                              Tlie University nf Wyoming  
                                                 CHRISTINE LEIGH HEYRMAN  
                                                    lliandeis University  
                                                           MARK H. LYTLE  
                                                            Hard College  
                                                        MICHAEL B. SJOFF  
                                        Tlie University of Texas, Austin  
                                                                          
McGRAW-HILL PUBLISHING COMANY                                            
New York St. Louis San Francisco Auckland Bogota Caracas Hamburg Lisbon  
London Madrid Mexico Milan Montreal New Delhi Oklahoma City Paris        
San Juan Sao Paulo Singapore Sydney Tokyo Toronto                        
The Statue of Liberty has now stood watch over New York harbor for more than a             
hundred years. In that time the tired, poor, huddled masses of immigrants who              
passed beneath her torch have become, to late-twentieth-century Americans,                 
anonymous parts of a continuing stream, stretching back in the mind’s eye to the           
English Pilgrims, the French fur traders along the St. Lawrence, and the Spanish           
friars of Old California. But the nineteenth-century stream of immigrants arriving         
at Ellis Island was different from the large majority of those who had traveled to         
America in an earlier age. Innovations in transportation, communications, and              
industry created an international network that made possible for the first time            
voluntary migration on a massive scale.                                                    
Before 1820 substantial numbers of people had moved to North and South                     
America, but for the great majority the choice had hardly been voluntary. Perhaps          
7.8 million Africans were brought to the Americas during those years, virtually all        
as slaves. That number was four to five times the number of Europeans who came             
during the same period. In contrast, between 1820 and 1920 nearly 30 million free          
immigrants arrived from Europe.                                                            
 Nor was this Hood directed only toward America. At least as many Europeans               
 left their homelands for other regions of Europe or the world. While millions of         
 immigrants were taking trains across the American plains in search of jobs and           
 homesteads, millions more from eastern Europe followed the Trans-Siberian Rail-          
 way (completed in 1905) into Asiatic Russia. The Canadian prairie provinces of           
               Manitoba and Saskatchewan competed for homesteaders                        
               with Montana and the Dakotas. And when cowboys                             
               began driving American steers to newly built railheads                     
               for shipment east, gauchos across the pampas ol western                    
               Argentina were rounding up cattle to be shipped to Bue-                    
               nos Aires. Before 1900 two out of three emigrating Ital-                   
               ians booked passage not for the United States but for                      
               Brazil and Argentina.                                                      
               This broad movement could not have taken place                              
               without a widening global network of communication,                         
               markets, and transportation. Some of the effects of the                     
               industrial transformation had been felt well before the                     
Europe was a primary recruiting ground. In the late nineteenth century pov-                
erty, oppression, and mechanization conspired to push Europeans from farms into            
cities and finally off the continent entirely. Meanwhile, economic opportunity             
pulled them to America. The Labor Contract Law, repealed in 1885. allowed                  
prospective employers to recruit laborers abroad, pay their passage, then deduct           
the cost from their wages. Industrialists were among the most aggressive recruit-          
ers, advertising in newspapers, distributing pamphlets, and sending agents to              
Europe. When iron workers arrived in the United States from Sweden in the                  
1880s, they often knew only three words of English: "Charlie---Deere---Moline              
(Charlie being the president of the John Deere Plow Company in Moline, Illi-               
nois). ■                                                                                   
An unprecedented wave of immigration flooded American shores. Over 8                       
million people arrived between 1870 and 1890, another 14 million by 1914. East-            
ern and southern Europe, where mechanized agriculture ami religious persecu-               
tion simultaneously took hold, replaced northern and western Europe as the chief           
sources of immigration. Most of the new arrivals settled in industrial cities. Often       
unskilled, many of them peasants, they went to work in factories and mines or on           
construction and road gangs. In at least 21 major manufacturing or mining indus-           
tries two out of every three employees were new immigrants from eastern and                
southern Europe or African-Americans from the South.                                       
To get those jobs they relied on well-defined networks of friends and rela-                
tives, together with a new breed of labor brokers. Tough and savvy immigrants              
themselves, these contractors met newcomers at the dock, promising work and                
serving as a funnel to the new world. For their trouble they took a healthy cut of         
the immigrants’ wages and overcharged them for goods. Among Italians they were             
known as “padrones,” and by the end of the nineteenth century they controlled              
two-thirds of the labor in New York.,                                                      
Following such prescribed paths tended to concentrate one group or another                 
within certain industries or at specific jobs/Poles, Slavs, and Italians began to fill     
the mines of Pennsylvania; Greeks worked in the textile mills of New England. In           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
 1880                                              1920                                   
one Pittsburgh steel mill, Serbians clustered in the blooming mill, Poles in the   
hammer shop. Russian and Polish Jews, skilled tailors and seamstresses in the old  
country, went into needle trades of New York. But whatever they did, hard-         
pressed immigrants were willing to accept less pay and put in more hours than      
those they replaced. "Immigrants work for almost nothing, complained one na-       
tive-born laborer, "and seem to be able to live on wind---something which I        
cannot do.^                                                                        
At the same time a massive migration of rural Americans---some 11 million          
between 1865 and 1920---provided a source of home-grown labor for industrial       
cities. Driven from the farm by machines and bad times or just following dreams of 
a new life, they moved first to small and then perhaps to larger cities. Unlike the
vast majority of immigrants, they could often read and write English. At the very  
least they could speak the language and understand American ways. In iron and      
steel cities as well as coal-mining towns, they sometimes commanded better in-     
dustrial jobs or served as supervisors and foreman. More often they lacked the     
skills for higher paying work. If they could get them, they found jobs instead in  
retail stores or offices and slowly entered the new urban middle class of white-   
collar workers.                                                                    
Unless, of course, they were black. Most African-Americans continued to            
work the cotton fields of the South, but a small number, nearly 300,000, moved to  
northern cities between 1870 and 1910. Like the new immigrants, they sought to     
escape discrimination and find jobs. Unlike many of those immigrants, few blacks   
returned home. More often they stayed in the industrial cities and brought their   
families, one by one. They failed to escape discrimination but did find work---    
usually in low-paying jobs as day laborers and janitors or laundresses and domestic
servants. By 1890 only 7 percent of all black men worked in industry.              
The development of an industrial labor force extracted high human costs. The       
daily work rhythms of a European peasant, a black field hand, and a midwestern     
fanner were quite different from the 12-hour shifts of a Pittsburgh steelworker or 
a woman plucking tobacco from cigarette-rolling machines in North Carolina.        
Monotonous, alienating, and difficult, such work was as dangerous as it was dehu-  
manizing. In the last third of the nineteenth century the United States had the    
highest rate of industrial accidents in the world, another component in the emer-  
ging industrial orderr'Labor would pay dearly for economic progress.               
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
At the center of the new industrial systems were the railroads, helping to spread  
communications networks, efficiently moving freight, reinventing time. Steel rails 
even redefined the geography of America. Unlike canals, which ran only between     
bodies of water, railroads could move goods and raw materials wherever track was   
laid. Under their impact the commercial axis of the nation shifted from New York   
and New Orleans, with its heavy reliance on river and coastal shipping, to New     
York and Chicago. Railroads also stimulated economic growth, simply because        
they required so many resources to get things built. By the 1850s they furnished   
the largest single market in the country for iron and devoured large quantities of 
W. Taylor, who revolutionized working conditions in the steel industry. Taylor        
was obsessed with efficiency. As a boy. he had invented the overhand pitch to         
deliver a baseball with new speed and precision. In steel plants during the 1870s     
and 1880s, he undertook careful time-and-motion studies of workers movements,         
set up standard procedures, and offered pay incentives to those who surpassed his     
production quotas. In a famous application of his theories, he designed 15 orc        
shovels, each for a separate task to be performed in a specific way, so that 140 men  
were able to do what had previously required a crew of (MM). The company cut its      
costs in half, and the remaining shovelers got a raise. By the early twentieth        
century “Taylorism had become a full-blown philosophy, complete with its own          
professional society. “Management engineers' prescribed routines from which           
workers could not vary. Work itself was thus separated from the planning of work,     
and labor was managed as yet another part of an integrated system.                    
For all the high ideals of Taylorism, ordinary' workers refused to perforin as        
simple cogs. Many European immigrants, accustomed to celebrating numerous             
saints' holidays, continued to take those days off, regardless of factory* work rules.
{The Greek Orthodox church had more than 80 festivals a year, while Polish            
weddings lasted as long as five days.) When the pressure of six-day weeks became      
too stilling, workers look an unauthorized “blue Monday off. Often they simply        
walked oft the job, took another “greenhorn opening in another industry, or           
packed up and moved to a new city. Come spring and warm weather, the turnover         
in factories rose significantly, just as it decreased in the fall. At the turn of the 
century, factories reported turnover rates of more than KM) percent in the course     
of a year. That meant that the Armour meat-packing plant in Chicago, for exam-        
ple, had to hire 8000 new workers in 1914 just to stay fully s tatted.x               
Workers who stayed on the job earned low wages, before 1900, an unskilled             
laborer could expect between $1.25 and $1.50 for 10 hours of work, a skilled one      
perhaps twice that amount. It took about $600 to make ends meet, but most             
manufacturing workers made just under $500 a year. Native white Americans             
tended to earn more than immigrants, those who spoke English more than those          
who did not, men more than women, and all others more than African-Americans          
and Asians. By 1900, some 1.7 million children worked in factories and fields,        
more than double the number 30 years earlier. On average, their paychecks were        
three times smaller than those of adult males. Parents often had no choice but to     
send their children to work. As one union leader observed of coal miners, “Abso-      
lute necessity' compels the father in many instances to take the child into the mine  
to assist him in winning bread for the family .                                       
Women worked outside the home too. Farm women had always labored on                   
the family homestead, but by 1870 one out of every four nonagricultural workers       
was female. In general they earned one-quarter of what men did. Nearly all were       
single and young, anywhere from their mid-teens to their mid-twenties. Most           
lived in boarding houses or at home with their parents, where they usually con-       
tributed their wages to the family kitty. Once married, they took on a life of        
full-time housework and child rearing.                                                
Only' 5 percent of married women held paying jobs in 1900. That figure can            
he misleading, since home-bound women who needed money earned it by in-               
creasing their housework with extra laundry or sewing or by taking in boarders.       
And industrialization inevitably pushed women out of the traditional domestic         
women’s sphere and into new jobs. The census of 1890 listed 369 occupations in        
America. Women worked in all but nineAMainly they had jobs considered exten-          
kissed the little ones, flattered the mothers, and took the fathers around the cor-   
ner for a quick drink. Then it was hack to the clubhouse, where he promised some      
constituents a subscription for a new church bell. He bought tickets for an excur-    
sion of parishioners and a baseball game between two teams in his district. Before    
leaving, he told two dozen pushcart peddlers he would visit the precinct station in   
the morning to register their complaints of police harassment. He arrived at a        
Jewish wedding reception at hall past ten (having already sent the bride “a hand-     
some wedding present") and finally got to bed at midnight.                            
Such relentless exertion helped to make Plunkitt a fortune. Bom to Irish              
immigrant parents in a shantytown called "Nanny Goat Hill" on Manhattan's             
Upper West Side, he died a millionaire in 1924 at the age of 82. His pluck and        
practicality would have made him the envy of the most successful industrialists.      
Like the Carnegies and Rockefellers, his rise from butcher boy to political boss      
was fueled by fierce ambition. City politics was his way out of the slums in a world  
that otherwise favored the rich, the educated, ami the well established.              
In the late nineteenth century the needs of rapidly growing cities and the            
people who lived in them gave political bosses like George Washington Plunkitt        
their chance. I seen my opportunities and I took ’em,” Plunkitt used to say.          
Every city building contract, every tax assessment, municipal bond issue, and         
rental on city property, every franchise and charter lor a new business offered       
Plunkitt and his cronies an opportunity for lining their pockets with kickbacks,      
payoffs, and profits made from inside knowledge of city projects. This was "boo-      
dle,’ or honest graft (not to be confused with "black" graft, which came from vice    
and extortion). In Plunkitt s world boodle was the just reward for public service     
that normally paid so little.                                                         
How much boodle bosses collected depended on how successfully their orga-             
nization controlled municipal politics. Control, in turn, hinged on electing the      
right officials, or as Plunkitt would have said, "turning out the vote. In the end,   
this whole system hung on the personal loyalty of bosses to immigrants and immi-      
grants to bosses. 1'hat explains why Plunkitt spent so much time catering to his      
constituents. "When a poor man comes . . . for help," said one city boss, "we         
don t make one of those damned fool investigations like these city charities. No. by  
God, we fill his belly and warm his back and vote him our way.”                       
Plunkitt s New York was the first great cits in history to be ruled by num of         
the people in an organized and continuing fashion. Bosses and their henchmen          
came from the streets and saloons, the slums and tenements, the firehouses and        
funeral homes. More remarkable still, their families had only recently arrived in     
America. Usually bosses were immigrants or their children. Most remarkable of         
all. other great cities were rifled by them too. W hile the Irish of Tammany Hall     
ran New York. Germans governed in St. Louis, Scandinavians in Minneapolis, and        
Jews in San Francisco. In the late nineteenth century, the golden door of opportu-    
nity opened onto the city.                                                            
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
The modern city was the product of industrialization. The vast systems of commu-     
nication and transportation, of manufacturing, marketing, and finance, of labor      
and management converged in the industrial city-. Gities contained the great in-     
vestment banks, the smoky mills and dings' sweatshops, the spreading railroad     
yards, the tenements and mansions, the new department stores and skyscrapers.     
They drew people like magnets from places as far away as Lincoln, Nebraska, and   
Minsk in Russia. By the end of (he nineteenth century industrial cities had come  
of age. America---once an agrarian republic---was becoming urban, with tens of    
millions of “urbanites,” an urban landscape, and a growing urban culture.         
The Urban Explosion                                                               
"We cannot all live in cities, reformer Horace Greeley lamented just after the    
Civil War, "yet nearly all seemed determined to do so. . . . Hot and cold water,  
baker s bread, gas. the theater, and the streetcars . . . indicate the tendency of
modem taste. The city had all the household conveniences, temples of entertain-   
ment. and newfangled transports imaginable---and more: the best stores, the best  
restaurants, the best schools, the best newspapers, and virtually every museum,   
library, art gallery, bookshop. and orchestra. The city housed (he delights of the
age and most of the opportunity. Promising wages high enough to buy this good     
life cities beckoned native-born Americans and a generation of immigrants to      
realize their dreams of success*.                                                 
During the 50 years after the Civil War, world population rose by about 50        
percent. The population of the United States quadrupled---from 23 million to 92   
million. Yet the number of people living in American cities increased nearly sev-  
enfold. The census of 1870 defined a city as containing 8000 people or more. Ten   
years earlier, only one American in six qualified as a city dweller; in 1870 one in
four did; in 1900. one in three. By 1910 nearly half the nation was urban.         
Densely populated Europe and Asia boasted only a few cities of a million or        
more. In America giants sprouted overnight. Chicago (which rose from a swamp)      
had only 30,000 people in 1850, but it approached the million mark by 1890,        
making it the fastest growing metropolis in the world. So confident were city      
lathers of continued expansion that they laid new streetcar lines far into open    
cornfields. Just two American cities contained populations of over 500,000 at the  
outbreak of the Civil War. There were six when the century turned. Three---New     
York, Chicago, and Philadelphia---had more than a million each.                    
Cities grew in every region of the country, some faster than others. The           
Northeast and upper Midwest, where industrialization took hold earliest, were far  
more urban than the West and the South, although big cities could be found in      
those regions as well. Atlanta and Nashville (later Louisville, Memphis, Dallas,   
and Houston) boomed under the influence of railroads. In Birmingham, a steel       
town founded in Alabama in 1871, one early resident recalled that “property        
changed hands four or five times a day during the real estate craze of the 1880s.  
Los Angeles had barely 6000 people in 1870. By 1900 it was the second largest city 
on the Pacific coast with a population of 100,000 and a set of nearby “satellite"  
towns, including Azusa (named, said its founders, “from A to Z in the USA!”).      
Size alone does not make a modern city. Without efficient ways of moving           
people and tying diverse functions together, without the means to control re-      
sources and capital, no settlement, however large, can perform as an organic,      
integrated unit, the mark of a modern metropolis. In the United States, the dy-    
namic instruments of industry and commerce, along with striking advances in        
urban technology, helped to transform swelling towns into modern metropolises.     
Some cities became famous for their main product: Milwaukee for beer, Tulsa for    
oil, Houston for railroad cars, and Hershey, Pennsylvania, for chocolate. The      
giants continued to diversify. New York, the nation’s banker, printer, and com-    
mercial center, also produced clothing and cigars. Chicago became the leading      
butcher, packer, and granary and by 1870 began to move into steelmaking.           
The Great Global Migration                                                         
In the nineteenth century the world was moving to town. By some estimates 60       
million people left farms and villages for cities between 1820 and 1920. Every-    
where in Europe the forces of change pushed people oft the land. After the mid-    
1820s and the end of the destructive Napoleonic Wars a cycle of baby booms         
continued at 20-year intervals for the rest of the century. Improved diet and      
sanitation, abetted by Louis Pasteur’s pathbreaking discovery that bacteria cause  
infection and disease, reduced deaths. The population of Europe doubled be-        
tween 1750 and 1850. Meanwhile the use of machinery enhanced productivity but      
cut the need for agricultural labor. In 1896 it took one man in a wheat field to do
the work 18 had done just 60 years earlier.                                        
Surplus farm workers became a ragtag army ol rural migrants. Pushed from           
the land by machines, they were pulled by machines into the great industrial cities
of Europe. The prospect of good pay and shorter hours drew them to urban factor-   
ies. The young especially saw their fortunes in the city. In America those who     
stayed behind agonized as they watched their towns being robbed ol the future.     
Frightened and envious, they shared Thomas Jefferson’s view of cities as “ulcers       
on the body politic.” The result was a voluminous literature of urban fear with        
sensational titles like The Spider and the Fly; or, Tricks, Traps, and Pitfalls of City
Life by One Who Knows (1873) and Metropolitan Life Unveiled; or the Mysteries          
and Miseries of America's Great Cities (1882). No doubt their vivid pictures and       
splashy accounts seduced as many breathless readers as they repelled. By 1910 a        
third of all city duellers had come from the American country side.                    
Another quarter came from overseas, the crest of a tidal wave of immigration           
that began to hit American shores in (he mid-1880s. Until then most immigrants         
had come from northern and western Europe---first the English. Scotch, Dutch,          
and French in the eighteenth century, then Germans, Scandinavians, and Irish in        
the mid-nineteenth century . Beginning in the 1880s “new immigrants with swar-         
thier faces appeared from southern and eastern Europe. Some were fleeing politi-       
cal and religious persecution. The assassination of Czar Alexander II in 1881          
brought a resurgence of aiiti>Seinitic pogroms in Russia. Polish and Russian Jews      
escaped by the tens of thousands from their “shtetls,” or villages, into crowded       
European cities and then on to the new “Promised Land across the Atlantic.             
Others left to evade diseases like cholera, which swept across southern Italy in       
1887. But most came for the same reasons as migrants from the American country -       
side---a job, more money, a fresh start.                                               
Ambitious, hardy, and resourceful, immigrants found themselves tested at               
every step of their journey. They were uprooted from old ways and old friends.         
Most left mothers and fathers, brothers and sisters, wives and children behind. In     
many cases it was too expensive* to bring relatives along, at least on the first trip  
(the price one-way was about $50 in 1901). Wayfarers often stole across heavily        
guarded borders, sometimes on foot, sometimes by train. They traveled for weeks        
to reach a port like Le Havre in France* or Bremen in Germany. If they could find      
no lodgings, they slept in the streets. At dockside, shipping lines vaccinated. dis-   
infected, and examined them to ensure against their Iwing returned at company                     
expense* (by 1907. some 40.(KM) emigrants had been rejected at Liverpool alone).                  
It took from one to two weeks to cross the Atlantic. Immigrants spe nt most of                    
that time below decks in “steerage compartments one passenger described as “a                     
kind ol hell that cleanses a man of his sins lx?fore coming to the land of Columbus.              
When they finally reached America (the main receiving station opened in 1892 on                   
Ellis Island in New York's harbor), they still had to pass a dreaded medical exami-               
nation that weeded out the physically and mentally unfit. No wonder the immi-                     
grant s arrival was. in the words of the hero of an immigrant novel. The Rise of                  
Dai id l^vinskif (1917). “like a second birth to him. Imagine a new-born babe in                  
fjossession of a fully developed intellect. Would it ever forget its entry into the               
world? Neither does the immigrant forget his entry into a country which is, to                    
him, a new world in the profoundest sense.                                                        
Immigrants arrived in staggering numbers---over 6.3 million between 1877                          
and 1890. some 30 million by 1920. In 1907 alone, 1.2 million landed. By the turn                 
of the century immigrants made up nearly 15 percent of the population. Most                       
newcomers were young, between the ages of 15 and 40. They usually came from                       
farms and tiny hamlets. Few spoke English, had skills, or had much education.                     
They worshiped mainly in Catholic. Greek, or Russian Orthodox churches and                        
Jewish synagogues. Almost two-thirds were men. a large number of whom came                        
solely to make money for buying land or starting businesses back home. Some                       
changed their minds and sent for relatives to join them, but returnees were com-                  
mon enough to have a name---“birds of passage. For every 100 eastern and                          
southern Europeans who arrived between 1908 and 1910, 44 went back.                               
Jews were the singular exception. Over half came from cities and had l>een                        
tailors, merchants, and artisans in Europe. Almost all stayed and brought their                   
families with them. There was little else they could do. As one Jewish immigrant                  
wrote ol his Russian homeland, “Am 1 not despised? Am I not urged to leave? . . .                 
Do I not rise daily with the fear lest the hungry mob attack me?                                  
The Immigrant in the City                                                                         
When they put into port, the first thing newcomers were likely to see was a                       
city---perhaps Boston, New York, or later Galveston, Texas. Enough of them trav-                  
eled inland so that by the tuni of the century three-quarters of the residents of                 
Minnesota and Wisconsin and nearly two-thirds of Utah had at least one foreign-                   
born parent.* Most immigrants, worn by physical and financial exhaustion, settled                 
in cities, no matter where they came from. Even Italians, Slavs, and Greeks whose                 
families had farmed for generations looked to cities for quick money.                             
f riends or labor contractors or just the drift of people speaking familiar                       
tongues drew them to specific neighborhoods. Immigrants usually clustered to-                     
gether on the basis of their villages or provinces, reflecting old world habits and               
prejudices. In America Greeks from Athens still considered Spartans ignorant and                  
belligerent. while* Spartans found Athenians effete and decadent. Sometimes it                    
seemed that only mutual mistrust of Sicilians united northern Italians with those                 
from the central provinces. New York contained no "Little Italy but distinct                      
groups of Italians---Neapolitans and Calabrians in the Mulberry Bend district.                    
* Mormons serving as missionaries in Europe and Great Britain especially swelled I'tabs population
with converts.                                                                                    
Genoese on Baxter Street, northerners west of Broadway and on Sixty-ninth             
Street. Wherever they ended up. Jews tended to settle according to the regions in     
which they had lived in Europe.                                                       
Cities developed a well-defined mosaic of ethnic communities, but these               
neighborhoods were constan tly in flux. As many as half the residents moved every     
10 years, often to better quarters. More recent arrivals from Italy, Russia, and the  
Balkans replaced earlier ones from Ireland and Germany. Despite popular per-          
ceptions, no other group of immigrants lived like the Chinese in urban ghettos        
composed exclusively of one nationality SRacial prejudice forced the Chinese to-      
gether, and local ordinances kept them from buying their way out. Though one          
nationality usually dominated a neighborhood, there was always a sprinkling of        
Poles, Slavs, or Greeks in Italian and Jewish areas and vice versa.                   
Ethnic communities served both as refuges h orn the strangeness of American           
society and springboards to a new life. In their neighborhoods immigrants could       
find comrades who spoke their native tongue and theaters that performed national      
plays and music, even as they were assaulted everywhere by a new language and         
culture. Familiar foods, sometimes prepared at ethnic restaurants like the Ger-       
man Luchow’s or the Italian Mamma Leone’s, competed with expensive American           
fare whose consumption was a sign of status and acceptance. The Jewish Daily          
Forward and scores of other foreign-language newspapers reported events from          
the homeland but also gave eager readers profiles of local leaders, advice on vot-    
ing, and tips on adjusting to life in America. Organizations such as the Hebrew       
Immigrant Aid Society, the Polish National Alliance, and the Society lor the Pro-     
tection ol Italian Immigrants furnished fellowship and assistance, usually in the     
newcomers native languages. They also fostered assimilation by sponsoring base-       
ball teams, insurance programs, libraries, and English classes.                       
Houses ol worship were always at the center ol immigrant life. They often             
catered to the practices of individual tow ns or provinces; yet occasionally they cast
off orthodoxy' under the cultural pressure of American experience. With Irish         
priests dominating the American Catholic church many immigrants formed new            
churches with priests from their homelands. Eastern European Jews began to            
break the old proscription against sitting next to their wives and daughters in       
synagogues, and the Orthodox churches of Armenians, Syrians, Rumanians, and           
Serbians gradually lost their national identifications.                               
Immigrants worked in factories, in the construction and needle trades, or as          
common laborers on the street. Their backgrounds and cultural values influenced       
the kinds of jobs they took. Italians, for example, were committed to family above    
individual success and were wary of children who did better than their parents. All   
but one ol the nearly 500 bootblacks in New York in 1894 were Italian. Because        
Chinese men did not (eel washing or ironing was women’s work, more than 7500          
of them could be found in San Francisco laundries by 1880. Sew ing ladies* gar-       
ments seemed unmanly to many native-born Americans but not to Russian and             
Italian tailors. Slavs tended to be the most physically robust ol the new' immigrants 
and valued steady income over education. They pulled their children out of            
school, sent them to work, and worked themselves in the mines for better pay          
tlian in factories^                                                                   
On the whole, immigrants married later and had more children than the                 
native-born. Greeks and eastern European Jews prearranged marriages according         
to tradition. They imported “picture brides, betrothed by mail and often from the     
same village as their prospective husbands. After marriage men ruled the house-       
hold, but women managed it. Although child-rearing practices varied, immigrants       
resisted the relative permissiveness of American parents. Youngsters were ex-         
pected to contribute, like little adults, to the welfare of the family. Caught be-    
tween the past and the present, immigrants clung to tradition and assimilated         
slowly. Children adjusted more quickly, despite heart-rending clashes with their      
elders. They soon spoke English like natives, married whomever they pleased,          
and worked their way out of old neighborhoods^,                                       
\<                                                                                    
The Shape of Cities                                                                   
Cities of the late nineteenth century' still exhibited the ringed residential pattern 
that had emerged in the old “walking cities” earlier in the century. In those days    
the professional and upper classes had lived within walking distance of their oilices 
and shops in the city center. As the middle and upper classes moved outward from      
an increasingly industrial core, the poor, some immigrants, blacks, and lower-class   
laborers filled the inner void. They took over old factories and brownstones, shan-   
ties and cellars; they crammed themselves into dank tenements; and by sheer           
weight of numbers they transformed these areas into the slums of the central city.    
Curled around the slums was the “zone of emergence,’ an income-graded                 
band of those on their way up----second-generation city dwellers, factory workers,    
skilled laborers, and professional mechanics---living in progressively better tene-   
ments and neater row houses. Their residents had escaped poverty but could still      
slip back in hard times. Farther out was the suburban fringe, home to the white-      
collar managers and executives, who lived in larger houses on individual lots.        
With income determining residence, cities developed a concentric and frag-            
mented look. Yet for all their differences, the circles of settlement held together as
a part of a massive and interdependent whole.                                         
Urban Transport                                                                       
One reason cities remained whole was urban transportation. In the middle of the       
nineteenth century' the horse-drawn railway had begun conveying people, some          
35 million people a year in New York and 6.5 million in Boston. The railways          
problems were legendary: so slow', a person could w alk faster; so crowded (accord-   
ing to Mark Twain), you “had to hang on by your eyelashes and your toenails ; so      
dirty, thousands of tons of smelly horse manure were left in their wake every day .   
Civic leaders came to understand that the modern city could not grow, much            
lesS survive, without improved transportation. One far-fetched scheme---trolley       
cars pulled by steam-driven cables up the steep hills of San Francisco---worked       
well enough so that Chicago, Seattle, and several other cities installed similar      
systems in the 1880s. Cable lines and steam locomotives were elevated on trestles     
high above crowded streets in New York and Chicago. New York completed the            
first elevated line in 1870. By the early 1880s its lines were hauling 175,(MX) pas-  
sengers a day. The system spread to Kansas City, Chicago, and other large cities      
that could afford it. None of the breakthroughs quite did the trick. Cables re-       
mained slow and unreliable; “els’ were dirty, ugly, and noisy.                        
It took electricity to rescue city travelers. In 1888 Frank Julian Sprague, a         
naval engineer who had once worked for Edison, installed the first electric trolley   
line, a 12-mile stretch of track in Richmond, Virginia, with overhead wires to        
power 40 cars. The ingenious Sprague also designed a multiple-unit system of          
control that permitted individual cars to be powered, lighted, and braked inde-       
The political machine lx>re a striking resemblance to the corporation. Like a         
corporate executive, the boss looked on politics as a profession and treated it as a  
business. His office might be a saloon, a funeral home, or, as in the case of ’George 
Washington Plunkitt, a shoeshine stand. His managers were party activists, ar-        
ranged in a hierarchy with local committeemen reporting to district captains,         
captains to district leaders, and district leaders to the boss or bosses who ran the  
machine. Like a businessman, the boss sought to harmonize the competition or          
destroy it. His machinery was power and money, his workers, the party hacks; his      
consumers, the voting public.                                                         
I'hc stock and trade of the machine was simple: a Christmas turkey, a load of         
coal for the winter, flowers for the sick, legal assistance and help with the authori-
ties. "I think that there’s got to be in every ward somebody that any bloke can       
come to---no matter what he’s done---and gel help, said Boston ward leader            
Martin Lomasney. Help, you understand; none of your late and justice, but             
help. Bosses sponsored fun too---ball teams, glee clubs, torchlight parades, ward     
balls, and joy rides up the river with bands playing and drink flowing, even nurs-    
ing bottles for the tiny ones. “You can’t do nothin* with the people, said W illiam   
Devery after organizing a joyride up the Hudson Kiver for 10*000 of his New York      
constituents, “unless you do somethin for ’em.5*                                      
This crude welfare system not only won votes for machine-sponsored candi-             
dates; it also served as a form of public philanthropy .a Private charities proved    
unable to cope with the crush of urban despair. By helping people, bosses also        
offered a path for advancement to the least privileged and a method of Americani-     
zation for the most foreign. To the unskilled, the boss doled out jobs in public-     
construction. For bright, ambitious young men. he had places in city offices or in    
the party itself. These represented the first steps into the middle class. Help came  
in more basic forms loo---English-language classes, guidance at the polls, speedy     
naturalization---which began to turn foreigners into grateful citizens.               
It was votes that bosses really wanted. They went lo almost any lengths to gel        
them. William Tweed, whose ring ruled New York briefly in the 1860s and 1870s,        
streamlined the process of naturalization. His ward leaders filled out applications   
for citizenship, then had judges running for reelection sign them----up lo KMX) a     
day. Even day KMX) new Americans became 1(MM> new supporters of Boss Twet'd.          
“Little Bob Davies of Jersey City was adept at mobilizing the “graveyard vote.        
He drew names from tombstones to pad lists of registered voters and hired “re-        
peaters’’ to vote under the phony names. Democratic boss “I I inky Dink Krnna of      
Chicago’s First Ward liked to get his fraudulent names from the Hospital lor the      
Insane at Dunning. Dunning inmates, he said, were more astute than Bcpiiblican        
voters.                                                                               
When reformers introduced the Australian (secret) ballot in the late 1880s to         
prevent fraud, bosses pulled the “Tasmanian dodge, premarking the election            
ticket to assure the vote went their way. Failing that, they dumped whole ballot      
boxes into the river or drove unpersuaded voters from the polls with gangs of         
barroom thugs. In an age when men alone had the right to vote, the most fearsome      
election day terrorists were women hired to intimidate opponents voters: Euchre       
Kate Burns, the champion female heavyweight brick hurler of New York. Battle          
Annie, the ferocious leader of the Battle Bow Ladies Social and Athletic Club; and    
Hell-Cat Maggie, who filed her front teeth to points and wore long artificial nails   
of brass. When she went tearing through the* polls, nails clawing and teeth flash-    
ing, even the bravest citizen fled.-"*                                                
Why did bosses go to such lengths? Some, like “Honest Ed Flynn of the                
Bronx, simply loved the game of politics. More often bosses loved money. Their       
ability to get it was limited only by their ingenuity or the occasional success of an
outraged reformer. The record lor brassiness must go to Boss Tweed. During a         
reign of barely a d5z.cn years. TXveed bilked New York City out of millions of       
dollars. His masterpiece of graft was a chunky three-story courthouse in lower       
Manhattan originally budgeted at $250,000. When Tweed was through, the city          
had spent over $13 million---and the building was still not finished. Each window,   
consisting of a wooden frame, glass, and a small awning, was worth $12.50; each      
cost the city $8000. For carpeting valued at $13,000, the bill came to $350,000.     
Tlie New York Times estimated that 65 percent of the total went back to the Tweed    
King Tweed died in prison, but with such profits to be made, it is no wonder that    
Imsscs rivaled the pharaohs of ancient Egypt as builders.                            
In their fashion bosses played a vital role in the industrial city. Rising from      
the ranks of those they governed, they guided immigrants into American life and      
helped some of the underprivileged escape poverty. They forged a massive con-        
struction program that changed the urban landscape. Most of all they modernized      
city government by uniting it and making it perform. Choosing the aldermen,          
municipal judges, mayors, and administrative officials, bosses exerted new control   
that allowed them to provide the contracts and franchises needed to run cities.      
The price was often outrageous Inflated taxes, extorted revenue, unpunished          
vice and crime were only the obvious costs. A woman whose* family enjoyed            
Plunkitt s Christmas turkey might be widowed by an accident to her husband in a      
sweatshop kept open by timely bribes. Filthy buildings might claim her children,     
as corrupt inspectors ignored flagrant violations. Buying votes and selling favors,  
bosses turned democracy into a petty business---as much a “business, said            
Plunkitt, “as the grocery or dry -goods or the drug business^                        
The Social Conscience of the City                                                    
Vrbau blight and the condition of the poor, particularly the immigrant poor, in-     
spired social as well as political activism, especially within the churches. Some    
ministers told their middle-class flocks that poverty resulted from weak character   
and a lack of morality. Others, like the popular Congregationalist minister Josiah   
Strong, simply concluded the city was “a menace to society Along with a host of      
anxious economists and social workers, these church leaders blamed the trouble       
on new immigrants and urged restrictions on their entry. In the 1880s and 1890s      
nativist organizations like the American Protective Association and the Immigra-     
tion Restriction League attacked Catholics and other non-Protestant newcomers.       
In 1897 the first bill requiring literacy tests to reduce immigration passed Con-    
gress, but President Grover Cleveland vetoed itx                                     
Other clergymen took their missions to the shims, bridging the distance be-          
tween the middle class and the poor. They became the social conscience of the        
city beginning in 1870 Dwight Lyman Moody, 300-ponnd former shoe salesman,           
joined gospel singer and organist Ira David Sankey to win armies of lowly converts   
with revivals in Boston. Chicago, and other cities. Evangelists helped to found      
American branches of the British Young Men’s Christian Association and the Sal-      
vation Army. By the end of the century the Salvation Army had grown to 700 corps     
stalled by some 3000 officers. They ministered to the needy with food, music,        
shelter, and simple camaraderie^                                                     
A small group of ministers rejected the old ethos that personal guilt explained    
sin and turned to a new "Social Gospel. "JI hey believed individual salvation would
come through the betterment of society, not the other way around .'flu- influential
Congregationalist minister Washington Gladden in Applied Christianity (1886)       
and other books spread the word that the church was responsible for performing     
good social works. Souls could be saved only if the Ixidies that contained them    
were first well led, housed, and clothed. Charles 1.. Sheldon, a minister from     
Topeka, Kansas, asked readers of his best seller hi His Steps (1896) to follow the 
lead of the charitable citizens of the fictitious town of Raymond. When confronted 
with the social ills of poverty, drunkenness, and slum life they asked themselves, 
"What would Jesus do? Houses of worship, such as William Rainford’s St.            
Georges Episcopal Church in New York, became centers of social activity with       
boys' clubs ami gymnasiums, libraries, glee clubs, and industrial training pro-    
grams.                                                                             
Church-sponsored programs often repelled the immigrant poor, who saw               
them as thinly disguised missionary efforts. Immigrants and other slum dwellers    
were more receptive to a bold new experiment called the settlement house. An       
agency of social reform imported from Great Britain (w hich had begun to grapple   
with the problems of the industrial city earlier in the century), the American     
settlement house first appeared on the Lower East Side of New York in 1886.        
Situated in the worst shuns, these early community centers were run by middle-     
class women and men to help the poor and foreign-bom. At the turn of the century    
there were over 100 of them, the most famous being Jane Addams' Hull House in       
Chicago (1889). In 1898 the Catholic church sponsored its first settlement house in 
New York, and in 1900 Bronson House opened in Los Angeles to aid the Hispanic       
community.-                                                                         
High purposes moved settlement workers. Leaving comfortable middle-class            
homes, they moved into the settlement houses. They dedicated themselves (like       
the "early Christians,” said one) to sen ice and sacrifice. They sought to teach new
immigrants American ways and to create a community spirit that would foster         
"right living through social relations. Like political Itosses. they helped, provid-
ing everything from day nurseries to playgrounds and libraries. Armed with statis-  
tics and personal experiences, they also entered the world of politics, lobbying for
social legislation to regulate tenement housing, the working conditions of w omen,  
and the improvement of schools.                                                     
As they set about their work, settlement workers never lost sight of practical-     
ity or the humanity of their clients. Immigrants were to be made American, but      
they were also to be encouraged to preserve their heritages through festivals,      
parades, and museums. If the blight of the cities could be ended, decency, crea-    
tivity, and wholesomeness would go a long wayi “The delicious sensation to be       
found in a swimming pool," Jane Addams wrote, would doubtless outweigh the          
temptation “to play craps in a foul and stuffy alley.”                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
Settlement workers and other middle-class reformers offered Americans a star-       
tling look at the underside ol the city, but a grand view of life at the top was    
available to anybody who strolled along Nob Hill in San Francisco, the North        
Shore ol Lake Michigan near Chicago, or the Main Line outside Philadelphia. In      
New York, architect Richard Morris Hunt and the firm of McKim, Mead & White         
transformed Filth Avenue into the most spectacular residential showplace in the     
country. William H. Vanderbilt’s $11 million mansion on the comer of Fifty-First    
Street was actually three palaces under one roof. Just down Fifth Avenue was his    
grandfather’s mansion, a limestone replica of a French chateau.                     
Few' saw the insides with their gold walls, carvings, and Renaissance tapes-        
tries, their staircases and ceilings (in some cases ripped from medieval castles and
shipped across the Atlantic). No matter---new, mass circulation newspapers gave     
anybody who wanted it a peek at the socially prominent. Before the Civil War.       
James Gordon Bennett, publisher of the New York Herald, pioneered journalistic      
voy eurism with lurid tales of w hat w ent on behind the potted palms at fancy dress
balls. By the 1880s most newspapers had society pages. The upper crust of New       
York was a prime topic even in small cities like Mobile, Alabama. In 1889 its local 
paper devoted almost an entire issue to the 282 marriageable ladies of the Social   
Register, complete with their personal and financial assets. Luder the guise of     
“news, high-toned city life invaded even the provinces of America.                  
The Urban Middle Class at Home                                                      
Between the top and the bottom stretched the vast and ill-defined middle of urban   
society---educated professionals, white-collar clerks and salesmen, shopkeepers.    
serious impact until after the Civil War. As late as 1870 hall the children in the   
country received no formal education at all. The average citizen had taken only      
four years ol classes, and one in live Americans could not read. Then a great        
educational awakening occurred, as business required better educated workers         
and the number of compulsory state-supported school systems grew.                    
Attendance in public schools mon' than doubled between 1870 and 1900. The            
length of the school term rose from 132 to 111 days. Illiteracy fell by half. At the 
turn of the century, nearly all the states outside the South had enacted compulsory  
education laws. Almost three out of every four school-age children were enrolled.    
Yet an ordinary' adult still had attended for only about live years, and less than 10
percent of those eligible ever went to high school.                                  
The average school day started early, but by noon most girls were released           
(the assumption being they required less formal education than Ixjys). Curricula     
stressed fundamentals---reading, writing, and arithmetic---but courses in manual     
training, science, and phy sical education were added as the demand for technical    
knowledge grew and opportunities to exercise shrank. In the classroom teachers       
had absolute control. Students learned by rote, sitting in silent study with hands   
clasped or standing erect while they recited phrases and sums. “Don’t stop to        
think, barked a Chicago teacher to a class of terrified youngsters in the 1890s,     
“tell me what you know!’                                                             
A rigid social philosophy underlay the harsh discipline. In an age of industri-      
alization, massive immigration, and rapid change, school curricula taught confor-    
mity and values as much as simple facts and figures. Teachers were supposed to be    
drillmasters, hammering their charges into shape for the sake of society. “Teachers  
and books,’” wrote New Jersey' College Professor John I . Hurt in 1879. "are better  
security than handcuffs and policemen. In McGuffey's Reader, a standard text-        
book used in grammar schools throughout the nineteenth century, students             
learned not only how to read but also how to behave. Hard work, Christian ethics,    
and obedience to authority would lead boys to heroic command, girls to blissful      
motherhood, and society to harmonious progress.                                      
African-American students had to deal with the special problems ol discrimi-         
nation and segregation. As the federal commitment to Reconstruction faded, so        
did the impressive start made in public education for blacks. Yet they' were so      
eager for education that by the end of the century' nearly half ol black America     
could read. It was a remarkable achievement, for most of the first generation of     
former slaves had been illiterate. Worse still, for nearly 100 years after the Civil 
War, the doctrine of “separate but equal, " finally upheld by the Supreme Court in   
I’lcs.si/1. Ferguson (1896), kept black and white students apart but scarcely equal. 
By 1882 public schools in a half dozen southern states were segregated by law. the   
rest by practice. Underfunded and ill-equipped, serving dirt-poor families whose     
every member had to work, all-black schools drew only about a third of the South’s   
black children.                                                                      
Like African-Americans, many immigrants saw' education as a way of getting           
ahead, while some educators saw it as a means ol Americanizing immigrants.           
"Education, declared a New York principal, "will solve every problem of our          
national life, including that of assimilating our foreign element. Few public        
schools paid special attention to immigrants. Educators assumed that immigrant       
and native-born children would learn the same lessons and turn out the same way.     
But toward the end of the century’, as immigration mounted, eastern cities began     
to offer night classes in English anil civics lor foreigners. When public education  
proved inadequate or failed to address their needs, immigrants established their     
own schools. Catholics. for example, started an elaborate expansion of their paro-   
chial schools in 1884 Public or private, the education of immigrants served the      
same purpose: teaching fundamentals while promoting citizenship through whole-       
some values. The first step in civilization, wrote Father Paul Tymkevich of the      
Greek Catholic church, “is to acquire good habits, and where can they acquire        
them? Ou the streets? In the saloons?"                                               
School was obviously the place, and by the 1880s educational reforms were            
already promoting "good habits and marketable skills. A number of reforms came       
from Germany, already a center of innovation. Opened first in St. Louis in 1873,     
American versions of "kindergartens” put four- to six-year-olds in orderly class-    
rooms while parents went off to work. "Normal or teacher-training schools multi-     
plied, so that in 1900 almost one teacher in five had a professional degree. Science 
and manual training supplemented more conventional curricula. Such vocational        
studies supplied industry with better educated workers and also helped to control    
them by reducing union influence over apprenticeship. By 1890, 36 cities had         
vocational high schools.                                                             
College Years                                                                        
Increasingly colleges served the urban industrial society, not by controlling inass  
habits but by providing a corps of leaders and managers. Early in the nineteenth     
century, most Americans had regarded higher learning as effete and irrelevant. Of    
the few who sought higher education, many preferred the superior universities of     
Europe to those in the United States. As American society became more orga-          
nized, mechanized, and complex, the need for professional, technical, and literary   
skills brought greater respect for what colleges could teach. The Morrill Act of     
1862 generated a dozen new state colleges and universities, eight mechanical and     
agricultural colleges, and six black colleges.                                       
^Private philanthropy added more. In 1873 Johns Hopkins, who had acquired            
part of his fortune from ownership of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, be-           
queathed $7 million to found the university that lane his name. John D. Rockefel-    
ler reestablished the University of Chicago (1890), while railroad baron Leland      
Stanford endowed Stanford University (1891) with $24 million. The number of          
colleges and universities nearly doubled between 1870 and 1910. Their enroll-        
ments swelled to a third of a million. At that time the 16 universities of France had
40,000 students, a figure that roughly’ equaled the number of faculty of American    
institutions.                                                                        
The "college man enjoyed new respect as universities flourished. Small-              
town boys and girls admired him and children’s novels like Frank Merriwell al        
Yale celebrated his exploits. No longer depicted as a wastrel or bookworm, he was    
now informed and virile. The upper middle class had a new ideal---the educated       
rogue in a ribbed turtleneck sweater. At his side, the envy of all to see, was a new 
phenomenon---the "co-ed." Before the Civil War women could attend only three         
private colleges. After the war they' had new ones for themselves, among them        
Smith (1871), Wellesley (1875), and Bryn Mawr (1885). Many land-grant colleges,      
chartered to serve all people, admitted women from the start. By 1910 some 40        
percent of college students were women, almost double the 1870 figure. Only one      
college in five refused to accept them.                                              
Potent myths continued to make college life hard for women. As Dr. Edward            
Clarke of the Harvard Medical School told thousands of students in Sex in Eiluca-    
In 1862 the Central Pacific won from Congress the     
opportunity to build the western link of the trans-   
continental railroad eastward from San Francisco.     
To the I nion Pacific Corporation fell the right to   
construct the section from Omaha westward. But        
the real money in this and other ventures lay not so  
much in the revenues from passengers and freight,     
but from generous loans and gifts of federal and      
state lands. For every mile of track completed, the   
rail companies received twenty sections of land in    
the states along the route and forty sections per     
mile in the territories. (One section equaled 6,400   
acres or ten square miles.) By the time the Central   
and Union Pacific railroads were completed, they      
had received some 45 million acres. Fraudulent        
stock practices, corrupt accounting, and wholesale    
bribery (with the complicity of the vice-president    
anti at least two members of Congress) enabled the    
promoters to earn large profits.                      
General Grenville Dodge, an army engineer             
on leave to the Union Pacific, recognized that the    
immense labor force needed to build the railroad      
might be recruited cheaply from the mass of Irish     
and other European immigrants. He drove his           
workers with ruthless army discipline, completing     
as much as ten miles of track in a single day.        
Charles Crocker had no similar source of cheap        
labor in California lor the Central Pacific, since the
gold rush era had passed. Worse yet, he faced the     
formidable task of forging a route through the Si-    
erra Nevadas When his partner Leland Stanford         
suggested imported Chinese labor, Crocker dis-        
missed him with a laugh---at first. But it was some   
10,000 Chinese lalxirers (‘ the Asiatic Contingent    
of the the Grand Army of Civilization,” one ob-       
server dubbed them) who accomplished the daunt-       
ing task. With wheelbarrows, picks, shovels, and      
baskets they advanced eastward, building trestles     
like the one at Secrettown (left) and chipping away   
at the steep Sierras’ looming granite walls. On the   
worst stretches they averaged only eight inches a     
day.                                                  
Once the Chinese crews had broken into the            
flat country' of the desert basin, the two railroads  
raced to claim as much federal land as possible.      
Labor bosses pushed their men with blatant ap-        
peals to racism. In the resulting scramble, the two   
sides passed each other, laying over two hundred      
miles of parallel track before the government or-     
dered them to join al Promontory' Point, Utah, in     
new Civil Service Act. anti reduced the federal surplus by beginning construction   
of a modem navy. Such even-handed administration left him little chance for         
renomination from party leaders. Hall-Breeds regarded him as a Stalwart, Stal-      
warts as a renegade. Arthur could never have accepted anyway; he was dying and      
knew it.                                                                            
The election of 1884 was. in the words of a contemporary, the "vilest" ever         
waged. It pitted Half-Breed Senator James Blaine, the beloved Plumed Knight         
from Maine, against Democrat Grover Cleveland, the former mayor of Buffalo and      
governor of New York. Despite superb talents as a leader and vote-getter, Blaine    
was haunted by renewed charges that he helped to secure illegal favors for the      
Little Rock and Fort Smith Railroad. "Grover the Good, on the other hand, had       
won a well-deserved reputation for honesty by lighting corruption and the spoils    
system in New York. The diligent and portly Cleveland, sighed a reporter, ' re-     
mains within doors constantly, eats and works, eats and works, and works and        
eats. Unfortunately Cleveland, a bachelor, spent enough time away from work to      
father an illegitimate child. "Above all, tell the truth, he instructed his campaign
managers, when the scandal broke, whereupon Republicans throughout the coun-        
try broke into a chant of "Ma, ma, where's my pa?" In the last week of the tight    
race, Democrats circulated among the numerous Irish-Catholic voters of New          
York the statement of a local Protestant minister that labeled Democrats the party  
of “Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion" (alcohol. Catholicism, and the Civil War).        
Most of tire Irish who had been tempted to support Blaine returned to the Demo-     
cratic fold and New York swung to Cleveland. When Cleveland won the election        
(by a mere 25.000 out of 10 million votes). Democrats told Republicans where to     
find the bachelor father: "Gone to the White House, ha. ha. ha!”                    
form a united Canada Province. At the time of the American Civil War the Canadi-    
ans were prepared lor a peaceful separation from England and the creation of an     
independent Canada.                                                                 
The continuing interest of American expansionists in the territory to the           
north also spurred the British to redefine Canada's status. In 1866 Congress had    
put financial pressure on Canada by cutting back on the amount of free trade and    
fishing privileges that had been negotiated between the two countries. With         
enough pressure, the expansionists in Congress speculated, Canadians hurt by the    
loss of American markets might favor annexation. In addition, neither President     
Andrew Johnson nor Ulysses S. Grant made any attempt to stop raids into Canada      
conducted periodically by the Irish Fenian Brotherhood. Canadians correctly sus-    
pected that annexation was the price the United States would extract for calling off
the Irish. At the same time, the United States made extraordinary demands on        
Britain to pay indemnities for damages caused by Confederate raiding vessels built  
in England. The only way Britain could repay those damages, proponents in Con-      
gress recognized, was to cede Canada to the United States.                          
But in 1867 Britain cased the discontent in Canada over its colonial status by      
adopting the British North America Act, which organized Ontario, Quebec, New        
Brunswick, and Nova Scotia into a single confederation possessing greater power     
for self-government and an independent foreign policy. Under the Anglo-Ameri-       
can Treaty signed in 1871 the United States settled its claims for compensation.    
Canada, like the United States, experienced increasing immigration from Europe      
and expansion into its western plains. By 1871 Manitoba and British Columbia had    
both achieved provincial status, comparable to American statehood. Even though      
disputes erupted between the United States and the new Canadian government          
over questions of boundaries, fishing rights, seal hunting, and tariffs, most Ameri-
cans decided that it was more profitable to trade with Canada than to annex it.     
Mexico                                                                              
Mexico posed possibilities and problems of a different sort. During the Civil War,  
France’s new emperor, Napoleon III, had occupied Mexico City with a French          
army and soon after established a puppet monarchy under Austria-Hungary ’s          
Archduke Maximilian, now Emperor Maximilian of Mexico. Only French bayo-            
nets kept the ineffectual Maximilian in power. Once the distractions of the Civil   
War eased, the United States made increasingly menacing noises about the new        
regime. Napoleon III quickly realized that social unrest in Mexico, coupled with    
the threat of invasion by' the bat tie-hardened Union army, rendered his North      
American ambitions chancy at best. As soon as he withdrew Iris troops, the puppet   
government fell and Maximilian was executed by Mexican partisans.                   
Freedom from the French did not bring stability' to Mexico or free it from the      
designs of diehard American continentalists. These included a group of veteran      
army officers who had suddenly found themselves without any wars to fight, Texas    
Bangers who coveted Mexican cattle and grazing lands, and a number of political     
opportunists. If a border war could be provoked, these schemers reasoned, tire      
officers would have new commands, the Rangers could legally- steal Mexican stock,   
and Texas would gain new lands to govern. Commercial and business interests,        
however, opposed such schemes. They preferred friendly economic ties with the       
new regime of Porfirio Diaz to the uncertainties of war and the conquest of a       
potentially hostile people. In 1881 Secretary of State James G. Blaine laid con-    
tinentalism to rest forever. The United States had no territorial designs whatso-       
ever in Mexico, he announced. It sought only the opportunity to invest its “large       
accumulation of capital. ”                                                              
William Henry Seward                                                                    
No one did more to initiate the idea of a "New Empire" for the United States than       
William Henry Seward. Possessed of “a slouching, slender figure,” as Henry              
Adams once described him, Seward had “a head like a macaw; a beaked nose,               
shaggy eyebrows; unorderly hair and clothes; hoarse voice; offhand manner; free         
talk and perpetual cigar. As secretary of state under Lincoln and Andrew John-          
son, his skillful diplomacy' averted direct European interference in the Civil War,     
and the breadth of his intellect and vision led him to drcam drcams beyond those        
of most politicians. Though his own efforts to shape a new American empire ran          
into opposition in Congress, he glimpsed the course American expansion would            
take over the next 40 years.                                                            
Seward rested his expansionist policies on what he perceived as two central             
political laws. The first, based on his reading of history, was that "empire has, for   
the last three thousand years . . . made its way constantly westward . . . until        
the tides of the renewed and decaying civilizations of the world meet on the shores     
of the Pacific Ocean. In his view, the surge of industrialization had only acceler-     
ated that pace of westward movement. Seward thus concluded that the United              
States needed to be prepared to win the great battles among the commercial              
nations for supremacy7 in the Far East. His second maxim underscored how that           
battle should be won; the great empires of the future, he believed, would be            
commercial, not military. "The nation that draws the most materials and provi-          
sions from the earth, and fabricates the most, and sells the most of productions and    
fabrics to foreign nations, must be, and will be, the great power of the earth.         
Thus the American empire would not require colonies. Rather the United States           
asked only lor unrestricted access to Asian markets on nondiscriminating terms.         
That idea formed the basis of the “open-door” concept, which guided both British        
and American Far Eastern policy.                                                        
Seward assiduously pursued American links to Japan, Korea, and China. For               
him, a transcontinental railroad served to tie eastern factories to western ports       
and, from there, to the western Pacific. His diplomatic efforts led to the Burlin-      
game Treaty of 1868, which made it possible for the railroads to recruit Chinese        
labor to build the western half of the first transcontinental line. For similar- reasons
Seward pressed for the construction of a canal across the Central American isth-        
mus. And though he opposed direct colonialism in Asia, he advocated that the            
United States acquire a string of Pacific island colonies, protectorates, or naval      
stations, through which the United States could defend a canal and the sea lanes to     
China.                                                                                  
Seward s dreams of opening the Far East to American commerce bore little                
fruit in his lifetime. Chinese society and Chinese markets remained for the most        
part tightly closed to American penetration, as the Singer Sewing Company s             
difficulties demonstrated. Moreover, the shabby treatment of the Chinese in Cali-       
fornia, compounded by the insulting restrictions placed on Asian immigrants in          
1882, aggravated Sino-Ameriean relations. The efforts of American missionaries          
often aroused antiforeign resentment among Chinese nationalists. W hat access           
Americans had to the China market was largely the result of British determination       
to prevent other powers from further carving China into exclusive spheres.              
market. In 1886 they granted the United States naval rights to Pearl Harbor.        
Finding themselves hopelessly outmaneuvered, the British could only ask the         
Americans to keep the islands neutral and trade open to all nations.                
The McKinley Tariff of 1890 changed matters dramatically, however, by re-           
moving sugar from the list of exempt items. Hawaiian planters recognized that if    
the islands were annexed, the tariffs would no longer apply to them. Unfortu-       
nately for their cause, in 1891 Queen Liliuokalani brought to the throne a national-
ist rule much less sympathetic to American ways. As a nationalist, she firmly       
believed that Hawaii should remain in the hands of its native peoples. And as a     
monarchist, she firmly believed those hands should be hers, and not those of        
planter interests dominating a constitutional legislature. So the sugar planters    
began plotting and in January 1893 staged a revolt. Their success was conveniently  
assured when the American minister to Hawaii, John Stevens, ordered ashore          
sailors of the U.S.S. Boston on the pretense of protecting Americans. Faced with    
heavily armed opposition, the queen capitulated, leaving a commission of plant-     
ers, four American and one British, in control.                                     
While Stevens had acted without direct orders from Washington, President            
Harrison and Secretary of State Blaine supported his efforts. On his own initiative 
he also recognized the new government, placed it under the protection of the        
United States, and urged President Harrison to annex the islands, though the        
native Hawaiians had given no indication they desired to become Americans.          
Eager to preempt any British designs, Harrison signed an annexation treaty with     
the American-dominated commission from Hawaii.                                      
in China, the Russians clearly had imperial designs on Manchuria. And the more      
they learned about the czar’s government, the more Americans objected to its        
repressive policies and its secret police. They were shocked to learn about the     
horrors of exile in the Siberian labor camps. But no issue did more to arouse       
American popular opposition to the czarist government than anti-Semitism. Offi-     
cial Russian policy restricted Russian Jews to an area of settlement in eastern     
Poland and western Russia called the Pale. Other laws limited Jewish educational    
and economic opportunities. Young Jewish men at the age of 12 faced over 30         
years of forced military service. When revolutionaries assassinated Czar Alexander  
11 in 1881, a bad situation became worse. The government condoned pogroms that      
for the next 30 years led to the beating and killing of Jews, the looting of shops, 
and illegal confiscation of property.                                               
In the 1880s the population of the United States included only 250,000 Jews,        
mostly of German extraction. Their vocal protests, however, aroused the sympa-      
thies of other Americans as well as the State Department, which interceded when     
the pogroms affected American Jews traveling or living in Russia. On other occa-    
sions the State Department reminded the Russian government of the American          
commitment to religious freedom. The Russians replied that since the United         
States did not see fit to treat its minorities equally, the principle should not be 
binding on Russia either.                                                           
By the 1890s the pogroms had turned Jewish immigration to the United                
States from a trickle to a torrent. American Jewish leaders and humanitarians       
became more insistent that the government take some action to curtail Russian       
anti-Semitism. At first John Hay and President Theodore Roosevelt (who suc-         
ceeded McKinley in 1901) refused. "What possible advantage would it be ... to       
the Jews of Russia, if we should make a protest against these fiendish cruelties and
be told it’s none of our business?’ Hay asked Jewish financier Jacob Schiff .       
Insistent public protest led the politically shrewd Roosevelt in this case to let   
domestic concerns reverse his support for nonintervention. He agreed to forward     
apetition to the Russian government, which the Russians refused to accept. All      
the same, the United States had taken an important step. An ideological principle   
rather than a material interest had influenced American relations with Russia. Il   
anything, American protests worsened the treatment of Russian Jews and cer-         
tainly aggravated Russian-American relations. Roosevelt, however, reaped politi-    
cal benefits from a grateful American Jewish community. Jewish leaders, in turn,    
had demonstrated that influential pressure groups could affect the course of Amer-  
ican foreign policy.                                                                
Diverging Interests                                                                 
By the 1890s Russian and American economic interests had begun to diverge as        
well. As the United States came to work more closely with Britain, both powers      
began to regard Russia as a threat to the open door in China. Manchuria, a Chi-     
The drive for social justice reflected the optimistic, tolerant impulses of progres-    
sivism; the pursuit of social “welfare” for the masses, its paternalistic instincts. But
more than a few progressives feared they were losing their country to aliens,           
ethnics, and city low-lifes. To maintain control they sometimes went beyond their       
basic strategy of education and sought restrictive laws to uplift and refashion the     
behavior of the masses. In doing so, the progressive custodians of culture some-        
times allied themselves with more traditional evangelical Protestants.                  
To such uneasy reformers, cities seemed the place where sin flourished: races           
jostling uneasily, strange Old World cultures clashing with "all-American cus-          
toms. long Chinese pigtails or Hasidic Jewish sidelocks lending a discordant air to     
city crowds; saloons and dance halls luring youngsters and impoverishing laborers;      
prostitutes walking the streets; vulgar vaudeville shows and motion pictures pan-       
dering to uneducated audiences. The city challenged reformers possessed of Prot-        
estant, middle-class values to convert this riot of diverse customs and ways into a     
homogeneous society conceived in their own image.                                       
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
Stemming the Immigrant Tide                                                             
During the late nineteenth century, racism in the form of Jim Crow laws restricted      
the social and economic opportunities of blacks in the South, but that region was       
hardly the only area where discrimination flourished. Asians. Hispanics, and Indi-      
ans faced similar restrictions in the West, as did “new” immigrants from southern       
and eastern Europe in the North. By 1900 more than 10 million Americans out of          
a total population ol nearly 80 million had been born in Europe. Another 26             
million had foreign-born parents, largely from Mediterranean and Slavic coun-           
tries. Under these conditions a new science called "eugenics” quickly lent respect-     
ability to ideas popular among “older stock middle-class Americans that the new-        
comers were biologically inferior. By 1914 more magazine articles discussed             
eugenics than slums, tenements, and living standards combined. Eugen icists,            
who advocated selective breeding for human improvement, believed that heredity          
determined everything. “Observe immigrants," wrote sociologist Edward A. Ross           
in 1912; "you are struck by the fact that from ten to twenty percent are hirsute,       
low-browed, big-faced persons of obviously low mentality. . . . They clearly' be-       
long in skins, in wattled huts at the close of the Ice Age.”                            
For some old-line Americans, assimilation was not only undesirable---it was             
impossible. “What can you expect of the Americanism of a man whose breath               
always reeks of garlic?” sneered a member of the Daughters of the American              
Revolution. Middle-class urban reformers, despairing over the link between im-          
migrants and political machines, reduced immigrant voting power by increasing           
residency requirements. In many states only native-born and fully naturalized           
citizens could vote. Madison Grant, a Park Avenue patrician and amateur zoolo-          
gist, helped to popularize the notion that the “lesser breeds’ threatened to “mon-      
grelize" America. In The Passing of the Great Race (1916) Grant warned that “race       
suicide ’ threatened the United States. Mixing with inferior immigrants, he ar-         
gued, “gives us a race reverting to the more ancient, generalized and lower type.       
More enlightened reformers such as Jane Addams stressed the “gifts' imini-              
grants brought to their adopted culture: folk dances, music, handicrafts, and of   
course exotic foods. With characteristic paternalism, reformers hoped to “Ameri-   
canize” the foreign-born (the term was newly coined), especially through educa-    
tion. Peter Roberts, a progressive educator, developed a lesson plan for the Young 
Men's Christian Association that taught immigrants to dress, tip, buy groceries,   
and vote. In Milwaukee factories English was taught so immigrant workers could     
read safety signs. But some lessons were far from practical. In 1916 burly men who 
labored by day could be found nightly in Cleveland schools copying T am a yellow   
bird. 1 can sing. I can fly.”                                                      
Progressive reformers revealed their intolerant side as they sought an end to      
unrestricted entry for immigrants. Here, too, they employed organization, inves-   
tigation, education, and legislation. Active since the 1890s, the Immigration Re-  
striction League pressed Congress in 1907 to require a literacy test for admission 
into the United States. Instead the Senate appointed the Dillingham Commission     
to study the matter. Despite evidence that no correlation existed between the new  
immigrantsand feeble-mindedness, crime, epilepsy, or tuberculosis, the commis-     
sion's 42-volume report concluded that unlimited immigration created unmanage-     
able social problems. The commission endorsed a literacy test to stem the tide. To 
the delight of many ethnic groups. Presidents Taft and Wilson vetoed it in 1913    
and 1915. Congress nonetheless overrode Wilson’s second veto in 1917.              
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
The Curse of Demon Rum                                                             
Tied closely to concern over immigrants was an attack on saloons. Part of a broader
effort to clean up cities, the antisaloon campaign also drew strength from the     
century-old crusade to ban alcohol. By 1900 the danger seemed greater than ever.   
Consumption had increased to over two gallons a year per person. By 1909 there     
was one saloon for every 300 city dwellers. Over half the population of Boston and 
Chicago visited a bar at least once a day. In inner cities, immigrants and the     
working-class poor made up most of the clientele.                                  
Whether drinkers or teetotalers, progressives or conservatives, reformers          
agreed that saloons were the societal equivalent of “a nest of rats. Taverns and   
social clubs seemed to be at the center of a host of social problems---gambling and
prostitution, political corruption, drug trafficking, unemployment, and poverty.   
Few temperance reformers recognized the complex cycle of social decay that pro-    
duced such problems, fewer still the important social role played by saloons as    
"workingmen’s clubs." The saloon was often the only place to cash a check, borrow  
money, find out about jobs, eat a cheap meal, take a bath, or sit with a group of  
friends.                                                                           
Led by the Anti-Saloon League, reformers concentrated efforts to prohibit          
the sale of alcohol at local and state levels. A massive publicity campaign bom-   
barded citizens with pamphlets and advertisements. Doctors cited scientific evi-   
dence linking alcohol to cirrhosis, heart disease, insanity, and other serious ill-
nesses. Social workers connected drink to the deterioration of the family;         
employers, with accidents on the job and lost efficiency. By 1917 three out of four
Americans lived in dry counties, and nearly two-thirds of the states had adopted   
laws that outlawed the manufacture and sale of alcohol, to stop profiteering from  
human pain and corruption (most reformers considered a ban on drinking unreal-     
istic and intrusive).                                                              
Bolshevik party to power in Russia, and in December his lieutenant, Leon Trot-       
sky, opened peace negotiations with Germany in the Polish city of Brest-Litovsk.     
While Russia lapsed into civil war, Germany transferred a million soldiers to the    
western front in preparation for the spring offensive. A dispirited Allied army      
settled in for another cold winter. “We will wait," said a French commander, "for    
the tanks and the Americans.                                                         
“You’re in the Army Now”                                                             
Many Americans went to war assuming their role wotdd he limited to economic          
and military aid. “Congress, a prominent senator had declared in mid-April 1917.     
“will not permit American soldiers to be sent to Europe." The Allies desperate       
plight forced the General Stall of the Army into a crash program for sending a       
million men to Europe by the spring of 1918. To raise such a fighting force.         
Congress passed the Selective Service Act in May 1917. Feelings about the draft      
ran from strong opposition to enthusiastic support. "There is precious little differ-
ence,” protested Democratic House Speaker "Champ Clark in 1917, “between a           
conscript and a convict, Progressives were more inclined to see military service     
as an opportunity to overcome class antagonisms in America: “Universal [military]    
training will jumble the boys of America all together. . . . smashing all the petty  
class distinctions that now divide, and prompting a brand of real democracy.         
After local draft boards opened their doors, 24 million men registered. Al-          
most 3 million Americans were drafted; another 2 million volunteered. Most were      
white, and all were young, between the ages of 21 and 31. Several thousand           
women served as clerks, telephone operators, and nurses. But there were people       
who opposed the war and military' service. A handful ol tenant farmers, blacks,      
and Indians in two Oklahoma counties protested in the "Green Com Rebellion.          
Official reports put the number of draft evaders at 300,000, though many more        
went unreported. Others, including some 4000 conscientious objectors, simply         
requested exemptions.                                                                
Most of the 2 million American troops who landed in Europe looked forward            
to service. "Here was our one great chance for excitement and risk.” wrote a         
volunteer later. “We could not afford to pass it up. In a nation of immigrants,      
nearly one draftee in five had been bom in another country. Training often aimed     
at educating and Americanizing ethnic recruits. In special "development battal-      
ions drill sergents barked out orders while volunteers from the YMCA taught          
American history and English. Not all camps sought assimilation. "We are not in      
this war to make American citizens,” read a stall report, “we are in to win the      
war. At Camp Gordon in Georgia, Italians and Slavs drilled full-time in two          
distinct units. Commanders spoke their languages; chefs cooked them Italian and      
Slavic dishes; and no one bothered with Americanization.                             
African-Americans volunteered in disproportionately high nuinl>ers and               
quickly filled the four rigidly segregated Regular Army and eight National Guard     
units that already existed for them. White officers commanded almost every one.      
A training program at Fort Des Moines graduated a single class of 639 black          
officers, all below field rank and all assigned to one experimental division---      
controlled by whites. Historically barred from skilled trades and often too poor to  
support their families, blacks failed to get exemptions at the same rate as whites   
They made up about 10 percent of the population but 13 percent of the draftees.      
Only one in live sent to France actually saw combat (compared to two of every        
three whites). Southern Democrats had opposed training African-Americans to          
“welfare capitalism” of the 1920s, in which employers used profit-sharing, com-       
pany unions, and personnel departments to forestall worker discontent.                
During the war, personnel management was not enough to guarantee indus-               
trial peace In 1917 American workers called 4450 strikes, the most in American        
history. To keep factories running smoothly, President Wilson created the Na-         
tional War Labor Board (NWLB) early in 1918. The NWLB arbitrated over 1000            
labor disputes, helped to increase wages and decrease hours, and established          
overtime pay. In return for pledges not to strike, it .guaranteed the rights of unions
to organize and bargain collectively. NWLB examiners oversaw elections for shop       
committees in the steel industry, long impervious to unionization. When the           
Smith and Wesson arms plant in Springfield, Massachusetts, and the Western            
Union telegraph company discriminated against union employees, the govern-            
ment commandeered both firms.                                                         
Given such sympathetic federal support, organized labor grew. President               
Samuel Gompers of the American Federation of Labor (AFL), the nation’s largest        
union, represented labor on Wilson’s National Defense Council and later on the        
War Labor Board. Membership in the AFL increased from 2.7 million members             
in 1916 to nearly 4 million in 1919. On Armistice Day Gompers complained that         
labor had yet to achieve all the gains it needed. What rights had been won.           
Gompers justifiably feared, would end with peace.                                     
War work sparked massive internal migrations of labor to meet shortages as            
the war choked oil immigration from abroad and the draft depleted manpower at         
home. Factory owners scoured the country for a fresh labor supply. Industrial         
cities, no matter how small, soon swelled with newcomers. Between 1917 and            
1920, some 100,000 Mexicans crossed the border into Texas, California, New            
Mexico, and Arizona. Some Mexican-Americans left segregated barrios in the            
West for northern war plants. Most worked ou farms and ranches, freed from            
military service by the deferment of all agricultural labor.                          
Northern labor agents limned out across the South to recruit young blacks.            
African-American newspapers like the Chicago Defender summoned them north             
to the “Land of Hope. “I beg you, my brother, to leave the benighted land             
urged one editor. “Get out of the South. Over the war years more than 400,000         
migrated to the booming industrial centers of the North. The number ol African-       
Americans in Chicago more than doubled. In Cleveland it quadrupled; in Detroit        
it jumped sixfold. Towns like Hattiesburg, Mississippi, were decimated by the         
drain. Finally, under pressure from southern politicians, the U.S. Employment         
Service suspended its program to assist blacks moving north.                          
Largely unskilled and semiskilled, blacks took factory jobs in the steel mills of     
Pennsylvania, the war plants of Massachusetts, and the brickyards of New Jersey.      
Mostly rural backgrounds left them unprepared for life in the city. The new arriv-    
als, noted one magazine, were often “crowded into dark rooms, . . . shivering         
with the cold from which they do not know how to protect themselves.’ The             
Urban League and other voluntary organizations tried to meet the housing short-       
age, but the basic problems---high rents and low wages---remained unresolved.         
W. E. B. Du Bois and other African-American leaders urged their followers             
to “forget our special grievances and close our ranks shoulder to shoulder with our   
own white fellow citizens. ” So they did, deferring dreams of equality and material   
gain until the war was over. In France, where 200,000 blacks served, only 42,000      
saw combat. Four regiments of the all-black 93rd Division, brigaded with the          
French army, were among the first Americans in the trenches and among the most        
Propaganda and Civil Liberties                                                        
'Once lead this people into war. President Wilson said before American entry          
into the conflict, “and they'll forget there ever was such a thing as tolerance.      
Americans did succumb to a ruthless hysteria during World War I, but they had         
help. Intense prewar opposition to American participation coupled with pressing       
fears over public apathy led the president to create the Committee on Public          
Information (CPI), headed by George Creel, a California newspaperman. Sur-            
rounding himself with old inuckrakers such as Ida Tarbell and Ray Stannard            
Baker. Creel launched what he called “a fight for the minds of men. for the ‘con-     
quest of their convictions." The CPI mobilized artists to design colorful war post-   
ers, including James Flagg’s famous "I Want You for the U.S. Army. It distrib-        
uted 75 million pamphlets, issued 60(X) press releases, and sponsored war             
expositions attended by 10 million people in two dozen cities.                        
Initially committed to a simple faith in the fact, the CPI soon developed             
into the most powerful propaganda mill the nation had ever known. An army of          
Four-Minute Men. 75,000 fast-talking orators, invaded movie theaters, lodge           
halls, schools, and churches to keep patriotism at “white heat with lour minutes      
of war tirades. The CPI organized “Loyalty’ Leagues” in ethnic communities and        
sponsored parades and rallies, including a much-publicized immigrant “pilgrim-        
age” to the birthplace of George Washington. Such propaganda often worked.            
People whose anthem had been the pacifist song “I Didn’t Raise My Boy to Be a         
Soldier were singing George M. Cohan's patriotic “Over There six months later.        
The line between patriotic appeal and intolerance proved impossible to main-          
tain. Overly enthusiastic parents enlisted their five-year-olds in paramilitary clubs 
like the “Khaki Babes. ’’ As war hysteria mounted, volunteerism blossomed into an     
orgy of “100-pereent Americanism. Immigrants, aliens, radicals, and pacifists         
came under suspicion as a coercive urge to conformity took hold. German-Ameri-        
cans naturally became special targets. Local influenza epidemics were blamed on       
German spies contaminating water supplies. In Iowa the governor made it a crime       
to speak German in public. Hamburgers were renamed "Salisbury steak", Ger-            
man measles, “liberty measles. In April 1918 a mob outside of St. Louis seized        
Robert Praeger. a naturalized German-American who had tried to enlist in the          
navy, bound him in an American flag, and lynched him. After deliberating for 25       
minutes a jury found the leaders not guilty.                                          
In 1917 Congress gave hysteria more legal bite. The Espionage Act provided            
$10,(XX) fines ami 20-year sentences for anyone convicted of obstructing military     
operations (including recruitment), aiding the enemy, or mailing treasonous mate-     
rial. In 1918 the Sedition Act outlawed in one broad stroke “any disloyal, prolane,   
scurrilous, or abusive language about the form of government of the United            
States, or the Constitution of the United States, or the (lag of the United States, or
the uniform of the Army or Navy. " Under these acts. 1500 citizens were arrested      
lor offenses including denouncing the draft, criticizing the Red Cross, and com-      
plaining about taxes. Opponents of the war. especially radical groups, suffered       
most. The Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), a militant labor union centered      
in western states, saw the war as a battle among capitalists and threatened to strike 
mining and lumber companies in an anti-war protest. In September 1917 federal         
agents raided the Chicago headquarters of I he IWW---familiar ly known as the         
“Wobblies”---seized membership lists and office equipment, and arrested 113 ol        
its leaders in the name of patriotism. The crusade succeeded in destroying the        
union.                                                                                
country, country folk could be mean-spirited and intolerant in return. They could   
draw support from their allies---rural migrants to cities and an embattled Protes-  
tant elite. All were determined to defend the older order against the modern age.   
                                                                                    
Nativism and Restriction of Immigration                                             
In May 1920 Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, two Italian aliens and admit-     
ted anarchists, were indicted for a shoe company robber)' and murder in South       
Braintree, Massachusetts. Most of the evidence linking them to the crime was        
circumstantial. In July 1921, after a jury found them guilty. Judge Webster Thayer  
sentenced them to death. For the next six years they appealed the decision. Each    
time Thayer denied their motions, even when a Bhode Island gang member con-         
fessed to the crime.                                                                
The case, seemingly a straightforward robber)’ and murder, became one of            
the most celebrated of the decade. Critics charged that Sacco and Vanzetti were     
innocent, convicted only lor being foreign-born radicals. Whatever the merits of    
their ease, the two never received a fair hearing, Testimony at their trial often   
focused on their anarchist beliefs, draft evasion, and foreign birth. Thayer himself
had called them "anarchist bastards' in private. When a special commission in-      
cluding the presidents of Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology     
denied clemency, the forces of upper-class respectability seemed aligned against    
them. For protesters around the world, Sacco and Vanzetti were symbols of big-      
otry and prejudice. In August 1927, when they were executed, 50,000 marchers        
wearing red armbands followed the funeral procession for eight miles to bid a final 
farewell.                                                                           
By then, nativism---a rabid hostility to foreigners---had produced the most         
restrictive immigration laws in American history. In the aftermath of World War I   
immigration was running close to 1 million a year, almost as high as prewar levels. 
Most immigrants came from eastern ami southern Europe; the majority were            
Catholics and Jews, With just over half the American population white and of        
native-born parents, alarmists like novelist Kenneth Bolx-rts worried that unre-    
stricted immigration would produce “a hybrid race of people as worthless and        
futile as the good-lor-nothing mongrels of Central America and Southeastern Eu-     
rope. Appreciating the benefits of a shrunken labor pool, the American Federa-      
tion of Labor supported restriction too.                                            
Led by Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts ami Hiram Johnson of Califor-             
nia. in 1921 Congress enacted emergency legislation that established an annual      
limit on immigration. A quota set the number of entrants at 350,000 a year and      
parceled them out on the basis of 3 percent of each nationality living in the United
States as of 1910. Asian immigration was banned entirely. Three years later the     
National Origins Act cut the quota to 150.(XX), pushed the base year back to 1890   
(before the bulk of southern and eastern Europeans arrived), and made the restric-  
tions permanent.                                                                    
The National Origins Act fixed the pattern of immigration for the next four         
decades. Immigration from southern and eastern Europe was reduced to a trickle,     
w hile the steady How of northern and western Europeans continued. In Congress      
support for restriction was especially strong among rural members who saw limit-    
ing immigration as a matter not only of race ami religion but also of beliefs and   
loyalties. “On the one side, declared a representative from Kansas during the       
debate, “is beer, bolshevism, unassimilating settlements and perhaps many Hags---   
on the other is constitutional government; one Hag. stars and stripes.” The great     
movement of Europeans to America, a migration of classes and nationalities that       
had been unimpeded for 300 years, came largely to an end.                             
The “Noble Experiment                                                                 
In the same years that Sacco and Vanzetti were appealing their case, the “noble       
experiment of Prohibition was underway. The Eighteenth Amendment, banning             
the sale, manufacture, importation, and transportation of liquor, look effect in      
January 1920. For nearly a hundred years reformers had ti ied to reduce the con-      
sumption <>l alcohol. Progressive temperance arguments stressed efficiency, pub-      
lic health, ami the corrupting influence of the saloon. In World War 1 the need to    
feed starving war victims prompted the conservation of grains lor food. Meanwhile     
hysterical patriots questioned the loyalties of breweries with German names and       
fellow citizens who drank beer and ale.                                               
Where in force, Prohibition was not total: as private citizens, Americans             
could still keep liquor in their homes and serve drinks to their friends. They        
simply could not make, sell, or import any “intoxicating beverage." The Volstead      
Act. an enforcement statute passed in September 1919, defined an ' intoxicating       
beverage” as one containing 0.5 percent alcohol. The act permitted the use of         
existing stocks of liquor for religious and medicinal purposes and allowed the        
manufacture of industrial alcohol---but only if rendered poisonous.                   
Prohibition never stamped out liquor, but it did reduce consumption (as               
much as half by some accounts). Despite the availability’ of “moonshine and hard      
cider, drinking declined in rural areas. Cities recorded fewer deaths from alcohol    
and fewer arrests for drunkenness. From the start, however, enforcement was           
underfunded and understaffed. The Justice Departments Prohibition Bureau con-         
sisted of 15(X) agents. The entire Pacific Northwest never had more than 20 agents    
to cover it. Not one was given an airplane, a boat, or an automobile. Their salary’ of
S2IHK»a year amounted to a license to steal. One New York agent banked over $1.6      
million in four months on the job. Other agents, like Izzy Einstein and his partner   
Moe Smith, were honest and dedicated. Disguised as everything from rabbis to          
college deans, they made nearly 3000 arrests. Still others, frustrated and poorly     
trained, relied on quick triggers, pistol whippings, or their lists.                  
Prohibition had always been unpopular with a sizable minority of Americans.           
In southern Florida people drilled holes in coconuts, added brown sugar, waited       
three weeks, and enjoyed a pungent “cocowhiskey. Some citizens, like Alice            
Roosevelt Longworth, wife of the Speaker of the House of Representatives, made        
their own home brew in copper stills purchased at hardware stores. A few states       
never ratified the Eighteenth Amendment; others refused to enact local enforce-       
ment statutes.                                                                        
The consequences of so vast a social experiment as Prohibition w’ere often            
unexpected. Prohibition reversed the prewar trend toward beer and wine, since         
hard liquor brought greater profits to bootleggers. Ironically, it advanced tire      
cause of women’s rights: saloons had discriminated against "ladies, having them       
enter by a separate door; speakeasies welcomed them. A democratic air prevailed       
inside, where everybody broke the law together. Prohibition also helped to line       
the pockets---and boost the fame---of gangsters. "Searface Al Capone moved            
(roni New York to Chicago in 1920. Seven years later he was the best known            
mobster in America, with a $60 million empire of alcohol, gambling, extortion.        
33 million---were living on farms. The Great Plains, by contrast, were the only    
states that suffered a net loss of residents during the decade; 10,000 houses were 
left vacant on the high plains alone; 9 million acres of farmland went untended.   
Hie "exodusters" joined a growing migration of rural refugees. No one knows how    
many became migrants, but relief offices around the country did report a change    
in the typical migrant family. No longer black or brown, it was white and native-  
born, typically a young married couple with one child, leaving a farm or town on   
the Great Plains or in the South and traveling west.                               
Most did not travel far. perhaps to the next county. Long-distance migrants---     
many from Oklahoma, Arizona, and Texas---usually set their sights on California.   
Handbills and advertisements promised jobs picking fruit and harvesting vegeta-    
bles. If they' were like the Joad family in John Steinbeck's classic The Grapes of 
Wrath (1939), they drove west along Route 66 through Arizona and New Mexico,       
their belongings piled high atop rickety jalopies, heading for their Promised Land.
Over 350,000 Oklahomans arrived in California during the decade. So many came      
that ‘‘Okie” came to mean any Oust Bowler, even though most of Oklahoma lay        
outside the Dust Bowl.                                                             
During the decade nearly two of every' five migrants ended up in California,       
increasing its population by 1.1 million, the largest jump of any state. The poor  
were only a small minority of new arrivals, but enough came to make local citizens 
edgy. In 15 months, 86,546 destitute migrants crossed the California border, more  
than the total number of migrants for the first two years of the gold rush. By the 
middle of the decade the Los .Angeles police had begun forming "bum blockades      
to keep them out. “Negroes and Okies upstairs,” read one sign in a San Joaquin     
Valley theater. Native-born whites had never encountered such discrimination       
before.                                                                            
Only one in two or three migrants actually found work. At peak season Cali-        
fornia needed no more than 175,000 pickers. The labor surplus allowed growers to   
set their own terms. A migrant family could expect to earn about $450 a year, less 
 than half the subsistence level. Those that did not work formed wretched enclaves     
 called “little Oklahomas. The worst were located in the fertile Imperial Valles'.     
                                                                                       
 There at the end of the decade relief officials discovered a family of 10 living in a 
 1921 Ford. When the mother, suffering from tuberculosis and pellagra, was told to     
 go, she responded vacantly, “I wonder where.”                                         
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
The Fate of Outsiders                                                                   
The Chavez family lost their farm in the North Gila River valley of Arizona in          
1934. They had owned the small homestead near Yuma for two generations, but             
the Depression pushed them out. Cesar, barely six years old at the time, remem-         
bered only images of his family's departure: a "giant tractor leveling the corral,      
the loss of his room and bed; the family piling into a Chevy for the journey west;      
his father promising earnestly to buy another Arizona plot someday.                     
Hie elder Chavez could never keep his promise. Instead he and his family                
lived on the road, "following the crops in California. Like the Joads, the Chavez       
family roamed the West Coast in search of work. In eight years Cesar went to 37         
schools. The whole family was forced to sell their labor to unscrupulous contrac-       
tors for less than $10 a week. The father joined the strikes that hit the lm|x rial     
Valley in the mid-1980s, but they were crushed. "We were trapped, recalled              
Cesar. “Some people put this out of their minds and forget it. I don’t. Thirty          
years later he founded the United Farm Workers of America, the first union of           
migratory workers in the country.                                                       
The Chavezes resembled the Joads in every way but one: they were Mexican-               
Americans. The joads had found a few sympathetic store owners on their way              
west. When the Chavezes entered a roadside restaurant, a young waitress greeted         
them coldly: "We don't serve Mexicans here. Get out. In an America still strictly       
segregated, she never thought twice about refusing service to outsiders, whether        
they were brown or black. “White trade only” read the sign out front. “Every time       
we thought of it," said Cesar, “it hurt us.”                                            
The Spanish had inhabited the Southwest for nearly 400 years, producing a               
rich culture that mixed Old World and Indian civilizations. By the turn of the          
twentieth century there were nearly 300,(XX) Mexican-Americans in the United            
962 States, largely in the Southwest. In the following decade Mexicans fleeing jxwerty  
and revolution nearly doubled the Latino population ofTexas and New Mexico. In       
Arizona this group more than doubled; in California it quadrupled. During the        
war labor shortages led Washington to sponsor a bracero (day laborer) program,       
and in the 1920s American farmers opened a campaign to attract Mexican farm          
workers, who would accept low wages. By 1930 the census listed nearly 1.5 mil-       
lion Mexicans living in the United States.                                           
A deep ambivalence had always characterized American attitudes toward                
Mexicans, but the onset of the Great Depression turned most communities against      
them. Fearful of being burdened with their relief, cities like Los Angeles found it  
cheaper to ship them back to Mexico. Some migrants left voluntarily, but others      
were forced out. Beginning in 1931 the federal government launched a series of       
deportations, or “repatriations,” of Mexicans, including their American-born chil-   
dren (who by law were citizens of the United States).                                
During the decade the Latino population of the country declined by 500,000.          
Most of those who remained lived in poverty. The average income of Mexican-          
American families in Crystal City, Texas, in the Rio Grande valley was $506 a year,  
a sum that represented the combined income of parents and children. Fewer than       
two Mexican-American children in ten completed five years of school.                 
Hard times were nothing new for African-Americans. “The Negro was born in            
depression," one black man said. "It only became official when it hit the white      
man. Depressed agricultural prices and rampant discrimination had spurred a          
great African-American migration from the Deep South on the eve of World             
War 1. It continued through the 1920s, when over 800.000 moved to northern           
cities. Like their rural counterparts, these new urbanites found prosperity elusive, 
and as the Depression deepened black unemployment skyrocketed. By 1932 it            
reached 50 percent, twice the national level. Unemployed whites demanded that        
blacks be fired from their jobs as garbage collectors, street cleaners, elevator     
operators, and bellhops. A white clerk in Marianna, Florida, no different from       
millions of Americans, reasoned that “a nigger hasn’t got no right to have a job     
when there are white men who can do the work and arc out of work. By 1933            
several cities reported between 25 and 40 percent of their black residents with no   
support but relief payments. Even skilled blacks who retained their jobs had their   
wages cut by half, according to one study of Harlem in 1935.                         
African-Americans made do as they had for years. “We had one big advan-              
tage," attested one black man. "Our wives could go to the store and get a bag of     
beans or a sack of flour and a piece of fat meat, and they could cook this. And we   
could eat it. . . . Now you take the white fella, he couldn’t do this. His wife would
tell him: Look, if you can’t do any better than this, I’m gonna leave you. " Migra-  
tion from the rural South dropped to half of what it had been a decade earlier. As   
late as 1940 three of four African-Americans lived in rural areas; yet conditions    
there were just as bad as in cities. Forty percent of all black workers in the United
States were farm laborers or tenants. In 1934 one study estimated the average        
income for black cotton farmers at under $200 a year.                                
The Depression aggravated racial prejudice. "Dust has been blown from the            
shotgun, the whip, and the noose,” reported The New Republic in 1931, "and Ku        
Klux Klan practices were being resumed in the certainty that dead men not only       
tell no tales but create vacancies. Lynchings tripled between 1932 and 1933. In      
1932 the Supreme Court ordered a retrial in the most celebrated racial case of the   
decade. In 1931 nine black teenagers had been accused of raping two white            
women on a train bound for Scottsboro, Alabama. Within weeks all-white juries        
had found the boys guilty and sentenced eight of them to death. The convictions      
South or NRA codes resulted the loss of their jobs to whites, black newspapers        
were quick to rename the agency “Negroes Ruined Again.’ In New York’s Harlem          
the Reverend John H. Johnson organized the Citizens' League lor Fair Play in          
1933 to persuade white merchants to hire black clerks. After picketers blocked        
storefronts, hundreds of African-Americans got jobs with 1 larlem retailers and       
utility companies. Racial tension over employment and housing continued to run        
high, and in 1935 Harlem exploded in the only race riot of the decade.                
Discrimination persisted under the New Deal. Government efforts to pro-               
mote “grassnxtts democracy” often gave control of federal programs to localities,     
where prejudice produced inequalities. Relief payments to black clients in At-        
lanta, Georgia, averaged $19.29 a month; whites received $32.66. When local           
farm committees decided to retire acreage under the AAA, black sharecroppers          
and tenants were often the ones put out of production. New Deal showplaces like       
the TVA’s model town of Norris, Tennessee, and the subsistence homestead vil-         
lage of Arthurdale, West Virginia, were closed entirely to blacks. Officials feared   
integration would promote trouble in these communal paradises.                        
African-Americans did benefit from the New Deal, but more as dispossessed             
citizens than as a disadvantaged race. The federally run WPA, whose employment        
practices were based on need, hired blacks for almost 20 percent of its jobs, even    
though they comprised less than 10 percent of the population. The minimum             
WPA wage of $12 a week was twice what many of them had earned before. Public          
Works Administrator Ickes established the first quota system for hiring blacks        
(based on their percentage of the local work force). By 1941 the number of African-   
Americans working for the government exceeded their percentage of the popula-         
tion.                                                                                 
Training programs, including Mary McLeod Bethune’s enormously success-                
ful Office of Minority Affairs, helped to reduce black illiteracy from 16.4 percent to
11.5 percent by the end of the decade. Life expectancy jumped from 49 to 55 years     
for black women and from 47 to 52 years for black men in the 1930s. (Among            
whites it rose from 63 to 67 for women and from 60 to 62 for men.) Countless          
blacks shared the sentiments of a Washington cab driver who explained that he         
had voted for Roosevelt and the Democrats because they “favor the little man, and     
I’ve been a little man all my life.                                                   
The nearly 1 million Mexican-Americans in the United States received little           
assistance from the New Deal. Hispanic culture sometimes impeded relief efforts.      
The Mexican folk tradition of self-help inhibited some from seeking aid, while        
others remained unfamiliar with claim procedures. Still others failed to meet resi-   
dency requirements. Low voter turnout and a high proportion of aliens among           
Mexican-Americans reduced their political power and the attention paid to their       
interests. Uneducated and unskilled, they often toiled as migrant farm workers        
outside the reach of many New Deal programs, including Social Security.               
Throughout the Southwest and California, the Civilian Conservation Corps              
and the Works Progress Administration did help with jobs on the land and in           
construction. On Capitol Hill Dennis Chavez of New Mexico, the only United            
States senator of Hispanic descent, succeeded in channeling relief and other fed-     
eral funds into Spanish-speaking communities. During the decade Hispanics, like       
blacks, were mired in poverty but developed enough faith in Roosevelt to switch       
from the Republican to the Democratic party.                                          
After decades of neglect Indians found themselves the subjects of new federal         
interest. Indian families on reservations rarely earned more than $100 a year.        
general were horrified by Japanese and Nazi atrocities, especially toward the         
“lesser breeds of Asia and Europe. It was difficult to practice racism at home        
while fighting it abroad, but it was not impossible. The war sometimes aggravated     
intolerance, raising serious questions of minority rights.                            
Little Italy                                                                          
Aliens from enemy countries fared far better in World War II than in World War 1      
Immigration restriction had greatly reduced the numbers of foreigners who had         
not yet become citizens. When war came there were about 600,000 Italian aliens        
and 5 million Italian-Americans in the United States. Whether aliens or citizens,     
all had struggled during the Depression. Most still lived in Italian neighborhoods    
centered around churches, fraternal organizations, and clubs. Some had been           
proud of Mussolini and supported b'ascismo. “Mussolini was a hero,” recalled one      
Italian-American, “a superhero. He made us feel special, especially with anti-        
Italian prejudices so strong. All that stopped after Pearl Harbor. During the war,    
Italian-Americans unquestioningly pledged their loyalties to the United States.       
At first the government treated Italians without citizenship (along with Japa-        
nese and Germans) as ‘aliens of enemy nationality.” They could not travel without     
permission, enter strategic areas, or possess shortwave radios, guns, or maps. By     
1942 few Americans believed that German- or Italian-Americans posed any kind of       
danger. Eager to keep the support of Italian voters in the 1942 congressional         
elections, Roosevelt chose Columbus Day, 1942, to lift restrictions on Italian ali-   
ens. The segregation of Italian-Americans ended. Henceforth they would maintain       
their ethnic unity as a matter of choice, not necessity.                              
Concentration Camps                                                                   
Japanese-Americans, whether aliens or citizens, did not find similar tolerance. Far   
more than the Italians, the 127,(MX) Japanese in the United States had remained       
separated, often because state laws and local custom created complex barriers to      
assimilation. In the western states where they were concentrated around urban         
areas, most Japanese could not vote, own land, or live in decent neighborhoods.       
The 1924 Immigration Act had permanently barred 47,000 Japanese aliens, known         
as “Issei," from becoming American citizens.                                          
This near-apartheid system forced most Japanese-Americans to remain iso-              
lated from the mainstream of American life. Despite such restrictions, some Japa-     
nese achieved success in farming and small businesses like landscaping. Their         
accomplishments sometimes added to the hostility of white neighbors. Pearl Har-       
bor intensified ugly racial prejudice. One California undertaker captured popular     
sentiment when he announced, “I’d rather do business with a Jap than with an          
American.”                                                                            
By February 1942 West Coast politicians began to press the Roosevelt admin-           
istration to evacuate the Japanese from their communities. It did not seem to         
matter that about 80,000 were American citizens, called ‘‘Nisei, and that no          
evidence indicated they posed any threat whatsoever. To some politicians, lack of     
evidence seemed proof in itself. California Attorney General Earl Warren thought      
it significant that no sabotage had been reported. “It looks very much to me,” he     
stated, “as though it is a studied effort not to have any until the zero hour arrives.
. . . That was the history of Pearl Harbor. 1 can’t believe the same thing isn’t    
planned for California. General John De Witt, commander ol West Coast de-           
fenses, was more blunt: “A Jap’s a Jap. ... It makes no difference whether he is    
an American citizen or not.’ In response, the War Department in February 19-12      
drew up Executive Order 9066, which allowed the exclusion of any person from        
designated military areas. Under De Witt’s authority, the order was applied only    
on the West Coast against Japanese-Amerieans.                                       
Even that violation of Nisei rights did not satisfy more racist elements. Forty     
percent of the people on the West Coast believed that all Japanese were loyal to    
another government. To the north, Canada had already ordered all Japanese males     
between 18 ami 65 to work camps away from the Pacific coast. In the United States   
vigilante violence soon broke out against the Japanese and their property. Pres-    
sure for removal mounted. “Put them all into concentration camps. ’ one man was     
quoted as saying, “and work it out after the war’s over!” By late February Roose-   
velt had agreed that both Issei and Nisei wotdd be evacuated from the West Coast.   
But where would they go? When some 90(X) moved on their own initiative, politi-     
cians from other states complained loudly. The army thus began in March to ship     
the entire Japanese community to “assembly centers.”                                
Sudden removal imposed numerous hardships, many of them unnecessary.                
Few Japanese had time to arrange for the care or sale of property left behind. Most 
incurred heavy financial losses as they sold out far below market value. Their      
distress became a windfall for people who had long resented their economic com-     
petition. Once the Japanese reached the assembly centers at race tracks, fair       
grounds, and other temporary sites they encountered other indignities. The army     
had not prepared the sites to offer basic sanitation, comfort, or privacy. “We lived
in a horse stable,” remembered one young girl. “We filled our cheesecloth with      
straw---for our mattress. The authorities at least had the decency to keep families 
together.                                                                           
The question of where to send the detainees was not resolved until Septem-           
ber 1942. Milton Eisenhower, who headed the War Relocation Authority (WRA),          
had hoped to distribute people in small numbers to CCC-style work camps. That        
plan ran into opposition from state officials. Instead, most of the Japanese were    
interned in 10 camps in remote areas of seven western states. Notions that the       
camps might become self-sufficient communities proved wishful thinking. Even         
resourceful farmers could not raise food in arid desert soil.                        
No claim of humane intent could change the reality---these were concentra-           
tion camps. Internees were held in wire-enclosed compounds by armed guards.          
Temporary tar-papered barracks housed families or small groups in single rooms.      
Each room had a few cots, some blankets, and a single light bulb. That was home.     
Bathing, meals, laundry, and recreation all took place in communal facilities. At-   
tempts to introduce community self-government failed. Relocation had under-          
mined the prestige of traditional elder leaders. The younger Nisei, who usually      
spoke English, were better able to deal with the authorities but were often more     
hostile.                                                                             
Some Japanese within the camps protested, and rioting occasionally erupted.          
That only hardened opposition to a WRA plan that had permitted some 17,000           
Nisei to leave the camps during 1943. In response, over 18,000 Japanese desig-       
nated as disloyal were sent to a special camp at Tide Lake in California. About      
8000 oi these asked to go to Japan rather than suffer further indignities. Yet when  
given the chance to enlist , thousands of Nisei distinguished themselves in combat.  
Despite all they had suffered they accepted the one right left them---to die for     
their country.                                                                       
Having created the camps, the government eventually found them hard to               
close. As late as 1944 the War Department warned that the West Coast would not       
tolerate rapid release of the Japanese. Many of the internees were now afraid to     
leave the relative safety of camps for life in hostile communities, but there was no 
reason to keep the camps open. Roosevelt finally decided after his reelection in     
1944 that the time had come to let the Japanese go. As of January 1945 all Japanese  
had permission to leave at will. In late 1945 the WRA closed the last of the camps   
and one of the sorriest chapters in American history.                                
Even the Supreme Court lent its authority to the policy. In the case of              
Hirabayashi v. United States (1943) the Court upheld the discriminatory military     
curfew aimed at Japanese citizens. The majority opinion stated baldly that “resi-    
dents having ethnic affiliations with an invading enemy may be a greater source of   
danger than those of different ancestry," even though the army had never demon-      
strated that any danger existed. The unanimous decision masked a divided Court.      
Justice Frank Murphy, who had wanted to dissent, got his chance in Korematsu c.      
United States (1944). The Court this time ruled that exclusion of Japanese-Ameri-    
can citizens in wartime was legal. With the support of Justices Owen Roberts and     
Robert Jackson, Murphy criticized his colleagues for their automatic deference to    
a military decision and the “legalization of racism. ” Such an opinion had influence.
On (he same day in Ex parte Endo the Court declared it illegal to detain loyal       
citizens more than temporarily. That did little to help Mitsue Endo. She had spent   
over two years in a relocation camp waiting for the Court to decide her case.        
Concentration camps in America did not perpetuate the horror of Nazi death           
camps, but they were built on racism and fear. Worse, they violated the traditions   
of civil rights and liberties for which Americans believed they were fighting.       
Minorities on the Job                                                                
The war gave minority leaders an opportunity to press lor broader civil rights. “A   
jirn crow army cannot light for a free world, the NAACP declared. The Pittsburgh     
Courier, a major black newspaper, advocated the “Double \ ’---“victory over our      
enemies at home and victory over our enemies on the battlefields abroad.” Such       
ideas of racial justice had been the driving force in the life of A. Philip Randolph,
long an advocate of greater black militancy. Randolph had demonstrated his gifts     
as an organizer and leader of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, the most      
powerful black labor organization. He was determined to secure for blacks their      
rights in defense industries and the armed forces. “The Administration leaders in    
Washington will never give the Negro justice, Randolph argued, "until they see       
masses---ten, twenty, fifty thousand Negroes on the White House lawn In 1941         
he began to organize a march on Washington.                                          
By using executive orders. President Roosevelt could have granted almost all         
of Randolph’s demands aimed to end segregation in the government, defense            
industries, unions, anil the armed forces. Only Randolph’s insistence that the       
government refuse collective bargaining rights to unions closed to blacks required   
congressional action. The president, however, had never been a stalwart oppo-        
nent of racial discrimination. He would have preferred to placate Randolph with a    
few kind words and gestures, but Randolph refused to be charmed. He predicted        
that lOO.tHX) blacks would march on Washington in mid-1941 if Roosevelt did not      
act.                                                                                 
Under pressure from Randolph, the president in June 1941 finally issued              
Executive Order 8802. federal policy now banned racial discrimination in the         
employment of workers in government or defense industries. To carry out that         
policy, the order established the Fair Employment Practices Commission               
il’EPC). In some ways that was the boldest step toward racial justice since the      
Civil War era. But the FEPC had only marginal success in breaking down barriers      
against blacks and Hispanics. It was one thing to ban discrimination, quite another  
to enforce that ban in a society still deeply divided by racial prejudice.           
Mexican farm workers oiler a case in point. During the Depression western            
farmers paid them below-subsistcnce wages, offered squalid housing, and some-        
times left them stranded in the country side between picking seasons. As unem-       
ployed white workers sought farm jobs, pressure mounted to reverse the flow' of      
Mexican immigration. Traditional discrimination in education, housing, and jobs      
grew more severe. Local authorities discovered that it was cheaper to lieport        
Mexicans, even some who were citizens or in the United States legally, than to       
provide relief to which they were entitled.                                          
The war reversed that pattern. Efforts by the FEPC opened industrial jobs in         
California's shipyards and aircraft factories, which hail previously refused to hire 
Hispanics. Thousands migrated from Texas, where job discrimination was most          
severe, to California, where war work created new opportunities. Labor shortages     
led the southwestern states to join with the Mexican government under the bra-       
cero (contract labor) program to recruit Mexican labor.                              
In Texas, by contrast, antagonism to braceros ran so deep that the Mexican           
government tried to prevent workers from going there. In 1942 the FEPC began         
to investigate systematic discrimination in the oil and mining industries. With      
support from labor unions company officials blocked Hispanics from training pro-     
grams and job advancement. In this case, the State Department stymied the             
inquiry because Assistant Secretary Sumner Welles claimed that hemispheric re-        
lations might suffer. Disclosures would also afford Axis agents a wealth of propa-    
ganda with which to embarrass the United States. Not until late 1943 was the          
FEPC able to proceed.                                                                 
Black Americans experienced similar frustrations. Early wartime prosperity            
bypassed them almost entirely. In 1941 half a million blacks were still unemployed    
while another two million worked at marginal, low-paying jobs. Over hall ol all       
defense jobs were closed to minorities. Eor example, with 100.(NX) skilled and        
high-paying jobs in the aircraft industry, blacks held about 200 janitorial positions.
The federal agency charged with placing workers honored local employment prac-        
tices. Generally that meant "whites only. The Office of Production Management         
refused to introduce antidiscrimination clauses into defense contracts. Unions seg-   
regated black workers or excluded them entirely. One person wrote to the presi-       
dent with a telling complaint: “Hitler has not done anything to the colored people--- 
it’s people right here in the United States who are keeping us out of work and        
keeping us down. Discrimination in housing, restaurants, transportation, and          
hotels added to the sense of grievance.                                               
Eventually the combination of labor shortages, pressures from black leaders,          
and initiative from government agencies opened the door to more skilled jobs and      
higher pay. The federal government increased its employment ol blacks from            
60,000 to over 200,000. Beginning in 1943 the United States Employment Sen ice        
rejected requests with racial stipulations. The National Labor Relations Board        
announced it would no longer certify unions that barred minorities. Faced with a      
dwindling labor pool, many employers finally opened their doors. By 1944 blacks,      
who accounted for almost 10 percent of the population, held 8 percent of the jobs.    
The wage gap narrowed so that black men (and white women) earned about 65             
percent as much as white males. The lure of industrial jobs drew some 400,000         
blacks from southern farms where they had eked out livings in sharecropping and       
tenant farming. About half went to the West ('oast, half to the Northeast and         
Upper Midwest.                                                                        
White hostility to blacks was never far from the surface, in Philadelphia in          
1943 the local streetcar company claimed its union contract prevented the hiring      
of blacks as motormen (drivers) or conductors. Nonetheless, the FEPC ordered          
the company to upgrade some blacks. After considerable foot-dragging eight            
blacks received promotions by July 1944. On August 1 several hundred white            
workers struck to protest the upgrading of blacks. The city’s 1600 streetcars, 600    
buses, and 500 railway cars stopped. Since Philadelphia was one of the nation’s       
most vital industrial centers, the government moved quickly to crush the strike.      
Eight thousand army troops manned the streetcars and kept the peace. FBI agents       
arrested strike leaders. Two days after it began, the strike was ended.               
The victory in Philadelphia was an exceptional case. When the government              
confronted a more powerful union, like the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen          
and Engineers, it was not as forceful. A railroad strike could have brought the       
entire economy to a halt. In the large majority of cases, employers and unions        
defied FEPC orders for equal treatment of minorities. As the war ended, the old       
practice of "last-hired, first-fired" resumed. Even in postwar boom industries like   
car making, minorities were quickly downgraded to lower paying jobs.                  
Al War with Jim Crow                                                                 
At the beginning of World War II three-fourths of the 12 million black Americans     
lived in the South. Hispanic Americans, whose population exceeded a million,         
were concentrated in a belt along the United States---Mexican border. W hen jobs     
for minorities opened in war centers, blacks and Hispanics became increasingly       
urban. Whether rural or urban, both groups suffered from deeply entrenched           
systems of segregation that denied them basic rights to decent housing, jobs, and    
political participation. The explosiveness of that prejudice became clear in 1942.   
Competition for housing and the use of public facilities like parks, beaches, and    
transportation between whites and rapidly expanding minority populations be-         
came fierce.                                                                         
In some cities government hinds created new housing. One such project built          
in Detroit was named to honor the black poet and abolitionist Sojourner Truth. It    
included 200 units lor black families. Federal authorities had picked a site for the 
houses along the edge of a Polish neighborhood. When the first black families        
tried to move in, they faced an angry mob of whites. Finallx. local officials had to 
send several hundred National Guardsmen to protect the newcomers, as Ku Klux         
klan members looked on menacingly .                                                  
The incident only provoked Detroit blacks and whites into greater confronta-         
tions. On a hot evening in June 1943. the simmering hatreds boiled over. At first    
scattered lighting broke out among blacks and whiles returning from a local park.    
Suddenly, widespread gunfire, looting, and mob violence broke out. Angry blacks      
assaulted white workers leaving night shifts. White mobs dragged blacks off street-  
cars and buses. Police and snipers exchanged rille fire. Six thousand soldiers from  
nearby bases finally imposed a troubled calm, but not before the riot had claimed    
31 lives and property damage was widespread. Refusing to take black grievances       
seriously, local officials accused the NAACP and the “militant Negro press for       
stirring up trouble. The black community charged that the police, shooting indis-    
criminately at blacks, did nothing to stop white rioters.                            
Detroit was not the only racially divided city, and blacks were not the only         
victims. Hispanics in southern California suffered the same indignities as black     
Americans. By 1943 inert Anglo hostility had come to focus on the paclmcos, or       
“zoot suiters. These were young Hispanic men and boys who had adopted the            
outrageous style of Harlem hipsters: greased hair, swept back into a ducktail:       
broad-shouldered, long-waisted suit coats; baggy pants. pegged at the ankles,        
polished off with a swashbuckling keychain. The Los Angeles city council passed      
an ordinance making it a crime even Io wear a zixit suit. For most ‘/.outers this    
style was a modest form of rebellion, for a few it was a badge of criminal behax ior;
for while sen icemen it was a target for racism.                                     
In June 1943 taunting turned Io violence. Sailors from the local navy base           
invaded Hispanic neighborhoods in search of zooters who had allegedly attacked       
 servicemen. The self-appointed vigilantes grabbed innocent victims, tore their          
 clothes, cut their hair, and beat them bloody. When Hispanics retaliated, the           
 police arrested them, all the while ignoring the actions of white servicemen. Irre-     
 sponsible newspaper coverage made matters worse. “ZOOTERS THREATEN                      
 L.A. POLICE," charged one Hearst paper.                                                 
 Accusations against zooters could not long mask the cause of the violence. Los          
 Angeles in 1943 had limited recreational facilities for servicemen. Living outside      
 American society, Hispanics offered convenient targets for servicemen’s unfo-           
 cused energies and irrepressible prejudices. Soon after the "zoot-suit riots a          
 citizens committee created at the urging of California Governor Earl Warren             
 placed the blame where it belonged---on both sides. Underlying Hispanic anger          
 were the grim realities of filthy housing, unemployment, disease, and white rac-       
 ism. All that added up to a level of poverty7 that wartime prosperity' eased but in no 
 way resolved.                                                                          
 Minority' leaders realized some legal gains during the war. The Congress of            
 Racial Equality (CORE), a nonviolent civil rights group inspired by the Indian         
 leader Mohandas K. Gandhi, used sit-ins and other peaceful tactics to desegregate      
 some restaurants and movie theaters. In 1944 the Supreme Court outlawed the            
 "all-white primary, an infamous device used by southerners to exclude blacks           
 from voting in primary elections within the Democratic party. Because Demo-            
 cratic candidates in the South often ran unopposed in the general elections, the       
 primary elections were usually the only true jToIitical contests. In Smith t           
 Alltvright the Court ruled that since political parties were integral parts of public  
 elections, they could not deny minorities the right to vote in primaries. In so        
 ruling the Court opened a legal door to further assaults on the Jim Crow sy stem. “1   
 see World War II as having been a step on the first rung of the ladder, concluded      
 one black soldier. "But 1 wouldn't want to wish it on anybody else. With race as       
 with gender, the war sowed the seeds of future upheaval. Hispanic, black, and          
 Indian veterans would play leading roles in the postwar struggle for equality .        
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
Politics did not go into eclipse after Pearl Harbor. As Roosevelt told reporters,       
“Dr. New Deal" had retired so that “Dr. Win-the-War" could go about his busi-           
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
ness. Politics nonetheless proceeded as usual. The increasingly' powerful anti-         
New Deal coalition of Republicans and rural Democrats saw in the war an oppor-          
tunity to attack liberal programs they had long resented. The president, for his        
part, was a politician who never lost sight of election returns. Without an electoral   
mandate (whether a Democratic Congress in 1942 or a fourth presidential term in         
1944) Roosevelt could not achieve the victory he sought in war and peace.               
Paying the Piper                                                                        
One of the most difficult questions Roosevelt laced was how to pay the enormous         
cost of fighting the war. The federal budget, only about $9 billion in 1939, jumped     
to $1(X) billion by 1945. The national debt soared from $49 billion in 1941 to $259     
billion by the end of the war. The money came from three major sources: taxes.          
No issue of World War II more starkly raised questions of human good and             
evil than the Holocaust. And tragically, the United States could have done more to   
save at least some of the 6 million Jews the Nazis killed. Until the fall of 1911 the
Nazis permitted Jews to leave Europe, hut few countries, including the United        
States, would accept them. American restrictions, which had been lowered             
slightly in 1938, became* progressively tighter. There are three factors explaining  
the exclusionary policy. First and foremost was the Depression. Many .Americans      
feared that any rise in immigration would make joblessness worse. That concern       
coincided with a second impulse to tighten rather than loosen the restriction        
system established under the Immigration Act of 1924. Opinion polls showed that      
in 1938, as Nazi persecution of Jews increased. 71 to 85 percent of all Americans    
opposed easing quotas to help refugees. In 1939 some 66 percent objected to a        
one-time exception that would have admitted 1(),(XX) children. The war in no way     
eased opposition to the admission of European refugees.                              
A third factor was an ugly strain of anti-Semitism that peaked in 1944 when          
pollster Elmo Roper warned that it “had spread all over the nation and is particu-   
larly virulent in urban centers. According to the polls Americans mistrusted Jews    
more than any European people except Italians. With the exception of a few bitter    
cranks, anti-Semites refrained from advocating outright persecution. More com-      
mon was a kind of passive anti-Semitism that nurtured negative feelings but no      
overt hostilities. Jewish leaders feared, probably with cause, that pressure to ease
immigration restrictions would make anti-Semitism worse. "1 see in the papers       
that 200,000 Refugee Jews in Hungary will not live through the week, a typical      
letter to Congress began. "Thats too Damn Bad what in the Hell <lo we care about    
jews in Hungary.                                                                    
What was more tragic was the anti-Semitism of senior State Department               
officials who systematically frustrated Jewish efforts to emigrate to the United    
States Immigration policy fell under the authority- of Assistant Secretary of State 
Breckinridge Long, who embraced the upper-class American tradition of unmodu-       
lated anti-Semitism. President Roosevelt could have used an executive order to      
clear the obstacles Long and his officials created, but for several reasons he did  
not. For one, he was no stranger to gentlemanly anti-Semitism and thus dis-         
counted the virulence with which Long enforced his prejudices.                      
The president also received mixed signals from the American Jewish commu-           
nity. Jews wanted to help refugees, especially alter 1942 as news of the death      
camps leaked from Europe, but they were not sure how to do so without aggravat-     
ing anti-Semitism. Until tile last year of the war polls showed that most Americans 
thought that only about 1(X),(MXi Jews had been killed. Jews were also split on the 
question of Zionism and the pressures to establish a Jewish homeland in Palestine.  
The British had blocked Jewish emigration to Palestine and opposed Zionism to       
avoid alienating the Arabs. Roosevelt and his advisers ultimately decided that the  
best way to save Jews was to win the war quickly. That still does not explain why   
the Allies did not do more: they cotdd have bombed the rail lines to the camps,     
sent commando forces, or tried to destroy the death factories.                      
Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau, the one Jew in Roosevelt’s cabinet,            
had at first gone along with the president and the British on the questions of      
Palestine and refugees. Then his staff informed him that the State Departmental     
Breckenridge Long’s insistence had since 1942 prevented information on the          
"final solution from reaching the United States. In 1943 Long also blocked apian    
Morgenthau ami Roosevelt both approved to ransom Jews in Romania and 6000           
Jewish children in France. By January 1944 Morganthau became so exasperated         
with the State Department that he sent Roosevelt a report entitled "The Ac-         
qniesence of this Government in the Murder of the Jews. Roosevelt stripped          
Long of his authority and appointed a War Refugee Board charged with saving as      
many Jews as possible. In the 1944 election both parties adopted pro-Zionist        
planks, and Roosevelt promised to seek the establishment of a Jewish common-        
wealth in Palestine. But some 18 precious "long and heartbreaking" months had       
been lost and with them an untold number of lives.                                  
At Yalta, the Big Three did not discuss, much less resolve the issue of Pales-      
tine. Returning home in February 1945, Roosevelt stopped for talks with Kinglbn     
Saud of Saudi Arabia. He impressed Roosevelt with Arab determination to end         
further Jewish immigration to Palestine. To many American Jews, the president       
now seemed to waver on his election promises, but it was Harry Truman who           
would face the survivors and their dreams of a Jewish homeland.                     
The United Nations                                                                  
Truman also inherited responsibility for establishment of the United Nations Or-    
ganization (UNO), The breakdown of the world economy during the 1930s fol-          
marriage” and offer lavish---and undemanding---affection” to returning Gls. One        
marriage counselor urged women to let their husbands know "you are tired of            
living alone, that you want him now to take charge.”                                   
For minorities, the end of the war brought a return of an old labor practice,          
"last hired, first fired. " At the height of the war over 200,(XX) blacks and Hispanics
had found jobs in shipbuilding. By 1946 that number had dwindled to less than          
10,000. The influx of Mexican laborers under the bracero program temporarily           
halted. In the South, where the large majority of blacks lived, wartime labor          
shortages had become surpluses. Returning black and Hispanic veterans discov-          
ered that for them conditions at home had hardly improved.                             
Those workers who were not union members had no way to protest being laid              
off, but organized labor was determined to preserve the gains made during the          
war. As reconversion brought an abrupt decline in hours and overtime, unions           
demanded pay increases of up to 30 percent to make up for lost wages. W hen            
management balked, strikes spread across the nation. Autoworkers walked off the        
job in the fall of 1945; steelworkers in January 1946; miners in April. Strikes in     
such key industries seriously threatened to impede peacetime production. In 1946       
some 5 million workers struck, a rate triple that of any previous year. Antiunion      
sentiment soared.                                                                      
Most labor-management confrontations came eventually to tl>e White                     
House, where negotiators generally settled on wage increases ranging between 18        
and 22 percent. But the crisis peaked in May 1946 with a threatened national rail      
strike, which would have paralyzed the nation's transportation network. An out-        
raged President Truman asked, “What decent American woidd pull a rail strike at        
a time like this?’ On May 23 he announced that the government would seize the          
railroads, while he requested power to draft striking workers into the military.       
The strike was settled before the threat could be carried out, but Truman's action     
startled liberals and conservatives alike. Few' people approved the idea of using      
the draft as a punitive tool. Labor leaders, for their part, became convinced they     
had lost their friend at the White House.                                              
The New Deal at Bay                                                                    
Inflation, shortages, ami labor unrest spelled political trouble for Harry Truman.     
In September 1945 he had boldly claimed his intention to extend the New Deal           
into the postwar era, with legislation to guarantee full employment, subsidized        
public housing, national health insurance, and a peacetime version of the Fair         
Employment Practices Commission to fight job discrimination. But by 1946 the           
spirit of reform had given way to a more conservative agenda. Truman’s political       
stock had fallen in and out ol Washington. Most of Franklin Roosevelt’s old advis-     
ers had left the administration to lead more peaceful and private lives. In Con-       
gress, a coalition of conservative Republicans ami southern Democrats stymied          
the president’s attempts at further reform. All he achieved was a watered-down         
full-employment bill, which created the Council of Economic Advisors to guide          
the president's policies and at least established the principle that the government    
rather than the private sector was responsible for maintaining full employment.        
As the elections of 1946 approached. Republicans harped on the production              
shortages, the procession of strikes, the mismanagement of the economy. “To err        
is Truman, proclaimed the campaign bottoms---or, more simply, “Had Enough?”            
Evidently many voters had. The Republicans gained control of both houses of            
No matter how strident it might be, anticommunist hysteria could not dampen the         
simple joys of getting and spending. The postwar years opened an era of unprece-        
dented prosperity. Two forces drove this economic boom. One was unbridled               
consumer and business spending that followed 16 years of depression and war.            
The other was a rapid expansion in government expenditures at the local, state,         
and federal levels. The three major growth industries since World War 11---health       
care, education, and government---were spurred by public spending. Equally              
important was the federal government’s expenditure in the military-industrial           
sector. The defense budget, which fell to $9 billion in 1947, reached $50 billion by    
the time Truman left office.                                                            
What this growth made clear was that Americans, despite their wish to avoid             
any more "experiments, did not abandon the basic premises of the New Deal.              
The government maintained its commitment to setting a minimum wage, raising it          
again in 1950 from 45 to 75 cents. Social Security coverage was broadened to cover      
an additional 10 million workers. Furthermore, a growing list of welfare programs       
benefited not only the poor, but veterans, middle-income families, the elderly,         
and students. The most striking of these was the GI Bill of 1944.                       
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
Soldiers as Civilians                                                                   
For returning veterans, the GI Bill of Rights created unparalleled opportunity.         
Between 1945 and 1952 the federal government spent some $13.5 billion on edu-           
cation and training. Veterans with more than two years service received all tuition     
and fees plus $50 a month ($75 for married GIs) for three years of college educa-       
tion at any school. States like New York and California rapidly expanded their          
university systems to meet the demand from veterans. By 1948 the government             
was paying the college costs of almost 50 percent of all male students as over 2        
million veterans went to college on the GI Bill.                                        
Increased educational levels encouraged a shift from blue- to white-collar              
work and self-employment. Although available jobs in areas like mining and man-         
ufacturing increased little if at all, work in areas like insurance, teaching, state and
local governments, construction, and retailing expanded rapidly. Veterans also          
received low-interest loans to start businesses or farms of their own and to buy        
homes. By the 1950s the Veterans Administration (VA), which doled out this fed-         
eral largesse, funded the purchase of some 20 percent of all new houses.                
The GI Bill accelerated trends that would transform American society into a             
prosperous, better educated, heavily middle class suburban nation. Between 1945         
and 1970 veterans, especially those with college educations, earned over 40 per-        
cent more than nonveterans. The GI Bill also contributed to the economic advan-         
tages white males held over minorities and females. Few women received benefits         
under the bill. Many lost their jobs or seniority to returning veterans. Blacks and     
Hispanics, even those eligible for veterans benefits, were hampered by Jim Crow         
restrictions in segregated universities and jobs in Ixith the public and private        
sectors. The Federal Housing Administration even helped draw up "model re-              
strictive housing covenants neighborhoods could adopt in order to "retain stabil-       
ity' by segregating according to “social and racial classes.”                           
Blacks were expressly excluded. Other suburban communities,excluded Jews and         
ethnics in the restrictive covenants that dictated who could take up residence.      
By 1950 some 5 million new housing units had been built, many in the new             
suburbs. But over 2.5 million families still lived doubled up. In California, a state
with three cars registered for every four residents, suburbs bloomed across the      
landscape. By 1962 California had become the nation s most populous state.           
Growth was greatest around Los Angeles, once the center of the most extensive        
11100 miles) urban electric railroad system in the world In 1940 city planners       
launched construction of a freeway system to lure shoppers into downtown Los         
Angeles Instead, white Angelinos saw the road network as an opportunity to           
migrate to the suburbs. Eventually one-third of the Los Angeles area was covered     
by highways, parking lots, and interchanges, increasing to two-thirds in the down-   
town areas. Los Angeles County developed a higher percentage of detached hous-       
ing (about 67 percent) than other major cities like Chicago with 28 percent. New     
York with 20 percent, and Philadelphia with 15 percent.                              
Much of the white population that moved to the suburbs was replaced by               
blacks and Hispanics, who were part of larger migrations, especially of millions of  
southern black families leaving the South over the next two decades to search for    
work in urban centers. The majority headed for the Northeast and Upper Mid-          
west. While central cities lost 3.6 million whites they gained 4.5 million blacks.   
Indeed, by 1960 half of all black Americans would live in central cities. Blacks and 
Hispanics were also drawn to California. In 1940 only 1.8 percent of California’s    
population was black. By 1950 that percentage increased to 4.3 (and to 8 by 1970).   
As of 1945, only Mexico City had a larger Hispanic population than Los Angeles.      
And by the 1960s the 3 million Hispanic Californians made up 16 percent of the       
population. Although most came from rural Mexico, 85 percent eventually settled    
in cities.                                                                         
When poor black and Hispanic migrants poured into cities after the war, their      
prospects were particularly bleak. Earlier waves of European immigrants had        
been absorbed by the expanding urban economy, but during the 1950s the flight      
of jobs and middle-class population to the suburbs made it impossible for blacks   
and Hispanics to follow the same path. With fewer jobs and declining educational   
systems due to the loss of middle-class taxpayers, the cities were no longer well  
equipped to acculturate the newcomers and integrate them into the economy.         
Unemployment for the most recently arrived was over 40 percent in the worst        
areas.                                                                             
Since few blacks or Hispanics could afford the cost of suburban living, they       
accounted for less than 5 percent of the population there. Black suburbanites were 
p<x>rer, held lower status jobs, lived in more ramshackle housing, and had less    
education than blacks in the cities. The pattern for whites was just the opposite. 
Tile few black suburbs that existed dated from before the war ami had little in    
common with the newer white "bedroom communities. Blacks who could afford          
to move could not find suitable housing at any price. Real estate agents refused to
show them houses; bankers would not provide mortgages. And many communities        
adopted either restrictive covenants or zoning regulations that kept blacks and    
other "undesirables” out. William Myers finally managed in 1957 to buy a house     
from a white family in Levittown, Pennsylvania, but the developers did not sell    
directly to blacks until 1960.                                                     
The Flickering Gray Screen                                                         
The move to the suburbs, combined with generally shorter working hours in          
white-collar jobs, influenced the way Americans spent leisure time. Nowhere can    
this better be seen than in the popularity of television.                          
Television was not new in the 1940s. The technology had existed since 1927,        
and in 1939 the National Broadcasting Company (NBC) and Columbia Broadcast-        
ing System (CBS) had begun regular broadcasting. Programs included bits of mu-     
sicals, vaudeville acts, and sports, transmitted by some 23 stations around the    
country'. The war halted broadcasting as skilled personnel and equipment were      
shifted to military work, but with the coming of peace television quickly realized 
its potential as a mass medium. The Radio Corporation of America (RCA) rushed      
to produce modestly priced black-and-white sets and to improve the quality of      
picture tubes. By 1949 Americans owned a million television sets tuned into 108    
licensed stations. Just three years later 15 million sets had been sold and by 1960
there were 46 million sets. Indeed, more Americans had televisions than had        
bathrooms.                                                                         
The networks offered sports, news (with film produced by movie studios),           
dramatic series, and puppet shows like “Kukla, Fran, and Ollie" and “The Howdy     
Doody Show” for children. In 1948 the networks assumed an important role in        
politics as they covered Both the Democratic and Republican conventions. Two       
years later, the medium showed its ability to combine entertainment, politics, and 
news by televising a series of hearings on organized crime chaired by Senator      
Estes Kefauver. Some 30 million viewers watched the New York City hearings         
broadcast live. The star attraction was mobster Frank Costello, who headed a large 
interstate criminal organization with close ties to city governments. Forbidden to 
show the witness himself, the television cameras focused on his hands as he nerv-  
cans and generally had incomes only half as large. Premiums would be paid into       
the social security system and financed by it. Citizens could also make voluntary    
payments that would cover doctors’ and surgical fees. Since Medicare made no         
provision for the poor who were not elderly. Congress also passed a program          
called Medicaid. Participating states would receive matching grants from the fed-    
eral government to pay the medical expenses of those on welfare or too poor to       
afford medical care.                                                                 
In one sense, Medicare and Medicaid worked. The poor and elderly did                 
receive significantly more help when facing catastrophic illnesses. But as in-       
creased numbers oi patients used hospital services. Medicare budgets rose. In        
addition, nothing in the act restricted hospitals or doctors from raising their fees.
The cost of the programs soared by over 500 percent in the first 10 years. In the    
year after Congress approved Medicare, hospitals raised their fees by 14 percent,    
double the increase of the year before. Doctors began to charge for care they once   
gave free, raising their fees about 7 percent every' year. Those increases wiped out 
the benefits many of the elderly’ and poor received, so that actual medical ex-      
penses remained constant. What was saved in hospital bills went for more costly      
drugs, dental work, and doctors' fees not covered under Medicare or Medicaid.        
Ten days after signing the Medicare bill Johnson signed the Omnibus Hous-            
ing Act, designed to subsidize rents for poor families unable to find adequate       
public housing. Four days Titter came the Voting Rights Act. Within two weeks        
Congress approved creation of a nexV-eabjnet-lex’el Department of Housing and        
Urban Development (HUD) to be headed by Robert Weaver, a former president            
of the NAACP. And in the tradition of the New Deal, which had patronized the         
arts under the WPA, Johnson created the National Foundation of the Arts and          
Humanities. Colleges and their students received support for scholarships and        
loans, research equipment, and libraries. Ami on another front, Great Society        
programs reformed American immigration policy. Although the United States still      
admitted just 170,000 people each year, the Immigration Act of 1965 abolished the    
national origins system, which favored northern Europeans over those from other      
areas of Europe. Racial provisions restricting Asian immigration were eliminated,    
although limits were still placed on immigration from other parts of the Western     
Hemisphere.                                                                          
Nor did Johnson, in his efforts to outdo the New Deal, slight the environ-           
ment. By the mid-1960s many Americans had become increasingly concerned              
about the acrid smog from factories and automobiles; lakes and rivers polluted by    
detergents, pesticides, and industrial wastes; and the disappearance of wildlife. In 
1964 Congress had already passed the National Wilderness Preservation System         
Act to set aside 9.1 million acres of wilderness as “forever wild. Lady Bird John-   
son, the president's wile, led a campaign to eliminate the garish billboards and     
junkyards that marred the views along so many of the nation’s roads. And Con-        
gress established pollution standards for interstate waterways and a year later      
provided funds for sewage treatment and water purification. Similar standards        
were tightened to diminish air pollution. The programs for the environment, like     
other Great Society measures, often ran afoul of entrenched interests. Mining,       
cattle-grazing, and lumbering businesses lobbied to continue using portions of       
public wilderness lands for their own benefit. On the other hand, the new stan-      
dards did result in a gradual, steady improvement in water and air quality in many   
areas.                                                                               
In 1966 Johnson pushed through bills to raise the minimum wage, improve              
auto safety, aid mass transit, and develop "model cities. But by then he had         
cal as seeking to establish diplomatic relations with China. Yet Nixon did not      
hesitate. For another year federal wage and price boards enforced the ground        
rules for any increases; most controls were lifted in January 1973. Nixon also      
devalued the dollar in order to reverse the foreign trade deficit. Cheaper dollars  
raised the price of imports like the popular Volkswagen Beetle and made Ameri-      
can exports more competitive in foreign markets.                                    
By the fall of 1972 the economy was again booming. As in foreign policy,            
Nixon had reversed long-cherished economic policies to achieve practical results.   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
“SILENT” MAJORITIES AND VOCAL MINORITIES                                            
During the 1968 campaign Richard Nixon had noticed a placard carried by a           
hopeful voter---"Bring Us Together"---and adopted it as his campaign theme. Yet     
of necessity political coalitions cannot bring everyone together. Their goal is sim-
ply to assemble a majority on election day. Nixon recognized quite well that in the 
three-way race of 1968, his 43 percent did not add up to a majority . But when      
Wallace’s vote was added, the total came to an impressive 60 percent. Nixon set     
out to add discontented southerners and blue-collar workers to the traditional      
GOP base. In doing so, he tried to identify them with the "silent majority, at the  
same time excluding other vocal minorities who had been actively campaigning for    
increased civil rights. The black movement had received the most national atten-    
tion during the mid-1960s, but other minorities also adopted more radical tactics   
to achieve their ends. Their new, more assertive visibility was crucial Io Nixon s  
attempt to form his own counter-majority.                                           
                                                                                    
Hispanic Activism                                                                   
Outside the southwestern states, southeastern Florida, anil New York City few       
Americans prior to the 1960s and 1970s had much contact with the nation’s His-      
panic population. The major immigration from Mexico and Puerto Rico began only      
after World War 11 and. in the case of Cubans, after the 1959 revolution that       
brought Castro to power. While historical, cultural, ethnic, and geographic differ- 
ences among the three major Hispanic groups made it difficult to develop a com-     
mon political agenda, activist leaders did seek greater Hispanic unity.             
The acquisition of Puerto Rico in 1898 gave the United States control over an       
Island population of one million people, whose diverse mixture of classes and races 
resulted from the intermarriage of African. Indian, and Spanish peoples. Their      
political status remained uncertain until 1947, when the island acquired a new      
constitution. Puerto Rico became neither a state nor an independent nation, but a   
commonwealth. Island people were defined as U.S. citizens subject to the draft,     
free from federal income taxes, anil ineligible for benefits under federal social   
sen ice programs.                                                                   
After World War 11 a weak island economy and the lure of prosperity on the          
mainland brought over a million Puerto Ricans into New York City. As citizens of    
the United States', they could move freely to the mainland and back home again.     
That dual consciousness discouraged many from establishing deep roots stateside.    
Equally important, the newcomers were startled to discover that, whatever their     
status at home, on the mainland they were subject to racial discrimination and        
most often segregated into rundown urban slums. Approximately half of the recent      
immigrants lived below the poverty’ level in 1964, according to the Puerto Bican      
Forum, and their unemployment was three times greater than for whites and 50          
percent higher than lor blacks. When light-skinned migrants escaped those condi-      
tions by blending into the middle class as “Latin Americans,” the Puerto Rican        
community lost some of the leadership it needed to assert its political rights. Still,
a shared island orientation preserved a strong group identity- By the 1960s, the      
urban barrios gained greater political consciousness as groups like “Aspira”          
adopted the strategies of civil rights activists and organizations like the Black and 
Puerto Rican Caucus created links with other minority groups.                         
The Cubans who arrived in the United States after 1959---some 350,000 over            
the course of the decade---forged fewer ties with other Hispanics. Most settled       
around Miami. An unusually large number came from Cuba’s professional, busi-          
ness, and government class, were racially white and politically conservative. Mex-    
ican-Americans, on the other hand, constituted the largest segment of the His-        
panic population. Until the 1940s most were farmers and farm laborers in Texas,       
New Mexico. and California. But during the 1950s. the process of mechanization        
had affected them, just as it had southern blacks. By 1969 about 85 percent of        
Mexican-Americans had settled in cities. With urbanization came a slow improve-       
ment of the range and quality of jobs they held. A body of skilled workers, middle    
class professionals, and entrepreneurs emerged.                                       
In I960, frustrated by years of neglect by major parties, Hispanic political          
leaders from the region formed the Mexican-American Political Association.            
MAPA declared its intent to be “proudly Mexican American, openly political, and       
necessarily bipartisan. By 1964 four Mexican-Americans had been elected to            
Congress, but the growing activism across the nation altered traditional Hispanic     
approaches to politics. Younger Mexican-Americans began to call themselves Chi-       
canos. In 1965 Cesar Chavez gained national attention by his efforts to organize      
migrant laborers into the United Farm Workers and lead them in La lluelga---The       
Strike---as they struck farm growers ami set in motion a national boycott of Cali-    
fornia lettuce and grapes. Corky Gonzales, a Denver social worker, established La     
Crusada Para Justicia (Crusade for Justice) to support strikes by Chicano high        
school students, protest police brutality, and oppose the Vietnam War. The more       
militant Reics Tijerina and his supporters in New Mexico occupied the Kit Carson      
National Forest to dramatize disputes over old Spanish land titles.                   
By the late 1960s Mexican-Americans had clearly established an ethnic con-            
sciousness and a movement. Like blacks, Chicanos saw themselves as a decul-           
turated people: their heritage rejected, their labor exploited, their opportunity for 
advancement denied. The new ethnic militancy led to the formation of La Raza          
Vnida (The Race United), a third-party movement which sought to gain power in         
communities where Chicanos were a majority and to extract concessions from the        
Democrats and Republicans. The more militant “Brown Berets adopted the para-          
military tactics and radical rhetoric of the Black Panthers.                          
The Choices of Native Americans                                                       
Like blacks and Hispanics, Indians resorted to the strategies of protest and dem-     
onstration; yet the unique situation of Native Americans (as many now called          
themselves) set them apart from other minorities. Despite a largely hostile white     
culture that had most often worked either to exterminate or assimilate, the tradi-    
tions and identities of American Indians survived through their tribes, bands,        
villages, and other kin associations. From a low in population of only 250,000 in     
1920, Native Americans grew steadily to around 800,(KM) by 1970. Leaders ol           
Indian tribal councils, many of them World War 11 veterans, pressed for expanded      
civil rights; and in 1948 the Supreme Court required stales to grant Indians the      
right to vote (Trujillo v. Garley).                                                   
But the growing pressures for civil rights that inspired that decision created        
another threat to Indian tribal identities, Liberals came to see the reservations not 
as oases of Indian culture, but as rural ghettos. During the 1950s they joined        
conservatives eager to repeal the New Deal and western state politicians eyeing       
tribal resources to adopt a policy of "termination.” Under this approach, the Bu-     
reau of Indian Affairs would reduce federal services, gradually sell off tribal lands,
and push Indians into the "mainstream" of American life. Although most full-          
blood Indians objected to the policy, some mixed bloods and Indians already           
assimilated into white society supported the move. The resulting relocation of        
1901-1910. Adding another 300,000 to 500,(XX) illegal immigrants each year, the    
total was even greater than the 8.8 million arriving in the first decade of the    
century.                                                                           
Latin American immigrants accounted for approximately 35 to 40 percent of          
the influx each year, as they had since the 1960s. The greatest number settled in  
sunbelt states of Florida, Texas, and California, as well as Illinois and New York.
However, the increased visibility of Hispanics did not readily translate into eco- 
nomic gains. In an economy increasingly divided between highly skilled jobs in     
the service sectors and low-paying unskilled jobs, Hispanics lagged behind anglos  
and blacks in education. Often, the lack of adequate English-language skills dis-  
couraged academic success. As housing costs soared during the late 1970s, only 43  
percent of Hispanics owned their homes, compared to 63 percent of all Ameri-       
cans.                                                                              
Larger families with less money translated into crowded conditions. Like           
immigrant families at the turn of the century, the more established Hispanic       
families provided housing for newer immigrants, who were often single. The new-             
comers hoped to save enough money from their weekly paycheck to send it to                  
relatives in Mexico or Central America.                                                     
At the same time, some of the new immigration patterns reversed established                 
ones. Traditionally, the majority of immigrants arriving in America have taken the          
lowest paying jobs, gradually assimilating into society and working their way up.           
Census figures from the mid-1980s indicated, however, that newcomers often did              
better than natives. Thus lorcign-born black and Hispanic people appeared more              
likely to have jobs than native-born ones. Riots in Miami during 1989 revealed              
growing tension between newly arrived Haitians and African-Americans. Heavy                 
immigration also disturbed relations between Hispanics and Central Americans.               
By the 1980s Asians had surpassed Hispanics in numbers of legal immigrants.                 
By eliminating the national origins quota system, the Immigration Act of 1965               
opened the door on a first-come, first-qualified basis, making possible the influx of       
people from China and Taiwan, Korea, Japan, the Philippines, Vietnam, Cambo-                
dia. Laos. Thailand, and India. As of 1990 about 6.5 million Asian-Americans lived          
in the United States. Like earlier immigrants from Europe, those from the Pacific           
rim came in waves. Some, like the Vietnamese ‘ boat people of the late 1970s,               
were driven from their homes by economic or political turmoil; others were drawn            
to reunite families or realize greater opportunities in the Western Hemisphere.             
Professional and educated Asian Indians emigrated in search of better jobs in the           
United States. Doctors and nurses constituted a large percentage of the early               
Korean immigrants. But letters home to relatives and other nationals soon at-               
tracted a more diverse population, which concentrated in small businesses. By the           
mid-1980s Indians owned over 50 percent of the non-chain motels in the United               
States, and Koreans often replaced Jews and Italians as owners of small inner-city          
delicatessens ami produce stores.                                                           
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                     SON |                 
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
 pKAJIH IHMH THifY SaF                                                                     
 Ihongkongc^                                                                 . ...         
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
 VriMiw;, IAILORING'                                                HUA BINH DELI          
 Au PHbC Tn.^-                                                                             
                                                           _____________ ■ ■,...           
                                                            BRIDOECREEK                    
I’he presence of other Asian-Ainericans and an international atmosphere             
drew many Asian-Americans to New York City, but climate made Hawaii and             
California particularly popular destinations, In 1977 alone some 40,000 Filipinos,  
many eager to escape from the corrupt regime of dictator Ferdinand Marcos,          
migrated to Honolulu. Of the 400,(XX) Korean-Americans in 1980 some 100,(XX)        
lived around Los Angeles. So. too, the half million Japanese-Americans settled      
primarily in California and Hawaii. By contrast, the federal government at-         
tempted to disperse the large influx of Vietnamese (as well as Cambodians and       
Laotians) who fled after the American withdrawal from Southeast Asia.               
Many of the new immigrants achieved success while lacing subtle forms ol            
discrimination. With the exception of the Vietnamese, whose average income had      
been lowered by the presence of newly arrived boat people, the census bureau’s      
1980 figures of average yearly income showed many Asian s leading not only other    
immigrant groups, but full-time American wage earners:                              
Asian Indian          $18,707                                                       
Japanese               16,829                                                       
Chinese              15,753                                                         
White                15,572                                                         
Korean               14,224                                                         
Filipino                13,690                                                      
Hispanic              11,650                                                        
Vietnamese           11,641                                                         
African-American      11,327                                                        
The high rate of success resulted partly from pres ions business and educational    
experience, as well as a powerful work ethic. One survey indicated that while the   
average American student spent 19.6 hours a week on academic work, the average      
Japanese-American spent 32.6 hours and Chinese-Americans. 40.4.                     
Racial tensions, made worse by job losses and the U.S. trade deficit with           
Asian countries, soon gave way to scattered acts of violence. in the |X>rts of Texas
and Louisiana the Ku Klux Klan joined with angry shrimp fishermen to mount a        
campaign of harassment and terror against newly arrived Vietnamese shrimpers.       
During a 1982 recession, some Detroit blue-collar workers vented their fear of      
Japanese auto imports by beating a Chinese-American to death. Many inner-city       
Korean merchants faced vandalism from local street gangs. The increasing num-       
bers of both Asians and Hispanics also raised fears that they would not assimilate  
into American society. To spur acculturation conservatives called for the elimina-  
tion of bilingual education. In 1981 the outspoken Max Rafferty, a nativist Califor-
nia educator, told Hispanics, "Immigrating was your idea. So the burden of learn-   
ing the new language falls upon you---or should.’ In 1986 California voters         
reinforced the message. They passed a stale referendum ending bilingual educa-      
tion. Other states such as Florida followed suit.                                   
Congress also attacked the problem of increasing illegal immigration along          
the nation’s southern border. After debating the issue for several years, in 1987 it
passed a compromise version of the Simpson-Mazzoli Bill, which for the first time   
punished employers for hiring illegal aliens. To ease the plight of those aliens    
illegally in the country, the new law allowed those resident since January 1982 to  
become citizens. The Immigration and Naturalization Service used stricter guide-    
lines for determining which immigrants would be granted political asylum, al-       
though critics complained that the anticommunist Reagan administration was          
