NATION OF NATIONS
that confronted him. “Go ahead! is the order of the day. he observed The whole     
continent presents a scene of scrambling and roars with greedy hurry. If the       
economic hallmark ol this new order was the growth of a national market, there     
were social factors that also contributed to the new, restless America.            
Population Growth                                                                  
The American population continued to double about even- 22 years---more than       
twice the birth rate of Great Britain. The census, which stood at fewer than 4     
million in 1790, surpassed 9 million in 1820. By 1850, then* were 23 million       
people living in the* United States. Although the birth rate peaked in 1800, it    
evidenced only a slow decline before 1840. In the 1840s. which was a period of     
rapid urbanization, it dropped about 10 penent, the first significant decrease in  
American history. In cities, couples tended to be older al marriage and families   
were smaller, in part because the labor of children was not as critical to the     
family’s welfare. At the same time, many basic population characteristics changed  
little throughout the first half of the nineteenth century: life expectancy did not
improve significantly, the population was very young, and early marriage and       
family formation remained the norm. especially in rural areas.                     
From 17fX) to 1820. natural increase accounted for virtually ail of the            
country s (population growth. But immigration, which had been disrupted by the     
Napoleonic Wars in Europe*, revived alter 1815. In the 1830s. some 600.000 immi-   
grants arrived, more than double the number in the quarter century after 1790.     
and this increase was just a foretaste of the ilood of newcomers that reached      
America beginning in the late 1840s.                                               
The vast areas of land available for settlement absorbed much of the burgeon-      
ing population. Old America seems to be breaking up. and moving westward,          
Morris Birkbeck, an Englishman, declared in 1817. By 1850 almost half of the       
to raise productivity. In the mid-1830s the mills began to increase the workloads. 
The most commonly used methods were the speed-up (increasing the speed of the      
machines), the stretch-out (increasing the number of machines each operator        
tended), and the premium system (paying bonuses for high productivity). Skilled    
women could make more money under the new system, but they had to work             
much harder to do so. The average worker’s productivity rose by 71 percent, but    
her wages went up only 16 percent. Even these changes in work rules failed to      
maintain previous profits, and on several occasions factories cut wages.           
TliejLylhw* ™f paternalism and the ever-quickening pace ol work finally pro-       
voked resistance among the women in the mills. Several times in the 1830s wage     
cuts precipitated strikes in which a minority of workers walked out. Management    
retaliated by firing strike leaders, hiring new workers, and blacklisting women    
who refused to return Tn the 1840s, workersprotests focused on the demand for a    
10-hour day. Perhaps a third of the female workers signed petitions calling for the
shorter workday, but the legislature, siding with the owners, concluded that work- 
ing conditions were not the state’s responsibility.                                
As the mills expanded, a smaller proportion of the workers lived in company        
boardinghouses and moral regulations were relaxed. But the greatest change was a_  
shiftiiLllu^vvxirkJbjve from native-born females to Irish iijimlnHulEZrThe Irish,  
who had comprised only 8 percent of the Lowell work force in 1845, made up         
almost half by 1860. hi addition, 30 percent of the workers were men, and the      
number of children in the mills (many of whom also were Irish) doubled. The        
arrival of the Irish, who were desperately poor and did not view their situation as
temporary, signaled the creation of a permanent working class. It also eventually  
led to a lowering of wages and a narrowing of the gap between the highest and      
lowest paying jobs in the factory.                                                 
Industrial Work                                                                    
The transition to an industrial labor force with values and behavior patterns that 
were attuned to factory work was not a smooth one. Before the rise of the factory, 
artisans had worked within the home. Apprentices were considered part of the       
family and subject to the discipline and control of the master. Masters were re-   
sponsible not only for teaching their apprentices a trade, but also for providing  
them some education and for supervising their moral behavior. Journeymen took      
pride in their work, knowing that if they developed their skills and were frugal,  
they could eventually set themselves up in a shop and become respected master      
artisans. Nor did skilled craftsmen work by the clock, at a steady pace, but rather
in bursts of intense labor alternating with slow seasons, their work frequently    
interrupted for a pint of ale, a bit of gossip, or even a prank or two.            
The factory, however, changed that. Pride in craftsmanship gave wav to rates       
of productivity. Goods produced by factories were not as finished nr elegant as    
those-done^ by hand. Instead, the emphasis was on mass producinn articles uf       
lower quality' that could be sold cheaply. At the same time that workers lost pride
in their work, they were required to discard old habits. Industrialism demanded a  
workerwho was sober, dependable, anti self-disciplined. The machines, whirring     
and clacking away, set a strict schedule that had to be followed. Absenteeism,     
lateness, and drunkenness hurt productivity' and, since work was specialized, dis- 
rupted the regular factory routine. Thus industrialization not only produced a     
fundamental change in the way work was organized, but also transformed the very    
nature of work.                                                                    
The first generation to experience these changes did not adopt the new atti-       
tudes easily, and many workers persisted in the old ways. The factory clock be-    
came the symbol of the new work rules. One mill worker who finally quit com-       
plained revealingly about “obedience to the ding-dong of the bell---just as though 
we are so many living machines. With the loss of personal freedom also came the    
loss of pride in one’s work and a sense of place in the community. Unlike the      
master-apprentice relationship, factories sharply separated workers from manage-   
ment, and few workers rose through the ranks to supervisory positions. Tn areas of 
the economy where factory production became dominant, even fewer could             
achieve the artisan’s dream of setting up one’s own business, since handcrafted    
goods were too expensive to be sold to any but the wealthy. Even well-paid         
workers sensed their decline in status.                                            
The Shoe Industry                                                                  
Shoemaking illustrates one way the artisan tradition came to be undermined._ll     
Lowell was the symbol of the textile industry, nearby Ly nn was the center of shoe 
manufacturing. Traditionally , a skilled cobbler possessed a good knowledge of     
The Minstrel Show                                                                     
During the first hall of the nineteenth century, a popular culture directed toward    
the masses developed in response to rising urbanization. Originating in the 1830s     
and 1840s and playing to packed houses in cities and towns throughout the nation      
and even in the gold fields of California, the minstrel show became the most          
popular form of entertainment in Jacksonian America. Featuring white actors per-      
forming in~blaefelacc. these shows revealed the deep racism embedded in Amen-         
caii society. Tlicy dealt in the- broadest ol racial stereotypes; their advertisements
ridiculed blacks, with bulging eyeballs, flat noses, large lips, and gaping mouths,   
as physically different. The skits themselves portrayed blacks as Imlloons. speak-    
ing in heavy dialect, performing outlandish dances, and singing almost compul-        
sively.                                                                               
Although popular throughout the country, minstrelsy's primary audience was            
in northern cities, and its basic message was that African-Americans could not        
cope with freedom and therefore did not belong in the North. Blacks in slavery        
were portrayed as happy and contented, whereas free blacks were invariably cari-      
catured either as strutting dandies who aped white ways or as helpless ig-            
noramuses. Longing to return to the South, one character declared. "Dis being         
free is worser den being a slave. Drawing its patrons from workers, Irish irnmi-      
grants, and the poorer elements in society, minstrelsy assured these white cham-      
pions of democracy that no matter what their situation, they were superior to         
blacks.               «                                                               
The unsettling economic, social, and political changes of the Jacksonian era          
heightened white anxiety. Under intense pressure to succeed, whites were              
loth•ries that were so popular among the lower classes. He outspokenly con-         
demned those who drank to excess, and he sought to close the booths that sold       
grog on the Boston Common. And he denounced Roman Catholic priests and nuns         
as superstitious, devious agents of Antichrist’’---that seven-headed, ten-horned    
beast described so vividly in the book of Revelation. By the late 1820s a new wave  
of immigrants had begun to arrive in the United States, many of them Catholics      
from Ireland and Germany. Such newcomers, as well as other working people who       
enjoyed rum, whiskey, or lotteries, did not appreciate Beecher’s efforts at “moral  
reform. When a blaze broke out in the basement of his church in 1830. local         
firelighters rushed to Hanover Street---for the pleasure of watching while that     
splendid structure burned to the ground. The fires of spiritual reform had been     
checked, temporarily, by a blaze of a literal sort.                                 
Any fire, real or spiritual, is a bit unpredictable as it spreads from one scrap of 
tinder to the next. So it proved with reform movements of the 1820s and 1830s:      
they moved in diverging, sometimes contradictory ways. What did it mean, after      
all. to bring in Christ’s kingdom? The goals of the early reform societies were     
moral rather than social. Leaders like Beecher sought to convert individuals and to 
church the unchurched, with the help of religious revivals and benevolent associa-  
tions. Their conservative aim. as he expressed it, was to restore America to “the   
moral government of God.” Other Christians, however, began to focus on social       
abuses and to demand more radical solutions. The degradation of slavery. the        
inequality of women in society, the abuses of prisons and asylums---these social    
evils needed to be attacked directly, they argued. Ironically, while Lyman          
Beecher remained in the conservative mainstream, many of his children went well     
beyond his own strategies for hastening the millennium. They spoke out for aboli-   
tion, women’s rights, and education in ways that left their father distinctly uncom-
fortable. In their activities, Beecher family members reflected the diversity of the
reform impulse itself.                                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                     REVIVALISM AND THE SOCIAL ORDER
Society during the Jacksonian era was undergoing deep and rapid changes. It was     
expanding economically' through the revolution in markets, as its citizens com-     
peted for status and wealth through the gospel of democratic individualism. In a    
nation where fortunes could be won and lost almost overnight, some reformers        
sought stability and moral order in religious community . The bonds of unity cre-   
ated by a revival brought a sense of peace in the midst of a society in change.     
Revivals could provide a sense of strength and discipline, too, in an emerging      
industrial culture that demanded sobriety and regular working habits. Other re-     
formers, however, sought to check the excesses of Jacksonian America by radically   
remaking institutions or devising utopian, experimental ways of living and work-    
ing together. The drive for renewal, in other words, led reformers sometimes to     
preserve social institutions, other times to overturn them. It led them sometimes   
to liberate, other times to control. And the conflicting ways in which these dy nam-
ics operated could be seen as the revivals of the Second Great Awakening were       
transformed by the electric career of Charles Grandison Einney.                     
The crusading idealism of revivalists and reformers inevitably collided with the      
hard reality that society could not be perfected by converting individuals. Despite   
the arguments ol the temperance movement, some Americans continued to drink.          
For all the zeal of the abolitionists, slavery showed no signs of disappearing. Even  
the revivalist tide had lost its force by the end of the 1830s. Several campaigns,    
including those to establish public schools ami erect asylums, had operated within    
the political system from the beginning. But a growing number of other frustrated     
reformers abandoned the principle of voluntary persuasion and looked to govern-       
mental coercion to achieve their goals. In America's democratic society, politics     
promised a more effective means to impose a new moral vision on the nation.           
Declared a writer in the American Temperance Magazine, The speculative has            
yielded to the practical. . . . In this sense, moral suasion is moral balderdash.     
Old-line politicians dicl not particularly welcome the new interest. Moral            
questions such as temperance and antislavery, which cut across party lines, threat-   
ened to detach regular party members and disrupt each party’s unity and voting        
base. Because the Whig ami Democratic parties had formed around economic              
questions rather than moral ones, both drew on evangelical and nonevangelical         
voters. Yet it was precisely for this reason that moral reform, by mobilizing evan-   
gelical voters, threatened the Jacksonian party system.                               
Both religion and reform helped shape that system, through ethnic and reli-           
gious loyalties. Whigs attracted immigrant groups that most easily merged into the    
dominant culture, such as the English. Welsh, and Scots. Democrats, on the other      
hand, recruited more Germans and Irish, whose drinking habits, more lenient           
observance of the Sabbath, and (among Catholics) use of parochial schools made        
native-born citizens suspicious. As the self-proclaimed party of respectability.      
Whigs especially attracted the support ol high-status native-born church groups,      
including the Congregationalists and Unitarians in New England and Presbyteri-        
ans elsewhere. Democrats appealed to the lower-status Baptists and Methodists.        
For all their evangelical ways, these groups usually lacked the prestige and social   
acceptance of the Presbyterians and Congregationalists. with whom they often          
dashed. Both parties also attracted freethinkers and the unchurched, but the          
Democrats had the adv antage because they resisted demands for temperance and         
Sabbatarian laws, such as the prohibition of Sunday travel.                           
                                                                                      
 Women and the Right to Vote                                                         
 As the focus ol change and reform shifted toward the political arena, women in      
                                                                                     
 particular lost influence. As major participants in the benevolent organizations of 
 the 1820s and 1830s, they had circulated petitions, sought new members, and         
 used their efforts on behalf of “moral suasion. But since women could not vote,     
 they felt excluded when reformers turned to electoral action to accomplish their    
 goals. By the 1840s. female reformers increasingly demanded the right to vote as    
 the means to reform society. Nor were men blind to what was at stake: one reason    
 they so strongly resisted female suffrage was because it would give women real      
 power.                                                                              
 The temperance and abolitionist movements, both of which turned to politi-          
cal action in the 1840s, helped convince women of the importance of gaining the      
ballot. Previously, many female reformers had accepted the right of petition as      
their most appropriate political activity. Hut The Lily, a women's rights paper,     
soon changed its tack. "Why shall [women] be left only the poor resource of          
petition? it asked. "For even petitions, when they arc from women, without the       
elective franchise to give them backbone, are of but little consequence. The right   
to vote would remain the key demand of the women’s rights movement until 1920,       
when the Nineteenth Amendment was ratified.                                          
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
The Maine Law                                                                        
The political parties could resist the women's suffrage movement, since most ol its  
advocates lacked the right to vote, l-ess easily put olT were temperance' advrxates. 
As early as 1825 Lyman Beecher had called for banning the sale of distilled spirits, 
and the antiliquor crusade turned to political action in the 1840s Although drink-   
ing had significantly declined in American society, it had not been eradicated, ami  
the arrival after 1845 of large numbers of German and Irish immigrants, who were     
accustomed to drinking, made voluntary prohibition even more remote. In re-          
sponse, temperance advocates decided to attack the supply of liquor by enacting      
state laws outlawing the manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages; they de-       
manded still penalties, including jail sentences, for individuals guilty of selling  
liquor. Antiliquor reformers reasoned that ifliquor was unavailable, the attitude ol 
drinkers was unimportant----they would be forced to reform whether they wanted       
to or not.                                                                           
In taking up the cause ol prohibition, the antidrinking movement gained the          
support of the evangelical churches, which condemned drinking even in modera-        
tion. Consequently, the issue of prohibition cut across party lines, with large      
numbers of Whigs and Democrats on both sides of the question. When party             
leaders tried to dixlgc the issue, the temp-rance movement adopted the strategy      
of endorsing for the legislature only candidates who pledged to support a prohibi-   
tory law. As a result, a growing number of legislators committed themselves to the   
antiliquor cause. To win additional recruits, temperance leaders emulated tech-      
niques used in political campaigns, including house-to-house canvasses, parades      
and processions, bands and singing, banners, picnics, and mass rallies.              
The major triumph came in 1851 in Maine’s legislature. The Maine Law, as it          
was known, prosided stiff penalties for selling liquor in the state; it also provided
lor search and seizure of private property. thereby’ strengthening the powers of     
enforcement. In the next few years a number of states enacted similar laws, al-      
though most were struck down by the courts or subsequently repealed. Neverthe-       
less, prohibition remained a divisive political issue throughout the century.        
While prohibition was temporarily defeated, the issue badly disrupted the            
unity of the two parties. It detached a numlrer of voters from both coalitions,      
greatly increased the extent of party switching, and brought to the polls a large    
number of new voters, including many ‘wets who wanted to preserve their right        
to drink. By dissolving the ties between many voters ami their party , the temper-   
ance issue played a major role in the eventual collapse of the Jacksonian party      
system in the 1850s.                                                                 
for manufactured gixrds, and buffalo, whose meat offered a reliable fixxl supply.    
Having obtained guns in exchange for furs, the Sioux could drive the Omahas.         
Otos, Cheyennes, and Missouris (who had not yet acquired guns) south anil west.      
Much like the Iroquois in New York a century earlier, the Sioux used their strate-   
gic position to dominate the western fur trade. But by the 1770s their previous      
advantage in guns had disappeared, anil any further advance up the Missouri was      
blocked by powerfid tribes such as the Mandans and Arikaras. These peoples were      
primarily horticultural, raising corn, beans, and squash and living in well-fortified
towns. They also owned more horses than the Sioux, which made it easier for          
them to resist attacks.                                                              
But the third frontier, disease, threw the balance of power toward the Sioux         
after 1779. European traders inadvertently brought smallpox with them onto the       
prairie. The horticultural tribes were hit especially hard liecause they lived in    
densely populated villages, where the epidemic spreail more easily. Observing        
this decimation, the Sioux abandoned their tentative experiments with agriculture    
and instead developed a nomadic culture centered on the buffalo hunt. They           
began a.second wave of westward expansion in the late eighteenth century, so that    
by the time Lewis and Clark came through in 1804. they firmly controlled the         
upper Missouri as far as the Yellowstone River.                                      
The Sioux's nomadic life enabled them to avoid the worst ravages of disease,         
especially the smallpox epidemic of 1837, which reduced the plains population by     
as much as haff They also benefited from government vaccination programs in the      
1830s and 1840s. after several U.S. forts were established on the Missouri, in-      
deed, the Sioux became the largest tribe on the plains and was the only one whose    
high birth rate approximated that of whites, their population doubling perhaps       
every 20 years. From an estimated 5000 in 1804, they grew to 25,000 by the           
1850s. Their numbers increased Sioux military power as well as the need for new      
hunting grounds. During the first half of the nineteenth century, they pushed        
farther up the Missouri, conquered the plains west of the Black Hills, and won       
control of the hunting grounds on the Platte River. By the 1840s. when whites        
began to traverse the region in large numbers, the Sioux had become the most         
powerful tribe on the plains.                                                        
So the “Sioux frontier was multidimensional, involving shifting boundaries           
of trade, animals, guns, and disease. Each of these factors disrupted the political  
and cultural life of the Great Plains. And as white Americans moved westward,        
their own frontier lines produced similar disruptions, not only between white        
settlers and Indians, hut also between Anglo-American and Hispanic cultures. To      
Americans in (he East, hearing tales of covered wagons along the Platte, the         
frontier saga seemed a stirring tale of "progress" moving west. To ranchers in New   
Mexico or California, this migration threatened their status as the predominant      
upper class. For the Chinese who had come to the gold fields of California. it       
meant creating a civilized enclave among the fon kivei (foreign devils), who         
mocked long pigtails and wore incredibly coarse clothes.                             
Ironically, perhaps the greatest instability created by the moving frontiers         
occurred in established American society As the political system of the United       
States struggled to incorporate territories, the North and South engaged in a fierce 
debate over whether the new7 lands should become slave or free. What, after all.     
was the destiny ol “these United States? (Americans, remember, still used the        
plural.) Just as the Sioux’s cultural identity was brought into question by the      
moving frontier, so too was the identity of the American Republic.                   
frontier settlers had grown indifferent if not hostile to religion. As the population
grew, however, a more conventional society evolved: towns and a middle class         
developed, the proportion of women increased, and the population became more         
stable. The presence of women. both as teachers and as strong advocates of educa-    
tion, made possible the establishment of schools.                                    
As towns expanded to serve the neighboring countryside, they provided                
stores, newspapers, cultural institutions, and better transportation. While oppor-   
tunity was greater on the frontier than in the East and early arrivals had a special 
advantage, the development of the market and a transportation network meant          
that success and wealth would not be equally distributed throughout the commu-       
nity. More and more, the agricultural frontier of the West resembled the older       
society of the East. Wealth became concentrated, some families fell to the lower     
rungs of society, and those who were less successful left, seeking yet another fresh 
start.                                                                               
The Gold Rush                                                                        
In January 1848. while constructing a sawmill along the American River, a carpen-    
ter and engineer named James Marshall noticed gold flecks in the millrace. More      
discoveries followed, and by May eager prospectors were stampeding to the Sierra     
foothills. Word took a season to trickle east, then spread like wildfire, and the    
following spring the Overland Trail was jammed with eager “forty-niners. Some        
80,000 emigrants journeyed to California that year, about 55,000 of whom took the    
overland route. The popular song that had once serenaded travelers to the boom       
country of Ixmisiana was quickly updated: “Oh, Susannah, don't you cry for me./      
I in gone to California with my wash-bowl on my knee. In only two years, from        
1848 to the end of 18-19. California's population jumped from 14,(XX) to 100,000.    
By 1852 it stood at twice that figure, and in I860 it was 380,000. California's      
glittering promise would always have a special allure for restless Americans.        
For those intent on making a fortune and returning home, there was no                
question of putting down roots. Camps literally appeared and died overnight, as      
word of a new strike sent miners racing off to yet another canyon, valley, or        
streambed. Most settlements were hardly mon* than a single street, littered with     
debris and lined with stores, buildings, and miners shacks---dirty, uncomforta-      
ble. and often no mon* than blankets or cloth tacked to a wooden frame in order to   
hold down costs. Almost always a saloon and gambling hall, which might double as     
a hotel and sometimes a brothel, was the most prominent building in town. Over       
80 percent of the prospectors who poured into these settlements were Americans;      
most hailed from the Mississippi valley, but Yankees and free African-Americans      
were there as well. Mexicans, Australians, llawaiians, Chinese. French, English,     
and Irish also came. Whatever their nationality, the new arrivals were overwhelm-    
ingly unmarried men in their twenties and thirties.                                  
The constant movement, the hard lalx>r of mining, the ready cash, and the            
rootlessness all contributed to the instability of camp society. “There is an excite-
ment connected with the pursuit of gold which renders one restless and uneasy---     
ever hoping to do something better, explained one forty-niner. Removed from          
the traditional forms of social control, miners felt and behaved as if (hey had left 
civilization behind. Gambling, swearing, drinking, and fighting were common-         
place. As a Denver paper complained during that territory’s gold rush a few years    
later, as soon as “men of decent appearance reached a mining camp, they sang         
low songs, walked openly with the painted courtesans with whom the town teems,        
and generally gave themselves up to what they term a time! Secure in the              
knowledge that “their women folks were safe and snug in their distant homes . .       
these [former| gentlemen announced that they were going ‘the whole hog or             
none.                                                                                 
Only about 5 percent ol gold rush emigrants were women or children; given             
this relative scarcity, men were walling to pay top dollar for women's domestic       
skills. Women supported themselves by cooking, sewing, and washing, as well as        
running hotels and boarding houses. “A smart woman can do very well in this           
country/’ one woman informed a friend in the East. “It is the only country I ever     
was in where a woman received anything like a just compensation for work. Yet         
women’s earnings depended on those of the miners, and as the mines played out.        
their w ages declined accordingly. Regardless, they suffered no shortage of suitors.  
"Even I had men come forty miles over the mountains, just to look at me, Eliza        
Wilson recalled, "and I never was called a handsome woman, in my best days,           
even by my most ardent admirers.                                                      
Women went to the mining frontier to be with their husbands, to make                  
money, or to find adventure. By far the class most frequently seen in the diggings    
were prostitutes, who numbered perhaps 20 percent of female Californians in           
1850. Many had practiced their trade elsewhere before coming to the mining            
districts. Those handsome enough to set themselves up in “high-class houses           
made tidy' fortunes. But for those who had aged or were less attractive, "cribs”      
were rented: tiny, foul, window less rooms with a cot. a chair, and a blur of faces at
50 cents apiece. In such circumstances, life was grim, violent, and uncertain.        
Predictably, mining the miners offered one of the more reliable roads to              
prosperity. Perhaps half the inhabitants of a mining town were shopkeepers, busi-     
nessmen, and professionals w ho serviced prospectors; also conspicuous were gam-      
blers, card sharks, and other shady characters, all bent on separating the miner      
from his riches. In such an atmosphere, violence was prevalent, so when a new         
vamp opened, miners adopted a set of rules and regulations to govern it. including    
a mining code? and local government. Justice was dispensed promptly, either by a      
vote of all the miners or by an elected jury. After witnessing one such trial, a      
European visitor commented, "1 never saw a court of justice with so little humbug     
about it. While effective when administered fairly, the system at times degener-      
ated into lynch law'.                                                                 
Observers spoke of the democratic spirit in the diggings. The only capital            
required is muscle and an honest purpose, boasted one. Yet such assertions over-      
looked strongly held nativist prejudices: when frustrated by a lack of success.       
American miners directed their hostility toward foreigners, whom they scorned         
w ith such derogatory names as "greasers (Mexicans) and "chinks" (Chinese). The       
miners ruthlessly exterminated the Indians in the area, mob violence drove Mexi       
cans out of nearly every camp, and the Chinese were confined to claims aban-          
doned by Americans as unprofitable. Efforts to exclude all foreigners from mining     
failed, but the state eventually enacted a foreign miners tax. which fell largely on  
the Chinese. Free African-Americans felt the sting of discrimination as well, both    
in the camps and in slate law. While American miners proclaimed that colored          
men were not privileged to work in a country intended only for American citi-         
zens.                                                                                 
Before long, the most easily worked claims had been played out. Moreover,             
with         miners in the state by 1852. competition steadily drove down the         
average daily earnings from $20 in 1848 to $6 in 1852. That was still higher than     
eastern wages, but goods and services cost significantly more too. As gold became   
increasingly difficult to extract, highly capitalized companies using heavy equip-  
ment dominated the industry. Shafis were dug deep into the ground, high-pres-       
sure waterjets tore away ore-bearing gravel, and veins of quartz rock were blasted  
out and crushed in large stamping mills. Virtually all of this was done by miners   
working lor wages rather than prospecting for themselves. Thus control of the       
mining industry passed into the hands of capitalists and corporate executives. Men  
who had come to California filled with visions of wealth usually found only shovels 
of mud. And as the era of the individual miner passed, so too did most mining       
camps and the unique society they spawned.                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
Instant City: San Francisco                                                         
When the United States assumed control of California, San Francisco had a popu-     
lation of perhaps 200. But thousands of emigrants took the water route west,        
passing through San Francisco s harbor on their way to the diggings. Some stayed,   
others returned from the mines to settle down, and by 1856 the city's population    
had jumped to an astonishing 50,000. In a mere eight years the city had attained    
the size New York had taken 190 years to reach.                                     
The product of economic self-interest. San Francisco developed in a helter-         
skelter fashion. Land prices soared, speculation was rampant, and commercial        
forces became paramount. The business streets presented a bedlam of noise and       
commotion, one visitor reporting that “the throng of men of all classes, characters,
and nations, with carts and animals, equaled Wall Street before three o’clock.      
Tin* city plan was a neat gridiron, but it paid no heed to the hilly terrain, and   
streets along the waterfront were projected precariously into the bay on piles      
driven into the water, until dirt from the hills being leveled could be carted down 
to fill in the cove. To complicate matters, south of Market Street the streets were 
laid out at a 45° angle to the original survey, which clogged the How ol traffic.   
Commercial sentiment was so strong that almost no land was reserved for             
public use. and the city* government took virtually no role in directing develop-   
ment. 4’he town appeared insubstantial, with people living in tents or p<x»rly      
constructed, half-finished buildings. Junk and rubbish littered the streets and     
goods were piled everywhere because of the lack of warehouse space. Property        
owners defeated a proposal to widen the streets, prompting the city’s leading       
newspaper to complain, “To sell a few more feet of lots, the streets were com-      
pressed like a cheese, into half their width. The city’s population was strikingly  
heterogeneous, and visitors reported that an amazing assortment of languages        
could be heard. Ethnic neighborhoods included Little Chile for South Americans,     
a French quarter, Sydneytown. where Australians dominated. Chinatown, and a         
Jewish section. In 1860, the city was 50 percent foreign-bom.                       
fhe most distinctive of the ethnic groups was the Chinese. They had come to         
Gum San. the land of the golden mountain, because China in the 1840s had            
experienced considerable economic distress. Between 1849 and 1854. some             
45,000 Chinese went to California. Like the other gold seekers, they were over-     
whelmingly young and male, and they wanted only to accumulate savings and           
return home to their families. (Indeed, only 16 Chinese women were recorded as      
arriving before 1854.)                                                              
When the Chinese were harassed in the mines, many found work in San                 
Francisco as launderers. The going rate at the time for washing, ironing, and       
starching shirts was an exorbitant $8 per dozen; many early San Franciscans actu-   
ally found it cheaper to send their dirts’ laundry to Canton or Honolulu, to be     
returned several months later. The Chinese quickly stepped in, for it took little   
capital to start a laundry---soap, scrub board, iron, and ironing board. Soon the   
price for washing shirts dropped to $2 a dozen. Other Chinese around San Fran-      
cisco set up restaurants or worked in the fishing industry . In these early years,  
they found Americans less hostile, so long as they stayed away from the gold fields.
In 1850 a San Francisco newspaper, the Alta California, predicted optimistically    
that “the China Boys will yet vote at the same polls, study at the same schools and 
bow at the same altar as our countrymen," As immigration and the competition for    
jobs increased, however, anti-Chinese sentiment intensified.                        
Gradually, San Francisco took on the trappings of a more orderly' community.        
The city government established a public school system, erected street lights,      
created a municipal water system, and halted further filling in of the bay. Fashion-
able neighborhoods sprouted on several hills, as high rents drove many residents    
from the developing commercial center of the city. Industry was relegated to the    
area south of the city; several new working-class neighborhoods grew up near the    
downtown section. Churches and families became more common. By 1856, when           
the city and county were consolidated, the city of the gold rush had been replaced  
by a new city whose stone and brick buildings gave it a sense of permanence.        
The Mormon Experience                                                               
The society spawned by the gold rush---in the makeshift mining towns and the        
chaotic progress of San Francisco---was a product of largely uncontrolled eco-      
nomic pressures. The society that evolved in the Great Basin of Utah exhibited an   
entirely different but equally remarkable growth. Salt Lake City became the cen-    
ter of a religious kingdom established by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day  
Saints. Church members, known generally as Mormons, streamed west by the            
thousands during the 1840s. But unlike most families on the Overland Trail, they    
were united by a common faith and closely bound by persecution. Sall Lake City      
reflected the discipline and unity of their movement, whose roots reached back to   
the “Burned-Over District of western New York, an area where the religious fires    
of revivalism flared up regularly.                                                  
The church had been founded in Palmyra, New' York, by a young man named             
Joseph Smith. In 1827, al the age of only 22, Smith announced that he had discov-   
ered a set of golden tablets on which was written the Book of Mormon. The           
tablets, translated by Smith, told the story of some lost tribes of Israel, who came
to America and established a Christian civilization, only to be exterminated by lhe 
Indians. Proclaiming that he had a commission from Gori to reestablish the true     
church, Smith gathered a group of devoted followers. Although he was a robust,      
cheerful, and magnetic person, Smiths unorthodox teachings provoked bitter per-     
secution wherever he went; first in Ohio and then Missouri, where mob violence      
hounded his settlement out of the state. Finally he obtained a charter from the     
Illinois legislature to establish a Mormon community at Nauvoo. Thousands of        
followers settled there, but hostility again mounted after rumors circulated around 
the state that Smith had announced to his inner circle a new revelation sanctioning 
plural marriage, or polygamy. In 1844, following a dispute with dissident Mor-      
mons, the state threw him in jail in Carthage, Illinois, where an anti-Mormon mob   
murdered him.                                                                       
increase the community's self-sufficiency. Regulations specified that sidewalks     
were to be a standard width, and homes were to be set 20 feet back from the         
sidewalks and constructed of adobe. The planners also provided lor four public      
squares in various parts of the city. As with the kingdom of Deseret itself, Salt   
Lake City lacked any traditional secular authority. The cits’ was divided into      
18 wards, each under the supervision of a bishop. Holding civil as well as religious
power, the bishops were responsible for fencing, constructing irrigation ditches,   
and building and maintaining the bridges across the ditches in their wards.         
By 1853 the city already covered four square miles. As the city expanded, the       
original plan had to be modified to accommodate the developing commercial dis-      
trict by dividing lots into sizes more suitable for stores. Experience and growth   
also eventually dictated smaller blocks and narrower streets, but the city still    
retained its spacious appearance and regular tiesign. Through religious and eco-    
nomic discipline church leaders succeeded in preserving a sense of unity and        
common purpose in an urban setting, while making a “desert bloom,’                  
Shadows on the Moving Frontier                                                      
Transformations like Salt Lake City and San Francisco were truly remarkable. But    
it is important to remember that Americans were not coming into a trackless,        
unsettled wilderness. As frontier lines crossed, 75,000 Mexicans had to adapt to    
the new American rule.                                                              
In theory, the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo guaranteed that Mexicans would           
be “maintained and protected in the free enjoyment of their liberty and property.”  
So long as Mexicans continued to be a sizable majority in a given area, their       
influence was strong. But as Anglo emigrants became more numerous, they             
scorned Mexicans and demanded conformity to American customs. When Mexi-            
cans remained faithful to their heritage, language, and religion, these cultural    
differences worked to reinforce Hispanic powerlessness, social isolation, and eco-  
nomic exploitation.                                                                 
New Mexico had the largest Hispanic population as well as the fewest Anglos         
in the former Mexican territory. As a result, the upper-class Mexicans who owned    
the land and employed large numbers of mixed-blood workers on their ranches         
managed to maintain their position. This class had established American allies      
during the Santa Fe trade, and their connections grew stronger as American busi-    
nessmen slowly entered the territory in the 1850s. Neither group had much inter-    
est in the lower-class Hispanics, whom both exploited.                              
In contrast, the rush of American emigrants quickly overwhelmed Hispanic            
settlers in California and Texas. Even in 1848, before the disc-oven of gold, Ameri-
cans in California outnumbered Mexicans two to one, and by 1860 Hispanics           
amounted to only 2 percent of the population. Ironically, the descendants of the    
Spanish, who had opened their own American frontier three centuries earlier by      
exploiting Indians in the silver mines, now found themselves subject to the Cali-   
fornia “foreign miners tax and driven out of the gold fields by Anglo mobs who      
had equally firm notions about their own superiority.                               
During the gold rush, the 200 or so ranchero families (who together owned           
about 14 million acres) prospered because of the demand for beef to feed the        
miners. But changes in California land law required verification of the rancheros   
original land grants by a federal commission. Since the average claim took 17 years 
to complete and imposed complex procedures and hefty legal fees, many ranche-       
ros lost large areas of land to Americans. Ix>wer-class Mexicans scratched out a     
bare existence on ranches and farms, or in the growing cities and towns. Despised    
by the dominant Anglo majority and without skills and resources, they were often     
reduced to extreme poverty.                                                          
Mexicans in Texas were also greatly outnumbered: they totaled only 10 per-           
cent of the population in 1840 and 6 percent in 18(50. Stigmatized as inferior, they 
were the poorest group in free society. One response to this dislocation, an option  
commonly taken by’ persecuted minorities, was social banditry. Just as the Shaw-     
nee prophet Tenskwatawa a half century earlier sought to drive out American          
intruders and restore the purity of Indian cultures, a number of Mexican bandits     
gained fame by attacking and robbing Anglos. The most famous was Joaquin Muri-       
eta of California, a scmifictional character whose legend actually drew on the       
exploits of several men. Another folk hero, less shrouded in legend, was Juan        
Cortina. A member of a displaced landed family in southern Texas, Cortina was        
driven into resistance in the 1850s by American harassment. He began stealing        
from wealthy Anglos to aid poor Mexicans, proclaiming, ‘To me is entrusted the       
breaking of the chains of your slavery His sizable band of followers staged a        
daring attack on Brownsville in 1859, then eluded the U.S. Army by retreating        
into Mexico. Cortina continued to raid Texas border settlements until the .Mexican   
army, under intense American pressure, finally imprisoned him. While failing to      
produce any lasting change, Murieta and Cortina demonstrated the depth of frus-      
tration and resentment among Hispanics over their abuse at the hands of the new      
Anglo majority.                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
With the return of peace, Congress continued to debate what to do with its newly      
won territories, especially whether to allow slavery within them. David Wilmot        
had already thrown down the gauntlet of the northern opposition with his proviso      
to outlaw slavery in any new territory. John C. Calhoun, representing the extreme     
southern position, countered that slavery ought to be legal in all territories. The   
federal government had acted as the agent of all the states in acquiring the land,    
he argued, and southerners had a right to move there and take their property with     
them, including slaves. Only when the residents of a territory drafted a slate        
constitution could they decide the question of slavery.                               
Between these extremes were two moderate positions. One proposed extend-              
ing the Missouri Compromise line of 36°30' to the Pacific. That approach would        
have continued the policy, dating back to the 1780s, of dividing the national do-     
main between the North and the South. The other proposal, championed by               
Senators Lewis Cass of .Michigan and Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois, was to allow     
the people of the territory rather than Congress to decide the status of slavery.     
This solution, which became known as popular sovereignty, was left deliberately       
ambiguous. Could settlers of a new territory prohibit slavery any time they wished    
or only at the time it was admitted as a state, as Calhoun argued? Hoping to avoid    
farther polarization, Cass, Douglas, and other supporters of popular sovereignty      
left northerners and southerners to draw their own conclusions.                       
In 1848 the two moderate approaches would probably have appealed to most              
mechanical reaper. Problems in harvesting had long limited the amount of grain      
farmers could grow, for they had only a short time to cut it before it spoiled. The 
reaper allowed as much as 14 times more wheat to be harvested with the same         
amount oflabor. John Deere established a factory in Moline, Illinois, in 1847, the  
same year that .McCormick set up headquarters in Chicago. McCormick was soon        
selling 1000 reapers a year and could not keep up with demand, while Deere          
turned out 10,000 plows annually.                                                   
By 1860 midwestern states produced for market more wheat, corn, beef, and           
pork than any other region. Again the shift in commercial agriculture had an effect 
on the political balance. ’ The power of cotton over the financial affairs of the   
Union has in the last few years rapidly diminished, the Democratic Review re-       
marked in 1849, “and bread stuffs will now become the governing power.”             
Rising Industrialization                                                            
On the eve of the Civil War, 60 percent of the American labor force was still       
employed in agriculture. But in 1860 for the first time, less than half the workers 
in the North were engaged in agriculture. The expansion of commercial agricul-      
ture spurred the growth of industrial labor, for out of the 10 leading American     
industries, 8 processed raw materials produced by agriculture; these included       
Hour milling and the manufacture of textiles, shoes, and woolens. The only excep-   
tions were iron and machinery. Industrial growth also spurted during the 1850s as   
water power was increasingly replaced by steam. Only a fixed number of rivers       
and falls were available for water-power sites, and in the Northeast, these had     
largely been occupied. For industry to spread, another source of power was essen-   
tial.                                                                               
Most important, the factory system of organizing labor and the technology' of       
interchangeable parts spread to other areas of the economy'. The textile industry , 
we have seen, first brought workers together in factories. Many industries during   
the 1850s adopted interchangeable parts, which required that a product s compo-     
nents be machined to very fine tolerances. Isaac Singer began using them in 1851    
to mass produce sewing machines, an invention patented only' five years earlier.    
In turn, sewing machines made possible the ready-made clothing industry, while      
shoe manufacturers adapted the machines to concentrate all steps of their produc-   
tion under a single roof. Similarly, the workers who assembled farm implements      
performed a single step in the process over and over again. By I860, the United     
States had nearly a billion dollars invested in manufacturing, almost twice as much 
as in 1849.                                                                         
Immigration                                                                         
The surge of industry' depended on having a large labor force to support the        
factory system. Natural increase helped swell the population to over 30 million by  
1860, but this accounted for only part of the new labor force, for the birth rate in
the United States had actually begun to decline. On the eve of the Civil War the    
average white mother bore five children, compared to seven at the turn of the       
century. But the beginning of mass immigration to America during the mid-1840s      
kept population growth soaring.                                                     
In the 20 years from 1820 to 1840, about 700,000 newcomers had entered the          
United States. That figure jumped to 1.7 million in the 1840s, then to 2.6 million  
in the 1850s. Though even greater numbers arrived after the Civil War. as a         
percentage of the nation’s total population, the wave from 1845 to 1854 was the     
largest influx of immigrants in American history. From the British Isles alone, a     
licet of 1000 ships transported immigrants back and forth; in 1854, one of the        
heaviest years, 51 ships left Liverpool in June, carrying nearly 22,000 passengers.   
Whether traveling as individuals or as families, most of the newcomers were           
young people in the prime of life: in 185(5 out of 22-1,000 arrivals, only 31,000 were
under 10 and 20,000 were over 40.                                                     
Although fares were low, the journey, which lasted from six weeks to three            
months depending on the weather, was anything but comfortable. The cheapest           
passage was the cramped, crowded quarters of steerage, where the food was bad,        
the air noxious, and sanitation inadequate. Sickness weakened the passengers, and     
sometimes epidemics decimated them. “Dyin’ like rotten sheep thrown into a            
pit, one Irish immigrant recalled, “and the minit the breath is out of our bodies,    
flung into the sea to be eaten up by them horrid sharks.’ Once disembarked in the     
United States, newcomers were set upon by runners for various boardinghouses          
and railroad companies, as well as swindlers who tried to take advantage of them.     
Tickets, printed with enticing pictures of a train, steamboat, or canal packet, were  
hawked al exorbitant rates, after which hopeful immigrants might find themselves      
herded, for example, onto a “night boat from New York to Albany, with no              
shelter from the rain or cold, and only a hard deck to sleep on. Deaths from          
exposure on the lines to Albany alone were estimated in the thousands.                
Certainly the booming economy and the lure of freedom drew immigrants to              
America, but they were also pushed by deteriorating conditions in Europe. In          
Ireland, a potato blight which struck in 1846 produced widespread famine. Al-         
ready desperately poor and oppressed by English landlords, the Irish faced hun-       
ger, starvation, and the ravages of epidemics that swept across the Emerald Isle.     
Out of an Irish population of 9 million, as many as a million perished, while a       
million and a half more emigrated, two-thirds to the United States. The tide          
continued, though at a lesser rate, even after the potato crop recovered in 1849.     
The Irish tended to be poorer than other immigrant groups of the day, gener-          
ally younger sons and daughters of farm families, who had become a burden to          
their families because Irish landholdings and farms were so small. Mostly unmar-      
ried, they often arrived as individuals rather than as part of a family, and they sent
money home to support their relatives. Although the Protestant Scotch-Irish con-      
tinned to emigrate, as they had in large numbers during the eighteenth century,       
the decided majority of the Irish who came alter 1845 were Catholic. Because they     
were poor and unskilled, the Irish congregated in the cities, where the women         
performed domestic service and took factory jobs and men did manual labor.            
Germans and Scandinavians also had economic reasons for leaving Europe.               
They might be small farmers whose lands had become marginal or who had been           
displaced by landlords, or skilled workers thrown out of work by industrialization.   
Others fled religious persecution. Some, particularly among the Germans, left         
after the liberal revolutions of 1848 failed. Many celebrated the lice institutions of
the United States and advertised them in letters home. “1 am living in Cod’s noble    
and free soil, neither am I a slave under others, wrote a Swede who settled in        
Iowa in 1850. Since coming to America, he added, 1 have not been compelled to         
pay a penny for the privilege of living. Neither is my cap worn out from lifting it   
in the presence of gentlemen. An approving Dutch woman reported that schools          
were free, taxes low, and while “the finery is great, one cannot discern any differ-  
ence between the cobbler’s wife and the wife ol a prominent gentleman.                
Immigration reached its highest levels during periods of prosperity, then             
declined significantly after 1857, when the country entered another depression.       
Newcomers testified that the pace of work was faster and more regular in the          
United States, but wages were high and the food abundant and cheap. “Nearly all       
people cat meat three times a day, marveled a woman from Holland.                     
Although many Germans and Scandinavians arrived in modest straits, few                
were truly impoverished, and many could afford to buy a farm or start a business.     
Scandinavians and the Dutch were most often farmers; Germans included workers         
and shopkeepers, who settled throughout the country side and in cities and towns.     
Unlike the Irish, Germans tended to emigrate as families, and wherever they           
settled they formed social, religious, and cultural organizations to maintain their   
language and customs. Whereas the Scandinavians, Dutch, and English immi-             
grants were Protestant, half or more of the Germans were Catholics.                   
As a result of the immigrant tide, many American cities by 1860 contained a           
sizable foreign-born population. The Irish were especially numerous in eastern        
cities, particularly Boston, New York, and Philadelphia. Germans had established      
enclaves there too, but they were more dominant in western cities like Cincinnati,    
Chicago, Milwaukee, and St. Louis. By 1860 a majority of the population in Chi-       
cago, St. Louis, and San Francisco was foreign-boni.                                  
Factories came more and more to depend on immigrant labor, since newcom-              
ers would work for lower wages and were less willing to protest harsh working         
conditions. The meager pay seldom supported a family, so both parents and all but     
the youngest children often had to work. The shift to an immigrant work force         
could be seen most clearly in the textile industry, where over half the workers in    
New England mills were foreign-born by 1860. Mostly Irish, they found that            
American employers gave them only the lower paying jobs and excluded them             
from company housing. Rising ethnic tensions between native- and foreign-born         
workers, as well as among immigrants of various nationalities, made it difficult for  
workers to unite.                                                                     
The massive influx of immigrants also strained city resources. Immigrants             
who could barely make ends meet were forced to live in overcrowded, unheated          
tenement houses, damp cellars, and even shacks. A building might appear as “a         
high, respectable-looking brick house on the outside, one New York journalist         
reported, but “w ithin, the hall was dark and recking w ith the worst filth. . . . The
lipper part of the house was filled with little narrow rooms, each one having five or
six occupants; all very filthy. The people seemed very poor, honest Irish, not long  
here, and without work, usually. Such urban slums became notorious for crime         
and drinking, which look a heavy toll on families and the poor. In the eyes of many  
native-born Americans, immigrants were to blame for driving down factory wages       
and pushing American workers out of jobs. Overarching these complaints was a         
fear that America might not be able to assimilate the new groups, with their         
unfamiliar social customs, strange languages, national pride, and foreign tradi-     
tions. Such fears precipitated an outburst of political nativism in the mid-1850s.   
Southern Complaints                                                                  
Industrialization affected the South, too, though in different ways. With British    
and northern factories buying cotton in unprecedented quantities, southern plant-    
ers prospered in the 1850s. Like those of northern commercial farmers, their         
operations became more highly capitalized to keep up with the demand. But            
northern capital went into machinery like McCormick’s harvester; white south-        
The Know-Nothings                                                                    
New York City was the primary gateway for immigrants, and it was here in 1850        
that a secret society, the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner. was formed. The        
society, which entered the political arena as the American party , proclaimed its    
unbridled hostility' to the growing political power of Catholics and immigrants. Its 
members were sworn to secrecy' and instructed to answer inquiries by' replying "I    
know nothing. In 1853, the Know-Nothings (as they were quickly dubbed) began         
organizing in several other states; after only a year they had become the fastest    
growing party1 in the nation. Not coincidentally. 1854 also marked the peak of the   
new wave of immigration.                                                             
Taking as its slogan "Americans should rule America, the American party              
advocated that immigrants be forced to wait not 5 but 21 years before becoming       
naturalized citizens, and it called on voters to oust from office corrupt politicians
who openly bid for foreign and Catholic votes. Know-Nothings denounced illegal       
voting by' immigrants, (he rising crime and disorder in urban areas, and immi-       
grants' more easygoing observance of the Sabbath. (Germans, for example, en-         
joyed congregating on Sunday in beer gardens rather than engaging in solemn          
contemplation at home.) Indeed, because the Irish as well as the Germans often       
drank more heavily than native-born Americans, the prohibition movement liad         
strong nativist overtones and gained the support of many Know-Nothings. Behind       
a great many of their specific complaints lay a virulent anti-Gatholicism. Know-     
Nothings were convinced that the "undemocratic" hierarchy of priests, bishops        
ami archbishops, controlled by the pope in Home, was conspiring to undermine         
American democracy.                                                                  
The party especially attracted the support of young native-born American             
workers, who bone the brunt of the economic dislocations caused by industrializa-    
tion and had to compete with immigrants for jobs. To workers, their jobs threat-     
ened and their status declining, immigrants ami Catholics seemed obvious sym-        
bols of the unwanted transformation. And in the election of 1854, joined by          
sympathetic farmers ami some members of the middle class, they voted in remark-      
able numbers lor nativist candidates in key northern states like New York, Penn-     
sylvania, Ohio, and Massachusetts.                                                   
The Know-Nothing triumph spelled doom for the Whigs, as the rank and file            
deserted in droves to the Know-Nothings. Fueled by its success, the American         
party turned its attention south, and in a few months it had organized in every      
state of the Union. By 1855. perhaps a million voters had enrolled in its lodges, as 
Know-Nothing candidates triumphed for the first time in Maryland. Kentucky,          
and Texas. Know-Nothing leaders confidently predicted that they would elect the      
next president.                                                                      
Yet only a year later---by the end of 1856---the party had collapsed as quickly      
as it had risen. Lack ol experience was one reason. Many Know-Nothing office-        
holders proved woefully incompetent, while in some stales ambitious politicians      
quickly took over the movement and used it for their own purposes. Worse, party      
members often fell to bickering among themselves and failed to enact their pro-      
gram: voting reforms, a longer periml of naturalization, and laws meant to check     
the power of the Catholic church. When firm deeds failed to follow strong words,     
supporters became disillusioned, lire party's secrecy, too, seemed out of tune       
with a free republican spirit and in some cities, Know-Nothing gangs stole ballot    
boxes or attacked immigrants to prevent them from voting. Such actions made a        
mockery of the American party’s claim to be a patriotic reform organization.         
