Introductory. We have now traced the discovery and] colonization of our country from the year KMX) up to 17631 and have seen why, when, and where the different European | nations made settlements. Especially have we discussed] the English, French, and Spanish settlements and followed] them in their struggle for the territory between the] Allegheny Mountains on the east, the Mississippi River on] the west, the Great Lakes on the north, and the Gulf of] Mexico on the south. We have seen how the heart of our I continent fell to the English. When Washington became President of the United] States in 1789, the white population of our country was] somewhat over three millions. Of this number two million six hundred thousand were English, found principally in the New England colonies, and in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Virginia, Maryland, and Georgia. There were two hundred twenty-one thousand Scotch-Irish found along the frontier from New York to Georgia; one hundred seventysix thousand Germans, principally in Pennsylvania; seventyeight thousand Dutch in New York; sixty-one thousand Irish scattered throughout the colonies; and seventeen thousand French, found especially in the South. Thus the American stock at the beginning of our national history was very largely English but, as we shall see, it became less and less so as time went on. Let us now see how the nations that discovered and colonized our country, and other nations as well, have continued to send their peoples to us. The old and new immigration. Immigration to our shores, after we became a nation, falls into two divisions — the old and the new. The old immigration began in 1789 and lasted to about 1880; the new began about the latter date and lasts to the present. The old immigrants came from northwestern Europe, from the Anglo-Saxon and A chart showing the number of foreign-born people from the world's chief nations living in the United States at the present time Celtic nations — England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland, Germany, Norway, Sweden, and Denmark. These peoples had much the same social anti political customs and ideals as the original American stock and were easily assimilated. The new immigration conies from southeastern Europe —from southern Russia, the Balkan states, and Italy. These peoples have different customs and ideals and have not been so easily assimilated. The Irish immigrations. There were quite a number of Irish in the colonies many of whom came over as indentured servants. Beginning in 1820 the Irish came to America in great numbers and for the next thirty years about half of the European immigrants were Irish. The great majority of the Irish were Catholics who were deprived of certain political rights by the English government. So, for political and religious reasons, many of them came to America, but the main cause of their immigration was economic. The English government had passed laws discriminating against Irish agricultural and manufactured products until their industries were virtually ruined. The little farms tilled by the Irish were owned by Englishmen living in England. Very high rents were charged by the landlords, so high that it was difficult for the Irish farmers to make a living. Beginning in 1845 a three years' famine swept over Ireland, as a result of which two million of the eight million population died. The Irish then turned their faces to the United States of America, where there was a new hope and a new life. So many came that few were left in Ireland except the old people. Since 1820 about four and a half million Irish have come to the United States and there are now in our country some five million people who have Irish parentage. Characteristics of the Irish. The Irish came at a time | when there was a vast amount of construction work going on —- highway, railroad, and canal building. Many moved into the West with the construction gangs. The greater number, however, remained in the cities, where they did the work to be found there. They were not inclined to take up the cheap lands anti become farmers. The Irish have never been difficult to assimilate and have occupied a conspicuous place in the building of our nation. 6. The Coming of the Germans The first German migration. The Germans have come to the United States in three distinct migrations. The first of these began in colonial times and extended through the War of 1812. Those who came then left their homes for economic and religious reasons. They settled principally on the lands in Pennsylvania and from there moved into Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas. Benjamin Rush wrote in 1789: "A German farm may' be distinguished front the farms of other citizens by the superior size of their harn>. the plain but compact form of their houses, the height of their enclosures, the extent of their orchards, the fertility of their fields, the luxuriance of their meadows, and a general appearance of plenty and neatness in everything that belongs to them.' The second German migration. The second period of German immigration began about the close of the War of 1812 and extended through the Civil War, 1865. The A German colonial dining-room in a Pennsylvania farm-house la the House of the Miller at Millbach. Pa., by courtesy of the Pennsylvania migration was the heaviest from 1845 to 1860. During these fifteen years one and one quarter million Germans came to our shores and another quarter million came during the Civil War. The causes of the second migration were varied. Affairs in Europe were unsettled after the wars Napoleon had waged. The kings and emperors, restored by the Congress of Vienna, 1815, began again to rule their peoples harshly, and the Revolutions of 1830 and 1848 followed. The German liberals and democrats, who took part in these revolutions, were driven out and fled to America. Economic conditions in Germany were bad, and tens of thousands of Germans came to the United States to make a better living. Whole communities came over at the same time and sought the cheap western lands. They went into the states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, Iowa, Wisconsin, and Michigan. Among the Germans of the second migration were found peasants, common laborers, skilled artisans, and professional men of all kinds. The third German migration. The third German migration set in at the close of the Civil War and extends to the I present time. The number of immigrants during this period even exceeded that of the second period. From 1870 to 1910 over three million two hundred fifty thousand arrived. In the single year of 1882 over a quarter of a million came over. The great majority of the immigrants of the third period were industrial workers. Many came to America on account of the overpopulation of Germany while others came to avoid compulsory military service. Many of them went into the western states of Kansas, Nebraska, and the Dakotas and took up land. Many of the laborers remained in the larger cities and found work in the mills, factories, and mines. Characteristics of the Germans. The great majority of the Germans sought the land. Their desire was to have homes of their own and live their lives in their own way. 7. The Coming of Other Europeans The British. No other nation has sent such numbers of immigrants to the United States as have Ireland and Germany. But from early times to the present immigrants from other European nations have come constantly to our shores. In the hundred years from 1820 to 1920 England sent to us some two and one half millions and Scotland and Wales over a half-million more. In the early years the English and the- Scotch sought out the land, settling in the western part of New York, in Ohio, Indiana. Michigan, and other mid-western states. The later immigrants from England and Scotland, together with the Welsh, settled in the cities, where they found employment in the mills and factories. The Scandinavians. The Scandinavians are the Swedes, the Norwegians, and the Danes who live in northwestern Europe. They have in their home lands little tillable soil but it is their great A family of Scandinavian immigrants photographed at Ellis Island on their way to the farm lands of the Northwest ambition to own farms. Beginning in the 1860's the Scandinavians came; to the United State in great numbers Over one million Swedes have come to us. In addition, seven hundred thousand Norwegian and three hundred thousand Danes have come, making a total Scandinavian population of over two million. The late immigrants from Scandinavia, from 1910 to the present time, have found work as sailors on the Great Lakes or along our coasts or on our merchant marine. The American yachts that defeated the English yachts owned by Sir Thomas Upton in the international race the last few years were manned by American sailors with Norse blood in their veins. Lindbergh is from Scandinavian ancestry'. The Norsemen arc still great sailors. And well they might be, for they are descendants of the old vikings and of Leif the Lucky who discovered the New World almost five hundred years before Columbus set sail! The Scandinavians are an honest, hard-working. Godfearing people and take pride in the fact that they are American citizens. The French. The French have never come in great numbers to the United- States. In colonial times, up to 1763, France held the territory in the New World along the St. Lawrence River, the Great Lakes, and the Mississippi River and its tributaries. The French never really occupied nor possessed this great area, but were interested in the fur trade with the Indians. As a result of the Seven Years' War, as we have seen, they lost their possessions to the English. The few French who have come to us have settled chiefly in the cities, where they became mill and factory workers. The Dutch. Nearly two hundred thousand people from the Netherlands have sought homes in our midst, coming chiefly for economic reasons. They settled principally in Michigan, where they are engaged in intensive farming — in market gardening. The Dutch are a sturdy people and conservative. The Swiss. More than a quarter of a million of Swiss are American citizens. They have settled chiefly in Ohio, Wisconsin, and California, where they are dairy farmers and stock raisers. In the larger cities are many Swiss who keep toy shops and jewelry stores. The new immigration. Beginning about 1880, a new type of immigrant came into the United States. The old immigrants came from northwestern Europe, were of Teutonic stock, were easy to assimilate, and took mainly to the soil. The new immigrants came from southeastern Europe and were of Slavic and Latin stock. They have settled in the large cities, chiefly of the northeastern states, and, because of their natural desire to live in these communities with their own people, they have been slower to adopt our language and customs. The United States has now ten millions of these immigrants who will gradually become American citizens. The Slavs. Many of the new immigrants are Slavs, who are divided into two main divisions — the North Slavs and the South Slavs, or Jugo-Slavs. The North Slavs include the Poles, the Bohemians, the Ruthenians, the Slovaks, and the Russians. The Jugo-Slavs include the Serbians, the Montenegrins, the Croatians, the Slovenians, and the Dalmatians. The Poles. Over three million people of Polish parentage live in our country. The Poles who came in the early migrations settled on farms, but the new Polish immigrants have settled largely in our industrial centers. The Poles have helped in the building of our country' in many ways — in time of war as in time of peace. They have proved themselves to be true American patriots, as were their illustrious Kosciusko and Pulaski who fought so bravely for our freedom and independence in the Revolutionary War. The Bohemians. The Bohemians, who sought our shores in colonial days, came for religious reasons; they were the persecuted followers of John Hus, a Protestant reformer of Bohemia. Of late years, the Bohemians have come to America to better their economic conditions. There are a half million people to-day in the United States of Bohemian parentage living in our larger cities and on farms, especially in Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma, and Texas. Ruthenians and Slovaks. There are nearly four hundred thousand Ruthenians, or Ukrainians, in the United States to-day, found principally in the mines and steel mills, and there are four hundred thousand Slovaks, who also work in our mines and in other industries. The Jugo-Slavs. Jugo-Slavia has sent several hundred thousand immigrants to our shores. They, too, are found in the mills and factories of the large cities in the eastern states and also in the coal mine districts. The Finns and the Hungarians. The Finns come from northern Europe. They are found on farms in the northwestern part of our country', a quarter of a million in numFrom a photograph by Brown Brothers. The Hungarians come from central Europe, and like the Finns, they are a people who crave education and have a great love for freedom. Illiteracy is scarcely to be found among them. The Hungarians in the United States number some three hundred and fifty thousand, and are found chiefly in the cities. The Italians. Beginning about 1880 many Italians sought our shores, and in all over three millions have come to us. In general they have sought our cities in every section of the country', comparatively few having become farmers. In the cities we find them in every field of urban activity, as professional men, as retail merchants, particularly of orchard and garden products, and as industrial laborers. They are as a group frugal, industrious, and saving, and have added in many ways to our growth and prosperity. Possibly more than any of the other great nationalities, they have shown a disposition to return to their home country after accumulating wealth here, and in our cities they have usually lived in districts of their own people. The Greeks. There are over three hundred thousand Greeks in the United States. They are to be found mainly in the towns and cities. There they keep restaurants, ice cream parlors, and similar retail businesses. Like the Italians, they have proved exceptionally thrifty, and are one of the most prosperous of our racial groups. The Jews. The Jews, suffering persecution in many of the European countries, early sought an asylum in the United States. It is estimated that one fifth of all the Jews in the world now live in the cities of our country. The earlier migrations of Jews to America came from Germany chiefly, but in the last quarter century they have come in greatest numbers from Russia and Poland. For centuries in Europe it has been hazardous for Jews to own land, and so in coming to the United States they followed in a great part the urban occupations which they hail pursued in Europe, retail and wholesale merchandising, banking, the various professions, and, in industry, chiefly garment making, both as employer and employee. 8. The Asiatic Immigration The Armenians and the Syrians. Our great nation has been peopled not only by Europe but by Asia and Africa as well. There are to-day in our country over one hundred and twenty five thousand immigrants from Armenia, Syria, and Arabia. The Armenians and Syrians have come chiefly because of Turkish persecution, and also because of the greater economic opportunities for them in America. The Chinese. In 1848 gold was discovered in California, to the gold field to seek their fortunes. They did not take their women-folk with them; so they welcomed the Chinese immigrants, for they could cook and wash and sew,— in fact do the very work that was most needed to be done. However, as more Chinese came to California, a race prejudice arose against them. The Americans were unable to compete with Chinese labor because they were unwilling to accept the Chinese standards of living. Anti-Chinese sentiment became strong in California and the cry was raised, "California for the Americans." The labor unions took up the battle-cry and Chinese immigration became a political question. The and many thousand Americans rushed Chinatown, San Francisco, in the last of the 19th century. After a photograph by Taber legislatures of California and other Western states passed laws against the Chinese. Asa result of these laws the Chinese could not send their children to the public schools; the Chinese could not become citizens; they had to pay a tax or license fee in order to engage in business; and they could not be employed on any public work. The Chinese question finally reached Congress. In 1882 that body passed a law excluding Chinese labor for a period of ten years, and the law has since been renewed. Over three hundred thousand Chinese have come to the United States. They have retained their native language, dress, and customs. They have not been assimilated and still remain in every respect "foreigners." To-day the Pacific Coast states have a "Chinese question" as the Southern states have a "Negro question." However, these questions are national in scope, and it is the duty of all sections of our nation to put forth their best efforts in helping to solve them. The Japanese. The Japanese, like the Chinese, have brought a race problem to our Western states. In 1900 there were about twenty-four thousand Japanese in the United States. In ten years' time this number trebled. The Japanese are found mainly in California, Washington, Oregon, and Colorado. They soon began to acquire land and to engage in market gardening, thus coming into competition with the American truck gardeners. Laws discriminating against the Japanese were passed by some of the Western states. In 1906 the authorities of San Francisco enacted a law preventing the Japanese children from attending public schools. Japan protested against this act, and the matter was settled by the famous "gentlemen's agreement" made by President Roosevelt and the Japanese government. Japan agreed to co-operate in enforcing our laws forbidding the immigration of her laborers, and San Francisco agreed to admit to her schools Japanese children not over sixteen years of age. 9. The African Immigration The Negro immigration. Most Americans are so accustomed to the Negro in their midst that they do not look upon him as a foreigner, although his native home is Africa. He was brought to the colonies against his will and sold into slavery in all the English colonies. The slave trade became a profitable employment carried on through the vessels of Old England and New England. In 1619 there were twenty Negroes in the colonies; in 1790 nearly seven hundred thousand. In 1860 there were about four million four hundred forty-one thousand, and in 1930 over ten millions. The story of slavery, the emancipation of the slaves, and the participation of the Negro in governmental affairs in the South will be told in other topics and need not be touched upon here. Status of the Negro to-day. The great majority of the Negroes are found to-day in the South — in the states where slavery existed. There they do the rough manual work in the cities. In the country they are found in all stages of progress. Many are farm laborers; some rent farm lands and cultivate them; and some own their own farms. The farm laborers are paid a monthly or yearly wage. Those who rent lands usually receive a certain share of the crop, the remainder going to the landlord. In most cases the landlords supply the farm machinery, the mules, and the seed, as well as the land, which enables them to have complete control of the farms and the crops. There are about two hundred and fifty thousand Negroes who own their farms. Quite recently many Negroes have left the South and gone north to work in the mills and factories. So many of them have done so that the Southern whites have become alarmed at the labor shortage and have begun seriously to study the question of improving the economic condition of the Negroes. Is our country succeeding as a "melting- pot"? Do all the foreigners become good American citizens? Do they accept our ideals? These questions demand our best thought. In various states and cities citizenship classes have been organized to teach our foreigners the English language and to do for them those things that will help them to become good American citizens. On different occasions our government has thought it wise to limit immigration. In 1885 Congress passed an act prohibiting the importation of laborers under contract. At different times, acts have been passed excluding convicts, idiots, lunatics, polygamists, paupers, and persons suffering from contagious diseases. In 1917 Congress passed the literacy test to be applied to all immigrants. This law excludes all aliens over sixteen years of age who are physically able to read but cannot read. The law provides that all aliens be required to read "not less than thirty nor more than eighty words in ordinary use" in the English language or some other language. In 1922 Congress passed a law limiting the number of immigrants any European nation can send to the United States. This act provided that no European nation could send to our country in any one year more than three per cent of the number of people it had in the United States in 1910. Two years afterwards the act was amended changing the per cent from three to two and basing the per cent upon the number of people the European nations had in our country in 1890. It also excluded the Asiatics entirely. The new National Origins Act, 1929. On July 1, 1929, the "national origins" law in regard to immigration became effective. The immigration law in force prior to this date provided that the annual quota of each nationality shall be two per cent of the foreign born of that nationality resident in the United States as shown by the census of 1890. The new law bases the quota on the "national origins" of the entire population of our country, as shown by the census of 1920. The new law has cut down the quotas from Germany, the Irish Free State, Norway, and Sweden. 