Had the law been obeyed by the New Englanders their trade would have been ruined. They naturally felt that Parliament had completely sacrificed them. The danger of Parliament interfering with American affairs had become evident. England made no serious effort to enforce the law, and the French trade went on as illegal smuggling. The lessons, however, of the danger from the power over-seas, and the ease with which it could apparently be disregarded, were not lost on our ancestors. The colonists begin to consider themselves Americans. The growing self-confidence and self-consciousness of Americans in this period were due not only to contacts with English officers, but also to constant struggles to control governors, and easy nullification of royal orders and acts of Parliament. Another important factor was the growth of the colonies. Between 1690 and 1763 the population increased from 215,000 to about 1,800,000. Only one new colony had been founded, Georgia, in 1733. The Georgia colony had been started by General James Oglethorpe, an English philanthropist, who secured a charter with the purpose of making a retreat in the New World where poor people from the debtors' prisons might start life afresh. Being granted the land between South Carolina and the Spanish in Florida, he set to work. The colony grew slowly. Comparatively few debtors emigrated, but Scotch Highlanders and Germans both settled in considerable numbers. What happened in Georgia was like what was happening in all of the colonies. There was little English immigration. The marvelous growth in population was due mostly to native births and to large numbers of Scotch, Irish, Germans, and to a lesser extent, Swiss. All these facts tended to make the American of 1760 feel himself more of an American and less of an Englishman. Many come from Ireland to the colonies. In the early part of the eighteenth century there was great distress both in Ireland and Germany. In Ireland, drought, sheep-rot, and disease seemed destined to complete the ruin wrought by the political and economic policy of the British. The Penal Laws made life almost unbearable for the majority of the population while discriminatory tariffs destroyed the woolen industry of the south and the linen industry of the north. When long-term leases for farms fell due in great numbers, stony-hearted landlords demanded double and treble rents to renew them. Many of the tenants came to America, where they arrived chiefly in Philadelphia. From there they poured out into the frontier counties of Pennsylvania and up the Shenandoah Valley. Great numbers reached the Carolinas. Though they came to all of the colonies they usually went out to the frontier, where land was cheap, and made the finest frontiersmen we have known. Of the social effects of this great movement of a people we shall speak in another topic. It is impossible to calculate accurately the number who came, but historians have estimated them as high as 500,000. We may conservatively place it at 300,000 to 400,000. When it is recalled that many of these came to us with hatred for England, it becomes evident that something very momentous had happened in the relations between the mother country and the American colonies. Many Germans, owing no allegiance to England, come to America. Germany had not recovered from the terrific slaughter and devastation of the Thirty Years' War. In the Palatinate and other provinces, as in the German cantons of Switzerland, there were intense poverty, suffering, and religious persecutions in the early eighteenth century. From this mass of human misery came another great movement of population to our shores, the Germans settling largely in Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia, the Swiss going mostly to Carolina. It is safe to say that by 1763 there were at least 100,000 of them in the colonies, and quite possibly many more. This stock had no hatred of England, but on the other hand no knowledge of her or loyalty to her. They knew only their new homes in America and their struggles to win them. The colonies contain many different peoples hostile or indifferent to England. By 1763, England had won her duel with France. She owned North America from the Atlantic to the Mississippi, and from Spanish Florida to the Arctic Sea. But in this vast territory were the unreconciled French in Canada, possibly 300,000 Indians who were ignorant of, or hostile to English rule, several hundred thousand from Ireland with a tradition of hatred for English oppression, 100,000 Germans who cared nothing about England, perhaps 400,000 black slaves who knew nothing of her, and a sturdy population of possibly 600,000 of her own sons and their descendants who were loyal but who were chips of the old block in their love of liberty and who had been used to a greater degree of selfgovernment in all their daily concerns than even Englishmen enjoyed at home. Here was a problem that would call for the wisest possible statesmanship. 2. Reorganization of the British Empire England changes her theory of empire. The British Government had colonial problems of a difficult sort to solve. Even if the statesmen in England had not handled them very badly, as all English historians to-day agree was the case, it is only fair to admit that the difficulties were great at that stage of the world's political experience. When the Peace Treaty of 1763 was being negotiated, it was bitterly debated in England whether France should be made to cede Canada or the intensely rich sugar island of Guadeloupe. This conflict of views indicated that a change was in progress in the theory of empire. According to the old mercantile theory there was no question that Guadeloupe, supplying a valuable raw material—sugar—should have been taken rather than what were considered the vast and barren wastes of Canada and the Indian-infested Mississippi Valley. This theory considered only the building up of a self-sufficing commercial empire. It was to be made up of the mother country and a group of colonies which would all contribute their particular share to the economic life of the let sleeping dogs lie. Both the close business ties between Southern producers of cotton and Northern manufacturers, and a genuine love for the Union untainted by money interest, made them desire to put off what might be the fatal day of decision. Slavery, quite as much as Northern factories and mills and bank accounts, was protected by the Constitution. Some day, the conservatives argued, the problem might be capable of solution, without force or injustice. Changed economic conditions had fastened slavery on the South, and another shift some time might make it possible for the South to get rid of it. England had done so in the Empire by spreading emancipation over a number of years and compensating the slave owners. In America the abolitionists aroused passion and focused attention in such a way as to make the question of slavery a burning one. The country was under the black shadow of dangerous sectional feeling, even when the people so light-heartedly marched and sang their way through a contest between a party without a platform and one without a vice-presidential candidate. A spirit of lawlessness seems to pervade our land. Meanwhile the ferment in America continued. We presented in the last topic something of the swirling currents in the mental life of the period. We have to note now that much of the passion and prejudice developed by new ideas and conditions found vent in mob action and a general reign of violence. Nor was this by any means confined to the dispute over slavery and abolition. The mobbing mania which attended that problem was merely a symptom of a far wider unsettlement in a society changing so rapidly that the forces of law and order were outrun by those making for new adjustments. The great increase in the number of foreigners arriving as immigrants was raising religious, economic, political, and social questions which were often treated in the spirit of the mob. Although the Germans suffered in places, the Irish were the special target for violence. There were anti-Catholic riots in numerous villages and cities. In many states Catholic churches were burned and priests maltreated. Almost invariably sufferers could get neither redress nor protection. Popular unrest arises in Rhode Island. In 1842 the effort to settle a question by means of violence almost precipitated civil war in Rhode Island, which had been backward in abolishing the freehold qualifications for the franchise. In this particular eddy of the national life, economic conditions, democracy, the negro, and the foreigner all played a part. Both the franchise and representation of the towns were antiquated in that state, which was yet being governed under its old colonial charter. In the early days the freehold qualifications had not been questioned when almost every one was a farmer and could own a few acres. The economic change from agriculture to shipping, and especially to manufacturing, had produced a considerable class of citizens who were no longer freeholders, but they considered that they had the right to vote. The conservatives in control were stubbornly opposed to enlarging the electorate, but the malcontents found a leader in Thomas W. Dorr, the son of a wealthy manufacturer and a graduate of Phillips Exeter Academy and of Harvard College. The Dorr War achieves its purpose. When the new People's party, as it was called, was rebuffed by the legislature, which declined to consider its grievances, a convention was assembled. A new constitution for the state was drawn up by the convention and submitted to the people. Nearly 14,000 votes were cast in favor of it, a majority of the qualified voters of the state. Technically neither the convention nor the new constitution had any legal status, but an election was held and Dorr was elected governor. Meanwhile, the legislature had been stung into action, and had prepared a new constitution, which, however, was defeated at the polls. There were now two governments in the state, and both appealed to President Tyler for aid. This he declined to give to either. The Dorrites next attempted to seize the arsenal, but the legal government of the Landholders, as they called themselves, broke the rebellion, and Dorr had to escape from the state. The Landholders had sought to make political capital by claiming that the Dorrites were trying to give the vote to numbers of undesirable persons. By the passage of laws of extreme severity against the rebels and by the condemnation of Dorr to life imprisonment, the Landholders lost almost all popular support. Before the end of 1842 they were forced to submit a new constitution to the people. It gave the franchise to all male citizens over twenty-one without regard to color, provided they paid a tax of not less than one dollar a year. Three years later Dorr was liberated from prison. The DonWar was thus successful, though the armed revolt itself had been suppressed. John Quincy Adams opposes the "gag rule" in Congress. Meanwhile, the slavery agitation was continuing as an ominous undertone in the national life. Almost every question before Congress became hesitated to accept the theory of a "new era of economics;' the actual increases in production, wages, and profits satisfied most persons, whether servants or captains of industry. America had got started on the wildest debauch economically that she has ever enjoyed or suffered from. As the ordinary man became more and more anxious to make money, he cared less and less about the affairs of the world at large. Foreigners were to sell us raw materials, buy our mass-produced goods, and send us gold in payment, while we reserved our entire domestic market for our own manufactures. Harding opposes our entrance into the League of Nations. Although Harding, when a candidate for the presidency, had made contradictory statements as to his attitude towards the League of Nations, he became opposed to it after his inauguration. In 1921, the Senate passed the Knox resolution which ratified the treaty with Germany and which declared the war at an end. It inserted a clause in the resolution prohibiting the President from appointing any representative of the United States to serve on any body, commission, or agency set up by the Versailles Treaty without the consent of Congress. For many years after, in the absence of that consent, we have had to be represented on many European commissions by an "unofficial observer" only. We make a beginning toward limitation of armaments. In 1921, although eager to take part in the movement for disarmament which had always been an American ideal, we felt unable to do so in connection with the League. President Harding invited nine powers, including Great Britain, France, Italy, and Japan, to meet in Washington to discuss reduction of naval power, and on November 12, the meeting was opened by Secretary Hughes. A beginning toward reducing naval expense was made by the agreement on the 5-5-3 ratio. This allotted equal strength of capital ships to the United States and Great Britain, and gave to Japan three-fifths of the strength of each of the others. Italy and France agreed to smaller percentages. Although sixtyeight capital ships were scrapped by the treaty, no progress could be made when other forms of more modem and effective naval weapons were discussed. France, particularly, objected to limitation of her submarines. The use of submarines, however, was forbidden as commerce destroyers. We come to an understanding with other powers. Perhaps more important than the naval treaty were the two which were made at the same conference regarding affairs in the Far East. In place of 3 renewal of the British-Japanese alliance, the nine nations represented at the conference, including China, Holland, Belgium, and Portugal, as well as those named above, made a new treaty. It is called the "nine- power treaty" and mutually guarantees the integrity of Chinese sovereignty and the policy of the "open door" for trade. In a "four-power treaty," Great Britain, France, Japan, and the United States agreed to respect each other's possessions in the East, and to submit to a joint conference any question likely to cause trouble. Various minor matters were also adjusted in other treaties. The conference was the one outstanding feature of Harding's term, and brought great credit to Secretary of State Hughes. Congress passes measures limiting immigration. For twenty years before the war, restriction of immigration had been discussed, and several measures had been passed by Congress for the purpose, 8000 inhabitants, was increasing almost at a rate three times as fast as the total population. New York, including the city of Brooklyn, now only a borough of the larger city, had reached a population of considerably over a million. It was twice as large as its nearest competitor, Philadelphia, which nevertheless had added 200,000 in a decade. Abnormally rapid growth, according to all previous standards, was indeed, in this period, the characteristic of American towns and cities, except, for the most part, in the South. Great cities were rising all through the changing West, such as St. Louis, which multiplied its population tenfold, from 16,000 to 160,000, between 1840 and 1860. Many foreigners come to our shores. The opportunities of the New World attracted foreign immigration in rapidly increasing numbers after 1820. The famine in Ireland in 1846 and the political troubles in Germany in 1848 made enormous increases in the numbers who came from those two countries. In the decade ending December 31, 1840, 600 came to us, mostly from Europe as always; in the next decade one and three-quarter million and in the next over two and one-half million. Of the last group, those arriving between 1850 and i860, nearly a million were Germans, nearly another million Irish, nearly 400.0 English, and 150,000 from Canada. The vast south European immigration of later years had as yet begun only as a trickling stream. By 1860 there were over 4,000,000 foreign-born living in the United States, of whom nine-tenths were in the free states. For the most part they settled in the larger cities of the East and in the farm country of the Middle West and Northwest. The Irish preferred the East, and the Germans and Scandinavians the West. Coming to us in abject poverty, many of the Irish were used by the factory owners and other employers of labor to reduce wages. Laboring men begin to organize trade unions. Although in 1828 a political "Workingman's Party" was formed, labor soon turned to the system of trade unions to attain its aims and reforms. These pertained mainly to hours of work and better social and educational status. As long as our present form of government lasts, a Labor party seems impracticable. One reason is that the Federal Government has not sufficient constitutional powers to regulate the varied conditions of labor. These powers belong mainly to the states. But a political party limited to a state only is of no influence under the workings of our political system. So labor, to a very great extent, has necessarily to apply its pressure by other methods. Some progress was made in this period by strikes and other exercises of the power of trade unions, chiefly in securing a more universal ten hour day instead of one of from twelve to thirteen. One of the early leaders, George H. Evans, published a labor paper in New York, The Working Man's Advocate, but the union movement, which had enlisted some 300,000 men by 1836, suffered severely in the terrible years following the crash of 1837. It was not until the Civil War came with its tremendous effects on laboring conditions that the more notable features of the American labor movement appeared. The factory system alters farm life. When we turn from city to country, we find considerable changes after the beginning of the century. The condition of the New England farmer was in some ways not so good as it had been. Apart from the nature of the soil, the broken character of the land has for the most part made large-scale agricultural operations in that section difficult or impossible. The small farmer of the old days, having almost no need for cash, had been able to make or raise, by family production, all he used. It was quite a different problem, however, so to increase the salable products of the small one-man farm as to keep pace with the new and incessant demands for cash with which to buy the new factory- made goods and tools. This was especially emphasized by the opening of the Erie Canal when the competition of the richer and more easily worked lands of the Mohawk Valley and the West began to be felt severely. In spite of some increase in cash markets afforded by the growth of near-by manufacturing centers, there was a steady flow of New Englanders to the West. In Maryland and Virginia much of the soil had become exhausted for large-scale production of the single staple. Our early immigrants come to find homes. There has been a mixture of races in America from the beginning. The chief of the colonizing groups was English, followed at a distance by the Dutch, Swedes, French in Louisiana, and others. In New York of the earliest days it was said that twenty languages were spoken, and within two years of its founding Philadelphia contained, besides the English, Dutch, Germans, Finns, Swedes, Danes, French, Scotch, and Irish. In the early eighteenth century foreign immigration set in on a heavy scale. By mid-century perhaps 20,000 Swiss, 60,000 Germans and an equal number of Scotch-Trish, besides Irish, Jews, and others, had settled here. These early immigrants, however, like the Scandinavian, German, and some other races in the next century, came, not to find jobs, but homes. Our later immigrants come to find work. In the course of the nineteenth century the situation radically changed. Immigration took on enormous proportions. By 1880 a half million foreigners a year were pouring in, rising a couple of decades later to 1,000,000. After that date also the racial character altered. Instead of Irish, Germans, and Scandinavians, there came in tidal sweeps Italians, Poles, Czechs, Slovaks, Greeks, Levantines, Russians, Rumanians, and others from eastern and southeastern Europe, who had little or no racial affinity with the English stock on which they were to be grafted. As Professor Beard has pointed out, never since the Roman Empire had a people imported such a deluge of strange races to serve them. For to a considerable extent from the 1830's and especially from the 1880's these new comers did come to serve the older Americans. The bulk of the more alien races came here seeking jobs. Whether they sought jobs themselves or took those they had been imported to fill, they naturally got those which native Americans least desired. They did the manual labor of laying railroads, and other sorts; they worked in coal mines and iron and steel furnaces. Several consequences flowed from this flood of newcomers and the work they did, even when they took up land in the West and became farmers. In Europe the population of each nation is largely of one race. In Spain, Italy, France, Germany, and others, all the work of every sort, the lowest as well as the highest, which contributes to the social result is done by people allied by blood. Every nation is provincial. It looks upon foreigners as somehow inferior. Multitudes of those who came to us were dreadfully poor. They were foreign, and strange to us. Many seemed uncouth. They did not know our language or our ways. They took the jobs to a great extent which Americans had rather looked down on anyway. Thus we came to look upon these new-comers rather as servile races and to regard the work they did as beneath what an American should do. We came in the North to look upon work done by them much as the Southerner had regarded work done by the slave, as something he himself could not stoop to. This was one of the evil effects. The foreigners interfere with the bargaining power of labor. Another bad effect was the extraordinary speed with which the country was settled and its industries grew. To those who were making money by the progress in real estate, coal, timber, oil, railroads, manufacturing, and many other material things, this seemed wholly desirable. The growth of population at a rate Europe never knew was regarded as indicating the success of the American experiment. We realize now that many of the evils from which we suffer—the corruption in politics, the mismanagement of our great cities, the general low morality of business, the waste of our resources, the emphasis placed on wealth and material success— stem from the feverish speed with which we grew and the haste with which colossal fortunes could be piled up in consequence. For labor itself, whether native American or imported, the effect was bad. The development of labor unions and the bargaining power of labor were greatly retarded because of the difficulty of incorporating in the movement these large bodies of foreigners who did not speak English and with whom the American worker would not join in combination. To the satisfaction of the capitalists these foreigners not only undersold labor but prevented labor from forming effective combinations. The foreigners come in such numbers as to prevent proper Americanization. Moreover, coming in such enormous numbers, they formed racial groups so that the normal process of absorbing individuals into American life was almost impossible. An individual alien might have quickly learned our language and adapted himself to our ways while at the same time he might have retained qualities which would have enriched our civilization. Many of these foreign strains have had much to contribute to us, such, frequently, as the love for music, an age-long appreciation of beauty, an ardent belief in the American Dream, a belief that life is something more than getting and spending, a willingness to consider no kind of useful work as unworthy, and many others. Of course, multitudes of them also have not had these qualities. Faced by solid masses of aliens in racial blocks, the Americans have too often felt that the necessary Americanization of these blocks has meant only destroying every alien trait and taste. Our foreigners have made many contributions to our civilization. On the other hand, in spite of every handicap, many of the later groups, like the earlier; have contributed much to our common civilization. The Scotch, Scotch-Irish, Irish, Dutch, French, and Germans who joined the English in the early settlement of the colonies made ours a mixed people from the start. Among the later groups the Scandinavians of the Northwest are second to none in maintaining the principles of the older America. Many of the Jews, ever since the colonial period, have contributed much to our cultural life. We find Italian, Polish, and Czech names in the list of citizens eminent for distinguished service. If we eliminated all the contributions of postcolonial immigrants and their descendants—works of art, literature, drama, music, the scientific contributions, the glorious deeds in army and navy, the support of hospitals, libraries, opera—the resultant scene would be a strangely shrunken America. America may now develop a new composite race. In the past fifty years, however, immigrants have been coming in far too rapidly for their own good or ours. Many voices were raised from time to time to warn of the dangers. The insistent pressure on Congress, however, by the employers, who wanted not only cheap labor but labor which would foil the efforts of the labor unions, was too much to allow proper legislation to be passed. It was the prospect of the impoverished millions and millions, who wished to come to America in one final and completely overwhelming flood at the end of the World War, which caused barriers to be put up. The "melting pot" is no longer being filled faster than it can melt, and we can now develop a new and composite race. There is to-day no such thing as a "pure race." Every race, including the English, is a mixture of many ancestral strains. What we now call pure is merely a race which has been free from too large mixtures for enough centuries to have established a character and quality of its own. That, in time, America may now achieve. 2. Influences of Recent Inventions Life in the 1890's is quite simple. America in the late 8o's and early 90's seems almost incredibly different in thought, surroundings, and ways of life from the America of our own day. It is true that the age of steam and machinery had wrought great changes in the social and economic life of the people. Labor-saving machinery had done away with much drudgery and had increased leisure and productivity. The cable, telegraph, and improved printing-presses had brought the modem newspaper into existence. Factory production, replacing home crafts, had forced a rapid urbanization of the population. Such a list of changes could be long extended. Yet with all of them, life for most people had not altered greatly, and their list of wants had not been much extended. They travelled more rapidly and often read more widely and had more conveniences, such as gas lights and friction matches, than their fathers had had in their early days, but there had been no great revolution in our life and its ways. Except for the very poor in the largest industrial centers, a home still meant for almost every American a house of his own in which the family lived its own life in privacy. The "apartment" was scarcely known. Transportation methods are crude in last century. Family activities and friendships were largely confined to the immediate neighborhood of the home. In the cities, there were no subways, few electric cars, and for the most part busses and horse-cars jogged along at about four miles an hour. There was not an automobile in use in the country in the early 90's, even the "safety" bicycle, invented about 1884, with pneumatic tires somewhat later, was too costly for very wide use until near the turn of the century. Every one, in city and country, relied upon a horse and carriage, if he had a conveyance of his own. 