Champlain was a typical representative of the adventurous French explorers. The work of these men gave the French a firm hold on the valuable fur trade. Germans and Irish helped to settle the colonial frontier. Many of these newer pioneers w7ere not of English stock. Beginning in 1710, large numbers of Germans had come to America, some to the Mohawk valley in New7 York, but the great majority to Pennsylvania. By 1755, there were nearly seventyfive thousand Germans in America. Their descendants, incorrectly labelled "Pennsylvania Dutch," are an important group in Pennsylvania today. The Germans were reinforced by thousands of newcomers from Ireland. Many of these were Scotch-Irish Protestants, descendants of Scotch emigrants to Ulster, although there w ere numerous Roman Catholics from other Irish counties. Between 1714 and 1720, fifty-four ships with Irish emigrants landed at Boston, and for several years Ireland sent over an average of twelve thousand per year. Some of them settled in New England, some in New York, but many more went to Pennsylvania. Virginia planned to establish settlements west of the Appalachian Mountains. Practically all these newcomers stayed on the eastern slopes of the Appalachian highlands. But explorers and fur traders were already penetrating the country beyond the mountains, and their enthusiastic reports of good land soon encouraged pioneers to try their fortunes there. In 1747, a group of wealthy Virginia planters and English financiers, calling themselves the Ohio Company, petitioned the king for a grant of half a million acres of land in the Ohio valley. The Board of Trade approved the project, and the Company received its title by direct grant from the king. Entirely apart from this enterprise, by 1757, the colonial government of Virginia gave away land to the extent of nearly two million acres. The French planned to exclude the English colonists from the Ohio valley. This evidence of English interest in the Ohio valley could not pass unnoticed by the French. In 1749, Governor Duquesne of Canada sent a French force down the Allegheny and Ohio rivers to proclaim their ownership of the whole region, and to build forts for defense. And in 1753, Governor Duquesne sent a thousand French and Indians into the Ohio valley to reinforce these earlier claims. George Washington was sent to warn the French not to trespass on English soil. To check this French advance if possible, and to file counterclaims in any case, Lieutenant-Governor Dimviddie of Virginia sent a formal warning, ordering the French out of the Ohio section (November, 1753). For this important mission Dinwiddie chose a young surveyor, twenty-two years old, who knew how to find his way in the woods—George Washington. This winter journey to Lake Erie proved a good test of Washington's courage and determination but it brought no results. The French commander had not the slightest intention of withdrawing his men. On the contrary, the French proceeded to strengthen their hold by building Fort Duquesne, where Pittsburgh now stands. These machines simplified the workof preparing the soil, planting the seed, and caring for the growing crops, but they left untouched the important problem of the harvest. There was no great advantage in being able to plant a larger acreage unless the human labor in gathering the crops could be reduced. Something more efficient than the sickle, cradle, and scythe was badly needed. In 1834 Cyrus Hall McCormick was granted a patent for a reaper. His device needed and received several improvements before it became really practicable; but by 1845 the McCormick reaper was used generally on the larger Western farms. Although it merely cut the grain, and did not bind it, it enabled one man to do the work of ten men using cradles. One operator with the McCormick reaper could cut an acre of grain in twenty-two minutes. The horse rake, in use after 1830, was worth nine men with hand rakes. By the year 1855 the mowing machine for cutting grass was generally used on the Western farms. These two devices helped the haymaker as the reaper helped the wheat farmer. One more great improvement came in 1836 with the invention of a practical threshing machine. In an actual comparative test made in 1855, the threshing machine accomplished more than twenty times as much as six men. With these machines a farmer could increase his output and actually cut down his cost of production, because he saved so much on labor costs. And in this connection it should be noted that the increasing use of machinery on the farms did not result in unemployment; it merely made it easier for men to make money from the land, and so encouraged more people than ever to try their hands at farming. This illustration, taken from the year 1864, shows the change that had taken place in the West since the early pioneer days. In Iowa a man could buy eighty acres of farm land, put up a house, build the necessary fences, and pay for the whole thing after harvesting his first crop. And he would still have $500 left over either to save or to use in buying more land. By the time the second or third generation had grown to maturity in the West, there was a striking change evident in the character of the population. Men of real ability, the equal of those who went into business and the law, went into farming. They did so because it gave them an excellent income, and economic independence. These Western farmers were an aristocracy in one sense; they represented the best racial stock and the best native ability in the country. But, unlike their contemporaries in the South they constituted the majority in their section. In the 1850's, as we have seen, the Southern planter was finding the problem of making a living more and more difficult. The situation in the Northwest stood out in sharp contrast. There, men were fast getting out of debt instead of sinking farther in every year. The farmer who wished to sell could turn over a going concern to his buyer, and this newcomer found everything in his favor. Retired farmers had capital to invest in banks, internal improvements, or possibly manufacturing. Here then was the difference between prosperity and depression apparently permanent in each case. Starting off on terms of equality, around 1800, in the short period of fifty years the Northwest and the Southwest had become almost two different countries. American opportunity brought new waves of immigration from Europe. All this development of plantations and farms, together with the building of roads, canals, steamboats, and railroads, required the work of millions of people, and at the same time furnished a most extraordinary chance for the common man to make a comfortable living. The American citizen had every reason to be proud of his country and supremely hopeful of her great future. Here was a place where individual human beings counted for something, where the whole economic, social, and political system seemed made for man's benefit. There was not only room for every body, there was opportunity for everybody. Compared with Europe, worn out with twenty years of war and still troubled by conflict between the old regime and the new—there were revolutions in Europe in 1820, 1830, and 1848—the United States looked indeed like the promised land. Europeans themselves caught the fever of hope and ambition and came over to settle by the hundreds of thousands. In 1825, for the first time in American history, the number of immigrants arriving during the year passed the 10,000 mark. In 1842 the new arrivals numbered over 100,000 and in 1850 over 300,000. For the ten years before 1840 over 500,000 immigrants entered the United States; in the ten years after 1840 the total ran over 1,700,000. There were three main racial groups represented in this entirely peaceful invasion of the country. In 1825 fiftythree Scandinavians came into New York. They were soon followed by thousands of their countrymen, who settled chiefly in the Northwest. Between 1830 and 1855 more than half a million Germans followed the Scandinavians, also going for the most part into the Northwest. Beginning in the 1840's large numbers of Irish entered the United States. While a few became farmers in the Northwest, the majority of the Irish preferred the cities of the Atlantic seaboard or the manufacturing towns of the industrial sections. Some took the places of the native-born in the factories, while others devoted themselves to the problems of practical government, particularly in Boston and New York. It may be worth noting that very few of these immigrants went into the South. Openings for free white laborers in that section were comparatively few; anyway, plantation owners and slaves alike often described the small farmers as "poor whites." The West on the other hand offered both opportunity and equality, and the immigrants seemed fully aware of the difference. Between 1810 and 1860 the Northwest became more and more important as the source of food for the American people. As late as 1850 the Middle Atlantic states still produced more than half of the nation's wheat. By 1860 Western production more than doubled, and this section took the lead. The figures for the total production of wheat show a remarkable increase: 27,518,000 bushels in 1810; 43,842,000 bushels in 1850; and 95,004,000 in 1860. During t he same period the production of com was almost quadrupled. Meat packing had always been a source of income to the American farmer, but in colonial days the business was in the hands of scattered individuals. After 1818 Cincinnati became noted for the increasing quantity of salt pork, smoked ham and bacon. After 1860 Chicago took Cincinnati's place as the packing center of the nation. In theory the Northwest should have been most intimately connected with the Southwest, partly because many of the pioneers came from the South, partly because the South was such a valuable market for provisions. Then too the Mississippi River system furnished a commercial bond which seemed likely to hold the two parts of the country together for all time. But the completion of the Erie Canal created an important link between the Northwest and the Northeast, and the new railroads did still more in the way of binding Northwest and Northeast into a unit. In addition to these economic connections these two regions were both interested in their free labor policy, as opposed to the system of slavery in the South. By 1860 the South seemed more isolated than ever, while the other two sections were most effectively united. Factories transformed the Northeast. Manufacturing began slowly in the East. So far in this account of the economic development of the United States very little has been said about the older sections of the country, the Middle Atlantic states and New England. But they were not standing still during this time; on the contrary they were undergoing a revolution almost as far-reaching as that of the South or the West, only theirs was a revolution in industry. Through the establishment of manufacturing enterprises the Northeast was able to derive a substantial share, indirectly, from the profits of Southern planters and Western farmers, because Eastern manufacturers supplied the whole country with textiles, shoes, clocks and watches, and iron ware. For this reason the East had just as much reason as the West to be interested in interned improvements: every new road, canal, steamboat, and railroad widened the market for Eastern products. During the colonial period, and for several years after the Revolution, the American people imported most of their manufactured goods. Shortly after 1800 the value of these imports amounted to $35,000,000. Nevertheless there was a considerable amount of small-scale manufacturing in the homes, particularly of linen and woolen goods, some made for use by the family itself, some for barter or sale. After the Revolution merchants encouraged this domestic industry by sending raw materials around to the farmers' wives, and then collecting and selling the finished product. Under this arrangement boots, shoes, and textiles were made at home. But there was no manufacturing on a large scale, partly because of the scarcity and consequent high cost of labor, partly because there was' more profit to be made from the sale of products of the sea, forests, and farms. This was particularly true from 1793 to 1807, when American merchants and shippers were making money by supplying the fighting European nations with essential raw materials and food. The embargo and the War of 1812 encouraged manufacturing in America. In 1807 President Jefferson tried to compel the belligerent powers to respect American rights by means of the Embargo Act. But in cutting off our export trade the government deprived its citizens of the means of paying for foreign imports. Then from 1812 to 1815 the United States itself was at war, and foreign trade stopped almost entirely. As a result Americans had to make their own goods or go without. Thus the years of the embargo and the war marked the real beginnings of American manufacturing. As a matter of fact the first signs of a new era in American industry had appeared in 1790. In England various leaders in the textile business had been experimenting with new7 machines for spinning cotton yarn. Because of the great advantage to be derived from these machines the inventors and owners tried to prevent their sale outside England. One young Englishman, Samuel Slater, came over to this country, not with the machines themselves or even with designs and plans for them, but with a very clear knowledge of how7 they were made. He tried to interest American investors in the idea of a cotton mill equipped with machines built like those in England. In 1790 he received the necessary financial backing and started a cotton mill, the first real factory in America, at Nantucket, Rhode Island. During the next ten years seven more mills were started; by 1808 there were fifteen cotton mills, all located in New England. These small plants ran about eight thousand spindles. But as soon as trade with Europe stopped, there was a remarkable increase in American industrial activity. By 1815 there were 500,000 spindles in operation. Besides cotton the American people were producing woolen goods, metal ware of various kinds, and glass. Conditions were unusually favorable for the establishment of factories, particularly in New England. The interruption of trade with Europe left the merchants no means of investing their money, and they were glad to put it into factories. When trade fell off the fanners could not sell their surplus, and farmers' sons and daughters were eager for work in the mills. These people were accustomed to work, and some of them had real mechanical ingenuity. So too had some of the factory owners. As early as 1798 Eli Whitney, the inventor of and cities was more evident in the great industrial area along the Atlantic coast from Maine to Maryland than in other regions. Here as early as 1880 nearly half the people lived in towns and cities, while ten years later sixty per cent were classed as urban. In New York and Connecticut more than two-thirds of the people lived in towns and cities; in Massachusetts eighty per cent; in Rhode Island, ninety per cent. Part of the city population came from the country. Part of the increased city population came from the farms and villages. These areas showed a steady decline while the cities were growing. In northern New England the abandoned farms were left as a pathetic memorial of communities which had supported a self-reliant, active, and hardy people. By 1890 even the little state of Vermont had 1,000 abandoned farms; New Hampshire had 1,300; and Maine, 3,300. In New York the population in the rural areas showed a decline, and the same was true in the rural sections of the newer states, Ohio and Illinois. Not all the people who moved away from farms in New England went to the cities, although of course many of them did. Others tried their hand at farming in the newer regions of the West, where land was cheap, and—so they hoped—profits would be large. Whatever the reason, the rural areas lost the most energetic and progressive elements in their population. But the abandonment of farms had other consequences. Before the outward-bound drift had become serious, northern New England had been dotted with little villages, each with its general store and post office, sawmill, gristmill, blacksmith shop, and a church or two. These were the centers where the farmers came to trade, where they met in town meeting, where they worshipped on Sunday. When a farmer became too old to work he would probably buy a house in the village and settle down for a peaceful old age. Such little villages were an economic necessity in the simple mode of life which prevailed before the Civil War, and they gave support to a number of people. But abandoned farms resulted in deserted villages, or at least in inactive villages. Immigration increased the city population. Another important factor in the growth of the cities was immigration. For several years after the Civil War Congress encouraged foreigners to come to this country. Manufacturers were permitted to hire laborers abroad, and to let them work out the cost of their transportation. This arrangement was not very' different in principle from that under which the indentured servants had come to the colonies. Even after importation of laborers under contract became illegal, Europeans kept on coming in increasing numbers because they could earn higher wages here than in their own countries. The majority of these newcomers went to work in the industrial centers. To be sure, they were untrained, but the new type of industry' could use unskilled labor. Before 1880 most of the immigrants to this country were of Teutonic, Scandinavian, English, or Irish stock —the kind of people who could adapt themselves quickly and easily to our mode of life. But the succeeding waves of immigration included great numbers. Each man represents 50,000 immigrants pictograph corporation of Italians, Hungarians, and Poles. These racial groups tended to concentrate in the already thickly settled urban areas. Here they created a double problem, because most of them had a lower standard of living than the rest of the population, and they were very' slow in becoming Americanized. Into New England there came in the late 1870's a heavy influx of French Canadians. By 1890 Massachusetts alone had 100,000 of them, and large numbers went into the industrial towns of the other Eastern states. Although they proved to be excellent workers, they too created a problem. They preferred to use their own language—as their descendants still do in their homes—and this marked them off as a separate group. They' still have their French newspapers. In religion they were Roman Catholic, as most of the Irish were, but the two groups could not worship together. Many industrial towns in New England therefore had two Catholic churches, one for the French, one for the Irish. When the Poles came, they too insisted upon their separate Roman Catholic Church. Because the majority of Irish were Democratic in politics, many of the French became Republican. On holiday's, even on such purely American ones as Memorial Day and the Fourth of July, some French Canadians in New England fly the French tricolor alongside the Stars and Stripes. Larger cities needed better streets. Few cities in this country have carefully planned for a great increase in population. The policy has been to let the people come, and then, when they have jammed themselves together. It is interesting to note that in recent years women have been taking leading parts in sports, particularly tennis and golf. For several years progress was retarded by clumsy clothing. Liberation from this burden has done much to encourage excellent play. There is a general feeling that the welfare of society is not promoted by allowing children or half-grown boys and girls to work in factories, stores, or offices. The general aim of these laws is to delay the time of employment until the individual has reached a certain age, and then when he goes to work to make sure that conditions are reasonably satisfactory7. In most cases states prohibit the employment of persons under fourteen years of age. At the same time, the laws require persons under fourteen to spend a certain number of days each year in school. In practically all states no minor is allowed to work without a certificate, and certificates may be refused in case of ill health or for other good reason. Generally, state laws limit the number of hours of labor for children, and most of them prohibit night work. Some of the Southern industrial states lagged behind the rest of the country in passing such laws. But the laws in the supposedly more progressive Northern states are not always well enforced. In 1928 the Labor Department of New York investigated charges that children were being illegally employed. The findings were not pleasant. Nearly 1,500 boys and girls w7ere at work in factories, in violation of the law, and over 2,700 in stores. Many of these were under fourteen years of age, while others worked at times prohibited by law. More than 3,000 of them had failed to secure the required certificate.1 Attempts to secure federal action on child labor have failed. Because of the evident need for protecting children, and because some states had refused to recognize this need, attempts were made to secure an act of Congress prohibiting child labor, or something even more certain, an amendment to the federal Constitution. In 1906 Senator Albert J. Beveridge of Indiana proposed such an amendment, the terms of which would prevent the shipment in interstate commerce of goods produced in mines or factories employing child labor. Nothing happened. Ten years later Congress passed a law with substantially the same provisions. In the federal Supreme Court declared this law unconstitutional. In Congress tried to get at the desired result by different means, this time with a law imposing a heavy tax on products of factories which employed children. In 1922 the federal Supreme Court decided that this constituted an illegal use of the taxing power, so this law followed its predecessor into the discard. The decision in this case was unanimous. In 1924 Congress approved the draft of a proposed amendment to the Constitution, giving the federal government power "to limit, regulate, and prohibit the labor of persons under eighteen years of age." By 1940, only twenty-eight states had approved the proposal. Other laws protected women in industry. In connection with t his program of protective legislation laws were passed to limit the hours for women in industrial employments. As early as 1870, Massachusetts had passed a ten-hour law for women, and this was upheld by the state supreme court. Fifteen years later the Illinois supreme court ruled against a similar law in that state. In 1908 an Oregon law, also providing for a ten-hour working day for women, was upheld by the federal Supreme Court. By 1921, forty-four states had passed laws of this kind. Another type of protective legislation is the minimum wage law, designed chiefly for women. The purpose is to compel employers to pay enough to cover the absolute necessities of fixing. Several states have passed such laws, but the results are of mixed value. Employers have shown a tendency to discharge all their lowest grade help, and to hire more efficient workers. They can afford to pay the minimum wage to these. Minimum wage laws therefore may bar certain types of people from getting any work at all because they are not worth the wage prescribed by law. Hours of labor for men were limited by law. The first attempts to limit the length of the working day for men Culver Service Miss Alice Marble, America's 1936 women's tennis champion, is not handicapped as were her predecessors shown on the opposite page were disapproved by the courts. The most widely known case of this kind, Lochner vs New York, dealt with a New York law limiting the hours for the employment of men in bakeries to ten hours. The Supreme Court found this unconstitutional. But by 1917 the make-up of the Court had changed, and in that year it approved an Oregon ten-hour law. The court also upheld the Adamson law, passed by Congress, which made the eight-hour day the basis for figuring wages for train crews. By 1930 the eight-hour day was the rule for many workers in thirty states, and in most federal positions. The United States restricted immigration in the interests of labor. The first steps taken to restrict immigration into this country applied to the Chinese. Thousands of "coolies" had been imported to help build the Central Pacific Railroad in California, and when the road was completed many of the Chinese settled in California. Rut their very presence disturbed the white inhabitants. The Chinese standard of living was much lower than the American; that is, the Chinese seemed able to live on next to nothing. On this account they were willing to work for wages which would have been utterly inadequate for any white laborers. In addition to this economic argument against them there were others based on moral grounds. Their vice dens and opium joints became so notorious that Congress sent a special committee to California to investigate them. Under these circumstances it is not surprising that white mobs should have tried to drive the Chinese out by force. One of the leading agitators in this attack upon the aliens was Dennis Kearney, an orator of the "sand lots" of San Francisco, whose slogan, "Roast Reef and Four Dollars a Day," inspired the Californians to put the Chinese in their "proper" place. The legislature of California passed a law to prevent further immigration from China, but the federal Supreme Court declared the measure unconstitutional because it violated a treaty between the United States and China. President Hayes then began negotiations with China in the hope of having the treaty changed by mutual agreement. This was done, and in 1880 Chinese immigration to this country practically stopped. In 1882 Congress passed another restrictive measure, designed to keep out undesirable persons: former convicts, the feeble-minded, and any who gave promise of becoming public charges. In 1921 Congress passed a temporary law which greatly reduced the number of immigrants from Europe. But this law was only a stopgap, and in 1924 the Johnson-Lodge Act was passed, which drastically cut down the immigration of foreigners into this country. Immigration was put upon a quota basis. From 1924 to 1927 the United States admitted from any given country only two per cent of the number born in that country who were actually residing in the United States in 1890. That is, if there had been 100.000 people of Russian birth living here in 1890, 2,000 Russians would be admitted each year. After 1927 the numbers to be admitted were reduced still further, so that not more than 150.000 foreigners altogether would be allowed to come in. This restrictive policy was adopted partly as an economic measure, to keep out cheap labor, and partly as a social measure, to prevent America from being flooded with too many different elements. It seemed desirable to give the country a chance to Americanize those already here, a process which would be difficult if untold thousands kept pouring in. Crime adds to the burden of government. Crime is present in every civilized society. Ever since civilization developed in human society, men have been perplexed by the problem of crime. So far as anyone can tell, this perplexity will last as long as civilization itself. Regulations defining crime and providing for its punishment are as old as recorded history, and as social life becomes increasingly complex, such regulations multiply. Philosophers and dreamers have drawn pictures of the perfect society, where crime does not exist, but no such ideal state has yet appeared. As some humorist observed, you cannot have an honest horse race without an honest human race. And he might have added, neither can you have a crime-free Utopia. What is crime? It has been defined as "antisocial behavior," but that does not get us far enough. Crime is that kind of behavior which is forbidden by the law, and which will be punished by the courts. If there were no laws, there would be no crime. Or we might get at it this way. All behavior might be divided into two classes: that which is approved, and that which is disapproved. Not all disapproved behavior is crime, because it doesn't get you into t rouble with the law. If you should go to a formal dinner party and shovel food into your mouth with a knife, you would be indulging in disapproved behavior, but you would not be arrested, tried, and imprisoned. You might not, however, be invited to that house again. But if the law prohibited the use of a knife at table, your behavior might land you in jail. In 1915 and in 1935 people were allowed to manufacture, transport, and sell intoxicating liquor; in 1925 there was a law forbidding these practices. Selling liquor today is not a crime; selling liquor in 1915 was not a crime; but selling liquor in 1925 was a crime. Crime is violation of law. Crime is caused by heredity and environment. What makes criminals? No one can answer this question without getting into the whole complex tangle of human behavior in general, something about which not even the psychologists are entirely in agreement. However, most of them would accept the statement that our behavior is shaped by two major influences: heredity and environment. Two children in the same family, brought up under practically the same conditions, may have very different patterns of behavior. One may have "good" habits; that is, he gets up promptly in the morning, does his work at school and at home neatly and cheerfully, and makes himself a pleasant person to five with. His brother may be so lazy that he never gets up voluntarily, he has to be driven to his work, he does everything badly, and he is always cross. There would seem to be some hereditary' difference between the two boys which makes them respond in most unlike fashion to the same kind of training. These differences may have a bearing on crime. No reputable psychologist believes that there is a criminal type, but there are people who seem determined to break rules, even when these rules are laws. The great cause of crime is probably environment, or training. Life in the slums, where children are exposed to many evil influences, probably encourages people to violate laws. Children may be encouraged to steal because their parents have no money. Petty thievery may, and often does, lead to serious crimes: burglary, bank robbery, or even murder. Children brought up in close association with criminals receive a training which points them toward a career of crime. Evidently some boys go in for crime because they have mistaken notions about fame. 