The Story of Our RepublicORThe Romance of AmericaBy MELVILLE FREEMAN, A.M.Head of History Department, High School of Practical Arts, Boston,Lecturer on Biographical and Historical Subjects; formerlyPresident, New England History Teachers' Association.Edited byESTON V. TUBBS, Ph. D.Principal, Morgan Park High School, Chicago; formerly Directorof Bureau of Curriculum, Chicago Public Schools.334 ILLUSTRATIONSincluding five color plates andnumerous pictures in the text in colorF. A. DAVIS COMPANY, PublishersPHILADELPHIATable of ContentsPAGEIllustrationsVIntroductionixTo the TeacherxiiiFoundation Stones of Our RepublicxivPronunciation of Proper NamesxyUNIT ICHAPTERThe Discovery of a New WorldI. The Great Discovery3II. The Land That Cabot Found17III. Spanish Gold Hunters and Their Rivals28UNIT IIThe Planting of the ColoniesIV. The Rivals Begin Their Own SettlementssoV. In Freedom's Cause69VI. Completing the Job of Settlement87UNIT IIIFoundation Stones of the RepublicVII. The Fight for an Empire108VIII. Americans in 1763125UNIT IVThe Winning of IndependenceIX. America Rebels148X. The War for Independence171UNIT VCreating a NationXI. The Shadow of Failure208XII. The Beginning of Success225XIII. A Change in Leadership-Jefferson249XIV. Finishing the Fight for Independence268UNIT VIA Changing CountryXV. The Union Wins and Loses290XVI. Old Hickory at the Helm317UNIT VIIWestern Conquests and SlaveryXVII. Through to the Pacific352XVIII. A New Quarrel and a New Compromise372XIX. The Slavery Truce Is Ended390ADDENDACharacter Training421Social Science Subjects for Further Study423Declaration of Independence425Constitution of the United States429Bibliographies451Index458(iii)128The Romance of America22-08CHSOld Fishing Industry MethodsNotice (B) the hook with bait, often herring; the (H) salt pit; the racks (M) on which adrying and fermenting process changed the color of a cod to a "dun" color, and preferred codwas known as "dun fish."such good terms. Native Irish hadAmerica, they went to settle wheresettled there also because these colo-neither a bishop nor a tax-gatherernies were free from prejudice againstcould reach them. So this was a landthe Catholic faith. Germans lived inof many peoples, even in 1763; butand about Germantown, and, of course,England was the motherland. Herspread elsewhere in Pennsylvania.customs, language, laws, and ideasIn very marked and clear contrastprevailed in all the colonies.to these quiet, industrious, peace-lov-In the large towns and on theing people, were the Scotch-Irish, aplantations there were many serv-restless, forceful, liberty-loving folk.ants and slaves. Laborers wereMany of them went to live on theneeded in this new country wherefrontier, where they fought the Indiansthere was more work to do than handsand pushed their way into the moun-to do it. Much help was necessary ontain regions and beyond. They hadthe great estates, and the well-to-doleft northern Ireland because of pettywanted servants. Most of these camereligious quarrels and high taxes. Infrom England. The poor, the unfor-Social Science: What things did our Colonial ancestors make in the home which are nowmanufactured in factories?A New Quarrel and a New Compromise383Early Iron IndustryLittle foundries developed, often beside a convenient hill of coal.in the world. In the next fifty years,on account of revolutions against theenormous and undreamed-of fortunesgovernment of kings. Many Germans,were going to be made in railroads,therefore, sought a refuge here fromsteel, and oil. Indeed, these discoverieshard times and punishment. Then,and inventions and the men behindtoo, passage across the ocean wasthem were destined to have more to doquicker, cheaper, and more comfort-with the development of the nationable than ever before. Knowledge ofthan any statesmen in Washington.America and its opportunities wasThe number of immigrants wasmore widespread among the commonrapidly increasing, aiding industrypeople. Industry and land were call-but arousing opposition. too. In theing for laborers. The Irish immigrantsten years between 1840 and 1850 twicegenerally remained in or near theas many people from foreign countrieseastern cities, where they found jobscame to the United States as came inin the mills, or in the constructionthe previous fifty years. There werework of city streets, and the rapidlyseveral causes for this. First, thereextending railroads. The Germans, onwas trouble in Europe. Poverty andthe other hand, generally soughtfamine in Ireland, due to failure ofhomes in the West.the potato crops, sent thousands ofNow most Americans at this timepeasants to these shores where theywere of native stock; that is, theirhad the promise of a living. In centralancestors had lived here for severalEurope a great deal of unrest existed generations. As a whole they did notSocial Science: Should an inventor have a permanent interest in the product resulting from hisinvention? Why did the Italians and Greeks settle in our cities instead of on farms?

A New Quarrel and a New Compromise385like this invasion of foreigners. TheBut the chief opposition in theonly ones who really welcomed themNorth was against the new Fugitivewere the employers who wanted cheapSlave Law. The northerner generallylabor. Willing to work for lowerhad a soft spot in his heart for thewages, the immigrants deprived manyrunaway slave, and was more inclinednative laborers of their jobs, or forcedto help him go free than to send himthem to accept lower pay. They livedback to bondage. Sheriffs were notin more crowded and squalid homes.anxious to arrest these runaways. Ifthey were brought into court, jurieswere likely to release them. Besides,many people were regularly provid-ing hiding places where the fugitiveswere concealed during the day andfrom which they could be sent aheadby night to the next shelter on theway to Canada and safety. Thesesecret routes existed through all thestates north of the Ohio River, andin New York and Pennsylvania. Theywere called "The Underground Rail-road," although of course there wasno railroad nor any passage underground. This method of helping theescaping slaves had been going on fora long time without much risk to theThe "Fust" Oil Wellhelpers, and was causing great lossesIts discovery in western Pennsylvaniato the slave-owners. It was the chiefcreated one of our greatest of Americanindustries, providing a new means of lightreason for the new law, which nowand then a new fuel for transportation.made such assistance to slaves aOut of the irritation and prejudicecriminal offense, punishable by alarge fine. United States officers wereappeared a curious political party, or-ganized to keep the immigrants in theirset on the trail of the runaway, withthe right to call on any citizen toplace and prevent their having any in-assist in the capture. Should onefluence in government. At first it wasrefuse, he might be himself arrestedsecret, and as none of the membersand punished. Jury trials were nowould tell anything, they were nick-longer permitted.named the "Know-Nothings." Then se-A great many highly respected mencrecy was dropped and under the namescorned the law and they helped theof "American Party," the numbers in-escaping slaves more than ever. Some-creased and they elected many of theirtimes they rescued or tried to rescuecandidates to office. The party split overthose who were caught. Anthonyslavery, however, and soon died out.Burns ran away from his VirginiaSocial Science: Most of our emigrants came to avoid persecution, punishment, or to improvetheir living conditions. Have they any right then to try to change our customs and government?25The Story of Our RepublicORThe Romance of AmericaBy MELVILLE FREEMAN, A.M.Head of History Department, High School of Practical Arts, Boston,Lecturer on Biographical and Historical Subjects; formerlyPresident, New England History Teachers' Association.Edited byESTON V. TUBBS, Ph. D.Principal, Morgan Park High School, Chicago; formerly Directorof Bureau of Curriculum, Chicago Public Schools.334 ILLUSTRATIONSincluding five color plates andnumerous pictures in the text in colorF. A. DAVIS COMPANY, PublishersPHILADELPHIATable of ContentsPAGEIllustrationsVIntroductionixTo the TeacherxiiiFoundation Stones of Our RepublicxivPronunciation of Proper NamesxyUNIT ICHAPTERThe Discovery of a New WorldI. The Great Discovery3II. The Land That Cabot Found17III. Spanish Gold Hunters and Their Rivals28UNIT IIThe Planting of the ColoniesIV. The Rivals Begin Their Own SettlementssoV. In Freedom's Cause69VI. Completing the Job of Settlement87UNIT IIIFoundation Stones of the RepublicVII. The Fight for an Empire108VIII. Americans in 1763125UNIT IVThe Winning of IndependenceIX. America Rebels148X. The War for Independence171UNIT VCreating a NationXI. The Shadow of Failure208XII. The Beginning of Success225XIII. A Change in Leadership-Jefferson249XIV. Finishing the Fight for Independence268UNIT VIA Changing CountryXV. The Union Wins and Loses290XVI. Old Hickory at the Helm317UNIT VIIWestern Conquests and SlaveryXVII. Through to the Pacific352XVIII. A New Quarrel and a New Compromise372XIX. The Slavery Truce Is Ended390ADDENDACharacter Training421Social Science Subjects for Further Study423Declaration of Independence425Constitution of the United States429Bibliographies451Index458(iii)

128The Romance of America22-08CHSOld Fishing Industry MethodsNotice (B) the hook with bait, often herring; the (H) salt pit; the racks (M) on which adrying and fermenting process changed the color of a cod to a "dun" color, and preferred codwas known as "dun fish."such good terms. Native Irish hadAmerica, they went to settle wheresettled there also because these colo-neither a bishop nor a tax-gatherernies were free from prejudice againstcould reach them. So this was a landthe Catholic faith. Germans lived inof many peoples, even in 1763; butand about Germantown, and, of course,England was the motherland. Herspread elsewhere in Pennsylvania.customs, language, laws, and ideasIn very marked and clear contrastprevailed in all the colonies.to these quiet, industrious, peace-lov-In the large towns and on theing people, were the Scotch-Irish, aplantations there were many serv-restless, forceful, liberty-loving folk.ants and slaves. Laborers wereMany of them went to live on theneeded in this new country wherefrontier, where they fought the Indiansthere was more work to do than handsand pushed their way into the moun-to do it. Much help was necessary ontain regions and beyond. They hadthe great estates, and the well-to-doleft northern Ireland because of pettywanted servants. Most of these camereligious quarrels and high taxes. Infrom England. The poor, the unfor-Social Science: What things did our Colonial ancestors make in the home which are nowmanufactured in factories?A New Quarrel and a New Compromise383Early Iron IndustryLittle foundries developed, often beside a convenient hill of coal.in the world. In the next fifty years,on account of revolutions against theenormous and undreamed-of fortunesgovernment of kings. Many Germans,were going to be made in railroads,therefore, sought a refuge here fromsteel, and oil. Indeed, these discoverieshard times and punishment. Then,and inventions and the men behindtoo, passage across the ocean wasthem were destined to have more to doquicker, cheaper, and more comfort-with the development of the nationable than ever before. Knowledge ofthan any statesmen in Washington.America and its opportunities wasThe number of immigrants wasmore widespread among the commonrapidly increasing, aiding industrypeople. Industry and land were call-but arousing opposition. too. In theing for laborers. The Irish immigrantsten years between 1840 and 1850 twicegenerally remained in or near theas many people from foreign countrieseastern cities, where they found jobscame to the United States as came inin the mills, or in the constructionthe previous fifty years. There werework of city streets, and the rapidlyseveral causes for this. First, thereextending railroads. The Germans, onwas trouble in Europe. Poverty andthe other hand, generally soughtfamine in Ireland, due to failure ofhomes in the West.the potato crops, sent thousands ofNow most Americans at this timepeasants to these shores where theywere of native stock; that is, theirhad the promise of a living. In centralancestors had lived here for severalEurope a great deal of unrest existed generations. As a whole they did notSocial Science: Should an inventor have a permanent interest in the product resulting from hisinvention? Why did the Italians and Greeks settle in our cities instead of on farms?A New Quarrel and a New Compromise385like this invasion of foreigners. TheBut the chief opposition in theonly ones who really welcomed themNorth was against the new Fugitivewere the employers who wanted cheapSlave Law. The northerner generallylabor. Willing to work for lowerhad a soft spot in his heart for thewages, the immigrants deprived manyrunaway slave, and was more inclinednative laborers of their jobs, or forcedto help him go free than to send himthem to accept lower pay. They livedback to bondage. Sheriffs were notin more crowded and squalid homes.anxious to arrest these runaways. Ifthey were brought into court, jurieswere likely to release them. Besides,many people were regularly provid-ing hiding places where the fugitiveswere concealed during the day andfrom which they could be sent aheadby night to the next shelter on theway to Canada and safety. Thesesecret routes existed through all thestates north of the Ohio River, andin New York and Pennsylvania. Theywere called "The Underground Rail-road," although of course there wasno railroad nor any passage underground. This method of helping theescaping slaves had been going on fora long time without much risk to theThe "Fust" Oil Wellhelpers, and was causing great lossesIts discovery in western Pennsylvaniato the slave-owners. It was the chiefcreated one of our greatest of Americanindustries, providing a new means of lightreason for the new law, which nowand then a new fuel for transportation.made such assistance to slaves aOut of the irritation and prejudicecriminal offense, punishable by alarge fine. United States officers wereappeared a curious political party, or-ganized to keep the immigrants in theirset on the trail of the runaway, withthe right to call on any citizen toplace and prevent their having any in-assist in the capture. Should onefluence in government. At first it wasrefuse, he might be himself arrestedsecret, and as none of the membersand punished. Jury trials were nowould tell anything, they were nick-longer permitted.named the "Know-Nothings." Then se-A great many highly respected mencrecy was dropped and under the namescorned the law and they helped theof "American Party," the numbers in-escaping slaves more than ever. Some-creased and they elected many of theirtimes they rescued or tried to rescuecandidates to office. The party split overthose who were caught. Anthonyslavery, however, and soon died out.Burns ran away from his VirginiaSocial Science: Most of our emigrants came to avoid persecution, punishment, or to improvetheir living conditions. Have they any right then to try to change our customs and government?25



