No authentic portrait of Columbus painted during his life is known to exist. This is a painting by Anthony More, probably done at the Spanish court between 1543 and 1553 after two miniatures originally painted from life for Queen Isabella. His costume appears to represent the period of the painting rather than that of Columbus. A Commercial Revolution had indeed been accomplished. The Discovery of America. If the world was round, it Was possible to tap the riches of the East by sailing due west as well as by rounding the African continent. Although the ignorant landsman might think that the world was fiat, educated astronomers and navigators had long believed otherwise. There Ivas nothing new in the theory held by Columbus; his greatness was not in the originality of his conception but in his courage in venturing the unknown seas to prove his belief, and in his perseverance in the pursuit of his project. Christopher Columbus was a typical mariner of his day. Born probably in Genoa, he was early attracted to Portugal, where he acquired fame as a map-maker and navigator, and where he sought aid from the king to sail due west in search of the Orient. Failing in Portugal, he went to Spain and after years of effort won the support of Ferdinand and Isabella. 1 laving decided to back Columbus, the monarchs commissioned him admiral and governor of any new lands discovered and conferred upon him one-tenth of "all the pearls, precious stones, gold, silver, spices, and other merchandise" he might find there. Setting out on August 3, 1492, with three tiny ships and about 100 men, Columbus sailed west until the night of October 11, when one of his men saw a light "like a small wax candle that was being hoisted and raised," and the next morning they found themselves in sight of land, probably one of the Bahamas of the West Indies. Convinced that he had discovered outlying islands of the Indies, Columbus cruised about for several months, discovering Cuba, Haiti, and many other islands of the West Indies. Showered with honors upon his return to Spain in 1493, Columbus prepared immediately for further explorations. Upon his third trip, he sighted the northern coast of South America, and upon his fourth he skirted Central America, but his quest for Cathay was fruitless. No riches immediately flooded the coffers of his sovereigns, and the great admiral died in 1506 in poverty and obscurity. The Norsemen. To the day of his death Columbus believed that he had discovered merely the fringes of the continent of Asia, but in reality he won eternal fame for opening to settlement a new world. Strictly speaking, Columbus simply rediscovered America.2 As early as the ninth century the Norsemen had colonized Greenland, and it appears that Leif Ericson about 1000 sailed from Iceland and landed on the coast of North America somewhere between Cape Breton on Cape Breton Island and Point Judith on the coast of Rhode Island. A Century of Exploration—The Spaniard. No sooner had the news reached Europe of the discoveries of Columbus, than Pope Alexander VI, at the behest of Portugal, drew (1493) a "Line of Demarcation" from pole to pole 100 leagues west of the Cape Verde Islands, the heathen lands discovered to the east to belong to Portugal and those to the west to Spain. This decision of the Pope was confirmed in the following year by a treaty between the two nations, but the line was moved to 370 leagues west of these islands. Under this arrangement Spain got practically all of the Americas except Brazil, and during the next century she moved aggressively to occupy this region. Nor did Columbus give his name to the new world. The term America comes from' an Italian merchant and explorer, Amerigo Vespucci, sailing under the Portuguese flag, who asserted that he had explored the coast of South America in 1497 and wrote letters concerning this "new world" which he claimed to have discovered. A German professor, Martin Waldseemiiller, in getting out a new edition of Ptolemy's geography, reprinted some of Vespucci's letters, and marked the new continent America. Other geographers followed this lead until the custom of calling both the northern and southern continents of the New World America was established. In the two decades following their discovery many of the West Indian Islands were occupied by Spain. From these islands as a base, explorers and conquerors carried the banner of Spain in many directions. In 1513 Balboa, following the rumors of a great sea to the south, crossed the Isthmus of Panama to behold the Pacific. In the same year Ponce de Leon sighted Florida in search of gold and the fountain of youth, and in 1519-21 Cortez with 500 men landed on the coast of Mexico and reduced the Aztecs to submission. Spain in North America. The spoils of Mexico excited the appetite of the Spaniards for new fields to conquer, and in 1532-38 Francisco Pizarro looted the accumulated wealth of another civilization in Peru. One of Pizarro's officers, Hernando de Soto, in search of new empires to conquer, landed in Florida in 1540 with "the most distinguished company of would-be Indian killers and robbers that had come together on Spanish soil since 1493." Killing and exploring, this band wandered through the forests of the present Gulf states until a handful of survivors reached Mexico in 1543. Coronado, in search of the "Seven Cities of Cibola" wandered throughout the American Southwest (1540- 42), penetrating the continent as far north as the present Kansas, but the fabled cities proved to be only the pueblos of the Zuni Indians. In 1565 the first permanent white settlement in the present area of the United States was established at St. Augustine in Florida. By that year the Spaniards had control of the West Indies, Mexico, Central America, and much of South America, and it is estimated that some 200 settlements had been established in which 150,000 white Spaniards lived. In the meantime (1519-22) a Spanish expedition, headed by a Portuguese, Ferdinand Magellan, sailed around the world in what may well be called the greatest feat of navigation of all time, an expedition which for the first time gave some idea of the extent of the new discoveries and of the size of the earth. i France Enters the Competition. It was hardly to be expected that the other nations of Europe would stand aside while Spain and Portugal monopolized the wealth of the Orient and of America. France, concerned for the moment with religious wars and the conquest of Italy, did not get into action until 1524 when the French king sent the Italian navigator, Verrazano, to seek a route to the Indies. He was followed ten years later by Jacques Cartier. On his second voyage in 1535, Magellan started with five ships and 237 men. One ship, the Victoria with 18 men, actually completed the voyage. Magellan himself was killed. Four centuries later (1924) the first navigation of the globe by airplane was completed by United States Army fliers in 175 days. In 1931 Wiley Post and Harold Gatty girdled the globe in eight days, 15 hours and 51 minutes. Post, flying solo, reduced this record in 1933 to seven days, 18 hours and 49 minutes. Cartier "found a goodly great gulfe, full of Islands, passages, and entrances/' which he explored until he had entered the St. Lawrence. This river he followed until the rapids which he named the La Chine Falls ended any hope of reaching China by this route. Other Frenchmen followed Cartier to fish and trade for furs, but no settlements were made in this region for more than 60 years. In the meantime, two French efforts to found colonies in the Florida region failed. Champlain's own drawing of his battle with the Indians at Ticonderoga, Lake Champlain, July 30. 1609. The Iroquois stand in front of the stockade which they had built, Champlain and his allies opposite. After Champlain had discharged his arquebus, killing two chiefs and wounding a third (see picture), the Iroquois fled. The French empire in North America was due primarily to the labors of Samuel de Champlain, who in 1603 made his first voyage to Canada and commenced his triple role of fur trader, explorer and colonizer, which was to continue until his death in 1635. His first voyage resulted in the founding of Port Royal (now Annapolis), Nova Scotia; subsequently (1608) he built a fort on the rocky promontory of Quebec. Setting out with an Indian war party in the following spring, Champlain discovered the lake which bears his name; and on this same expedition he helped his companions disperse a band of Iroquois, thus incurring for the French the undying hatred of the powerful Indians who controlled the region around New York. When the "Father of New France" passed from the scene, the French empire in America consisted of but a handful of fishing posts and fur trading stations, but it was destined to grow rapidly during the next century. English Explorations in the Sixteenth Century. For England the sixteenth century was an age of great change. Her economic interests were shifting from agriculture to handicraft industries. Her seamen were no longer content with short fishing voyages, but were dreaming of adventure on the high seas. It was the century when England broke from the religion of her fathers and organized a protesting national institution, the Church of England. It was also an age of high achievement, for during these years Shakespeare wrote his immortal plays and the little nation broke the sea power of the proud and mighty Spanish empire. Back in 1497 before Columbus had touched the mainland of America, the Italian navigator, John Cabot, in the service of Henry VII of England, had explored the North American coast and taken possession of it for England. No settlements followed Cabot's voyage for many years, hut it gave England a claim to the American continent which she later advanced. It was over half a century before England again took an interest in America, and when she did her effort was chiefly to break the trading monopoly of the Spanish and Portuguese and thus strike a blow at her rival Spain, rather than to settle the country. The interest revived with John Hawkins, who, instructing his crews "to serve God daily" and "to love one another," set out for Africa to secure a load of negro slaves. Hawkins's slaving expeditions soon brought him into conflict with Spain, a private fight which developed into a long imperial conflict. His young kinsman, Francis Drake, not content with winning a fortune by selling negroes, set out in 1577 with five vessels and 150 men to wage private war on Spain. Plundering Spanish towns and capturing treasure ships, he finally sailed one of his vessels completely around the world. Instead of being punished at the behest of the Spanish ambassador, the fearless pirate was knighted by Queen Elizabeth on his own quartet - deck. To put an end to this type of piracy as well as to conquer England for the Catholic faith, Philip II of Spain sent the Great Armada in 1588 to reduce the island kingdom, but Drake and his skillful navigators with their smaller ships outmaneuvered the unwieldy galleons of the Spaniards, destroying many and forcing the rest to return to Spain. Beginnings of Colonization. While Drake was still making his way around the world, the first efforts were being made to found an English empire in America. In 1578 Elizabeth gave Sir Humphrey Gilbert a patent to explore and settle the New World, hut the luckless navigator lost his life at sea. His half-brother, Walter Raleigh, took up the work in 1584, and sent an expedition which explored the coast of the region soon to he named Virginia. Persistently, but unsuccessfully, Raleigh tried to settle the new land. One group of settlers on Roanoke Island sailed back with Drake who happened along, and another group resources, and navigation facilities offer the chief explanations for the distribution of population. Methods of Earning a Living. Physiographic influences are also important in determining how man may earn his living. The barren soil of New England turned the settlers' interests toward an easier means of livelihood than farming, and the nearby supply of fish made the colonial and nineteenth-century New Englander a follower of the sea. New England became the center of colonial shipping and retained that position in later days during the great era of the American merchant marine. With the passing of shipping as their leading industry, New Englanders turned to the abundant water power and found in manufacturing an outlet for their energies and a source of wealth. In the Central Atlantic states, where fertile farm lands were combined with good harbors, rivers and water power, the activities of the people were more diversified. In the colonial South the discovery that tobacco was well adapted to the soil turned people to the production of this staple. Later they specialized in cotton, but as their wealth was drawn chiefly from these two commodities southern civilization remained predominantly agricultural and rural. The Economic and Political Background. In the colonization of America, religious, political, and economic motives were closely interwoven. Like the Spaniards, many Englishmen urged that the first object of settlement was "to preach and baptize into Christian Religion, and by propagation of the Gospell, to recover out of the arms of the Divell, a number of poor and miserable soules, wrapt up unto death, in almost invincible ignorance." As the years went on, one of the powerful motives which impelled Europeans to come to America was the persecution which the dominant churches inflicted upon dissenting minorities, a persecution which sent not only Englishmen, but Irishmen, Germans, French, Jews and other nationalities, to our shores. Political motives also played their part. Settlements were encouraged to weaken the power of Spain and later to check the eastward pressure of the French. In later years the four-cornered struggle for empire between Spain, France, England, and Holland contributed much in hastening the occupation of America. Englishmen fleeing from the political tyranny of the Stuarts and their philosophy of the divine right of kings, likewise helped to populate the colonies. Economic Motives. More important than the religious and political were the economic motives. England at the opening of the seventeenth century was ripe for a great effort in empire building. A surplus of capital, manufactured goods and labor had accumulated which might be expended for just such purposes. The confiscation of church property had placed unaccustomed wealth in the hands of the nobility, while city merchants and bankers were amassing capital from the rapidly developing commerce and industry. Manufacturing, particularly of woolen goods, was growing rapidly and merchants were scanning the horizon for new markets. The establishment of colonies, urged one writer, would promote especially the trades of "clothiers, wool men, carders, spinners, weavers, fullers, shear men, dyers, drapers, cappers, hatters," and would repair "many decayed towns"; and another writer pointed out that Virginia was a place "fit for the vent of our wares." The New World was also a region where raw materials for the workshops of England might be obtained. The development of the manufacture of woolens had not been an unmixed blessing to England. Much land which had been used for the production of foodstuffs was now given over to sheep raising. This "enclosing" of agricultural land for sheep raising threw many thousands of agricultural laborers out of work, while the dissolution of monasteries and the gradual break-up of the feudal system freed many to seek new means of livelihood. An author of a contemporary pamphlet speaks of our land abounding with swarms of idle persons which having no means of labor to relieve their misery, do likewise swarm in lewd and naughty practices, so that if we seek not some ways for their foreign employment, we must provide shortly more prisons and corrections for their bad conditions. It is no new thing but most profitable for our state, to rid our multitudes of such as he at home pestering the land with pestilence and penury, and infecting one another with vice and villainy worse than the plague itself. To take care of these "rogues, vagabonds, and sturdy beggars" with which England was "exceedingly pestered" proved a difficult task for the English Parliament, and many students of the unemployment problem saw in America a means whereby "all odious idleness from this our Real me" might be "utterly banished." To the unemployed, America held out hope, and those in authority were in no wise loath to part with this class. Above all, however, America offered to the masses of Europe a chance to start life anew and an opportunity to improve their economic future. The Trader Takes a Hand. The adventurers, Hawkins, Drake, Raleigh, Gilbert, and others, had stimulated interest in the New World but had done little for colonization except to prove that the task at that time was beyond the ability of any single individual, no matter what his wealth might be. The Crown was unwilling to incur the trouble and expense of founding colonies, but it was willing to grant charters to corporations or individuals who were inclined to risk their own for tunes; and thus it came about that the first permanent settlement was and the survivors had embarked for England when Lord de la Warre arrived with fresh supplies and men. A second influence leading to the salvation of the Virginia colony was the more intelligent treatment of the emigrants. A large proportion of the first colonists were merely servants of the company who bound themselves to work for a certain number of years in return for passage and maintenance during their period of servitude. The new arrangement of 1609 provided that every planter, whether man, woman, or child above ten years of age, was given one share of stock. All were promised maintenance, and at the end of seven years each was to receive 100 acres of land and a division of the assets of the company in proportion to the shares of stock held. These arrangements made the colony a true plantation, the colonists living from the common store, and the proceeds of their labors going to the company. Under the cruel but businesslike rule of Sir Thomas Dale (1611-16) the colony established itself, and a further impetus was given in 1619 when Sir George Yeard- ley modified the system of common industry by allotting to each settler a small plot of land to cultivate for himself. The third, and perhaps the most important, influence leading to the prosperity of the Jamestown settlement was John Rolfe's discovery in 1612 that tobacco would grow well in Virginia. There was a ready market in Europe, and by 1617 even the market places and streets of Jamestown were planted with tobacco. It provided an economic basis upon which the colony might thrive. Although many of the leaders of the Virginia Company were undoubtedly dominated by high patriotic motives, the primary interest of the concern was profit. In this respect the enterprise was a failure. The company sent to America over 5000 immigrants and expended £200,000, a vast sum for that time, but financially the project was a total loss. The Virginia Company, nevertheless, won undying fame, for it established the first permanent English settlement in America. The Religious Dissenters. The settlements at Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay were also made under the supervision of commercial companies, but their purpose was primarily to provide a refuge from religious persecution, England, like other European nations, was tom during the sixteenth century by religious controversy. Under Henry VIII the nation broke away from Catholicism in 1534, and recognized the king as head of the English Church; although the supremacy of the Pope was repudiated, much of the Catholic doctrine was retained. Under Henry's three children the English Church swung from his religious compromise to extreme Protestantism under Edward VI, back to Catholicism under Mary, and then under Elizabeth back again to the middle ground set up by Henry. A model in the Smithsonian Institution of the 180-ton ship which set sail in August 1620, with 102 Pilgrims. The voyage from Plymouth to Provincetown lasted 65 days. Religious opinion, but what made the situation so intolerable was the fact that all were expected to follow the religion ordained at the moment by the state. The movement toward Protestantism having started, there were bound to be many who wanted to go much farther than Henry or Elizabeth. These were known as Puritans because of their desire to "purify" the church of certain remnants of Catholic practice still used by the Church of England. Certain of the Puritans, feeling that it was impossible further to Protestantize the English Church, believed that they must separate entirely from its communion. The "Separatists." as they were called, were persecuted by Elizabeth and by her successor James I (1603-25). At the opening of his reign James announced his religious policy when lie replied to a petition of English Puritans by saying that, if they were aiming at the type of Protestantism in vogue in Scotland, "it agreeth as well with a monarchy as God with the Devil." "No Bishop, no King," he cried. "If this be all your party hath to say, 1 will make them conform themselves or harry them out of the land." The Separatists would never "conform themselves." and one group which lived at Scrooby in Nottinghamshire migrated under the leadership of their pastor, John Robinson, to Leyden in 1609. Settlement at Plymouth. In Holland this alien band found life desperately hard, and after some years they determined to seek their fortunes in America. A grant of land was secured from the Virginia Company and 70 London merchants subscribed £7000 to finance the expedition. Under the terms of the "Articles of Agreement of Plymouth Plantation" each shave was to be reckoned at £10. "adventuring himself' each emigrant was counted as holding one share. For seven years all wealth produced by the colonists was to go into the common stock, and from this and supplies sent by the London merchants the colonists were to be furnished food, clothing, and other necessities. At the end of seven years " capital & profits, viz. the houses, lands, goods and chattels, be equally divided between adventurers, and planters; which done, every man shall be free from the other of them of any debt or detriment concerning this adventure." The English. Although the American people even in colonial times were a composite of many nationalities, the settlers from England were in the great majority. More important than mere numbers, however, was the fact that the English language and culture were destined to predominate in the colonies. From England came the forms of government as laid down in the charters, modified, to be sure, by American conditions. Colonial legislatures, in a sense, were little parliaments which occupied here somewhat the same position that the English Parliament did at home. Whatever civil rights Englishmen had at home were the heritage of Americans. The local government of county, borough and township was introduced here as well as such officials as sheriff, constable, collector of taxes, and overseer of the poor. The English state church was the official form of religion in five of the colonies, although in New England Congregationalism was dominant. The colonists imported most of their manufactured goods from England. They read English books, and the wealthy sent their sons to England to be educated, while those who could not afford it sent them to schools modeled after the English type of education. In a cultural if not in a strictly racial sense, England was the motherland of America. The Irish and Scotch-Irish. Outside of the English, the most important group coming to America from the British Isles were those from Ireland. These were of two types, the pure Irish stock from south and central Ireland who were Catholic in religion and were scattered widely throughout the colonies, and the so-called "Scotch-Irish"i from northern Ireland who were of mixed Scotch, English and Irish extraction and Protestant in religion. Partly because there was no large distinct migration of south Irish, it has been difficult to estimate their number, but it was certainly much larger than has been generally supposed. On the other hand it is easier to follow the fortunes of the north Irish "The term "'Scotch-Irish'' is not wholly accurate. The non-Irish population who had settled in Ulster and other parts of north Ireland came from England as well as Scotland ; and of those who came from Scotland, the great majority were lowland Scots whose blond may have been more English than Scotch. In America all who came from Ireland, whether from north or south, were commonly known as "Irish." This is one of the reasons why it is difficult to estimate the number and influence of those from the north and those from the south of Ireland. Protestants from Ulster, who came in large groups during the first half of the eighteenth century. These men were descendants of settlers who had migrated to Ireland a century earlier to occupy the land which had been wrested from the Irish by the English king. Their religion was Presbyterian and their chief industry the making of woolens. When they were forced to pay tithes to the Church of England and forbidden to export their woolens to England, the Ulsterites turned to the New World. When they arrived in America they found the best lands near the coast occupied, and so were forced to move to the west. Trained by decades of border warfare in Ireland, brave, resolute, and aggressive, they quickly adapted themselves to the rigors of pioneer life and were "par excellence the Indian fighters/' Their little hamlets became the pioneer outposts from Belfast, Maine, to the back country of Georgia. The center of their migration was the Pennsylvania frontier, and from here a steady stream flowed through the Cumberland and Shenandoah Valleys into the great mountain trough, and finally out through the passes east into North Carolina or west some years later into Kentucky and Tennessee. The Germans. Next to the English and Irish, the largest national group coming to America in the colonial period was the Germans. The migration originated chiefly in the upper Rhine Valley or Palatinate where economic disorganization, political discontent and religious persecution were the causes which impelled them to cast their lot in a foreign land. Penn sent agents to encourage them to migrate to Pennsylvania, and more than 100,000 settled there during the eighteenth century. Certainly a third of Pennsylvania's population at the opening of the Revolution were Germans from the Rhineland, the ancestors of the "Pennsylvania Dutch" of later times. A smaller number found their way to the hudson and Mohawk Valleys, settling as far west as Palatine Bridge. Skillful mechanics and thrifty husbandmen, these home-loving people occupied some of the most fertile land in the east, and their descendants still hold it. Many of them, mingling with the Scotch-Irish, also pushed their way into the back country of Virginia and the Carolinas. Other Nationalities. In addition to the groups mentioned, many other nationalities contributed to the colonial stock. The Dutch were numerous in New York and New Jersey, and reminders of their civilization are still to he found in the Hudson Valley. The ill-starred attempt of the Swedes to settle the Delaware left some representatives of that nation in the Middle Colonies. Spaniards were to he found on the southern borders of the lands now part of the United States. Thrifty French Protestants, persecuted at home and denied a haven in the French colonies, came to South Carolina and scattered themselves in the seaports from New England to Georgia. Members of the Jewish race were to he found in the trading centers, and some of them by the end of the colonial period had achieved wealth and influence. Even in the colonial period America was a great melting, pot of many races, and this has been an important characteristic of our civilization down to the present time. Conditions Favoring Self-government. An important feature of colonial life was the large amount of home rule or self-government which existed here. Many influences contributed to this. We have seen, for example, how the charter of Massachusetts Bay made no reference to the place where the company should hold its meetings, thus enabling the company to transfer its charter and conduct all of its business in America. We have noted the extensive powers of government granted to the proprietors, who in turn granted to the people a participation in the government, reserving only supervision and veto power. The charters themselves granted many specific rights. Distance from England, frontier conditions, the self-reliance of the sturdy pioneers who, amid bitter hardships, were subduing a wilderness, all tended toward the maintenance of those political rights which existed and to a demand for more. In the minds of the settlers every little colonial assembly took on the significance of a little parliament. The colonists knew their own needs better than the government in England, and they looked to their own assemblies to advance their interests and protect their rights. Representative Government in Virginia. The development of representative government in Virginia was slow. Under the charter of 1606 the king kept the government closely in his hands, directing it through a general council in London and a resident council in Virginia, all of the members of which he appointed (p. 17). The charter of 1609 was more liberal in that it granted the corporation (the Virginia Company) the direct management of affairs, but less liberal as far as the colonists were concerned, for it enabled the company to abolish the resident council and establish a powerful one-man dictatorship. In 1619, however, the company granted a measure of home rule when it called a general assembly to be composed of the governor, his council, and a House of Burgesses made up of two representatives from each settlement, the latter to be freely elected. Delegates from eleven plantations were duly chosen and met on July 30, 1619, in the church at Jamestown. This was the first representative assembly in the New World and marks the beginning of representative government on the American continent. In 1624 Charles I revoked the charter, taking back the direct control of the government into his own hands, and ruling through a governor and council appointed by him. He did. nevertheless, allow the representative assembly to remain, and around this assembly the planters rallied to protect their interests. The Flood of Immigration. Since 1789, about 35,000,000 immigrants have sought our shores to enter permanently or temporarily into our economic life. The number of immigrants has varied from around 10,000 a year in the period before 1820, to almost 1,300,000 in 1907. Relative to the population in the United States, the greatest influx was in the late 'forties, but the greatest migration in actual numbers came between 1903 and 1914 when immigration rose to over 1,000,000 a year during six of these years. In spite of the ebb and flow of migration to this country (see graph, p. 438), the percentage of foreignborn to the total population did not vary to any great extent up to 1910. It amounted to about one-seventh of the population; another seventh of our people were native whites of foreign parentage. Causes for Immigration. The causes for this tremendous immigration are to be found in the conditions existing in both Europe and America. Religious persecution, political unrest, and adverse economic conditions impelled many to break the ties of their homeland in the hope of finding a fuller life here. The rapid rise in the number of immigrants in the 'forties, for example, was due in part to poor harvests on the Continent, to the potato famine of 1845 and 1846 in Ireland, and to the wave of political revolutions which swept Europe in 1848 and 1849. Quite as important were conditions in America. The greater economic opportunity existing here was the primary influence, particularly strong during periods of prosperity and weaker during years of depression. The rise and decline of immigration corresponds closely to economic conditions in America. Much of the immigration since the Civil War has been artificially stimulated by American employers in search of cheap labor, steamship companies looking for passengers, and railroads seeking to sell land (p. 388). Professor Commons, a leading immigration expert, goes so far as to say that "the desire to get cheap labor, to take in passenger fares, and to sell land, have probably brought more immigrants to America than the hard conditions of Europe, Asia, and Africa have sent." Certainly these agencies covered Europe with their propaganda. As the years went by and transportation facilities improved, emigration became a less hazardous undertaking no longer limited to the strong and self-reliant. Furthermore, probably one-fourth of the immigrants in recent decades have come over on funds supplied by relatives and friends in this country. Source of Immigration. Until the last decade of the nineteenth century, the immigrants came principally from the British Isles, from Germany and from the Scandinavian countries. In the nineties the source rapidly changed until in 1896 the immigrants from southern and eastern Europe (Italy, Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Poland) furnished over half the number. By 1910 the "new immigration," as it was called, furnished over four-fifths of the total. A good proportion of the new immigration were Jews who fled from religious persecution just as the Pilgrim fathers had fled centuries earlier. The course of American immigration has been dominated by conditions in Europe and America. Thus the depression following the panics of 1873 and 1893 resulted in a decline of immigration. The World War likewise produced an immediate decrease. The restriction laws after the war and the depression after 1929 explain the last decline. The early agitation came mainly from the ranks of organized labor who felt that a continuous flow of cheap labor kept wages down and prevented a rise in the standard of living. Capital, on the other hand, advocated comparatively easy immigration laws, arguing that a continued supply of cheap labor was necessary to develop the resources of the nation and to fill the jobs which the native American could not or would not fill. Beginning with the Act of 1882, a series of laws have been passed prohibiting the bringing over of immigrants under contract to labor, and excluding those believed to be morally, mentally or physically unfit—those afflicted with physical or mental diseases, vagrants, paupers, immoral persons, or anarchists. Almost every type of undesirable was excluded. Steamship companies were liable to fine for bringing over such persons, besides being compelled to return them, and were forbidden to solicit immigrants. In spite of these laws, there was no great diminution in the armies of immigrants descending annually upon our shores until the World War. A special phase of this long-continued agitation to restrict immigration was the excitement over incoming Japanese on the western coast. Following an order of the San Francisco board of education in 1906 to segregate Chinese and Japanese children in separate schools and a protest from Japan, the governments of the United States and Japan came to an understanding known as the "Gentlemen's Agreement." by which Japan agreed not to issue passports to skilled and unskilled laborers desiring to go to the United States. This failed to satisfy those opposed to Japanese immigration, and in 1924 the Japanese were excluded just as the Chinese had been 42 years earlier. Literacy Test. In an effort to devise new methods of exclusion or selection, the literacy test was added by Congress, but bills incorporating such a test were vetoed by Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson. Finally, in 1917, a literacy test was passed over Wilson's veto. The Presidents were undoubtedly right when they maintained that literacy was no fair test of the fitness of an individual to enter the army of American labor, but it must be remembered that the exponents of a literacy test were primarily interested in further restricting immigration and this seemed the easiest method at hand. Restriction since the War. Since the opening of the World War, immigration restriction has been given a renewed impetus. The danger of having large blocs of foreign nationals here in time of war disturbed many. America had long been a "melting pot" where the immigrants of various nations were fused into one, but many were now asserting that the "new immigration" did not fuse as readily as the old and that they were coming in such numbers that they could not be "Americanized" rapidly enough. The existence of large colonies of foreigners in the industrial centers gave some countenance to this assertion. To the early restrictionists, consequently, were now added many ardent patriots who saw in this situation a danger to American institutions. Many also feared after the war that, if the bars were not put up, America would be literally swamped by a deluge from the war-tom nations of Europe. Furthermore, employers no longer vigorously opposed restriction, for there was little labor shortage in the United States even in the prosperous years of the middle 'twenties. Ill response to the strengthened agitation, immigration not only has been radically restricted, but an effort has been made to favor the "old daily Ireland, from Germany and from the Scandinavian countries. In the 'nineties the source rapidly changed until in 1896 the immigrants from southern and eastern Europe (Italy, Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Poland) furnished over half the number. By 1910 the "new immigration," as it was called, furnished over four-fifths of the total. A good proportion of the new immigration were Jews who fled from religious persecution just as the Pilgrim fathers had fled centuries earlier. Closing the Gates. Some agitation in favor of immigration restriction had been in existence since the decade of the 'seventies. It had first course of American immigration has been dominated by conditions in Europe and America. Thus the depression following the panics of 1873 and 1893 resulted in a decline of immigration. The World War likewise produced an immediate decrease. The restriction laws after the war and the depression after 1929 explain the last decline. The early agitation came mainly from the ranks of organized labor who felt that a continuous flow of cheap labor kept wages down and prevented a rise in the standard of living. Capital, on the other hand, advocated comparatively easy immigration laws, arguing that a continued supply of cheap labor was necessary to develop the resources of the nation and to fill the jobs which the native American could not or would not fill. Beginning with the Act of 1882, a series of laws have been passed prohibiting the bringing over of immigrants under contract to labor, and excluding those believed to be morally, mentally or physically unfit. Those afflicted with physical or mental diseases, vagrants, paupers, immoral persons, or anarchists. Almost every type of undesirable was excluded. Steamship companies were liable to fine for bringing over such persons, besides being compelled to return them, and were forbidden to solicit immigrants. In spite of these laws, there was no great diminution in the armies of immigrants descending annually upon our shores until the World War. A special phase of this long-continued agitation to restrict immigration was the excitement over incoming Japanese on the western coast. Following an order of the San Francisco board of education in 1906 to segregate Chinese and Japanese children in separate schools and a protest from Japan, the governments of the United States and Japan came to an understanding known as the "Gentlemen's Agreement," by which Japan agreed not to issue passports to skilled and unskilled laborers desiring to go to the United States. This failed to satisfy those opposed to Japanese immigration, and in 1924 the Japanese were excluded just as the Chinese had been 42 years earlier. Literacy Test. In an effort to devise new methods of exclusion or selection, the literacy test was added by Congress, but bills incorporating such a test were vetoed by Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson. Finally, in 1917, a literacy test was passed over Wilson's veto. The Presidents were undoubtedly right when they maintained that literacy was no fair test of the fitness of an individual to enter the army of American labor, but it must be remembered that the exponents of a literacy test were primarily interested in further restricting immigration and this seemed the easiest method at hand. Restriction since the War. Since the opening of the World War, immigration restriction has been given a renewed impetus. The danger of having large blocs of foreign nationals here in time of war disturbed many. America had long been a "melting pot" where the immigrants of various nations were fused into one, but many were now asserting that the "new immigration" did not fuse as readily as the old and that they were coming in such numbers that they could not be "Americanized" rapidly enough. The existence of large colonies of foreigners in the industrial centers gave some countenance to this assertion. To the early restrictionists, consequently, were now added many ardent patriots who saw in this situation a danger to American institutions. Many also feared after the war that, if the bars were not put up, America would be literally swamped by a deluge from the war-tom nations of Europe. Furthermore, employers no longer vigorously opposed restriction, for there was little labor shortage in the United States even in the prosperous years of the middle 'twenties. In response to the strengthened agitation, immigration not only has been radically restricted, but an effort has been made to favor the "old" was passed, limiting immigration in any year to three per cent of the number of each nationality in the United States, according to the Census of 1910. This did not go far enough for the ardent restriction and a new law in 1924 changed the quota to two per cent of any nationality residing here in 1890. Citizens of Canada and of all free American nations were exempt, as were travelers, merchants, seamen, and officials, but the Japanese were now debarred. The law of 1924 not only cut the quota almost in half, but it favored the "old immigration/' However, this act provided that the two per cent quota scheme should remain in force only until 1927, when a "national origins'' method should be applied. According to this scheme, government scientists were to attempt to find out the real origin of the American people as constituted in 1920, and then apportion the immigration among the nationalities, with the total limited to 150,000 a year. So much opposition developed against this law that it was not put into operation until 1929.1 From 1927 until 1933 inclusive immigration declined each year; the years 1927-1935 saw more aliens leave than were admitted. Americanization. While restrictive laws were being urged and passed to reduce radically the number of immigrants, a strong agitation developed to "Americanize" the newcomers. Speaking in very general terms, "Americanization'' is the process of acquainting immigrants with American customs and institutions in the hope that they will soon become Americans like ourselves. There is obviously some difficulty here, for there is a wide difference of opinion as to what America stands for and what the qualities of the ideal American should he. There is, nevertheless, much in a fundamental way that can he done in helping the newcomer to conquer language difficulties, in protecting him from the unscrupulous who would profit from his ignorance, in pointing out possibilities of self-improvement, and in suggesting his rights and duties under our laws and constitutions. Much excellent work of this kind has been done since the war by public and private organizations. It is high time; for during most of our history we have considered the immigrant rather as a source of cheap labor than as a human being and a potential citizen of the United States. Annual Prison Commitments in Selected States Although traffic violations and liquor offenses added greatly to the number of cases brought before the courts since 1920, the number of crimes involving prison sentences does not prove any "'crime wave" since 1900. The graph is made from statistics of prison commitments in California, Indiana, Minnesota, Massachusetts, New York, Ohio, Texas. Control of Crime. The lawyer commonly thinks of crime as a violation or neglect of legal duty, while the sociologist and everyday citizen usually think of it as the commission of an anti-social act condemned by the opinion of the majority as expressed in common or statute law. Concerning crime in the United States two statements are frequently made: (1) that America is the most lawless country on earth, and (2) that the past decade has seen a great crime wave sweep the nation. For the first of these contentions there seems to be much basis in fact, for statistics amply prove that the proportion of homicides (killing of one person by another) to the population is much higher in America than in Europe. But there is little to prove the truth of the second charge, for in the Report of the President's Research Committee on Social Trends (1933) the statement is made that no support is found for the belief that an immense crime wave has engulfed the United States. The number of arrests and of court cases per 100,000 population increased moderately from 1900 to 1930, . . . with a tendency to rise more rapidly after 1920 than before. A large part, however, of the increase in the last decade is explained by traffic cases, which increased at approximately the same rate as automobile registrations. The same opposition to "foreigners," exemplified in earlier years in the KnowNothing party, crops up now and again, although it was less intensive during the 1930's than in earlier periods. The decline may be due in part to the radical restriction of immigration which has cut to a minimum the flow of aliens to our shores. The immediate problem is that of establishing a tolerant attitude among the national groups already here—and especially between the races, white and colored—which will tend to the betterment of all. There have been some friction and intolerance between various branches of the white race —for example, between Jews and Gentiles—but the friction has been in no way as intense as that between the white and colored races. The census of 1930 showed the population of the principal colored races in continental United States as follows: Negro, 11,891,000: Mexican (Indian or part Indian), 1,423,000; Indian, 332,000: Japanese, 139,000. 