The Colonial People; Immigration to America. Our ancestors in colonial America came from across the Atlantic, bringing with them their institutions, ideas, and ideals, which they planted on American soil, and which in this new environment were modified and adjusted to American conditions. The first of these immigrants to America, about 100 in number, came from England in 1607. From this small beginning our country grew into a great nation. Growth in population by natural increase and by immigration continued so that by 1790 the population of the United States had grown to nearly 4,000,000. During the first hundred years nearly all of those who came, except the negro slaves, were English, but by 1763 about 40 per cent of the population was composed of other groups, among which were the Germans, Irish, Scotch, "Scotch-Irish." French Huguenots, and Jews. In addition to these were the African negroes, who by 1776 numbered about 500,000. The immigration movement, which began with the settling of America, has continued throughout our history, and by 1935 had brought more than 37,000,000 people to our shores. Many nationalities and racial groups have contributed to our cultural heritage and have greatly influenced the development of our civilization. Family Life. The first English settlement in America, at Jamestown, was composed almost entirely of men, but those interested in the colonization of America soon realized the importance of women in establishing a permanent settlement. They knew that it was necessary to build homes in order to make the colony a success. In 1619, ninety young women were sent to Virginia to become the wives of the settlers. Many lonesome men gathered at the shore as the ship arrived, chose their wives, and after paying one hundred twenty pounds of tobacco, each, for the cost of transportation, happily took their brides to their new homes. The next year, when the Mayflower brought the Pilgrims to New England, thirty-two of the settlers brought their wives, while others sent for their wives as soon as rude homes could be built and land could be cleared to furnish a means of supporting their families. In New England and in the South women were at a premium. Their work consisted not only of cooking the meals and making the clothes, but also of assisting in many other activities; and, like the men, they were often exposed to physical danger. The rigors of frontier life took a heavy toll among the women, and it was not uncommon for some men to marry three or four times. Colonial widows were often remarried within a few weeks or months of the deaths of their husbands, and young girls rarely lacked numerous suitors. Although some freedom of choice was allowed young girls in the selection of their husbands, the important decision was often made by their parents. Courtship was carried on with difficulty, by the fireside, with all the family present, though in some localities the young couples made use of courting sticks—long reeds, through which they conversed in whispers. In some cases, in spite of the disapproval of Puritan ministers, young people courted as they strolled on the village green in the late afternoon. As population and wealth increased, the customs concerning courtship became less strict, and prospective husbands demanded dowries from their future fathers-in-law. In accordance with the rigid morality of the day, divorce was rare, and a divorced person was an object of pity or contempt. The scarcity of laborers and money made large families desirable, and children were regarded as " an heritage of the Lord." It was not uncommon to find families in which there were twelve or fifteen children, although in the absence of skilled medical attention, and with the hardships of frontier life, the death rate was high. Strict obedience was exacted from the children, and corporal punishment was often inflicted; two precepts were generally held to be true: "Spare the rod and spoil the child," and "Children should be seen and not heard." Clothing. The early colonists were poor in money and could not afford fancy clothes. Leather breeches and plain clothes of homespun were used in the early colonial period, but as wealth increased in the later period, silken hose, powdered wigs, and satin knee breeches were worn by the upper classes. The hardships of frontier life and the prevalent religious views both played their parts in making the clothing of the first colonists very simple. Gradually, the coarse homespun serges and linsey-woolsey gave place to imported cloth, and the families of the colonists dressed in the styles prevailing in England. Members of the poorest families usually have its aristocratic element. Lord Fairfax, with his thousands of acres, and William Beverly, with an estate of similar size, became the feudal lords of the Virginia Piedmont. The Appalachian Barrier. The rapid settlement of the Piedmont and its increasingly aristocratic society caused a renewal of the westward movement. The advance of the pioneer was impeded by the formidable Appalachian Mountains. These were a system of generally parallel ridges, with intervening valleys, extending over a width of about 150 miles, and a length, from Vermont to Alabama, of about 1,300 miles. The largest of the many valleys of the Appalachian system is the Great Valley, which extends for the whole length of the system. The part of that valley in Virginia is called the Shenandoah Valley; it is shut off from the Virginia Piedmont by the Blue Ridge. There were four gateways through which the Appalachian system might be easily crossed. The Hudson-Mohawk route presented fewer natural obstacles, perhaps, than any other, but it was not open to the pioneers until after the Revolution. The powerful Iroquois Indians blocked the way across New York, and until about 1760 the French held the district around the Great Lakes. A second gateway was by the way of the Potomac and Monongahela valleys, leading to Pittsburgh. This route, too, was blocked by the French until about 1760. A third route was westward from Georgia around the southern end of the mountains; but Georgia was late in being settled, and hostile Indian tribes were an obstacle to the use of this passage until after Jackson's victory over the Indians in the battle of Horseshoe Bend, in 1814. A fourth route was by way of the Cumberland Gap, the most difficult of the western passages, but it was the first to be used by the pioneers. Cumberland Gap is a pass between two mountain ridges on the border between Kentucky and Tennessee. Daniel Boone, following the buffalo paths, blazed a trail through this passage, which later was developed into the famous Wilderness Road. It was, until after the Revolution, die most traveled passage to the West. The Early Frontiersmen. Most of the settlers who first crossed the mountains were of German, Scotch-Irish, or Irish stock. Many German colonists who had moved to Holland during revolutions in their own country had been attracted by William Penn to his colony, where they settled in the Susquehanna Valley. They were commonly known as the "Pennsylvania Dutch." Some of them soon found their way into the mountain valleys, which they followed southward into the back country of Virginia and the Carolinas. They were good farmers and knew how to select good fanning land. They were a sturdy people, well adapted to the hardships of frontier life. The Scotch-Irish settlers were not of mixed blood, as their name might suggest. They were people of Scotch descent whose ancestors had lived in Northern Ireland, and before that had lived for centuries in the Lowlands of Scotland. During the reign of James, I, many of the Scotch Lowlanders were induced to leave the poor soil of Scotland and settle in the northeastern part of Ireland. But the Irish soil was little better than that which they had left behind, and these staunch Presbyterians soon found themselves involved in religious disputes with the Irish Catholics. America, therefore, easily attracted great numbers of them to her shores. There were also many Irish settlers who came to the Catholic colony of Maryland for religious reasons, while still others had hoped to improve their economic condition on the fertile soil of the New World. The Scotch-Irish and the Irish settlers found most of the land in the Tidewater, and much of that in the Piedmont, already occupied, and consequently many of them pushed farther to the west into the Appalachians. Accustomed to hardships at home, these settlers made ideal frontiersmen. America was fortunate in having such hardy, thrifty, and courageous men and women to lead in the conquest of the wilderness.The Settlement of the Old West; Treaty of Fort Stanwix. To prevent friction between the Indians and the English colonists in the West, the British government had attempted by the Proclamation of 1763 to prevent the settlement of the territory between the mountains and the Mississippi River. The vast district west of the Appalachians and lying between the Great Lakes and Florida was reserved for the Indians. The Proclamation Line, west of which white settlements were forbidden, was the watershed separating land draining directly to the Atlantic Ocean from that draining to the St. Lawrence River or to the Gulf of Mexico (map p. 118). In 1768, however, Sir William Johnson negotiated with the Iroquois Indians. By it the United States committed itself to the maintenance of freedom of trade in the Orient. The Boxer Rebellion. Aroused by the foreign aggressions, the Chinese organized anti-alien societies known as the orders of "Literary Patriotic Harmonious Fists," or "Boxers." Secretly supported by the troops of the empress of China, they began a series of outrages which culminated in the siege of the British legation at Peking (now Peiping), to which many of the foreign residents had fled for protection. For about two months the besieged party held its own against the "Boxers," while a joint force composed of American, Japanese, British, French, German, and Russian troops fought their way to the city. Fearing that the powers would seize the opportunity to proceed with the partition of China, Secretary Hay hastened to announce to the world that it was the purpose of the United States to uphold the territorial integrity of China. This principle now became a part of our Far Eastern policy. The announcement had the desired effect, and the only penalties imposed upon China were the punishment of the leaders of the rebellion and the payment of an indemnity of $334,000,000. Our share of the indemnity was $24,000,000; but when it was discovered that the losses sustained by American citizens and the cost of the expedition amounted to only $11,000,000, the difference was returned to China. This was a friendly gesture which did much toward furthering cordial relations between the two nations. China set the money aside as an educational fund to educate Chinese students in American colleges and universities. Friction with the Japanese. A series of events early in the twentieth century tended to cool the friendship of the Japanese for the United States. At the close of the Russo-Japanese War in 1905, the Japanese were disappointed because the terms of the treaty of peace were not as favorable as they had expected. They blamed this diplomatic defeat upon President Roosevelt, upon whose invitation the peace conference was held. The Japanese irritation which resulted from this affair was increased the next year when the school authorities of San Francisco excluded Japanese subjects from the schools attended by Americans and Europeans. The Japanese were insulted by this racial discrimination, and although the matter was adjusted by President Roosevelt, the affair served to intensify the bitterness of the Japanese toward America. The most serious of the problems that involved the two nations was that of immigration. Since 1882, Chinese immigrants had been excluded from the United States, and there was a strong sentiment in this country for the extension of this policy to include all Oriental laborers. In 1907 Japan entered into an agreement with the United States not to grant passports to laborers who wished to come to this country. This "gentlemen's agreement" was observed for nearly two decades; but when die Immigration Act of 1924 was passed, instead of assigning a quota to Japan, as was done to most other nations, the act excluded all members of the yellow or Mongolian race, including the Japanese as well as the Chinese. The proud Japanese people were incensed by what they regarded as a deliberate insult, and an open break between the two powers was narrowly averted. The Panama Canal; Early Interest. Sailors and engineers dreamed of constructing a canal across the Isthmus of Panama almost from the time it was discovered that this narrow strip of land was blocking a direct route from Western Europe to the Indies; but it was not until the middle of the nineteenth century that definite steps were taken toward launching the project. Experts were unable to agree upon the route. Some favored the short but difficult route across Panama, then a province or "department" of Colombia, while others believed that a more feasible route was one across Nicaragua. Many Americans favored the latter because of its greater proximity to the United States. In 1846 the United States showed its interest in the isthmian canal by negotiating a treaty with Colombia (then called New Granada). According to the terms of this treaty, the United States was granted the right of way or free transit by any means of transportation, in return for the guarantee of the neutrality of the zone and Colombia's sovereignty over the property. Later attempts to modify this treaty in such a way as to give the United States greater concessions were unsuccessful. This treaty was in force at the time of the Panama revolution in 1903. American interest in the canal was greatly increased in 1848 by the discovery of gold in California (p. 317). Two years later, by the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty, the United States and Great Britain agreed that any canal connecting the two oceans, and constructed by either, should be jointly controlled by the two powers, should not be fortified, and should be open to the use of all nations. Conflicting interpretations of this treaty, and the outbreak of the War between the North and the South, prevented the launching of the project at that time. In 1867, however, the United States showed that its interest had not waned, by negotiating with Nicaragua for a right of way across that country. The provisions of this treaty were very similar to those of the treaty of 1846 with Colombia. With the passing of the frontier, an important problem in the assimilation of immigrants arose, for the frontier had long served as a means of Americanizing our foreign population. The Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia brought to the attention of the American people some of their deficiencies in cultural achievement. There was a renewed interest in education, and the public school system developed rapidly. Many social reforms took place, and progress was made in art and literature. The period since 1900 is interesting because of the rapid expansion of metropolitan areas, the continued growth of population, and the restrictions placed on immigration. The first attempts to regulate the influx of foreigners were through laws which did not greatly limit the numbers; but laws passed after 1920 set definite limits on the number of immigrants from each nation of the Old World, based on the percentage of each nationality already a part of our population. Because of the longer hours for leisure, considerable interest was aroused in recreational activities. Athletic sports attracted large numbers of our people, both as active participants and as spectators. More attention was given to reading, and millions of books on art, poetry, literature, history, and biography came off the press, while thousands of libraries were established throughout the country. Our government extended its recreational facilities through its national parks and forests. The coming of the automobile enabled people to travel more widely, and thus to enjoy more of the natural scenery of the North American continent. Accurate statistics on immigration before 1820 are not available; but according to reliable estimates about a quarter of a million immigrants came to the United States in the three decades prior to 1820. During the period from 1820 to 1860 more than 5.000.000 came. Immigrants came to America in the hope of improving their living conditions. Political revolutions, religious oppression, wars, and hard tunes in Europe brought many to the United States, which they considered a land of opportunity. Settlement of the West. In the West population increased rapidly after the War of 1812. Soldiers returning from the war, men unemployed because of the closing of factories, and plantation owners whose soil had been exhausted, turned westward. The successful Indian fighting of Jackson in the Southwest and of Harrison in the Northwest lessened the danger from Indians, and stimulated immigration to those sections of the Fort Dearborn, the beginning of the great city of Chicago country. Many of the European immigrants, especially those from Germany, were interested in agriculture and settled where good fanning lands. Ewing Galloway Skyscrapers of Chicago today were plentiful. Due to this settlement of the West, the center of population, which in 1790 was 23 miles east of Baltimore, Maryland, had moved by i860 to a point 20 miles south of Chillicothe, Ohio (see map, p. 328). By i860 nearly half of the people of the United States lived west of the Appalachian Mountains. The Growth of Cities. With the expansion of industry after 1820, population in the East began to shift from farms to towns. The urban population had increased from less than 250,000 in 1800 to over 2,000,000 in 1850, and New York City had become the metropolis of America. Whereas in 1815 the only towns or cities in America with a population over 10,000 were New York, Philadelphia, New Orleans, Boston, Charleston, 655 Salem, and Providence, by 1830 five had a population of over 30,000. St. Louis, Cincinnati, Louisville, Pittsburgh, and Memphis, on rivers of the West, and Detroit, Cleveland, Buffalo, and Chicago on the Great Lakes, were flourishing towns, while in the North streams were dotted with numerous other towns which had grown up around factories. Manners and Character. The first generation of Americans born after the formation of the Union entered national politics during the War of 1812. The seemingly limitless opportunities for advancement in the West and in industry had broken down class barriers and created a spirit of optimism and self-confidence which impressed Europeans unfavorably. The typical American seemed always in a hurry. The quick business lunch dates from this period, and in the home food was eaten hastily and in silence. Culture seemed to be on the decline. Because the spirit of equality was strong in the West, the new states gave the right to vote to adult males without any restriction based on taxpaying or ownership of property; and the older states followed their example. By 1828 the suffrage had been so extended that Jackson was said to be the first President to be elected by the people. In the East, particularly among Southern planters and New England merchants, the aristocrat remained entrenched; and in the capital at Washington, society became highly organized. Elsewhere, however, social barriers were breaking, and advancement depended upon a man's own efforts. Food. Food was abundant but not attractively served. Only in the more cultured homes was the dessert served separately from the other dinner. Knives frequently did the duty of forks. Among the very poor whites, salt pork, com bread, and molasses were the staple foods. The tomato, or the "love apple," as it was commonly called, was generally regarded as poisonous until after 1830, but nearly all the other vegetables commonly known today were served. In aristocratic homes the men sometimes remained at the table to drink wine or beer after the ladies had withdrawn, but after 1815 coffee began to take the place of stronger beverages. Ice cream became a popular dessert with those who could afford the ice, but most homes were not provided with ice in the summer. Dress. The wars with Great Britain had resulted in such strained relations that the United States copied France in fashions of dress and accent. For a short period tight-laced dresses gave place to simpler ones with flowing skirts and low necks. Soft, heelless slippers and long gloves were worn; the hair was elaborately dressed; and the face was powdered with pulverized starch. Men's clothing became more conservative. Knee- breeches were replaced by long trousers, and wigs were discarded in favor of the natural hair, cut long and parted in die middle. Growth of Population. The population of the United States increased from 31,500,000 in i860 to about 76,000,000 in 1900. Many foreigners continued to come to America during this period and were welcomed by the government and by industry. In 1864 the Federal government set up the Immigration Bureau in Washington for the purpose of assisting those coming from other countries to America. Some of the Western states also maintained immigration bureaus and sent agents to foreign countries for the purpose of stimulating immigration. Due largely to this encouragement, about 14,000,000 foreigners came to America during the last forty years of the nineteenth century. In the latter part of this period most of them went to the cities, whereas a majority of the earlier immigrants had become farmers. Changed Character of Immigration. During the 8o's a fundamental change took place in the character of the immigration. Before that time three fourths of the immigrants had come from northern and western Europe, while from that decade on they were mainly from southeastern Europe and the Near East. While the earlier immigrants sought farms, the newer arrivals supplied labor for factories and mines during a period when America was rapidly becoming industrialized. It was during the 8o's that the movement to restrict immigration began. Many citizens felt that since this "new" immigration was of racial stock different from the native American, it would be more difficult to assimilate, and impossible to Americanize. The immigrants often settled in foreign quarters of the cities, where they retained their own languages and their native customs. Because thousands of these immigrants were laborers who were able to exist at a comparatively low standard of living, they accepted lower wages than the American workmen. Soon considerable opposition to immigration began to develop on the part of organized labor. The disappearance of the frontier also brought problems of labor and of immigration into prominence. As long as Western lands remained, the dissatisfied people in the East were able to seek homes in the West, where the frontier aided the Americanization process, but by 1890 this had become almost impossible. As the frontier gradually disappeared, labor unrest became more widespread and labor organizations became more hostile to the increasing number of foreigners. As early as 1882 Chinese laborers were excluded by an act of Congress. In 1885 a law was passed prohibiting laborers under contract from coming into the United States, and in 1891 Congress passed a law which prohibited the advertising for immigrants by American factory owners. In 1881 the office of Superintendent of Immigration was created, and a tax of fifty cents was levied on each immigrant. Before the end of the century there was agitation for a literacy test. A bill was introduced in Congress in 1896, providing for the exclusion of all immigrants between the ages of fourteen and sixty who could not read English or some other language. It did not become a law because of the President's veto.* In the twentieth century more rigid immigration laws were enacted and enforced, as we shall see in the following chapter. Social Organization and Customs. By the end of the War between the North and the South, great social, political, and economic changes were appearing in the United States. The intermingling of all classes and groups on the battlefield had broken down many of the old social barriers, and with the development of industry a new aristocracy based on wealth was arising. Among all classes society was more showy and artificial than cultured. Nevertheless, women continued to be treated chivalrously and to live sheltered lives until, with the advent of the typewriter, many began to enter occupations outside the home. The modesty of the period before 1900 is amazing to the generation of today. All styles of dresses included very long skirts (see pp. 396, 656), and the sight of a woman's ankle was shocking, while women who ventured to swim did so clothed in dresses reaching below the knees, and wearing hose. Until the long gored skirts and choker-necked waists displaced the full dresses of the 70's and 8o's, ten yards of cloth were required for the average dress. Moreover, in order to conform to fashion, women sacrificed their comfort by wearing tight corsets and small shoes. Fashions for men, too, were overdone. Heavy mustaches and sideburns were special marks of a well-dressed man, while scarf pins, cuff buttons, and watch chains were all too conspicuous. Concentration of Population. From 1900 to 1940 the population of the United States increased from about 76,000,000 to about 131,500,000. During this period there was a continued drift toward the city, a drift, however, which declined sharply in the decade 1930-1940. By 1940 about 56.5 per cent of our population was classified as urban, that is, living in cities, towns, or villages of 2,500 or more. Over one fourth of our total population lives in cities of 100,000 or more. According to the United States Census Bureau there were in the United States in 1940 ninety-two cities each having a population of 100,000 or more. Many of these large cities formed the cores of still larger and more populous metropolitan areas. This development of metropolitan areas was made possible by rapid transportation, and has extended the influence of the city to larger areas. Some of the largest metropolitan areas are those focusing on New York, on Chicago, on Philadelphia, on Los Angeles, on San Francisco, and on Detroit. This increasing growth and dominance of large American cities, while slowed down during the depression decade 1930-1940, seems destined to continue. Immigration Restriction. During the period from 1900 to 1910 the number of immigrants to the United States was 8,795,000; from 1911 to 1915 there were 4,460,000; but from 1916 to 1920, during the period of the war, the number dropped to 1,276,000. In 1921 the United States decided upon a radical change in its immigration policy, looking toward a more rigid restriction. It was felt that the disturbed conditions in Europe as a result of the World War, and the high taxes resulting therefrom, would cause too many poverty-stricken Europeans to come to this country. In the five years from 1921 to 1925, 2,639,000 were admitted, and 1926 to 1930 the total was 1,468,000. This decrease, and further decreases later, was due largely to the laws discussed in the following paragraph. In 1921 the Emergency Quota Act was passed and remained in effect for one year. It provided that the number of immigrants of a particular nationality should not exceed three per cent of the number of persons of that nationality living in the United States in 1910. In 1922 the Emergency Quota Law was extended for two years more. However, it was considered unsatisfactory, and in May, 1924, a new Quota Law was enacted which admitted annually, from July 1, 1924, to June 30, 1927, two per cent of the number of a given nationality resident in the United States in 1890. After July 1, 1927, the quota was to be "that proportion of 150,000 which the number of persons of a given national origin residing in the United States in 1920 bears to the country's total population in 1920." In 1929 a new immigration law likewise limited the number of quota immigrants to about 153,900 annually. Natives of Canada, Mexico, and Central and South America, however, may be admitted to the United States without regard to any quota. The Influence of the Machine Age. The invention of more and more laborsaving machinery destroyed the demand for immigrant labor. It made possible the production of more goods, and by increasing the efficiency in production, shortened working hours, thus affording more leisure time to our working population. The Machine Age produced social changes which affected almost every phase of American life. While the coming of the automobile provided additional means of transportation, it also served to draw people away from their homes. In many cases homes were neglected in order that cars might be purchased. Manufacturers devoted millions of dollars to the employment of artists and engineers whose task was the production of a beautiful car within the means of the average person. While the automobile tended to take many people away from the home, the radio attracted them to it until the automobile manufacturers met the situation by putting radios in the automobile. Although the principle of the radio had been known, it was not until 1920 that the first broadcasting station was established in the United States. Immediately, the radio surpassed other forms of entertainment in popularity and friends boasted to friends about the stations they had "picked up" the night before. As the radio established itself as a permanent feature of American life, producing companies entered upon a competitive business which resulted in the clear transmission of sound and the production of ornamental radio cabinets. Meanwhile, the airplane was introducing a new element into transportation. The efforts of S. P. Langley and of Wilbur and Orville Wright had borne fruit in 1903 in producing a heavier-than-air craft. Though it was largely in an experimental stage until the close of the World War, the airplane has since become an important element in transportation. Through its mail and passenger service, the nation has been drawn closer together than had been possible before. In addition to the automobile, the radio, and the airplane, other inventions have altered American life. Electricity has revolutionized the home, has made cities by night fairylands of beauty, and has helped to solve the traffic problem by its automatic lights. Gas stoves have lessened the labors of the cook, and the tractor has displaced older methods of farm labor, while the dictaphone has simplified the duties of the business office. 