The New Democracy. The masses who hailed the advent of Andrew Jackson were not mistaken in their belief that a new type of democracy had come into power. The "revolution" of 1828 was more thorough than the "revolution" of 1800, because, while Jefferson held that die common man should be given the opportunity through education and training to fit himself to take part in the government, Jackson declared that such education and training were of trifling account. "The duties of all public officers are ... so plain and simple," he said, "that men of intelligence may readily qualify themselves for their performance." Jefferson, the aristocratic Virginian scholar and statesman, believed that the competent should rule, subject always to the vigilant and free criticism of the people at large. Jackson, the assertive, self-made frontiersman, believed that government should be by the people as well as for the people, and hence that the offices should be "passed around," in order to give as many as possible a share. It was chiefly the growing influence of the new West that gave strength to the Jacksonian democracy. By 1828 nine of the twenty-four states of the Union lay west of the Allegheny Mountains, and they contained more than one third of the 12,600,000 inhabitants of the country. In these pioneer communities differences of social rank disappeared. The voice and opinion of the Western pioneer were worth as much as those of any aristocratic merchant or planter in Boston or Charleston. These Westerners were, in Professor Turner's phrase, "men with bark on." Though not one in a hundred had probably ever heard of Emerson, they would have readily agreed with his saying " Europe extends to the Alleghenies; America lies beyond." The Labor Class. The West was not the only factor in the development of the new democracy, however. The growth of manufactures in the Eastern states since the second war with England had given rise to a laboring class (swelled by immigration from Europe) which was becoming conscious of its strength and was demanding legislation for its social and economic improvement. The factory system took away the independence of the worker and made him a cog in a great machine. He was no longer the master of his own tools but die servant of the expensive tools owned by the capitalists. He had to enter the factory gates when the whistle blew, and had to work from twelve to fifteen hours a day in such quarters and for such wages as the management provided. Women and children generally toiled beside the men to eke out a living. Women comprised half the operatives in the cotton mills of New England, and children of six or eight years of age worked from daylight to dark for a dollar a week, "growing up," as one pathetic petition put it, "as ignorant as Arabs of the desert." Trade unions had existed for many years, and strikes had not been infrequent; but they were feeble and local affairs before the extension of the suffrage gave some political influence to the working class. In the very year of Jackson's election the trade unions of Philadelphia organized a Workingmen's party and put up candidates for local offices. What was more natural than that the class which was demanding higher wages, shorter hours of work, free public education, and more sanitary conditions in mills and factories should flock to the support of Andrew Jackson, the plain man of the people? It was their votes in the industrial section of the country1 that ensured his election. Without his votes from New York and Pennsylvania he would have been defeated. Reform Movements. The age was marked also by a number of efforts for the improvement of the physical, moral, and mental condition of the people. Excessive drinking was a curse of American society in the early nineteenth century. Vast quantities of raw com whisky were consumed by the Western frontiersmen, while nun, brandy, fiery punches, and strong wines were as common as butter or salt on the tables of the merchants and planters. Even the ordination of a minister of the Gospel often provided a sideboard stocked with a variety of strong liquors. It was in 1826 that the first organized movement for total abstinence was started in Boston. From that time on, temperance and total-abstinence societies spread rapidly through the country. In 1827 a gifted Scotchwoman, Frances Wright, created a great sensation by appearing on the lecture platform, in a day when it was expected that women should be modestly busy in the kitchen or modestly idle in the parlor. "Fanny" Wright boldly discussed temperance, slavery, prison reform, the care of the insane, and the rights of women. In spite of ridicule and insult, other apostles of the liberation of women from social and legal bondage, like the Grimke sisters of South Carolina and the eloquent Quakeress Lucretia Mott, pleaded their cause from the lecture platform. In 1828 William Ladd, of New Hampshire, founded the American Peace Society. This society anticipated by nearly a century the program of Woodrow Wilson for an international guarantee against war. He advocated a Congress of the Nations, meeting at fixed periods, and the establishment of a World Court to decide disputes arising between the countries. These are but a few of the movements of the time which, with the campaigns for popular education, for the abolition of slavery, for the release of debtors from prison, for the safeguarding of health in the factories, and for the humane treatment of patients in hospitals and asylums, testily to the new interest in the welfare of the " common man." The New Politics. Thomas Jefferson believed that the life of American democracy depended upon the class of free, self- reliant owners of the soil who would keep a watchful eye on their public servants, to guard against any invasion of their "unalienable rights" of "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." Once let men become herded in cities (the plague spots of civilization), they would degenerate into an idle, vicious, turbulent "proletariat" easily led by demagogues. Just the thing that Jefferson feared was beginning to take place in the Jacksonian era. The factory system was gathering hundreds of thousands of "hands" into the industrial centers of the North. Immigrants from Europe, attracted now not so much by the land as by the chance for a job in a mill, began to pour in by the tens of thousands to take the place of the Americans who preferred to go West rather than work for a boss. These immigrants furnished a cheap labor supply, and, being rapidly naturalized and enfranchised, offered the politicians a rich harvest of votes. Politics, the science of government, came to be more and more the game of capturing the offices. The art of flattering the people rather than of instructing them was cultivated. All the tricks of political advertising — catchwords, cartoons, badges, banners, stump speeches, clubs, and rallies — were used to catch votes. And public office, when once attained, was looked on not so much as an honorable position of civic responsibility as a source of patronage with which to reward the faithful "party workers." William L. Marcy, of New York, in a debate in the United States Senate in 1832, made the remark "To the victors belong the spoils." This famous proverb, borrowed from the Romans, gave the name to the vicious "spoils system," which cursed our government for half a century after Jackson's accession. It meant that with every change of administration the civil servants of the defeated party, however long or faithful their service had been, were turned out of office to make way for adherents of the victorious party. The New President. The man who was elected to the Presidency at this important time of ferment, which marked "the rise of the common man" in politics and industry and social planning, was a sharp contrast to his predecessors, not only in speech and manners but in his ideas of the nature of the first office in the land. Our former Presidents had considered themselves as "executives," to carry out the laws made by Congress, They respected the "checks and balances" of the Constitution. Cass, Douglas, Clay, and Webster talked of the destiny of the American flag to float over the whole continent from Hudson Bay to the Isthmus of Panama, and of the superiority of our free democratic government over the "effete monarchies" of the Old World. The failure of the potato crops in Ireland in 1845 and 1846, and the revolutions of 1848 which convulsed the leading states of continental Europe, sent to our shores hundreds of thousands of. immigrants who were welcomed to the "land of liberty." Our government was quick to express its sympathy for peoples struggling for their freedom from European despotism. In December, 1850, our Secretary of State, Daniel Webster, sent a defiant reply to the Austrian representative at Washington, who had complained of the sympathy we showed to Hungary in her struggle for freedom: "The power of this Republic at the present moment is spread over a region one of the richest and most fertile on the globe, and of an extent in comparison with which the possessions of the House of Hapsburg are but a patch on the earth's surface." When the Hungarian patriot, General Louis Kossuth, came to America the next year, he was received by Congress and the people with a welcome only less enthusiastic than that given to Lafayette a quarter of a century before. In the summer of 1853 Douglas made a trip abroad and probably expressed the sentiment of a large proportion of his fellow countrymen when he wrote: " Europe is tottering to the verge of dissolution. When you visit her, the objects which enlist your attention are the relics of past greatness, the broken columns erected to departed power." And Henry Clay, on his deathbed, wrote to Kossuth that "for the cause of liberty, we should keep our lamp burning brightly on this western shore, as a light to all nations." The Americans of the mid-century were no more modest than was Woodrow Wilson at the time of the World War in their idea of the role of the United States as an example of justice to an erring world. We Become Interested in an Isthmian Canal. The most imposing work of man in the Western Hemisphere is the Panama Canal, through whose locks and Gatun Lake and Culebra Cut thousands of ships pass every year between the Atlantic and the Pacific. How the United States acquired the Canal Zone and built the canal early in the present century will be told in a later chapter. That was the completion of a project which had been dreamed of for three centuries, ever since the explorers had discovered how the continent of North America tapers down rapidly at its southern end to a mere ribbon of land, fifty miles wide, connecting it with its sister continent of South America. Our expansion to the Pacific coast and the rush of the gold- seekers to California roused great interest in a canal route across the Isthmus toward the middle of the nineteenth century. For example, we made a treaty with the republic of New Granada (now Colombia), in 1846, giving us permission to build a road, railroad, or canal across the Isthmus of Panama, in return for which we guaranteed the sovereignty of New Granada over the Isthmus, as well as freedom of transit for all nations on equal terms. Three years later we made similar treaties with Nicaragua and Honduras. In these negotiations we came into collision with the British, who had a colony on the coast of Nicaragua and seemed to be planning to extend their "protectorate" over the Isthmus. Both nations being willing, however, to come to an agreement on the building of a canal, the British sent over Sir Henry Bulwer as a special envoy for that purpose. The Clayton-Bulwer Treaty. After several months of negotiation, Sir Henry and our Secretary of State, John M. Clayton, signed a treaty on April 19,1850, "for facilitating and protecting the construction of a ship canal between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans." Both parties pledged themselves never to obtain exclusive control over such a canal, nor to erect fortifications on it, nor to acquire any colonies in Central America. They were to protect any company that should build the canal and to guarantee the neutrality of the canal when built. The canal was to be maintained "for the benefit of mankind on equal terms to all." In spite of these liberal provisions, trouble between the United States and Great Britain in Central America did not come to an end. The British held on to the colony in Nicaragua and even annexed some islands off die coast of Honduras, hundred miles in width in which the great grass-covered plains offered admirable grazing fields. The stock-raisers of Texas, as soon as the war was over, began to send droves of long-homed cattle "north of 36" to fatten on the plains before they were sold to the packers and shippers for the Eastern markets. In 1871 more than six hundred thousand cattle crossed the Red River on the "long drive" northward. Huge cattle ranches paralleled the mining camps all the way from western Kansas to Montana, and the cowboy in his leather "chaps" and broad sombrero, rounding up the branded cattle of his own drove at the close of the grazing season, became one of the most picturesque figures in American life. So long as the cow country remained open land, roamed over by the buffalo and the Indian, the cattlemen and ranchers reaped large profits. But when the farmers and sheep-raisers began to encroach upon the " open range," staking out their claims under the Homestead Act and enclosing their farms with wire fences to protect their stock against wolves and thieves, the cowboy had to give way to the settled and prosaic farmer. Big Business. While the West was yielding its treasures from farm, forest, and mine, and the "prostrate South" was struggling to repair the damages done by the war, the bankers, manufacturers, railroad promoters, and merchants of the North were building up large fortunes. The trend of business was toward combination into larger and larger units. In place of the modest factories of ante-bellum tunes, run by a few workers under the personal supervision of the owners, came huge industrial plants covering acres of ground and costing millions of dollars, equipped with expensive machines tended by thousands of laborers under a hired "boss." The rise of big business was due to several factors. In the first place, it was profitable to combine in a single organization the various steps in the manufacture of a finished article, such as the digging, transportation, smelting, refining, and rolling of the iron ore to convert it into a steel rail, in order to escape the taxes which the government laid on the separate processes. Then, too, a vast amount of capital had been created by the government during the war by its issue of over two billion dollars' worth of bonds, most of which were in the hands of the bankers, who were permitted by law, as we have seen (p. 438), to use them as a basis for loans to the manufacturers, the railroad- builders, the oil-refiners, and the other " captains of industry." Again, unrestricted immigration brought swarms of aliens to our shores after the war to supply "hands" for the new industries. A law of Congress passed in 1864 allowed the unlimited importation of laborers. In 1863 only 80,000 immigrants had come to America. The number rose to 320,000 in 1866, to 380,000 in 1870, and to 420,000 in 1873, before the great panic came to send the figures down below the 200,000 mark. In Philadelphia alone over 180 new manufacturing plants were established in the last two years of the war. The value of our manufactured products increased 200 per cent in the period from i860 to 1880, and certain sections of the country became great centers of special industries, such as the steel region about Pittsburgh and the textile sections of southern New England. The Standard Oil Company. It would take volumes to describe the formation and operation of these various combinations, or "trusts," in transportation, banking, and lumbering, and in the steel, coal, petroleum, leather, whisky, sugar, textile, and other industries. We may select the Standard Oil Company as one of the oldest and most typical of them. Toward the close of the Civil War, John D. Rockefeller, a successful young business man in Cleveland, Ohio, became interested in the possibilities of petroleum, which had begun to "gush" from wells drilled in western Pennsylvania in 1859. Rockefeller set out to control the petroleum business. In 1865 his Standard Oil Company of Cleveland was operating on the modest capital of one hundred thousand dollars. Five years later he organized the Standard Oil Company of Ohio, with a capital of one million dollars, and had control of most of the refining business of the state. Another five years and he had absorbed the important refineries in New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore, and was controlling nearly 90 per cent of the refinery business of the country. In 1882 the great Standard Oil trust was incorporated vigorous, and efficient administration. He insisted on fair terms to China in the act of 1882 for the restriction of Chinese immigration to the United States. 1 He tried to prevent the raid on the Treasury by his veto of "pork barrel" bills, which appropriated huge sums for small harbors and unnavigable rivers. He advocated a fair revision of the tariff. He laid the foundation for our modem navy of ironclads. Most significant of all, though he had been dismissed from the New York customhouse by Hayes for his abuse of the patronage, three years later he signed the act which has been called "the Magna Carta of Civil Service Reform." Guiteau's pistol shot had roused the country to a realization of the disgraceful state of the civil service. Following the recommendation of Arthur in his Presidential message of December, 1882, George H. Pendleton, a Democratic Senator from Ohio, introduced a bill providing for a commission to classify the grades of the civil service and devise a system of competitive examinations for the selection of the candidates. The bill also forbade political assessments, as well as removals from office for failure to make "voluntary" contributions to political campaigns. The bill was passed by large majorities in both houses and signed by Arthur (January 16, 1883). The President showed his sincerity in the cause by appointing an ardent reformer as chairman of the Civil Service Commission, promulgating a set of rules for the faithful execution of the act, and himself putting about fifteen thousand government employees into the classified service before he left office. Thousands of Chinese coolies had been imported to work on the construction of the Central Pacific Railroad. By 1870 there were over seventy thousand Chinese in the country, nearly five sixths of them in California. Their low standard of living aroused the hostility of American labor, and there began a crusade against them, led by Dennis Kearney, the "sand lots" orator of San Francisco. "'Four dollars a day and roast beef' and "The Chinese must go" were the slogans. President Hayes secured the consent of China to our "regulation, limitation, or suspension" of Chinese immigration, and on the basis of this agreement Congress forbade the entrance of Chinese laborers into the country for twenty years. Arthur vetoed the bill on the ground that the "suspension" of immigration for twenty years was equivalent to a prohibition of it. Fie forced Congress to reduce the period to ten years. But he might as well have signed the original bill, for at the close of the ten-year period Congress renewed the exclusion of the Chinese by the Geary Act. He wished to relieve the people of undue taxation, but his efforts for tariff reform were thwarted by the big manufacturing interests. He was confronted, during his whole term, with a Republican Senate which tried to hamper him in his constitutional right of dismissing Federal officers. Although he labored faithfully for economy, reform, and honesty in the government, he found his path beset with thorns. The Pension Vetoes. Cleveland's chief concern was to limit the expenditures of the government to the objects necessary for die public welfare and to keep taxation down to the point necessary to meet such expenditures. The pensions paid to the veterans of the Civil War had increased from $15,000,000 in 1866 to $56,000,000 in 1885. In the latter year there were nearly 350,000 names on the pension rolls. In so far as these names represented soldiers or sailors actually wounded or disabled in the war, the pensions were, as Cleveland said, "cheerfully approved by the people." He himself signed more pension bills than any of his predecessors. But there was an immense amount of fraud in the system. Pension agents were abroad in the land, seeking fees by persuading ex- soldiers or their survivors to make claims on the government for pension for illness or accidents in no way connected with their military service. One man had broken his leg by falling into a cellar, another had been thrown from a buggy, a third had been killed by a snowslide in Colorado twenty years after the war, a fourth had been shot by a neighbor who was aiming at an owl. Over seven hundred pension bills were passed in Cleveland's administration, and he insisted on giving each of them his personal examination, with the result that he vetoed two hundred and thirty-three of them. He was unmercifully criticized by the Republicans for "weighing the merits of the veterans in an apothecary's scales," and was accused of "insulting" the army when he vetoed a Dependent Pension Bill which granted a pension of twelve dollars a month to every dependent soldier and sailor who had served three months, regardless of whether he had received any injury or had even participated in a battle. So great was the abuse heaped upon him by certain officers of the Grand Army of the Republic that he canceled his engagement to visit their encampment at St. Louis. Congress upheld his veto, however, and even the rank and file of the veterans at St. Louis approved it by a vote of Labor Unrest. The middle years of the decade of the 1880's were vexed by so many conflicts between capital and organized labor that they have been called the period of "the great upheaval." Strikes increased from 485 in 1884 to 645 in 1885 and 1411 in 1886, involving in the latter year nearly ten thousand establishments and a half a million workers. The situation was made worse by the arrival of radical agitators in the flood of immigrants who came to our shores. The social revolutionists and anarchists of Chicago had formed the International Working People's Association in 1883, advocating violence in the class struggle. Their membership was largely recruited from the embittered revolutionaries of continental Europe. Of the eight anarchist newspapers published in the city, only one was printed in the English language. The labor strife culminated in a deed of horror on May 5, 1886. An open-air meeting in Haymarket Square, Chicago, called by the anarchists to protest against the forcible repression of a strike in the McConnick reaper works and to demand an eight-hour day, was ordered by the police to disperse. The reply was the explosion of a dynamite bornb tin-own into the midst of the police squad, killing one man instantly and mortally wounding seven others. Cleveland's unpopularity with the officials of the G. A. R. was increased by his "rebel-flag order" of April 30, 1887, instructing the Adjutant General to return to the Southern states a number of flags which had been captured from the Confederate armies and had been lying for years in the attic of the War Office building at Washington. The storm of protest that arose over this "recognition of the lost cause," and the realization, on further thought, that the disposition of the flags belonged to Congress and not to the President, led Cleveland to revoke the order. More than twenty years later a Republican Congress under Roosevelt voted unanimously to return the flags. A Change of Scene. While the politicians at Washington were wrangling over tariff, currency, and trust legislation, and the parties were impressing Mr. Bryce with the idea that they existed mainly for the purpose of getting into office when they were out and staying in when they were in, an important movement was gathering to a head in the South and West. In thousands of country schoolhouses and town halls groups of farmers, labor agitators, free-silverites, men burdened with mortgages on their homes and impoverished by the decline in the prices of their crops, were meeting to denounce the tyranny of the bankers and capitalists of the East and to demand that the government pay some attention to the distress of the most numerous classes of the people, namely the farmers and laborers, on whose toil the prosperity of the country was built. They accused both Republican and Democratic leaders of indifference to their needs, and deserted the ranks of the old parties by the thousands to join new organizations such as the Farmers' Alliance, the Agricultural Wheel, the Coin-growers' Association, and the People's Party, to fight for relief from debt and despair. At first they were ignored by the politicians in the seats of power or scornfully dismissed as "wild- eyed revolutionists," "leather-lunged orators," and "political rain- makers." But as their numbers grew and they began to make their way into the state legislatures and into Congress, fear took the place of ridicule in the minds of the Eastern conservatives, and sectional hostility succeeded indifference and neglect. The government began to realize that it was no tempest in a teapot, caused by a few "wild-eyed revolutionists," but a storm of menacing violence that was rising in the West. The Western Land Boom. To understand that storm we must note the experience through which the agricultural West was passing in the decade of the 1880's. Encouraged by the homestead grants, the opening of new lines of railroads, the flood of immigrants from Europe, and the return of good times after the panic of 1873-1878, a stream of settlers had poured into the states west of the Missouri. The population of Kansas was 364.000 in 1870; by 1890 it had reached 1,427,000. Nebraska grew from 122.000 to 1,508,000; Dakota Territory, from 14,000 to 511,000. "A territory greater than the original area of the United States was peopled in half a dozen years," wrote Senator Peffer of Kansas in the Forum of December, 1889. A spirit of unbounded optimism seized upon the settlers. Mr. Bryce, who made a trip to the great wheat lands over the newly completed Northern Pacific Railroad in 1883, wrote: "The confidence of these Westerners is superb. Men seem to live in the future rather than in the present. . . . They see the country not merely as it is but as it will be twenty, fifty or a hundred years hence." The island republic of Santo Domingo had become bankrupt through successive revolutions. Its revenues were less than one third of the interest on its debt of thirty-two million dollars, and its European creditors threatened to collect by force unless the United States would guarantee the honest and efficient management of the finances of the republic. Roosevelt announced in his message of December, 1904, to Congress that in case of "chronic wrongdoing or impotence" on the part of a Latin-American state we were bound by the Monroe Doctrine to intervene, "however reluctantly," and to "exercise an international police power." With the consent of the president of Santo Domingo, he negotiated a treaty making the United States the receiver for the bankrupt republic and appointed an official to collect the revenues. The Senate refused to ratify the treaty; but Roosevelt went on with the policy under an "executive agreement" until the Senate gave way in 1907. Under our management of her finances the solvency of Santo Domingo was restored and her creditors were satisfied. Heretofore we had only forbidden Europe to interfere with the governments of the republics of the New World; now we stepped in ourselves. This exercise of the "police power" to prevent disturbances in Latin America is called "the Roosevelt corollary of the Monroe Doctrine." In the same year that the Senate ratified the Santo Domingo treaty, Roosevelt and President Diaz of Mexico co-operated in establishing the Central American Court of Justice, to which the five republics between Mexico and the Isthmus of Panama agreed to submit all their disputes with one another. In 1908 a further step toward the security of the Caribbean countries was taken in the creation of a Central American International Bureau to further the interests of education, trade, agriculture, and industry. A Controversy with Japan. Serious trouble with Japan was threatened in 1906 when the board of education of San Francisco ordered Japanese, Chinese, and Korean children to attend separate schools provided for them. Up to the close of the nineteenth century not more than twenty-five thousand Japanese immigrants had come to our Pacific shores; but the crowded condition of the islands of Japan and the economic distress caused by the war with Russia sent the immigration up to seventy-five thousand by 1906. The Japanese government protested against the San Francisco order as a violation of the treaty rights of 1894, which gave Japanese residents here the status of citizens of "the most favored nation." Certain newspapers of California and Japan whipped up the quarrel by mutual insults and appeals to race prejudice. Roosevelt summoned the mayor of San Francisco and several of the anti- Japanese leaders to Washington and warned them that they must leave the settlement of an international question in the hands of the Federal government, at the same tune assuring them that he would at once "take action that would meet the needs of California" The result was the "Gentlemen's Agreement" of 1907, by which Japanese children under sixteen years of age were admitted to the regular public schools and the Japanese government agreed to prohibit the immigration of Japanese laborers to this country. Again in 1909 Roosevelt had to intervene with a threat of Federal action to prevent the California legislature from passing bills to exclude the Japanese from holding land. But it was only a truce. Four years later the legislature at Sacramento passed the act forbidding aliens ineligible to citizenship to hold land in the state. Our Fleet Sent Round the World. It was perhaps chiefly to impress Japan with the naval strength of the United States that Roosevelt decided to send a fleet of battleships around the world. Many people protested against leaving our own shores unprotected, and some even predicted that Japan would attack our Pacific coast as soon as the fleet had put to sea. But the President, as commander in chief of the navy, had a right to send the vessels where he pleased. He had money enough, he said, to send them as far as San Francisco, and they would remain there if Congress refused to appropriate the funds for the rest of the voyage. The final victory for a national worn an-suffrage amendment, which had been proposed by Susan B. Anthony as early as 1869, was due to the steady campaign waged in the states. Washington was won in 1910, and in the next two years California, Kansas, Arizona, and Oregon gave the ballot to women. By 1916 a dozen states, which chose about one sixth of the Presidential electors, had adopted woman suffrage, and the politicians realized that the woman vote was a factor to be reckoned with, like the labor vote, the Irish vote, or the fanner vote. The large Eastern states, which had resisted the movement, began to fall in line, beginning with New York in 1917; and in 1919 both houses of Congress passed the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution, forbidding the United States or any state to deny the right to vote to any citizen on account of sex. Tennessee ratified the amendment as the thirty-sixth state in 1920, in tune to allow the women of the country to take part in the Presidential election of that year. In 1840, even after the democratic reforms of the Jacksonian period, only one fourth of the adult population of the country had the ballot; eighty years later the proportion had risen to four fifths, i i The following diagram shows the extension of the suffrage since Washington's day. The shaded portions represent the proportion of the voting population to the total population of twenty-one years of age or over. Municipal Reform. As far back as the 1880's James Bryce called the government of our cities "the one conspicuous failure of American democracy," and twenty years later his severe judgment was echoed and confirmed in Lincoln Steffens's Shame of the Cities. The Industrial Revolution was so rapidly converting America into a land of city dwellers that by 1910 more than a third of our population lived in cities of over twenty- five thousand. Immigrants crowded into the slum districts of the great urban centers. The foreign-born formed only 7.5 per cent of the population in the country regions, but in the cities of five hundred thousand or over they comprised 33.6 per cent. They were sometimes naturalized at the rate of one a minute, and tens of thousands of ignorant voters (coming in ever-greater numbers from the poorer countries of southern and eastern Europe) remained in the large cities to become the easy prey of political bosses and a difficult problem for the agencies of Americanization. Facing the "Triple Entente" of England, France, and Russia was the "Triple Alliance" of Germany, Austria, and Italy, formed in 1883, from which, however, Italy had become almost detached on account of her rivalry with Austria. Germany looked upon the Entente as a plot to surround her with an "iron ring" of hostile powers and thwart her ambition for colonial expansion and "a place in the sun." Indeed, Colonel House, who was on a mission to Europe in the summer of 1914, in the interest of preserving peace, wrote to President Wilson on May 29, "Whenever England consents, France and Russia will close in on Germany and Austria." The Outbreak of the World War. It was an event in the Balkans (the "tinderbox of Europe") which started the conflagration. On June 28, 1914, Francis Ferdinand, the heir to the Austrian throne, was assassinated with his wife while driving through the streets of Sarajevo, in the Austrian province of Bosnia. Holding the Serbian revolutionary societies responsible for the murders, the Austrian government (backed by Germany) declared war on Serbia and marched upon her capital (July 28). Russia then mobilized her army to protect her fellow Slavs in the Balkans and check the Teuton "thrust to the East," whereupon Germany declared war on Russia (August 1). This was bound to involve Russia's ally France, against whom Germany declared war two days later. And when the mighty German military machine was launched across the neutral soil of Belgium, in order to strike a fatal blow at Paris before the Russian army could get into action, Great Britain came to the assistance of France (August 4). In vain had the foreign ministers of the great capitals of Europe labored during the last week of July to avert the catastrophe of a general war. In vain had they pleaded for time for the submission of the Austro- Serbian case to the Hague Tribunal or to the arbitration of Great Britain, France, Germany, and Italy. The precarious structure of peace, built on the old doctrine of the "balance of power," fell like a house of cards. Bulgaria and Turkey joined the Central Powers; Japan and Italy came to the side of the Allies. Eventually, of all Europe only the Scandinavian countries, Holland, Spain, and Switzerland remained neutral. Wilson's Proclamation of Neutrality. The United States, of course, had no part in the European rivalries, fears, and hatreds that had precipitated the war. We cared little whether Slav or Teuton controlled the Balkan Peninsula. Probably not one in ten thousand of our citizens could locate Bosnia or Baghdad on the map. Three thousand miles of "cooling ocean" lay between us and inflamed Europe. Moreover, our land was the hospitable refuge of immigrants from all the belligerent countries. Nearly 9,000,000 of our population were either of German birth or of German parentage. Russians, Italians, Poles, Hungarians, and Irishmen worked side by side in our mines, mills, and factories. The very year of 1914 was the peak year of immigration, bringing 1,200,000 foreigners to our shores. In the midst of the coal strike three hundred thousand railroad shopmen, dissatisfied with the rulings of the Railway Labor Board under the Esch-Cummins Act (p. 749), laid down their tools. They were supported by the railroad brotherhoods and the American Federation of Labor. The strike was even more serious than the coal strike, because the personal safety of the traveling public depended on keeping the locomotives and cars in proper repair in the railroad shops. Attorney- General Daugherty took the ground that the strike was the work of communist agitators who took their instructions direct from Russia. He declared that if the "Red Borers" were allowed to get control of the railroads," from that hour our time-tables and freight rates would be made out in Moscow, and the first step would be taken in a revolution to overthrow our government and substitute a Soviet regime." Whether he really believed that such a danger threatened, or was merely using the "Red menace" to divert the growing criticism of his management of the Department of Justice, is uncertain. At any rate, he induced President Harding to go before Congress with a special message, on August 18, denouncing the strike: We must assert the doctrine that in the Republic the first obligation and the first allegiance of every citizen, high and low, is to his government. . . . We have a state of lawlessness shocking to every conception of American ideals.... Deserted continental trains in the desert regions of the Southwest have revealed a cruelty and contempt for law on the part of railroad employees, who have conspired to paralyze transportation. And lawlessness and violence in a hundred places have revealed the failure of the striking to hold their forces to law obedience.... I am resolved to use all the power of the government to maintain transportation and sustain the right of men to work. . .. There arc existing laws by which to settle the prevailing disputes. There are statutes forbidding conspiracy to hinder interstate commerce. There are laws to assure the highest possible safety in railway service. It is my purpose to invoke these laws, civil and criminal, against all offenders alike. The Program of "Normalcy" Two weeks later the Attorney-General went in person to Chicago and secured from a Federal judge an injunction forbidding the strikers to picket shops, to hinder the inspection or repair of locomotives or cars, to obstruct the movement of trains, to trespass on the premises of the railroads where repair work was going on, to intimidate any of the employees of the roads, or even to communicate by telegraph or telephone to encourage to strike. This "most sweeping injunction ever issued in the history of labor disputes in America" was assailed by labor as a violation of constitutional rights and an attempt to reduce the workers to a "condition of slavery." The strikers had committed no crime, said Mr. Gompers, in "quitting work when conditions became intolerable." But the courts upheld the injunction, as in the case of the Pullman strike of 1894. The shopmen's strike was quelled by this drastic action of the government. According to figures made public early in 1924 by the Department of Justice, it had caused nineteen deaths by violence, wrought the destruction of millions of dollars' worth of railroad property, reduced the income of the roads by 20 per cent in 1923, and cost the government nearly two million dollars for special deputies sworn in by the Attorney-General to preserve order. The Immigration Laws. Because America has made it her boast to be a land of refuge for the oppressed and of opportunity for the seekers of new fortunes, our doors have until quite recently stood wide open to the immigrants from the Old World. In 1914 the high-water mark was reached, with a total of 1,218,480 immigrants, of whom more than 800,000 came from Italy, Russia, and Austria-Hungary, and 260,000 were illiterates of fourteen years of age or over. During the war the numbers of immigrants fell off; but when the war was over, there was danger that we might be flooded by refugees from the distressed countries of Europe. "The world is preparing to move to America," wrote the Commissioner of Immigration. The war had also revealed some alarming facts in regard to our foreign population. Many immigrants were neglecting to become naturalized American citizens, retaining their real allegiance to the lands from which they had come. Radical labor agitators were suspected of "taking their orders from Moscow." Over one thousand newspapers in the United States were printed in foreign languages, and over 10 per cent of the people here could not speak English. American labor leaders were disturbed over the influx of hordes of foreigners who were accustomed to work for low wages, and patriotic citizens generally were alarmed at the numbers of newcomers who had no knowledge of American institutions or ideals. If we were not to become what Theodore Roosevelt called "an international boardinghouse," some step must be taken to limit the unrestricted immigration of the prewar days. The method adopted was the quota system. On May 19,1921, President Harding signed the Emergency Quota Act, which limited the number of immigrants that any country could send to the United States in any given year to 3 per cent of its people who were here according to the census of 1910. But this law was unsatisfactory, because a large number of immigrants from the eastern and southern countries of Europe had come here before 1910 and hence had large quotas (Russia, 34,284; Poland, 25,827; Italy, 42,057). To turn the balance more in favor of the northern countries, such as the British Isles, Germany, Norway, and Sweden, which had sent us so many welcome immigrants in the nineteenth century, a new law was passed in 1924, fixing the quota at 2 per cent of the number of the nationals of each country in the United States according to the census of 1890. The new law cut down the Russian quota to 2248, the Italian to 3845, and the Polish to 5982, while it permitted 63,574 to come from the British Isles, 51,227 from Germany, and 9561 from Sweden. The new law also provided that after July 1, 1927, only 150,000 immigrants should be admitted annually, divided among the several countries in proportion to the numbers of their nationals here according to the census of 1920. Because the act of 1924 forbade the entrance into our country of all aliens who were ineligible to citizenship, it drew from the Japanese ambassador at Washington a respectful but forceful protest to our State Department. Japanese exclusion, said the ambassador, was not only a violation of the "Gentlemen's Agreement" of 1907 (p. 577) but also an affront to his nation from which "grave consequences" might arise. Though the Japanese quota under the new act would have been but 142 immigrants a year, and President Coolidge asked that the exclusion clause be taken out of the act, Congress refused to change the law. The net result of the immigration laws was to put a stop to the steady flow of aliens to our shores. The foreign-born population of 13,225,000 in 1920 increased only 0.6 per cent in the next decade. "The doors of the United States as the historic haven of the oppressed in all lands were now closed." 