The average farmer's dwelling contained simple homemade furniture and utensils, while the homes of the wealthy were filled with imported furniture, tapestries, paintings, and engravings. The fireplace was an essential of every house, not only as a source of heat, but also as a means of cooking meals and of drying fruits and vegetables. A marked contrast also existed between the food and dress of the small farmer and those of the well-to-do merchant or planter. After the stress of early settlement had passed, there was ample food for all, but delicacies were few and variety was lacking. The ordinary northern farmer and the poorer people of the South consumed virtually only what they themselves produced or caught, but the southern planter and the northern aristocrat set a lavish table. The small farmer wore plain homespun and leather, produced in the household, while the "gentleman farmer" and the wealthy city dweller closely followed the dictates of London fashion, dressing luxuriously in fine fabrics imported from the Old World. Population in the English colonies grew at a rapid rate, partly as the result of immigration, and partly through natural increase. The birth rate was high and families were large. Benjamin Franklin, for example, was one of a family of seventeen children; while families of fifteen, twenty, twenty-five, and even thirty children were not unusual. On the other hand, the death rate was correspondingly high. In general, the population was scattered thinly along the Atlantic seaboard. Thus, on the eve of the American Revolution only about one tenth of the total population of almost three million lived in towns. Philadelphia could proudly boast of nearly twenty-five thousand inhabitants. Boston and New York were not far behind, each with about twenty thousand residents, while Charleston came next with slightly more than half this number. In neither city nor town were there to be found the conveniences which later distinguished them from rural sections. Two classes predominated in the cities: the rich merchants on the one hand, and the artisans and small shopkeepers on the other. As centers of wealth and progress, the cities exercised an influence upon culture and intellectual development altogether out of proportion to their relative size. While the economic life of the United Statesand its people was shifting, certain social developments of great importance were taking place. One of these was the rapid growth of population. By 1840 the inhabitants of the United States numbered 17,000,000, and in the next twenty years the total soared to nearly 31,500,000. The increase was more pronounced in the West than in the other sections of the country. By the middle of the century almost half of the population lived west of the Alleghenies. Another significant trend was the growing concentration of people in cities. In 1840 there were 44 cities having a population of 8000 or more and containing one twelfth of the total population. Two decades later there were more than three times as many such cities containing in all about a sixth of the population. By 1860 the combined population of New York and Brooklyn had passed the million mark. Much of this increase was accounted for by the widening stream of immigration. During the 1820's an average of about 20,000 immigrants entered the United States annually. At the end of the next decade the figure was close to the 100,000 mark, while in 1854 a peak of well over 400,000 was attained. Most of the immigrants came from the British Isles and northern and western Europe. Large numbers flocked from Ireland, where the potato famine of 1845 and succeeding years literally starved the inhabitants into leaving their native land. Diminished crops, economic hardships, and the failure of revolutionary uprisings brought many Germans to the shores of America. The flow of immigration was likewise influenced by conditions in the United States, reaching its height in years of prosperity and declining in times of depression. Most of the newcomers became laborers, farmers, or mechanics. While nearly all of the Irish settled in the eastern section of the country, largely in the cities, the majority of the Germans turned to the soil. At least half of the latter pushed their way across the mountains to the new West. Opposition to immigration. The increasing stream of immigrants called forth a strong protest from native-born Americans. The newcomers were willing to work long hours for low wages. Those who settled in the cities tended to concentrate in wretched tenements and shanties, thus creating new slum areas. Their lower standards of living aroused considerable opposition. The opponents of the Democratic Party also were disturbed by the fact that the newcomers formed the backbone of such Democratic organizations as Tammany Hall in New York. Much of the antagonism toward the new arrivals centered about religion. Many of them, particularly among the Irish and Germans, were Roman Catholics; and Protestants viewed with alarm the spread of Catholic churches, convents, and parochial schools. In the early fifties the scattered elements opposing these foreigners united to form a semi-secret political organization calling itself the American Party. When questioned as to the name and purpose of the party, its members replied: "I know nothing." As a result the party came to be known as the "Know-Nothing" Party. Due to the production of cotton by slave labor, the South shared in the expansion of population to a lesser degree than did the North and the West. The extensiveness of cotton cultivation and the unsuitability of slaves for factory labor discouraged the development of manufacturing in the South. Moreover, the small farmer found it exceedingly difficult to compete with the great planters who owned large numbers of slaves. As a result, few immigrants were attracted to the South, and the slave states gradually lost ground in comparison with the free states. A further effect of slavery was to create more distinct social classes than were to be found in the other sections of the country. At the top of the scale was the aristocracy, composed of some 6000 planters and their families out of a total southern white population of about 6,000,000. Next in order came the small planters, the well-to-do townsmen, and mechanics and tradesmen. Still lower in the social scale were the "poor whites" of the sand hills and pine barrens, and the secluded mountain regions. Ignorant and superstitious because of their isolation and lack of educational opportunities, the "poor whites" lived under wretched conditions. At the bottom of the social scale were the slaves, considered essential in the production of the staple crops of the South. Though the need for this type of labor brought the number of slaves to nearly 4,000,000 in i860, the demand for more was insistent. Proof of this was to be found in the increased value of slaves. Whereas at the beginning of the century a "prime" field hand brought from $4째째 to S500, by 1860 the price ranged from Si200 to $1500. The descriptions of slave life which have come down to us vary greatly. While no doubt there were individual plantation owners and overseers who exhibited the cruelty of Simon Negro areas, and the bad housing conditions which resulted contributed to friction between the races. Within their own zones, particularly in the South, the Negroes had their own professional classes, their schools and churches, banks and hotels, and their own amusements. In the South, also, the so-called "Jim Crow" laws provided for a separation of the two races in public conveyances and even in railroad stations. In the economic world likewise the lot of the Negro has not been fortunate. Long after he acquired freedom he remained primarily a farmer, either as a tenant or share-cropper (page 448), a hired laborer, or in a few cases as a landowner. In the cities he usually became an unskilled laborer or found employment in domestic or other forms of personal service. His entrance into labor unions was obstructed, and but a small percentage attained employment in the higher mechanical ranks. By 1934 there were only about 100,000 Negroes engaged in the professions of teaching, preaching, the law, and medicine. The intellectual progress of the Negro, on the other hand, was encouraging, especially in view of his lack of education and training prior to 1865. Illiteracy among the colored people declined from 70 per cent by 1880 to about 16 per cent in 1930. Even at the later date, however, the percentage of illiteracy was nearly eleven times that of the native whites. Opportunities for higher education increased, so that, in 1932, nearly 20,000 Negroes were attending college and about 1500 degrees were granted. Moreover, in various cultural fields Negro leaders emerged who were worthy of recognition. These included Booker T. Washington, a former slave, who founded Tuskegee Institute for Negroes and who became the outstanding leader of his race in America; Roland Hayes and Paul Robeson, whose glorious voices have thrilled vast audiences in Europe as well as in America; and the poets, James Weldon Johnson and Countee Cullen. Such progress augured well for the future. Perplexing social problems were raised as well by the continued flow of immigrants to our shores. No small part of the increase in the American population since 1865 was due to immigration. In the early eighties, for example, the influx of foreigners reached a new high-water mark of more than 750,000 for a single year, while the total for the decade amounted to more than 5,000,000. This rise in the tide of immigration resulted in large part from the attraction of cheap or free western lands and from the glamorous picture of America as the land of opportunity painted by employers of labor and steamship companies. Moreover, conditions in Europe, such as hard times, overpopulation, compulsory military service, and anti-Semitic feeling, persuaded many to seek new homes in America. A new type of immigrant. More significant than mere numbers was the changing character of the immigrants. Earlier settlers had come chiefly from England, Ireland, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries. Because they closely resembled the native stock in race and background, they were readily absorbed into the American nation. In the 188o's and thereafter, on the other hand, swarms of immigrants began to flow across the Atlantic from eastern and southern Europe. They included Poles, Finns and Jews from Russia, various racial groups from Austria-Hungary, and Italians and Greeks. As the cheap western lands became scarcer, these newcomers tended to concentrate in the industrial centers. Living in colonies in the crowded slums of the cities, they continued to speak their own languages and preserve their own customs and institutions. Thus the process of Americanization was made increasingly difficult. The introduction of these new elements into the American "melting pot" caused patriotic societies to raise their voices for the restriction of immigration. At the same time significant opposition came from the ranks of labor. Whereas the industrialists welcomed new recruits who were willing to do any kind of work for low wages, labor raised a protesting voice against the admission of workers who constantly served as strikebreakers, lowered wages, and reduced the standards of living (page 543). Before the end of the century, the influx of foreigners with radical and socialistic ideas began to alarm the very captains of industry who at first had encouraged the importation of a cheap labor supply. They attributed the increase in strikes and the growth of violence to a radical alien element. "The ranks of anarchy and riots number no Americans," asserted Chauncey M. Depew in 1887. "The leaders boldly proclaim that they come here not to enjoy the blessings of our liberty and to sustain 째ur institutions but to destroy our government, cut our throats, and divide our property." Chinese exclusion. The first serious attempt to restrict immigration arose in connection with the Chinese. In 1868 the United States had drawn up the Burlingame Treaty with China This agreement extended special privileges to Americans in China and gave Chinese citizens the rights of travel and residence in the United States. While the first transcontinental railroad was being constructed, the immigration of a cheap labor supply from China was encouraged, but by 1879 the Chinese offered a serious problem along the Pacific coast. American labor could not compete with the Chinese coolies, who worked for starvation wages and lived under conditions which Americans would not tolerate. In response to public protests, President Hayes succeeded in modifying the Burlingame Treaty so as to permit the United States to "regulate, limit, or suspend" the right of entry into the United States of Chinese laborers. Agitation for exclusion continued, and in 1882 legislation was enacted which prevented Chinese coolies from entering the United States for ten years, and made all Chinese immigrants ineligible for citizenship. In 1892 the period was extended for another decade. This prohibition was continued indefinitely, and only students and certain specified classes were admitted to the United States. American immigration policy. About the time that the first Chinese Exclusion Act became a law, another act fixed the general policy of the United States toward immigration. It forbade the landing of objectionable persons, such as paupers, convicts, and insane people, and placed upon the steamship companies the burden of returning those not admitted. Three years later (1885) aliens were barred who arrived under contract to labor for an American employer. Furthermore, a law of 1891 extended immigration restrictions so as to exclude those suffering from contagious and loathsome diseases. A bill requiring all new arrivals to pass a literacy test obtained the approval of Congress, but was vetoed by President Cleveland. The latter adopted the stand that it was better "to admit a hundred thousand immigrants who, though unable to read and write, seek among us a home and opportunity to work, than to admit one of those unruly agitators and enemies of governmental control who can not only read and write, but delights in arousing by inflammatory speech the illiterate and peacefully inclined to discontent and tumult." Many years were to pass and more millions of aliens were to cross our borders before any effective measure was passed to stem the tide. Japanese restriction. Early in the twentieth century the multiplication of the number of Japanese along the Pacific coast created a new source of alarm. As a protest against the number of Japanese students in the public schools, the San Francisco school board, in 1906, adopted a resolution requiring all such students to attend separate Oriental schools. Japan was about to tender a formal protest when President Theodore Roosevelt prevailed upon the school board to withdraw its decree. To appease California and the other Pacific states, however, Roosevelt brought about an informal understanding with Japan known as the "Gentlemen's Agreement" (1907). This was confirmed the following year in the Root-Takahira Agreement Oriental pupils under sixteen were to be admitted to the regular public schools, but Japan in turn agreed to refuse passports to Japanese laborers seeking to enter the United States. An immigration act of 1907 denied admission to all Japanese who did not possess proper passports. This act was so interpreted as to exclude Japanese who came from island possessions 째f the United States or from any foreign country other than Japan. Although Japan observed the terms of the Gentlemen's Agreement rigidly, the same could hardly be said of the Pacific states. The presence of a large number of Japanese led these states to pass laws which seriously threatened friendly relations between America and its neighbor across the Pacific. Thus, in 1913 California denied to aliens ineligible to citizenship the right to acquire agricultural lands or to take up leaseholds for more than three years. The situation was further aggravated when other Pacific states followed California's example. Strained relations inevitably followed. Japan found it difficult to understand the division of authority between the states and the federal government, and regarded anti-Japanese legislation as an affront to its national dignity. Immigration laws of the third decade of the century further heightened the tension between the United States and Japan. Restriction of immigration. Aliens from eastern and southern Europe continued to migrate to the United States at the average of a million a year in the period before the World War. With the outbreak of the conflict in 1914, the warring countries of Europe refused to give their nationals permission to leave, and the flow of immigrants to our shores lessened. Despite this fact, Congress, in 1917, succeeded in passing over a presidential veto a law providing for a literacy test in some language for all those who sought our shores. The act also debarred vagrants, those who suffered from chronic alcoholism, persons believing in the violent overthrow of government, and Asiatics, not including Japanese. After the World War, however, the stream of immigrants again threatened to reach the prewar volume. In view of the widespread unemployment in the United States at the time, the situation appeared even more critical. In 1921, therefore, Congress passed an Emergency Quota Act. This measure limited the number of aliens of any nationality to be admitted in any one year to three per cent of the number of foreign-born persons of that country residing in the United States as reported in the census of 1910. The quota was based upon land of birth rather than land of last residence. Originally effective for one year, the law was later renewed for another two-year period. Immigration Act of 1924. The Emergency Quota Act was replaced in 1924 by the Lodge-Johnson Act which established still more drastic limitations upon immigration. The quotas were to be determined by the census of 1890 rather than that of 1910, and the number admissible in any one year was refluced from three to two per cent. The act also provided for selection of immigrants at their source rather than at our immigration stations. Government officials, unmarried children under eighteen years of age, wives of resident American citizens, professors, students, and resident aliens returning from visits abroad were not subject to quota restrictions. This was likewise true of citizens of Canada, Mexico, and the independent republics of Central and South America. After July, 1927, the quota of each country was to be that proportion of 150,000 which the number of persons of a given national origin residing in the United States in 1920 bore to America's total population at the same date. This national origins arrangement, which did not actually go into effect until 1929, was favorable to Great Britain and Northern Ireland, but reduced the quotas from eastern and southern Europe to a total of a few thousand. An important feature of the law of 1924 was the total exclusion of immigrants ineligible to citizenship, including the Japanese. Despite the vigorous protest of Japan, this provision was included in order to appease California and other western states. Further restrictions. The severe depression of the 1930's led to additional restrictions on immigration. Those who were likely to become public charges were debarred by law. In view of existing unemployment and "hard times" many were denied admission under this provision who would have been accepted in normal times without question. As a result immigration dropped below 100,000 in 1931 and to 23,000 in 1933. In fact, during the first half of the decade the number of departures was actually greater than that of those admitted. For the time, at least, the United States ceased to be the melting pot of the world. In spite of the difficulties presented by the Negro and the alien immigrant, the American people tended to become increasingly unified. Distance ceased to be a social barrier. Those who resided on the west coast were closer to New England than the citizens of Boston and New York in colonial days. The common man as well as his wealthy neighbor could tune his radio to hear the news of the day or to listen to the broadcast of important events from the far corners of the country. 