But they fell short when compared with Alexander Spottswood (1710-1722), one of the ablest and best governors of colonial Virginia. The habit of governing through lieutenants, the governor residing in England, became prevalent early in the eighteenth century. One man, Douglas, was nominal governor for forty years, drawing a large salary, though he never crossed the Atlantic Ocean. Despite the many drawbacks, the unworthy governors and their frequent quarrels with the assembly and people, Virginia continued to prosper, and by the end of the seventeenth century the population numbered a hundred thousand. The people up to this time were almost wholly English, but in 1700 several hundred Huguenots made their home in the colony. About 1730 the Scotch-lrish began to settle in large numbers in the Shenandoah Valley, and soon after these came the Germans. The frontier was moved gradually westward from the tide-water counties until it had crossed the summit of the Alleghanics. The coming of these peoples infused new modes of life, new religious customs, new democratic ideas into Virginian society; and in the course of the next half century many vital changes were brought about, as the abolition of primogeniture and entail, the separation of Church and State, and religious toleration. Thus the various nationalities, blending slowly into one people, spent the remainder of the colonial period hewing away the forests and laying the foundations of a great state. The founding of Maryland marks the beginning of a new plan in colony building in North America. The tentative experiments of Gilbert and Raleigh had for their object mainly the establishing of trading posts, from which a search for gold and for a northwest passage to the Indies might be carried on. Close upon these followed the founding of the earliest permanent colonies by chartered companies, the chief objects being to bring commercial advantage to the companies, and to make good by actual occupation English claims to the soil. With the founding of Maryland came the first permanent proprietary government of America, that is, a government by a lord proprietor, who, Spottswood and many other real governors were called "lieutenant governors," the "governor" residing in England. Fiske puts It, they tolerated "everybody except Catholics, Episcopalians, and anybody else who disagreed with them." But this was going too far, even for Oliver Cromwell, who sided with Calvert; and at the word of that powerful dictator the Toleration Act was restored and the Puritan domination was ended. In 1661, soon after the Restoration in England. Lord Baltimore sent his only son, Charles Calvert, to be governor of his colony. Charles was an excellent governor. He served fourteen years when in 1675 his father, Cecilius, died and he became the lord proprietor. For the first time now the Marylanders had the proprietor living among them. Cecilius, the founder of the colony and its proprietor for over forty years, devoted his life to Maryland; but he resided in London and never crossed the Atlantic Ocean. This period, from the Restoration, 1660, to the English Revolution in 1688, was one of unusual quiet in Maryland. It is true that the people were on the verge of rebellion in 1676 — an echo of the Bacon Rebellion in Virginia — and that the government after the death of Cecilius was for a time similar to that of Berkeley in Virginia, tending toward aristocracy, nepotism, and restriction of the suffrage; but on the whole the inhabitants were happy and industrious and were rapidly increasing in numbers. During this time the Quakers, the Dutch, the Germans, and the Huguenots were in considerable numbers finding their way to Maryland. Maryland had a boundary dispute with Pennsylvania, covering nearly three quarters of a century, which will be noted in our Maryland account of that colony. On the flight of James II becomes a from the British throne, 1688, Baltimore promptly royal col- dispatched a messenger to Maryland to proclaim the accession of William and Mary. But the messenger died at sea, the message was not delivered, and while- the other colonies in quick succession proclaimed the new sovereigns, Maryland hesitated. The delay was fatal to Baltimore's charter, and in 1691 Maryland became a royal province. Baltimore, however, was still permitted to receive the revenues in the form of quitrents and excises from his sometime colony. Maryland remained a royal colony till 1715 when it passed back into the hands of the Calverts. The royal governors, among whom we find the ubiquitous Nicholson and Andros, were all men of commendable worth. When Maryland became a royal colony one of the first acts of its legislature was to pass a law establishing the Church of 1693 the population was but half of what it had been fifteen years before; and the Clarendon colony planted by Yeamans on Cape Fear had been wholly abandoned. Meantime another colony had been planted at the mouth of the Ashley and Cooper rivers. (This will be noted under South Carolina.) These two surviving colonies, several hundred miles apart, now began to be called North and South Carolina. Their governments were combined into one, and better times were now at hand. In 1695 John Archdale, a good Quaker, became governor of both Carolinas, and from this time the settlements were much more prosperous than before. After 1704, however, North Carolina was again in turmoil, the causes being bad governors and continued attempts to establish the Church of England at the expense of the Dissenters, more than half of whom were Quakers. During this first decade of the eighteenth century, settlers came in increased numbers.Huguenots from France came and settled at Bath near Pamlico Sound; Germans from the Rhine founded New Berne at the junction of the Trent and Neuse rivers. The white population was now about five thousand. Albemarle settlement had extended many miles into the forest; this involved encroachment on the soil of the native red man — and it brought its troubles. In the autumn of 1711 a terrible Indian massacre took place in North Carolina. Hundreds of settlers fell victims of the Indian war merciless tomahaw'k. The chief sufferers were the inoffensive Germans at New Berne, where one hundred and thirty people were slaughtered within two hours after the signal for the massacre was given.1 Various tribes, led by the Tuscaroras, engaged in the massacre. But the people rallied, and, receiving aid from South Carolina, they, led by Colonels John Barnwell and James Moore, hunted the red men from place to place and in a great battle near the Neuse they destroyed four hundred of their warriors. At length the Tuscaroras, whose ancestors had come from New York, resolved to abandon their southern home and return to the land of their fathers. They removed in 1714 and joined the Iroquois or Five Nations, and that confederation was afterward known as the Six Nations. The people of North Carolina were, in the main, honest and law-abiding, and when not goaded by profligate rulers and unjust laws, quiet and peaceable. It is true, there were many who had fled from other colonies to escape debts or the hand of the law; but a large portion of society was composed of sturdy, Christian men and women. Religion soon found a footing here as in the other colonies, though there was no resident clergyman in the colony before 1703. The Church of England was supported by taxation, but the Dissenters were in the majority. The Quakers especially became numerous, and George Fox himself, the founder of the sect, visited the place and made many converts. In 1714 the lords proprietor sent out Charles Eden for governor, and he was the best and ablest governor the colony ever had. But on his death, eight years later, the colony separation again fell into unworthy hands. A period of great of North and turbulence followed when, in 1729, all the proprietors save one having sold their interests to the Crown, North Carolina and South Carolina were separated and each was henceforth a royal colony. Of the royal governors sent out after this date several were tyrannical or worthless; but the people increased rapidly in numbers. There was for many years a steady inflow of Germans from the Rhine by way of Pennsylvania and, beginning about 1719, a still larger stream of Scotch-Irish from Ulster. During the first sixty-six years the entire proprietary period — the people of North Carolina clung to the seaboard. But now' the eastern slope of the Alleghanies was rapidly' peopled, chiefly by Scotch-Irish and Germans, with a large sprinkling of shiftless "poor whites" from Virginia. The settlement of the region of the "back counties" had little connection with those of an earlier date on the coast, and the colony was practically divided into two distinct areas with a broad belt of forest between them. The conditions of life were very different in the two. The back country was non-slaveholding, and the economic conditions were very similar to those of the northern colonies; while the coast settlements were slaveholding and were marked by many characteristics of southern life. The products of the colony were at first tobacco along the Virginia border, rice on the Cape Fear River, and grain, cattle, and especially swine in both these sections. But at length the great pine forests began to yield their wealth, and before the Revolution tar, turpentine, and lumber became the chief products of North Carolina. Of all the thirteen colonies North Carolina was the least commercial, the most provincial, the farthest removed from rice swamps. Even among the blacks the death rate was very high, and their ranks had to be refilled constantly from Africa. But slaves were cheap. A strong black man could be purchased for forty pounds and, as he could earn nearly that amount in a year, the planter found it more profitable to work him to death than to take care of him.1 Almost from the beginning the slaves in South Carolina outnumbered the whites; slavery became the cornerstone in the political system and so it continued to the time of the Civil War. The people of South Carolina clung to the seaboard even longer than did those of their sister colony on the north. In 1715 some five hundred Irish came and occupied lands vacated by the Yamassees near Port Royal. But the back country was held by the Cherokees until 1755, when they made a treaty ceding this territory to the Crown. Soon after this a notable movement of the population began. Emigrants from Pennsylvania, from Virginia, and from North Carolina poured into this region in large numbers. The population in 1760 was estimated at one hundred and fifty thousand, three fourths of whom were slaves. He then removed the judge and appointed a new one, thus offending the popular party. Peter Zenger, the publisher of a newspaper, the New York Weekly case, attacked the governor through its columns and severely criticized his action. The governor was enraged at these attacks, and he ordered the paper burned and the editor arrested tor libel. At the trial, Zenger was defended by .Andrew Hamilton of Philadelphia, the greatest lawyer in America. The justice of the cause and the eloquence of Hamilton won the jury and resulted in a complete victory for the accused editor. A few years after Zenger's case was settled, New York society was greatly convulsed by the so-called Negro Plot.This was a craze similar to the witchcraft delusion bad swept over Massachusetts half a century before. It had its origin in a general belief that the Spanish Catholic priests, in league with the slave population, were planning to burn the city. The fear spread; the whole community went mad, and before the storm abated, twenty-two persons, four of whom were whites, had been hanged, thirteen negroes burnt at the stake, and a large number transported. The craze soon passed away and the people recovered their normal senses. The account of this affair constitutes the most deplorable chapter in the history of New York. It is now believed that no plot to burn the city existed, and that every one who suffered on account of the delusion was innocent. The province of New York grew steadily to the time of the Revolution. Every decade witnessed the coming of home seekers in large numbers to the valley of the Hudson. New York French Protestants, Scotch, Irish, Scotch-Irish, refugees from the Rhenish palatinate, and others spread over the beautiful river valleys; but the great majority of the people were English and Dutch. By 1750 the population was probably eighty thousand and this number was more than doubled by the opening years of the Revolution. New York City was a busy mart indeed, containing some twelve thousand people in 1750; and more than five hundred vessels, great and small, plowed the waters that half surrounded it. The city was the political, social, and business center of the province. Among its leading figures in winter were great landholders of the Hudson Valley and Long Island, who spent their summers on their estates. But the great middle class, composed chiiefly of tradesmen of every- grade, made up the majority of the population. To visit his growing family in the forests of Pennsylvania, and he found that vast changes had been wrought in his absence. Twenty thousand people had made their homes in his province. The city that he had founded was fast rising to importance, and the wilderness of the river valley was dotted with farms. Here he found not only his fellow Quakers, but Germans from the Rhine, Swedes, and Dutch, together laying the foundation of a great commonwealth. The great-souled proprietor had been deeply humbled since last he saw the fair lands of Pennsylvania — he had lost his faithful wife and eldest son, he had lost his fortune, and he had borne the charge of treason against his native country. And now to these was added another sorrow — the people of his province had been weaned away from him during the intervening years; he was no longer "Father Penn" as he had been before; they clamored for even greater freedom than his generous soul had granted them at first, and to this was added the demand of Delaware for a separate government. Penn was grieved, but he granted these requests. He gave to Delaware a separate legislature, and to Pennsylvania a new government. The form of government that Penn now conferred upon his colonists practically transferred all power to the people, subject to their allegiance to the Crown and the veto power of the governor. It eliminated the council as a legislative body, leaving it but little influence as an advisory board to the governor. It also defined the rights of prisoners, granted liberty of conscience, and made provision for amendments. This constitution remained in force for seventy-five years — until the War for Independence. In 1701 Penn bade a final adieu to his beloved Pennsylvania and sailed again for his native land. But even now, after his long years of turmoil, it was not for him to spend his old age in rest and quiet. On reaching England, fortunes's he found that he had been robbed of the remnant of his fortune by an unjust steward, and later he was thrown into prison for debt. In earlier manhood he had suffered various imprisonments for conscience' sake, but now he chafed under confinement and to secure his release he mortgaged his province in the New World. But still other misfortunes awaited him. He was stricken with paralysis, and for years he lay a helpless invalid, dying in 1718 at the age of seventy-four. The character of Perm is one of the most admirable in history. It is difficult to find a man, especially one whose life is spent in the midst of political turmoil and governmental strife, so utterly incorruptible as was William Penn. When on the threshold of manhood, and the flush of youth was on. his cheek, the allurements of wealth and station and of royal favor beckoned him to a life of ease and pleasure; but he turned away from them all and chose to cast his lot with a persecuted people.— purely for conscience' sake. No allurements of Pharaoh's court, no threats of an angry father, nor frowning walls of a prison-cell could shake his high-born purpose to serve God in the way that seemed right to him. His life was full of light and shadow. He suffered much, but he also accomplished much — far more than the age in which he lived was ready to acknowledge. He founded a government based on the eternal principle of equal human rights, with its sole object the freedom and happiness of its people. That alone was sufficient to give him a name in history. Thirty-seven years elapsed between the founding of Pennsylvania and the death of the founder, and he spent but four of these years in America; yet we are wont to regard William Penn almost as truly an American as was Franklin or Washington, and in the annals of our country his name must ever hold a place among the immortals.Penn willed the colony to his three sons, John, Thomas, and Richard, and these with their successors held it until after the Revolution. In the early part of the eighteenth century a great number of palatine Germans, driven from their homes by religious wars, found their way to Pennsylvania, settled Germantown (since absorbed by Philadelphia), and scattered over the Schuylkill and Lehigh valleys. The English were for a time alarmed at the influx of such numbers of a foreign people; but they were not long in discovering that these Germans chiefly of the Lutheran faith, were an industrious, peace-loving people, fairly educated and, while wholly unostentatious, as sincerely religious as the Puritan or the Quaker. Still greater during this period was the stream of Scotch-Irish from Ulster. These hardy Scotch Presbyterians, who had occupied northern Ireland for two or three generations, were being curbed in their industries for the protection of English industries and annoyed by petty religious persecution. They came to America in great numbers — so great as to form more than half the population of Pennsylvania, and many thousands of their numbers passed on to the southern colonies, settling along the coast and in the wilderness of Kentucky and Tennessee. In Pennsylvania they settled chiefly on the plains and mountain slopes west and south of the Susquehanna. The Scotch-Irish, as well as the Germans and others, were attracted to Pennsylvania because of the liberal, humane government inaugurated by William Penn. Slavery was never popular in Pennsylvania, and the number of slaves was kept down by strict laws against their importation. Before the Revolution many of them had been Set free by their masters. Of Redemptioners, mostly Germans and Irish, there were probably more in Pennsylvania during the eighteenth century than in any other colony. The majority of them, after their period of servitude, became useful citizens. During the long period of its colonial youth, we find in Pennsylvania the same kind of quarreling between the people and the governors, the same vagaries in issuing paper money, the same unbridled spirit of freedom, the same monotonous history, as we find in most of the other colonies. Among her governors we find in the early period no really great men, but in 1723 there arrived in Philadelphia a young man from Boston who soon rose to be the leading figure in the colony, and so he continued for more than half a century. This was Benjamin Franklin, who, it may be said, was the greatest character of colonial America. Flake, Dutch and Quaker Colonies; Earle, Colonial Days in Old New York; Goodwin, Dutch and English on the Hudson; Brooks, The Story of New York; Cornell, The History of Pennsylvania; Fisher, The Quaker Colonies; Andrews, Colonial Self-Government; Osgood, The American Colonies in the Seventeenth Century; Pownall, Administration of the Colonies; Egerton, British Colonial Policy; the general histories by Channing and Avery. Chitwood, A History of Colonial America. Myers, Narrathe of Early Pennsylvania, West New Jersey, and Delaware. This is a storehouse of contemporary documents. For many years there was no particular public sentiment against slavery; but about the time of the English Revolution, the Quakers and Germans of Pennsylvania began to be heard in opposing the institution on moral grounds. Thus began a public feeling against slavery that was destined to increase in volume for more than a hundred and fifty years, and at last to bring about the overthrow of the institution in America.Next above the slaves, and not far above them, stood the indented white servants. Many of these were criminals, who, being thrust upon the colonics by the mother country, escaped imprisonment or death by a long term of servitude in America. Others were waifs from the streets of London, sold by their inhuman parents, or kidnaped by cruel traders and sold into servitude across the sea. Still others, known as redemptioners or free-willers, voluntarily sold their services for a term of years, not usually more than five, in order to pay their passage across the sea. The shipmaster would bring a company of them to an American port, and dispose of them to the planters, farmers, and merchants. The majority of the redemptioners, after serving their time, merged into the great middle class and became substantial citizens. Many left the scenes of their servitude and pushed out to the frontier, hewed their homes out of the frowning forest, and led a quiet, industrious life. Of the convict class, few were reformed by their service; the majority continued shiftless and worthless, and constituted, especially at the South, the most undesirable element of society. On election days and other special occasions they, and too often citizens of the more respectable classes, would gather at the taverns and courthouses and spend the time drinking, gambling, and fighting. They also, with the free negroes, constituted the chief criminal classes in most of the colonies. Crime was punished by hanging, whipping, ducking, branding, and by exposure in the pillory and the stocks — less frequently by imprisonment, except in some of the northern colonies. The indented servants, like the slaves, were far more numerous in the South. In New Jersey the mode of life was somewhat similar to that of New England, from which many of the people had emigrated. This was especially true of East Jersey, while in West New Jersey, where the Quakers predominated, the mode of life resembled that of Pennsylvania. The soil, with the exception of the sand regions in some portions of the colony, was fertile, and farming was practically the sole industry. There were few large estates, the great majority of the settlers being small farmers, each with his clearing in the forest; and this, with the fact there were few slaves or indented servants, brought about a social equality unknown in most of the colonies. There was little culture or education except in the villages that dotted the great highway between New York and Philadelphia. The people were thrifty and honest; houses were left unlocked, and there was little crime. The laws and punishments were modeled after those of New England. The moment we cross the Delaware into Pennsylvania we find a notable change in colonial society. It is true there were many English Quakers, as in West Jersey, but they were outnumbered by others. There were Germans, Irish, Scotch-Irish, Welsh, and Swedes. The tolerant spirit of the Quaker government had attracted men of every nationality and every creed. First in numbers came the Lutherans and Presbyterians, and after these the Dunkards, Moravians, Baptists, Anabaptists, Pietists, and Mennonites, with a sprinkling of Methodists, Episcopalians, and Roman Catholics. Yet with all the mixture of sect and nationality there was no colony in America more peaceful, contented, and democratic than Pennsylvania. It is true that the Germans and the Scotch-Irish could not get along well together, and they kept apart by settling in separate communities or in parallel bands across the colony, while the English predominated in Philadelphia and vicinity. There was also frequent political strife between the Scotch-Irish and the Quakers, and the latter often combined with the Germans to retain their prestige in the legislature. The chief industry was farming; the soil was rich and productive, and the river valleys were laden with waving fields of grain every year, while the broad meadows and mountain were dotted with grazing herds. But there were other occupations in Pennsylvania reaped a golden harvest from it, could have strengthened itself powerfully for the future, had it been tactful and wise; but it was neither tactful nor wise. Instead of taking advantage of the popular wave and building for the future, it stooped to humble some of its old enemies. It enacted a number of obnoxious laws, based on a spirit of revenge, and in this way it drove thousands into the ranks of its great rival. To raise revenue for the impending war a direct tax on lands, slaves, and houses was imposed. For every slave between the ages of twelve and fifty years the owner must pay fifty cents a year, while the land and house tax was graded according to the value of the property, and the value of a house was determined by the number and size of its windows.1 These special taxes were unpopular and they chilled the ardor of many a Federalist who owned houses, lands, or slaves. Still less popular was the Naturalization Law, which raised the time of residence for naturalization from five to fourteen years. This was aimed at resident Frenchmen, but it affected equally the foreign-born of other nationalities, and played its part in weakening the party that enacted it. The Federal party might, however, have survived all this had it stopped here. But the over-zealous party now proceeded to enact the famous, or rather infamous, Alien and Sedition Laws. The .-Mien and Sedition Laws are usually named together in common parlance, but they were passed separately, though their general object was the same. The most offensive section of the Mien Act gave the President power to banish from the country, without giving a reason, without a trial of any sort, any alien whom he considered a dangerous or suspicious person. A cry instantly arose from the Republican press, denouncing the law as unconstitutional, since it denied trial by jury and usurped a power that belonged wholly to the states. But few months after Congress had met it passed an act abolishing all internal revenue on distilled spirits, the stamp tax, and the tax on carriages. It also reduced the army to about three thousand, sold some of the vessels of the navy, and lowered the salaries of customhouse officials, These acts greatly reduced the number of officials, and Jefferson further proved the sincerity of his professions by consolidating two or more offices into one wherever the public business would warrant it. Congress next addressed itself to a few of the obnoxious laws made by the Federalists. The Alien and Sedition Acts had expired; but there stood the Naturalization Act and the Midnight Judiciary. The former was remodeled and the time reduced from fourteen years to five, where it still remains. The Judiciary Act, so distasteful to the Democrats, seemed to interpose an obstacle; but this was soon overcome. The act Repeal of had been passed by the Federalists after it was known Judiciary that the Democrats had carried the election, and yet law not one of the newly created offices was left to be filled by the incoming administration, and each new judge was supposed to hold the office for life. The Democrats regarded this as a gross abuse of power, and they determined to undo the work of their defeated rivals. A way was soon found. They could not take the man from the office, so they determined to take the office from the man. The Judiciary Act was repealed entire; but many years later, long after the Federal party had passed away, the growing business of the Federal courts demanded an extension of its service, similar to that which was now repealed. The Louisiana Purchase The greatest diplomatic achievement in the annals of the United States was the acquisition of the vast, unbounded region beyond the Mississippi known as Louisiana. This immense territory had been taken possession of by France through the explorer La Salle in 1682. Eighty years later France ceded it to Spain, at the time when she gave up Canada and the Ohio Valley to England. Since then a mighty genius had risen in France in the person of Napoleon Bonaparte, and through his surpassing skill, aided by the spirit of the Revolution, that country had surged to the front until more than held our own on the sea against the greatest naval power of the earth, the whole world was astonished. Before this war, the United States was never considered a first-class power; since then it has never been considered anything else. It was then that the nations began to realize that America was a rising giant, and that it demanded their respect; they have never since withheld it. In our home relations our success was equally marked. The people for the first time began to feel a national consciousness; they saw' with clearer vision than before that the nation had a future, a destiny, which no European interference could disturb. French and English factions in American politics disappeared. Soon after the close of the war began that tide of immigration from Europe that poured an unceasing stream upon our shores for a hundred years. Then, also, began that wonderful era of prosperity which has swept down through the century like a tidal wave, and which has no parallel in the history of civilization. Slavery in the colonies was first opposed by the Quakers and Pennsylvania Germans in the latter part of the seventeenth century. John Wesley, the great founder of Methodism, visited the South in later years and pronounced the institution the "sum of all villainies." At the opening of the Revolution all the colonies had slaves; but the Northern states soon began to emancipate, not so much from motives of morality as because the institution was unprofitable. Massachusetts abolished slavery by a decision of the courts; Pennsylvania provided for gradual emancipation in 1780; New Hampshire, Connecticut, and Rhode Island in 1784; New York in 1799; New Jersey In 1804, and so on. There were a few left in New Jersey as late as 1850. Jefferson inserted a clause against the slave trade in the Declaration of Independence, but it was struck out. The Ordinance of 1787 kept slavery out of the Northwest.1 The law of 1808, prohibiting the slave trade, brought relief to all opposers of the institution, for it was generally believed that the artery of slavery was now severed, and that it would eventually die out in the South, as it had in the North; and little was heard on the subject during the next ten years. But this hope was a delusion. Whitney's cotton gin brought cotton to the front and rendered it eventually the chief agricultural staple in America. More slaves were needed to raise cotton and slavery fastened itself upon the South with a firmer grasp, and at the same time the conviction was slowly taking possession of the northern heart that the whole system was wrong and should be checked. On both ethical and economic grounds the North came to oppose the extension of slavery. The South was quick to see that the only way in which to prevent future legislation unfriendly to slavery was to increase the number of slave states, and-thus ' to increase its representation in the United States Senate. The Missouri slavery agitation and, it may be said, the entire slavery" dispute of the following forty years may be regarded as an indirect result of the compromise of the Constitution. The employees of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad went on a strike on the 14th of July, and they were soon followed by the employees of all the other great lines east of the Mississippi, and for two weeks all traffic in that great section was at a standstill. The strikers took possession of the railroad property — tracks, yards, roundhouses, and rolling stock — and in Pittsburg, the center of the disturbance, there were serious riots, resulting in many deaths, and in the destruction of millions of dollars' worth of property. In Martinsburg, West Virginia, in Baltimore and other places there was much rioting and frequent conflicts between the rioters and the troops sent to keep the peace. The governors of Maryland, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia were forced to call for national troops to aid them in enforcing the laws. By the end of July the fire of mob violence had burned out and the strikers resumed work. In some instances the strikers had won some advantage by the strike; but in many cases they went back to work without any substantial gain. The railway strike was contagious. It was followed by sympathetic strikes in many callings — coal mining, manufacturing, and many branches of industry in which the wages of the laborer were low—- and the disturbance spread to the Pacific Coast. The most serious of these was the strike of the anthracite miners of Pennsylvania, which spread to the bituminous regions of West Virginia and westward to Illinois. The twofold grievance of the miners was too low wages, and the obligation to purchase all their supplies at the company stores at exorbitant prices. The miners, who had the general sympathy of the public, won in the contest and gained an advance of 10 per cent in wages. It provided for the free migration from one country to the other. Soon began the influx of Chinese from beyond the Pacific. Their willingness to work for very low wages rendered them, as their numbers increased, undesirable competitors with white laborers. After earning a few hundred dollars they would betake themselves back to their native land, whence hordes of their brethren would come to America to repeat the process. In no case did the Mongolian pretend to become an element in American society; he remained apart from the body politic, retaining his peculiar customs and superstitions. The Chinese threatened to deluge the whole western coast with their undesirable presence. After various sporadic efforts that came to nothing, a movement against Chinese immigration was set on foot in 1877. The laborers of San Francisco, led by Denis Kearney, one of their number, held many open meetings to denounce Chinese labor and immigration. The meetings were disorderly, and the leaders, including Kearney, were imprisoned. But the movement would not subside. Congress was petitioned to take up the matter, to the end that the Burlingame Treaty be modified in the interest of the people of the Pacific Coast. In 1878 Congress passed a Chinese Exclusion measure, which, however, was vetoed by President Hayes. The Chinese continued to come in increasing numbers. The agitation was renewed, and in 1882 a Chinese Exclusion law was enacted. 'This was followed in May, 1892, by the Geary Chinese Exclusion Law, introduced by Excision Representative Geary of California. This law was the most sweeping of its kind ever enacted by any country, and it awakened a vigorous protest from the Chinese government. While to some extent evaded, the law has greatly relieved the western coast of a most undesirable class. About the time of Hayes's accession to the presidency an industrial movement of the farmers reached its height. The Patrons of Husbandry, commonly called Grangers, Grangers was a secret organization for the promotion of agricultural interests. It was organized in Washington in 1867, admitted both men and women to membership, and professed to be non-political, though it had much political influence in forcing a reduction of the exorbitant freight rates of the railroad corporations. In 1876 the membership reached at least a million and a half. The great majority of the negroes became employees of their white neighbors, but many thousands of them purchased little farms as the years passed and became independent. The mineral wealth of the South was disclosed within a decade after the war. Coal was mined in all except three or four of the Southern states and in 1880 the coal output was more than twelve per cent of the entire coal production of the country. Alabama alone produced 400,000 tons of coal in 1880. The same state, also Tennessee and a few others, were found to be very rich in iron deposits, and since then a considerable portion of the iron production of the country comes from the South. Nothing perhaps is more significant in the transforming of the South into an industrial as well as an agricultural country than the building of cotton mills. Hitherto the cotton mills factories had been built chiefly in the British Isles * and in New England. But the South discovered that it could manufacture cotton yarns and fabrics more cheaply than it could be done anywhere else, owing to the nearness of cotton fields, its access to cheap labor, and to its boundless water supply from the mountain streams. The result was that cotton factories began to spring up in many parts of the South and by 1880 more than 700,000 spindles were turning and were consuming annually more than a hundred million pounds of cotton. From that time to the present the cotton manufacturing industry in that section has been constantly increasing. In 1881 a great cotton exposition was held at Atlanta, Georgia. The exhibits, numbering 1800 in all, included the various stages in cotton growing and the latest and best machinery used in its manufacture. Here also it was shown that cotton seed, formerly thrown away, was of much value for its oil and for cattle food and fertilizer. The exposition did much to inspire the South to greater achievement. Railroad building in the South has gone steadily forward since the close of the war and has been a great factor in the developing of the social, economic, and industrial interests of the country. The people of the South lost the Civil War, but they found themselves. In ancient times it often happened that whole nations migrated from one country to another, as when the Israelites entered Palestine from Egypt, or when Helvetians attempted to occupy Gaul. Such movement of population do not take place in our time. The habitable lands of the earth are preempted and, moreover, even small nations number millions of people and they would find it impossible to migrate as a whole. A few centuries ago portions of the populations of various countries swarmed out of the parent hive, driven perhaps by religious or political persecution, and settled in new lands for the purpose of making permanent homes. But they retained their connections with the home land. Of such classes were our thirteen colonies built up. It was left for the nineteenth century to register a great movement of population for economic reasons, not as groups or colonies, but as individuals or in families, giving up their citizenship and adopting that of the land to which immigration they went. Many of these went to Canada or South America or Australia, but the great majority came to the United States. Were it not for our immigrants of the nineteenth 'century one can readily imagine that our vast western country would still be a land of Indians and fur traders. Before 1820 no exact immigration records were kept. It is estimated that the yearly average between the close of the Revolution and 1820 was about 6700, or about 250,000 in all. .Alter that date the number rose steadily and in 1842 it passed the hundred thousand mark. In the late forties two events in Europe, the Irish potato famine and a political upheaval in Germany, sent great numbers of emigrants to America. Among the Germans who came were two notable men — Carl Schurz and Franz Sigel. In 1854 our immigrants reached 427,833, a number not again reached before 1872. The Civil War checked the stream of immigration, but in the following years it rose to greater heights than ever, the Irish and Germans predominating. The banner year of the century was 1882, when 790,000 newcomers from Europe reached our shores. Soon after the war the Scandinavians began coming in increasing numbers. A sturdy, industrious, religious people they were, of a pure Teutonic stock. They settled by tens of thousands in the great agricultural regions about the sources of the Mississippi. Later began a stream of a different class — Italians, Greeks, Russians, and others from Southeastern Europe. These came in great numbers and by 1896 they made up more than a majority of the immigrants. Of this class the immigrants proportion of illiterates was far greater than of the earlier immigrants. After the turn of the century the volume of immigration continued to swell until it had far passed the million-a-year mark. History presents no parallel to this long continued movement of population on a large scale. The American people at first and for many years welcomed the newcomers with open arms; but at length public opinion began to protest against the increasing volume, especially as many of the immigrants were of an undesirable class. In 1882 Congress passed a law excluding criminals and persons likely to become public charges. But many years were yet to pass before drastic legislation was enacted greatly curtailing the privileges of foreigners in making their homes in America. The great majority of Irish immigrants settled in the large cities along the Atlantic seaboard. They became workers in factories, laborers, builders of railroads. The Germans were chiefly farmers. Many of them remained in the eastern cities, but the majority went west and took up farming lands in the valley of the Ohio and the Mississippi. They were frugal and industrious; they were stanch friends of education and stable government. The English and Welsh settled chiefly in Pennsylvania and other mining states. The comers from Russia and the Mediterranean lands settled mostly in the cities. They became laborers, fruit venders, small store keepers, and, especially those of Jewish blood, merchants, bankers, and financiers. It is estimated that at least half of the American people are of foreign birth or descent, that is, are descendants of immigrants as distinguished from the colonists of Revolutionary times; and as a matter of course they have had an immense influence on the social, intellectual, political, and industrial life of the nation. The great majority of the people are of Teutonic or Germanic, often called Nordic, stock — English, German, or Scandinavian. However, the proportion has been somewhat changed, as compared with a century ago, by the influx of Irish and of the Mediterranean and Alpine peoples. Herein lies the one serious question, amounting to a "race problem" with respect to immigration. Can the American people absorb, "assimilate,'' these non-Teutonic masses and still remain the America of the early days? or will these masses so modify our ethnical life as to leave permanent results on our national characteristics? It was this question that led to the profound changes in our immigration laws in the early nineteen twenties, as will be noted later. Among our immigrants are some criminals, labor agitators and all-around mischief-makers, but the vast majority of them are good people. They come for a good purpose — to make homes.On April 11, 1921. at the call of the President, began the first session of the Sixty-seventh Congress. The chief objects of the extra session were to make peace with Germany, to revise the tax laws, to adjust the tariff duties, and to consider a soldiers' bonus. Two of the most important, the tariff and the bonus, were left over to the following year. By a joint resolution of the Senate and House, signed by the President on July 2, 1921, peace was declared with Germany and Austria — more than two and a half years after actual hostilities had ceased. An emergency tariff was speedily passed in the hope of relieving the farmers — an effect that did not follow. A permanent tariff bill was introduced in the House by Mr. Fordney of Michigan, chairman of the ways and means committee, and it passed that body on July 2t. But in the Senate it was left for nearly a year lying on the table. We shall notice it later. This law placed the quota from each country at two per cent of its nationals in this country in 1890. One object of the law was to cut down the coming of the racial groups from southern and eastern Europe and this was the sole object in basing the quotas on the census of 1890 — before those groups had begun to come In large numbers. This law was to operate until July 1927. After that time the whole number of immigrants should be limited to 150,000 annually, to be apportioned to the several nations in proportion to the racial stock represented by each in our population in 1920. Each country, however, is allowed a minimum of 100 a year, and certain classes, such as relatives of recent immigrants, are admitted in excess of the quotas. These immigration laws were in some degree the result of the influence of the Ku Klux Klan. This organization, chartered in 1915 by Georgia, took the old name of the secret order of Reconstruction days. It claimed to stand for pure Americanism and excluded from its membership Jews, Catholics, negroes, and alien born. It has been severely criticized as narrow and intolerant, but according to its confessed principles it stands for the better enforcement of law, for the continued separation of church and state and for Protestant, gentile, native, white domination of American institutions. While the Klan lays no claim to being a separate political party, it has taken sides in many city and state elections. 