From 1790 to 1825 the number of immigrants was only about eight thousand a year. These easily found work. By 1830 the number of immigrants reached fifty thousand a year, and by 1840, one hundred thousand. The famine in Ireland and a revolution in Germany sent a flow of newcomers to our shores. By 1850 three hundred thousand were coming each year. Most of them entered Northern and stayed in the North. They were usually uneducated and poor. They had spent everything they had to get here, and they would take any job they could find, regardless of poor wages and conditions. The earliest textile mills the the United States were built in New England. The industry soon spread to near-by states. cost too much. lie was dependent for a living on the man or the comThe native-born American hated the thought of working for somebody else. He would prefer to go to the frontier and farm. Many did go west rather than work in a factory. Those who took factory jobs did not expect to stay in the factory long. But many factory workers were unable in a whole lifetime to save enough money to go west with their families and start a farm. 2. Long hours. The hours of work in factories and shops followed the custom of the farm, where everyone labored from sunrise to sunset. The usual workday in a New England mill began at five o'clock in the morning if light permitted. A half hour was allowed for breakfast at eight and for lunch at noon. The day ended when it became too dark to see. Such hours taxed the strength of women and children to the limit. Low wages. Skilled men sometimes got as much as $2.00 a day, but 85 cents to $1.00 was far more common. Women received from 50 cents to $3.00 a week. Children got from 50 cents to $2.00 a week. This wage scale did not change much until after the War between North and South. The single man, who could get a week's board, room, and washing for $2.50, might save money to buy a farm in the West. The man with a family of children found it very hard to make ends meet, even though his wife and some of the children were wage earners. Child labor. Since a man could not support a family on his wages, his wife and children went to work too. Women and children had always worked, and the public did not realize that tending a machine all dav in a factory was more tiring and unhealthful than working in the house and on the farm. In one Rhode Island mill in 1801 an observer tells us that he found a hundred girls from six to twelve years of age. They earned from 12 to 25 cents a day and had a "pale, dejected look'. At that time most factory workers were children. Nothing much was done about the child-labor problem until late in the century. c. Industrial accidents. The factory, or industrial, system, as it came to be called, brought new dangers to the worker. Machines then did not have 'foolproof" safety devices; in fact they were built without much thought of safety. Artificial lighting was hardly ever used in factories and when used was very poor. Accidents were frequent, particularly to children, who are naturally careless. Some employers gave money to their injured workers, but others did not. Lender the common law (see page 49) the employer did not have to pay an injured worker if the worker or any of his fellows was in any way to blame for the accident. б.Unhealthy living and working conditions. The factory system led to an increase in sickness. Sanitary arrangements were crude, and large numbers of workers in one building favored the spread of infections. Besides, the manufacturing process often created dust, steam, or fumes, causing a high rate of tuberculosis among factory workers. Other health hazards were due to the rapid growth of the factory towns. Few of them had water or sewer systems. Most factory workers crowded into cheap, unhealthy tenements. Poor housing, poor food, and long hours of work under unsatisfactory conditions resulted In a high sickness and death rate, and at this period the city was much less healthful than the country. IMMIGRANTS arriving in the United States from Europe. American factory and mine-owners were eager for additional workers; so the immigrants usually had no difficulty in finding jobs. The labor movement develops. Until 1825 it was a crime in "land workers to organize and strike for higher wages. A fourth difficulty in organizing labor was the presence of Negro workers and the unfriendly attitude taken toward them by white workers. Skilled white workers generally insisted on keeping Negroes out their local unions. Frequently white workers called strikes to force the firing of colored workers. As a result Negroes willingly served as strikebreakers when given the chance. A fifth difficulty was the growing number of women workers. They worked for smaller wages than men, even when doing the same work. Employers used them instead of men whenever possible. Yet women took little interest in labor unions, for most of them planned to marry and did not expect to remain wage earners long. Early craft unions. From the early days of the Republic working-men had tried to organize. For the most part their unions were small, weak, and short-lived. The courts did not recognize the right of labor to organize, and labor leaders were sternly punished. In the 1820's the courts began to change their attitude. It seemed for a time that the common people were coming into their own, and while Andrew Jackson was in the White House, labor unions grew in number and strength. All unions went to pieces when the panic of 1837 threw a great number of men out of work. During the i85o's unions were again started. Four or five trades, or crafts, formed national unions, but only one lasted through the panic of 1857. Early in the i86o's about thirty trades organized national unions. These combined in 1866 to form the "National Labor Union." When a period of hard times set in six years later, this organization crumbled. However, the companies insisted on attaching Pullman cars to even train carrying mail. The companies hired 3600 armed guards, they used strikebreakers to run their trains. Mobs stopped a number t>] trains, and some railroad property was destroyed. The strikers claimed that the railroad companies had hired thugs to lead the mobs. The railroad companies promptly asked President Grover Cleveland to semi federal troops. The governor of Illinois, John P. Altgeld, who thought the strikers were in the right, insisted that he could restore order by using the militia. The President has no constitutional right to send federal troops into a state without the consent of its governor, but Cleveland decided he must send troops to protect the mails. The troops soon broke the strike. Labor did not have its way until 1917, when Congress passed a law requiring immigrants to be able to read or write in some language. Labor conditions in 1900. At the turn of the century wages and *urs were little better than in 1865. According to the census of 1900 two thirds of the male workers received less than $ 12.50 a week. Only the most highly skilled workers earned as much as $ 18.00 a week. Of course prices were much lower than they are now. Beef sold for 17 cents a pound, pork for 14 cents, eggs for 21 cents a dozen. A good pm of shoes cost $2.00, and a good suit cost $20.00. Low as these prices seem, most American workers found that their wages would barely support even a small family. Since the War between North and South the wealth of the nation had increased wonderfully. Yet it was concentrated in a small number of hands. By 1900, 1 per cent of the people owned more than the other 99 per cent put together. However, a large part of the wealth made by the fortunate 1 per cent was invested in factories, machinery. mines, railroads, steamboats, and other business property. This investment made mass production possible. It would gradually bring about shorter hours of labor and enable the people to enjoy more comforts. 