Population and immigration. In the middle of the eighteenth century about 1,500,000 people were living in the thirteen English colonies scattered along the Atlantic seaboard. Virginia ranked first in population, with 350,000 people; while next in order came Massachusetts and Pennsylvania. Of our large cities of to-day, Philadelphia and Boston each had a population of 25,000 in 1750, while New York had only one half that number. The New England colonists were nearly all of English stock, as were most of the settlers in Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas. In the Middle Colonies were many Dutch, Swedes, Germans, and Scotch-Irish.1 However, all of the colonies were so thoroughly English that settlers of a different nationality were regarded as foreigners. During the eighteenth century more of these foreigners came to the colonies than ever before. Many of them fled from religious persecution at home; while others sought refuge in the New World from the wars and oppressive conditions in Europe where the land was owned by a few people, and the laborers were little better than serfs. After the failure of the rebellions of 1715 and 1745, many Scotch Highlanders came to the colonies, large numbers of whom settled in North Carolina. There were also many Scotch-Irish, people whose ancestors had originally lived in Scotland but who afterwards moved to the northern part of Ireland. The ScotchIrish settled in the mountain valleys of Pennsylvania, Virginia, and the Carolinas. They were sturdy backwoodsmen, living in log cabins and cultivating their small farms without the aid of slaves. There were French Protestants or Huguenots in all of the colonies, especially in South Carolina. But the most numerous class of foreigners were the Germans from the Rhine Valley. The great German migration to the colonies began about 1717, and continued until the American Revolution. There were two chief 1 In New York, the Dutch and Swedish settlers lived side by side with an almost equal number of Englishmen. The Alien and Sedition Laws, 1798. The Federalist Party reached the height of its power when the X Y Z affair became public. Moderation forsook the party in its hour of triumph, and the Federalist leaders determined to humble their political enemies. The Republican papers were making bitter attacks upon President Adams and the Federalist Party. To make matters worse, much of this abuse was written by foreigners, either Frenchmen, or refugees from England, Ireland, and Scotland. These men took sides with France, and opposed our neutral policy. Congress finally passed two severe laws 1 intended to silence the Republican press, and to drive the abusive foreigners out of the United States: (1)The Alien Act gave the President authority to banish from the country any foreigner whom he considered dangerous to its welfare. (2)The Sedition Act made it a crime to speak, write, or publish any false or malicious statement against the President or Congress, "with intent to defame them, or to bring them into disrepute." No attempt was made to enforce the Alien Act, but there were ten convictions under the Sedition Act. Callender, the friend of Jefferson, was sent to prison for saying: "Mr. Adams has only completed the scene of ignominy which Mr. Washington began." The danger from these laws was, that they might be enforced so as to make any criticism of government a crime. Thousands of men went over to the Republican Party because they believed that these measures would destroy free speech and a free press. Thus the Alien and Sedition Acts helped to defeat President Adams for reelection, and hastened the overthrow of the Federalist Party. Another important result was the adoption of resolutions of protest by the legislatures of Virginia and Kentucky. A Naturalization Act was also passed at this time. This increased the time necessary for a foreigner to become a citizen. Fourteen years of residence we required instead of five years, the former period. About twenty years later most of the European nations accepted the American theory upholding the right of the citizen of one country to renounce his allegiance, and become the naturalized citizen of another country.1 Thus, after the lapse of more than half a century, the leading powers of the world finally accepted the principles of international law which the United States sought to maintain during the early years of the Republic. The Rush-Bagot agreement, 1817. The War of 1812 led to the construction on the Great Lakes of small but efficient warships. After the treaty of peace, the rivalry continued to determine which country was to have-naval supremacy on the Lakes. This competition in the building of warships was likely to prove a constant menace to cordial relations between the United States and its neighbor. Accordingly, Great Britain sent Charles Bagot to represent her at Washington, with positive instructions to promote cordial relations with the United States. In 1817 the two Governments signed the Rush-Bagot agreement, by which they bound themselves to maintain no warships on the Lakes. To guard against smugglers, each Government was permitted to have four small vessels of not over one hundred tons, armed with a single cannon; but all warships on the Lakes were to be dismantled and no others were to be built. In accordance with this agreement, each country sold or scuttled more than a dozen vessels. This agreement for naval disarmament on the Lakes was one of the most important treaties in our history. The absence of rival navies on our northern frontier meant that each nation had confidence in the good faith of its neighbor. It meant that throughout the three thousand miles along which our border touches that of Canada, there was to be neither battleship nor fortress nor sentinel. The westward movement is the story of a series of frontiers which the American pioneer reclaimed from nature and the Indians, each frontier in turn becoming the starting-point of a new westward march of the population. The winning of our first frontier came as the result of the establishment of the thirteen colonies along the Atlantic coast; and by the middle of the eighteenth century this frontier line was advancing toward the Alleghenies. After the Revolution our people began the task of occupying the country between the Alleghenies and the Mississippi, a movement that gave us the new States of Kentucky (1792), Tennessee (1796), and Ohio (1803). By the year 1810 one million people, or about one seventh of the total population, were living between the Alleghenies and the Mississippi; and this Western population more than doubled during the next decade. The westward movement. Conditions in the Eastern States were largely responsible for the westward tide which set in so strongly after 1814. The long Embargo, followed by war with Great Britain, practically destroyed our commerce and paralyzed the industrial life of the seaboard States. With the return of peace, and while New7 England w7as in the throes of business depression, a steady stream of settlers was pouring across the Alleghenies. Harrison's victory at Tippecanoe had opened up the fertile lands of Indiana and Illinois to a host of Eastern farmers; and population increased so rapidly that these Territories became States in 1816 and 1818, respectively. Jackson's conquest of the Creek Indians had like results for the Southwest. The rich cotton lands of the Gulf region attracted thousands of settlers, and the admission of Louisiana in 1812 was soon followed by that of Mississippi (1817), and Alabama (1819). Immigration from Europe. Not all of these pioneers came from our Eastern section. New types of faces began to be seen; for after Napoleon's downfall, thousands of emigrants left battlescarred Europe to try their fortunes in America. Coming at a our western frontier to its natural limits on the banks of the Rio Grande and the shores of the Pacific. By the year 1840 the westward march of the population had gone far beyond the political boundary line. Many Americans had emigrated to Texas soon after our claim to that region had been relinquished to Spain (1819); others made their way to the Mexican province of California; and numbers had gone to the Oregon country, then in dispute between Great Britain and the United States. In the Northwest, expansion could be brought about only by purchase, compromise, or war with a powerful nation; but in the Southwest, the weak and distracted condition of Mexico made expansion toward the Rio Grande almost inevitable. Indeed, Mexico herself had practically invited this outcome; for soon after becoming independent of Spain, she offered lands with prodigal liberality to colonists who would settle in Texas. Stephen Austin was one of the prominent leaders in the colonization movement which by 1830 had peopled Texas with 20,000 Americans. Meantime our repeated offers to purchase Texas, first during the administration of John Quincy Adams and later during that of Andrew Jackson, met with peremptory refusal from Mexico. Finally that country became alarmed at the influx of settlers from the United States, most of whom brought their slaves with them. The decree of the President of Mexico in 1829 abolishing slavery throughout the Republic was probably intended to check this movement; and in 1830 the Mexican Congress passed a law which prohibited further immigration from the United States. Texas declares her independence, 1836. No attention was paid to either of these measures, for Texas was no longer a Mexican province except in name. Texas was in fact an American community, awaiting the favorable moment to throw off the Mexican yoke. The opportunity came in 1833 when General Santa Anna made himself ruler of Mexico by the familiar process of heading a successful revolution. Santa Anna set aside the constitution of Mexico and ruled the country as a military dictator. The petition of the Texans for a separate State government was rejected, and 4000 soldiers were ordered into Texas. Nothing now remained for the Texans except submission to military despotism or a war for liberty. They chose to fight, and a convention which met in March, 1836, declared that henceforth Texas was a free and independent republic. The harbor is filled with ships bringing gold-seekers. Trail or along the southern route by way of Santa Fe. In the daytime the caravans filled up the roads for miles, like an army on the march; while at night their camp-fires glittered in every direction about the places blessed with grass and water. The gold fever lasted for four years, during which immigrants poured into California by land and sea, from America and Europe, and during the last year even from distant China. The public domain. The rapid peopling of the West was due in large measure to the liberal land policy of the National Government. The early policy of using the public lands as a source of revenue soon gave way to the system of selling them in small tracts to actual settlers. In 1820 Congress put an end to the credit system and provided that lands should be sold in eighty-acre tracts at a minimum price of $1.25 an acre. From 1790 to 1870 the total land sales, including grants under the Homestead Act of 1862, were 176,488,000 acres. In addition to sales for the Settlers in the open prairies frequently built their first house of sods, the cheapest and most convenient material. purpose of settlement, immense tracts of the public domain were granted to encourage internal improvements, for educational purposes, and as direct gifts to individuals and States. The abundance of cheap, fertile land attracted thousands of settlers from the East, and drew thousands more from the crowded countries of Europe. Conditions in the Old World contributed to swell the tide of immigration to our shores. The failure of the potato crop in Ireland in 1845 helped to supply the labor which built our railroads and canals; and the defeat of the liberal movement in Germany in 1848 helped to people our Western farms. The largest number of immigrants in any one year before i860 was 427,000 in 1854; the total volume of immigration during the twenty years from 1841 to 1860. The small farmer then retreated to the poorer lands, where he grew a few acres of cotton, raised some live stock, or engaged in mixed farming. Slavery degraded free labor, so that the poor whites of the South were despised alike by slaveowners and by negroes. They themselves looked upon the large slaveowners with feelings of sullen envy; yet when election day came, the whites who were without money and without slaves did the bidding of the lord of the plantation. The slaveholders took the political offices; the man who worked with his hands was seldom chosen to represent the South in the halls of Congress. The Southern political system was really a government of the few, maintained by and for the slaveholders. How slavery hurt the South. In many other ways slavery was working harm to the South. It prevented the growth of its population. The population of the North and the South was almost equal in 1800; but in i860 the North had 19,000,000 people, the South about 12,000,000. Political troubles in Europe and the discovery of gold in California brought large numbers of Englishmen, Irishmen, and Germans to the United States. In the decade from 1850 to 1860, nearly 3,000,000 of these immigrants entered our country. The newcomers avoided the South, for they would not compete with slave labor. They peopled the great industrial cities of the North, they took up farms in the Middle West, they mined its coal, built its railroads, and developed the resources of that section. The South was rich in natural resources, in deposits of iron and coal, in timber and water supply, but these resources were untouched until after the war. Slave labor could not develop them, and free labor would not while slavery existed. Thus slavery confined the industry of the South to agriculture and prevented the development of its natural resources, at the very time when free labor was making the North a great industrial region. Ring Cotton. In the year 1860 less than five per cent of the8,000,000 whites in the South owned the 3,500,000 slaves of that section; so that Southern society may be compared to an inverted pyramid. The apparent prosperity of the South was the prosperity of the small slaveholding class. The treaty laid down three important rules concerning neutrality by which the court was to be governed in making its decision: (1) A neutral government is bound to use due diligence to prevent the fitting out, equipping, or sailing of any vessel which it has reasonable grounds to believe is intended to cruise or carry on war against a power with which it is at peace. (2)To use due diligence not to permit either belligerent to make use of its ports or waters as the base of naval operations against the other. (3)To exercise due diligence in its own ports and waters, and, as to all persons within its jurisdiction, to prevent any violation of the foregoing obligations and duties. The arbitration tribunal met in March, 1872, and after listening to the arguments in the case, spent several months in weighing the evidence. The arbitrators rejected our claim for indirect damages, but held that Great Britain had failed in her duty as a neutral with regard to three cruisers — the Alabama, Florida, and Shenandoah; and the sum of $15,500,000 was awarded to the United States as damages. Great Britain paid the money promptly, and in due time the United States paid it over to the individuals who had suffered from the depredations of the cruisers. The outcome of the arbitration was an undisputed victory for the United States. More important still, the two great English-speaking nations were again on friendly terms, and had given to the world the greatest example in history of the value of arbitration as a substitute for war. Treaties concerning naturalization. Few immigrants came to the United States during the war, but, beginning with 1866, more than 300,000 foreigners were arriving each year. Nearly all of these persons wished to become citizens of this country, but there was a serious obstacle to their naturalization. The time-honored rule and practice of European nations was that no individual could renounce his allegiance without first securing the consent of his former Government. Relations with Japan and China. On the farther side of the Pacific our commercial interests declined in the years following the War between the States, due to the passing of our merchant marine and the substitution of petroleum for whale oil. However, the United States continued to develop diplomatic relations with Japan and China. In 1866 we joined Great Britain, France, and the Netherlands in demanding that Japan revise her tariff rates so as to conform to her treaty obligations. With China our relations were cordial. Anson Burlingame, sent by President Lincoln as minister to China, was so highly regarded there that in 1868 he returned to the United States as accredited Chinese minister. Representing China, he concluded with this country the Burlingame Treaty. The most important provision was the one prohibiting the importation of Chinese coolies, thousands of whom were being brought to the United States to aid in constructing the Pacific railroads. This prohibition was the result of the growing sentiment on the Pacific coast against Chinese immigration. It marked the beginning of our present policy of exclusion of all Asiatic peoples, which, in the case of the Japanese, afterwards led to a serious controversy. The Venezuelan boundary dispute. One of the most famous assertions of the Monroe Doctrine was that made by President Cleveland in 1895, arising out of the controversy between Great Britain and Venezuela. For many years a dispute had existed between these two countries over the boundary of British Guiana, and matters reached a crisis when gold was discovered in the Orinoco Valley. On several occasions Venezuela tried to induce Great Britain to arbitrate the question, but without success. Finally, when Great Britain was on the point of forcibly seizing the territory in dispute, Secretary of State Olney made a vigorous protest on behalf of the United States. He asserted that, if Great Britain were really encroaching upon Venezuelan territory, her action was in violation of the Monroe Doctrine; and that band of iron. Within a few years the buffalo disappeared from the western prairies, the Indians fought their last hopeless battles, and an army of settlers found new homes in the land of opportunities. The West had come into its heritage. Other continental lines. A second continental railroad was completed a few years later to help move the human tide into the northwestern country. This was the Northern Pacific, connecting Duluth on Lake Superior with Tacoma on Puget Sound. To the Northern Pacific as to the Union Pacific, Congress granted alternate sections of land along the railroad, the total amounting to 46,000,000 acres. Three other continental lines were promoted during the period between 1865 and 1885. These were the Atlantic and Pacific, from southwestern Missouri to southern California; the Texas Pacific; and the Atchison, Topeka and Santa F6. A sixth line, the Denver and Rio Grande, had penetrated through the mountains of Colorado and crossed Utah to the Great Salt Lake. In their own interest the railroads did much to encourage the establishment of farm homes in the West; they realized that the success of their lines depended upon prosperous farming communities raising produce which must be shipped to a market, and receiving in exchange goods which must be carried back by the railroads. The Homestead Act of 1862. Another important factor in the development of the West was the Homestead Act of 1862. Under this law the head of a family might secure title to 160 acres of public land by settling upon it and cultivating it for five years. This liberal land policy caused the center of population and industry to shift westward. From all parts of the Union and from foreign shores as well, a tide of settlers poured over the Western plains. For years we had been receiving a large and valuable immigration from the countries of northwestern Europe. Many of these newcomers took up public lands in Iowa, Minnesota, Kansas, Nebraska, and the Dakotas. Each German or Scandinavian farmer who prospered in the fertile Northwest became an effective immigration agency, sending back to his relatives and friends in the Old World information concerning the new land of opportunities. The control of immigration. Until 1882 immigration to the United States was free from any restriction by federal law. In that year Congress passed legislation intended to exclude the pauper, criminal, and insane classes of aliens, as well as Chinese laborers; and a few years later (1885) the Alien Contract Labor Law was passed. Under these and later acts the classes of aliens debarred include idiots, insane persons, paupers or persons likely to become public charges, epileptics, persons suffering from contagious disease, criminals, polygamists, anarchists, persons whose passage is paid by another (with certain exceptions), laborers under contract made previous to emigration to perform labor or service in the United States, and the Chinese and Japanese. For the most part these restrictions on immigration are sanitary measures to protect this country from immigration of the diseased and criminal classes. The prohibition of the Chinese and Japanese, and of contract laborers, is based upon social and economic considerations — to prevent the introduction of a dangerously low standard of living; and — in case of the Chinese and Japanese — of a people incapable of assimilation. Immigrants not qualified to enter are returned at the expense of the steamship company bringing them, this liability continuing for a period of one year after landing. The administration of immigration laws is entrusted to the Commissioner-General of Immigration of the Department of Labor. Inspection by United States officials is provided for both at the point of departure and at the port of entry in this country. Factors promoting immigration. Except during two decades, immigration steadily increased from 1820 to 1914. Beginning about 1847, the annual arrivals were more than 200,000; during the fifties the annual average was nearly 300,000; while for the decade 1900-10, the total immigration was 8,795,386. This large influx of foreigners was due in part to the opportunities for employment offered in this country, and partly to industrial and political conditions in Europe. Thus the famine in Ireland brought one million and a quarter Irish immigrants to the United States during the decade 1845-55. Our large German immigration was the result of political and economic factors, such as the revolution of 1848, and the severe industrial depression in Germany from 1873 to 1879. Besides the Germans and the Irish, the races which contributed the largest number of immigrants prior to 1882 were the English and the Scandinavian. Immigration from southeastern Europe. These immigrants from the countries of northwestern Europe were from the same stock as our own people; they quickly adopted American standards of living and became assimilated with the native population. But, beginning about 1882, a change occurred in the character of our immigration which has had effects of profound importance. This change was the shifting of the sources of immigration from the countries of northwestern Europe to those of southern and eastern Europe. In 1882 Europe sent us a total of 647,000 immigrants, of whom 87 per cent came from northwestern Europe, and 13 per cent from southern and eastern Europe. During the following years this ratio was almost exactly reversed; in 1902 only 22 per cent of our immigrants were from northwestern Europe, while 78 per cent were from southern and eastern Europe. In other words, the great volume of our immigration in this later period was drawn from Russia, Italy, Hungary, the Balkan countries, and Turkey, instead of from Great Britain, Ireland, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries. We were no longer recruiting our population chiefly from Teutonic stock, but from Slavic, Semitic, and Mongolian sources. These later immigrants were from peoples allied to us neither by race, language, nor civilization; and their percentage of illiteracy was ten times as high as that of immigrants from northwestern Europe. The great majority had lived under absolute monarchies and were not familiar with representative government; and they came from countries where industry was still carried on largely by hand, where agriculture was in a backward state, and where the population was removed from serfdom by scarcely more than a generation. Social effects of unrestricted immigration. In spite of the danger to American institutions from immigration of this character, Congress was slow to adopt restrictive measures. Our time-honored policy was to regard America as the haven of the oppressed, notwithstanding that the haven was frequently abused by aliens who had no sympathy for American institutions. Often live apart in racial groups, presented an obstacle to their Americanization, Investigation also disclosed the fact that the foreign-born furnish a larger relative percentage of the criminal and pauper classes than is the case with the native-born population; while the_illi±eracy of the immigrants placed a heavy burden upon our public schools. The demand for the exclusion of illiterate immigrants led Congress on three occasions to pass bills establishing a literacy test, but these measures were vetoed in turn by Presidents Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson. Finally in 1917 Congress passed a measure of this character over the executive veto. In the year 1896 rich deposits of gold were discovered near Klondike Creekin the remote Canadian territory of Yukon, a region almost within the Arctic Circle. Still larger deposits were soon discovered in the Nome district of Alaska, and the rush to the new gold fields was like that to California in 1849. During the six years that followed the discovery, Alaska yielded $132,500,000 in gold; and the treasure-seekers learned that the Territory held immense coal deposits, besides a large supply of valuable timber and a vast area suitable for agriculture. The Nobel Prize of $40,000 was awarded to President Roosevelt in 1906. Shortly after the Peace of Portsmouth, our traditional friendship with Japan was put to a severe test. Japan's aggressive attitude toward China aroused our suspicions, her expanding trade threatened our commerce in the Pacific, and the immigration of Japanese laborers to California created bitter hostility. A serious controversy arose in 1906 when the Board of Education of San Francisco passed a resolution requiring Japanese and Chinese children to attend separate schools, instead of being educated with the white children of that city. Japan protested against this action as a violation of her treaty rights with the United States, and as an affront to her as a nation. A compromise was brought about in 1907 by President Roosevelt. San Francisco agreed to admit to its ordinary schools all Oriental children under sixteen years of age; in return the Japanese authorities promised to withhold passports from laborers who planned to settle in the United States. The real issue in this controversy was not the question of school attendance, but the right of the Japanese to migrate to the Pacific Coast States and enjoy there the same privileges as other aliens. Hence a new crisis was precipitated in 1913 when California passed a law prohibiting the purchase of lands by aliens ineligible to citizenship. Japan protested against this measure on the ground that it was aimed especially at her subjects, who are ineligible to citizenship under our naturalization laws. The controversy was finally dropped after a fruitless exchange of diplomatic notes, but Japan's protest was not withdrawn and was subsequently renewed. The United States is clearly within its rights both in barring Japanese immigrants and in excluding the Japanese from citizenship; and any State has a legal right to prohibit aliens from owning land within its borders unless this legislation conflicts with some treaty provision. Our country is not alone in adopting the policy of protecting itself from the menace of Oriental immigration, since Canada, Australia, and other British dominions have passed even more stringent measures. 