Immigration contributed no small part to this stupendous growth.Causes of immigration. The causes of immigration have been many; but outstanding at all times has been the economic motive — the desire for land ownership. Even when religious, political, and racial persecutions played their part in causing people to seek another place to live, the desire for economic improvement was usually present also. Colonial immigration. In the colonial period a number of different peoples of Europe settled on the Atlantic seaboard. There were, for example. French. Dutch. Swedish. German. Irish, and Scotch, although most of the settlers in what is now the United States were English. Since the English predominated, they determined tire language, laws, and forms of government that became the basis of American life. The periods of immigration. There are about five great periods in the history of immigration to the United States: the first, from the close of the Revolution to about 1825; the second, from 1825 to the War between the States; the third, from the close of the War between the States to about 1890; the fourth, from 1890 to World War I; and the fifth, from World War I to the present. Immigration before the War between the States. In the first period a total of about three hundred thousand people came to this country', chiefly from the nations of northern and western Europe. In the second period there arrived about five million immigrants from the same countries. This migration included large groups of German and Irish immigrants, especially in the period between 1845 and 1855. The Irish potato famine of 1846 and 1847 and dissatisfaction with England's economic and political policies toward Ireland sent hundreds of thousands of Irish to our shores. Within a period of about seven years more than a million and a half Irish came to the United States. Political troubles The beginnings of opposition to the immigrant. During this period the older settlers began to show signs of opposition toward the newer ones. The immigrant has always been content — at least for a few years after his coming — to accept a lower standard of living than those already here. The immigrants who furnished the bulk of the unskilled labor of the country crowded the earlier inhabitants out of the lowly and poorly paid jobs, and were later crowded out themselves by succeeding waves of immigrants. Labor began to oppose unrestricted immigration on the ground that immigrants tended to keep wages down and to lower the American standard of living. Prejudice toward the new immigrant also began to appear at this time. This prejudice was based on differences in religions and on differences in nationality. Very frequently, however, it was really caused by fear that the immigrant was taking jobs and economic opportunities away from the earlier immigrants. As early as the 1830's secret societies were formed to protest against the foreigner, and "native" Americans organized political movements to discriminate against him. One evidence of this feeling was the KnowNothing movement of the 1850's; a more recent manifestation of it was the Ku Klux Klan movement of the 1920's; more frequently local groups have organized to propagandize their pet prejudices against particular foreign groups. Despite these "nativisf ' movements the general policy of the government toward the immigrant was one of welcome. Americans took pride in America as the land of opportunity, the haven for the oppressed. Immigration from 1860-90. The economic revolution after the War between the States required large numbers of workers. Manufacturers and the builders of railroads welcomed immigrants. The Western states also encouraged immigration. Larger numbers than ever before began to come to the land of opportunity. The chief source of immigrants during this period continued to be Germany and the British Isles; large numbers also came from the Scandinavian countries. The "new " immigration, 1890-1914. As the decades of the 1880's closed, it was noticeable that the origin of the immigrant stream shifted from northern and western to southern and southeastern Europe. For example, in the early 1880's about three fourths of the immigrants were from northwestern Europe. Some twenty years later, nearly three fourths came from Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Italy. Taking the census year of 1890 as an arbitrary date, it has become customary to refer to the immigration before that year as the "old" immigration and that since 1890 as the "new" immigration. The new immigration came when the industrial revolution was in full swing and the frontier had disappeared. These new immigrants found an America very different from that found by their predecessors. There was no longer good land to be had for little or nothing. Two thirds of the new immigrants were men of working age, almost a fourth of whom came to America intending to return to their families in the Old World after they had accumulated a little fortune. Encouragement of immigration by business interests. The large corporations sent their agents to Europe to spread stories about great opportunities that awaited the immigrant in America. They lured many would-be immigrants to the new world by offering them jobs. Steamship lines promoted immigration by means of alluring advertisements and salesmen who told such tales of American wealth that many immigrants came to believe that American streets were paved with gold. The hard lot of the new immigrant. Many of the new immigrants were poor, unskilled, and illiterate. Leaving overcrowded, backward countries, they went directly to our industrial centers and accepted work at the bottom of the wage scale. They huddled together in hovels and tenements under living conditions often worse than they had left. New immigrants in the factory and mining towns. The story of Lawrence, Massachusetts, is that of many a mill town of the East. In 1848 the textile mills of Lawrence were doing a thriving business. The population was six thousand, and of this number two thirds were native Americans. The other third were Irish immigrants. In 1910 the population was eighty-five thousand. Of this number six sevenths were of foreign birth or of foreign parentage. Nearly one third of this group were new immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. The majority of the laborers in the textile mills were foreignborn. The same tendency was noticeable in other cities and other industries. In 1870 the coal miners of eastern Pennsylvania were either native Americans or immigrants from the British Isles and Germany; by 1910 most were Slavs or Italians. The development of a policy of selective immigration coincides with labors opposition and the coming of the "newer" immigration. Differences between the old and new immigration. (1)The old immigration had come at a time when the country was growing and could absorb many new settlers. (2)The old immigration came in smaller numbers than the new. (3)Politicians more easily exploited the new immigrants to obtain their votes. (4)The old immigrants had come from nations with institutions, customs, and ideas similar to those of the settlers already here; the new immigrants had customs that were different from American ways. Thus it was claimed the "new" immigrant could not be so easily assimilated, that is, molded to American ways of living. By 1900, Mulberry Street was the heart of "Little Italy" in New York City. Many of the poorest Italian immigrants from southern Italy settled in this district. The new immigrants crowded together with others of their own kind. Most of our great cities soon had areas known, for instance, as "Little Italy," "Little Greece," "Little Bohemia." Bewildered by their inability to speak our language, the immigrants read foreign-language newspapers and went to foreign-language churches and theaters. The older people found it almost impossible to become Americanized. The public schools, however, did invaluable work, and the second generation of foreigners quickly adapted themselves to the ideals and conditions of American life. Various organizations attempted to carry the work of Americanization to the adult foreigners, but the task was extremely difficult. The necessity for Americanization was obvious when war broke out in 1914. The problem that resulted while America was a neutral was embarrassing enough; it became a serious matter when the United States entered the war. Although most of the "hyphenated" Americans, as they were called, supported the country of their adoption, some did so reluctantly and some were outspoken in their sympathy with America's enemies. This wartime experience was a factor which strengthened the movement for Americanization and the demands of labor for the restriction of immigration. Selective immigration. With the general immigration act of 1882 Congress began the practice of selective immigration. This law suspended Chinese immigration, the only definitely restrictive law that Congress passed until 1921. But between 1882 and 1921 Congress passed a series of laws which excluded certain classes of immigrants. In general these laws excluded: (1) criminals, (2) the mentally disabled, (3) those afflicted with certain diseases, (4) those likely to become public charges, (5) anarchists and other radicals who advocated the overthrow of government by force, (6) contract laborers, that is, those who were contracted for by steamship companies or industrial corporations, (7) polygamists, (8) aliens not eligible for citizenship (this referred chiefly to all Asiatics), and (9) those "who cannot read the English language or some other language or dialect." This literacy test was vetoed by Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson, but was finally passed over Wilson's veto in 1917. Restrictive immigration. After World War I there was a rush of immigrants to the New World. Fearing that the problem of Americanization would get beyond control, and that serious disturbances might attend the addition of large numbers to our labor supply during a period of adjustment, Congress passed an immigration bill. 1.The law of 1921. This law — the first to restrict immigration by numbers, or quotas — specified that each nation would be allowed to send to the United States each year no more than 3 per cent of the number of persons of that nation in the United States as shown by the census of 1910. The number expected to enter was about three hundred fifty thousand; but the law permitted so many exceptions that in 1924 twice that number entered the country. 2.Discrimination in favor of the old immigration. In 1924 Congress reduced the number of immigrants allowed to enter. Two per cent of the foreign "nationals" in the country, according to the census of 1890, were permitted to enter. On this basis the annual quota was about one hundred sixty-seven thousand. The 1890 census was used as a basis for the determination of quotas in order to cut down the proportion of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. One of the chief reasons for discriminating in favor of the peoples of northern and western Europe was the popular, although false, notion, that the people of northern and western Europe are superior mentally and physically to the peoples of southern Europe. This theory of "Nordic supremacy," although no reputable scientist sustains it, flatters the "Nordic." Hitler and the Nazis gave some popularity to this idea. The National Origins Plan, July, 1929. The 2 per cent feature of the law of 1924 was temporary. The permanent feature of the law is known as the "national origins plan." 1.Determination of quotas. The national origins plan of quota restriction, which finally went into effect July 1, 1929, provides that the total immigration from "quota" countries in one year shall be limited to 150,000. "The annual quota for any one nationality shall be the number which bears the same ratio to 150,000 as the number of inhabitants in continental United States in 1920 having that national origin bears to the number of inhabitants in continental United States in 1920 of European origin." The great difficulty in applying the principle was to determine the number of inhabitants in 1920 of the national origin of the group to be admitted. A special Quota Board was set up to determine this figure and the annual quota for each country. In filing its report, the Quota Board observed that "the information available raises grave doubts as to the value of these computations as the basis for the purpose intended." 2.Other features of the Quota Law. There are three other features of the law which need mention. First, the law specified that every country should be allowed to send a minimum of one hundred immigrants per year, even though its quota figure fell below that amount. Secondly, the law definitely excluded Asiatic immigrants. In the third place, the Quota Law did not apply to the Western Hemisphere. 3.Non quota immigration from the Western Hemisphere. Since 1929 non quota immigration to the United States from countries of the Western Hemisphere has been as heavy in some years as the quota immigration from Europe. Thousands of laborers from Mexico have crossed the border into our Southwest. There they are welcomed by fruit and beet-sugar growers and other employers of unskilled labor. Some have proposed that quotas be assigned to the countries of Latin America, but nothing has been done, partly because the depression acted as a bar to immigration and partly because employers objected to cutting off the supply of low-paid laborers. The immigration of Asiatics. The way in which our immigration policy may influence our international friendships is best illustrated by the story of tire exclusion of Asiatics. 1.Opposition to the Chinese. After the settlement of California in the middle of the last century large numbers of Chinese migrated to the Pacific coast, where they worked as unskilled laborers. Many were imported to work on railroad construction. Gradually opposition to Chinese immigration developed, and in 1880 China, by treaty, recognized the right of the United States to "regulate, limit or suspend" the immigration of Chinese laborers. In 1882 Congress suspended Chinese immigration for a ten-year period. This restriction was later renewed. In 1894, by another treaty, the entry of Chinese laborers was prohibited for ten years, and in 1904 Congress continued the exclusion of the Chinese without any time limit. During World War II (1943) this law was repealed and the Chinese placed under the provisions of the Quota Law. 2.The "gentlemen's agreement" with Japan. Meanwhile, Japanese immigration began to grow in numbers. The Japanese, instead of engaging in manual tasks, obtained land and began to compete with American farmers. The presence of the Japanese became an issue in the politics of the Pacific states, particularly in California. Japanese children were for a short time excluded from the public schools. Japanese were not allowed to become landowners. The Pacific states even proposed to check immigration by state action. The Japanese government protested to the federal government, which could do nothing but inform the Japanese officials that it had no control over the school or land laws of states. The situation was tense. The whole problem was quietly solved by the famous "gentlemen's agreement" of 1907, by which Japan promised to refuse passports to Japanese laborers seeking admittance to the United States. The United States was content to let Japan control the migration of her own people. 3.Abrogation of the gentlemen's agreement. Although Japan lived up to her promise, congressmen from the Pacific coast, in the debate on the law of 1924, urged that the United States abrogate the gentlemen's agreement of 1907 and assume direct control over her own immigration policy. The protest of the Japanese ambassador and his statement that "grave consequences" might follow such an act stirred the nationalistic ardor of Congress, and the threat was answered by the insertion of a clause stating that "aliens ineligible to citizenship" could not be admitted. In approving the law of 1924 Coolidge expressed regret that Congress had seen fit to abrogate the gentlemen's agreement. This feature of the law of 1924 was a factor in weakening the friendly relations that Japan and the United States had maintained for some time. The problem of refugees. Conditions in central Europe after 1937 brought up the question of modifying our quota laws to admit a larger number of political and religious refugees. This question became particularly acute after the Nazi pogrom against the Jews in November, 1938. This pogrom, followed by a series of discriminatory laws against Jews, shocked the conscience of Americans, making them aware that for some years discrimination toward minority groups had been developing in Germany, Russia, Poland, and elsewhere. Not only Jews but also Christians, Protestant as well as Catholic, sought escape from persecution. As of old, refugees looked to the United States. Many people urged that the quota laws be modified, temporarily at least, to permit the entrance of these refugees. The problem of smuggling and deporting. The enforcement of the quota laws has created the problem of preventing the smuggling of aliens across the Canadian and Mexican borders. There is a widespread "bootlegging" of aliens. While there are no reliable statistics on the number of aliens who enter illegally each year, it has been estimated that the total volume of immigration has been almost as great as it was before the adoption of a restrictive policy. The Labor Department, which has charge of immigration, has been active at times in checking up on aliens and in ordering the deportation of those who entered illegally. However, it is difficult to determine whether a person is illegally within the country unless he happens to run afoul of the law. The suggestion was made, therefore, that all inhabitants should be registered and fingerprinted. This idea gained popularity with some because of the propaganda that aliens were the source of "radical" and un-American activities. Others, who were familiar with the increasing problem of crime, saw merit in the suggestion. However, the suggestion was opposed by those who thought that governmental interference with the liberty of the individual need not go to the extent of card-indexing his movements. The federal government took no action till 1940, when Congress provided for the registration of all aliens in the country. Words and Phrases Americanization, assimilation, contract labor, gentlemen's agreement, literacy test, national origins plan, "new" immigration, "Nordic supremacy," "old" immigration, restrictive immigration, selective immigration Questions for Understanding the Text What are the chief causes of the movement of peoples? What economic interests opposed and supported unrestricted immigration? What is meant by the theory of "Nordic supremacy"? What has been the attitude of the United States toward Asiatic immigration? Assuming that you had been a member of Congress in 1924, prepare a brief speech explaining your vote on the question of abrogating the gentlemen's agreement with Japan. (If library facilities permit, compare with speeches actually delivered by members of Congress.) Account for the repeal of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1943. 5.Show how our policies toward European and Oriental immigration differ. Explain one motive that led us to limit both kinds of immigration. State one problem raised by our Oriental immigration. Questions for Further Study and Discussion 1.What have been the outstanding contributions of the immigrant to American life and culture? (Consult several special accounts. Class work on the question might take the form of the development of an assembly program or the outline of material for a pageant.) 2.Should the present quota law be repealed? If so what would you substitute — some form of selective immigration or a different type of restriction? Should the present quota principle be extended to the countries of the Western Hemisphere? 3.After reading and discussion formulate and defend the policy that the United States should pursue with regard to the deportation of aliens illegally within the country. 4.Consulting several encyclopedias and special works, prepare a brief report on the findings of reputable authorities on the subject of "races," "racial origins," and "racial supremacy." Why have certain words and phrases been placed in quotation marks? 5.Investigate and report on emigration from and immigration to the United States in the past few years. Extravagant exploitation of natural resources. From the days of the earliest settlements people acted as though American resources in soil, minerals, and forests were unlimited; and so they seemed. Through ignorance or carelessness or greed, a great portion of these resources have been destroyed. Forests were regarded as a common nuisance and burned as rapidly as possible in order to clear the land. The grasses, leaves, and surface mold were likewise burned. The fires did threefold injury: (1)valuable timber was destroyed; (2)the killing of the surface roots allowed rains to wash away the richest earth, only to clog the navigable rivers; (3)the burning of the decaying vegetable matter seriously reduced the fertility of the soil. A similar waste characterized the development of our mineral resources. Since it was both difficult and expensive to cap the outlet pipes of oil and gas wells on account of high pressure, in many cases these were allowed to flow unchecked, as though the oil or gas would flow forever. Carelessness in mining coal, taking out only the richer part of the coal seam and abandoning the mine with two or three times as much of the less easily mined coal left behind, meant the total loss of much of the material, for it would probably never pay to reopen such an abandoned mine. The search for quick profits, as well as the absence of improved equipment and methods, was responsible for much of the waste in mining. 