The economic principles which lay back of their troubles, so they were unable to suggest remedies. Even when they tried to promote their own interests by organization, they could not always agree. They quarreled among themselves over the type of organization they needed, over their major aims and objectives, and over methods. Partly because of this confusion in the ranks of laborers, and partly because of the refusal of employers to concern themselves with problems of labor relations, labor problems remained in a state of confusion from the 1870's to the 1890's. Immigrants made important contributions to American life. With the exception of the Indians, all of the rest of us in America are either immigrants or descendants from immigrants. But after 1865 the number of newcomers increased rapidly, and they came from parts of Europe which had sent us few recruits in our early history. Rightly or wrongly, Europeans still looked upon America as the land of opportunity. This belief that America was a promised land dated far back in history. But around 1865 and afterward steamship companies sent agents all over Europe urging people to come here. These agents were not unselfish. They were rounding up steerage passengers for a price. American railroads did their best to encourage immigration. Railroads had land to sell. Also any increase iri population, particularly in the west, would mean business for the railroads. Thousands of Europeans came over under the contract labor law, passed in 1864. Manufacturers were permitted to hire laborers abroad and to let them work off the cost of their transportation when they arrived. This arrangement was not so very different from that of the seventeenth century, under which indentured servants came over. Congress repealed the law in 1885, but even after 1900 some employers were accused of importing contract laborers. IMMIGRANTS REPRESENTED MOST OF THE races of Europe. In order to get some idea of the importance of immigration a few figures are necessary. Use these figures only for purposes of comparison. Between I860 and 1900,14 million immigrants entered the United States. During the next 30 years, more than 18 million came in. Before 1900 most of the new arrivals had come from the British Isles, chiefly Ireland, from Germany, and from the Scandinavian countries. These groups found many of their fellow countrymen already here. They found it fairly easy to adjust themselves to American ways of life, because social and economic customs of western and northern Europe were not notably different from what they found here. English and Irish immigrants did not even have to learn a new language. After 1890, or more particularly after 1900, many new racial groups came over. Of the northern Slavs, Russians and Poles were the most numerous. Of the southern Slavs, there were Serbs, Croats, Slovaks, and Slovenes, from the region of the Danube valley and the Balkans. There were Rumanians, Czechs, and Hungarians. Italians came over by the million. From the same geographical areas of southern and eastern Europe there came large numbers of persecuted Jews. These immigrants scattered themselves widely over the country. Some Germans and most of the Scandinavians became farmers in the West. Other Germans settled in middle western cities. Most of the Irish stayed close to the Atlantic seaboard, and they preferred the towns and cities. Of those coming from southern and western Europe, large numbers stayed in the large industrial cities. Some went into the coal mining areas. Incidentally, thousands of French from Canada spread throughout the mill towns and cities of southern New England. In 1895 there were more Germans in Chicago than in any cities of Germany itself, two only excepted: Hamburg and Berlin. But that was not all; Chicago had more Swedes than any city in Sweden, again with the exception of the two largest places. Chicago, too, had her share of Poles, Hungarians, Czechs, and Irish. As for Boston, the old Puritan stronghold, by 1890 one-third of its people had been born abroad. Many of these new Bostonians came from Ireland. In 1930 New York had Italians and Russians to a total of half a million, with a quarter million Germans and Poles. Of the newer groups from the continent, many were desperately poor. They spoke languages which sounded strange to older Americans, and they brought strange customs with them. They took what jobs they could get, and, being new, they took what pay was offered. But their services were out of all proportion to their earnings. They worked in the mines, the steel mills, the oil plants, the stock yards,and the packing houses. The new, heavy industries needed strong men, who could work hard, long, and steadily. Immigrants contributed to American culture. In this chapter we are concerned primarily with problems of labor, but our immigrants were interested in many other fields. They furnished leaders wherever initiative and ability were needed. Lovers of popular music know that Victor Herbert came from Ireland, Sigmund Romberg from Hungary. Well-known conductors of symphony orchestras have come here from Russia, Germany, Italy, and Holland. Enrico Caruso, the greatest operatic tenor of modern times, came from Italy. Fritz Kreisler, world-famous violinist, came from Germany. Augustus St. Gaudens, our most eminent sculptor, came from Ireland. Some of our greatest scientists came from Europe: Louis Agassiz in natural science, Charles Steinmetz, whose name is often mentioned with Edison's, in electricity, and Albert Einstein in mathematics and physics. Andrew Carnegie, a poor boy from Scotland, helped to build our steel business. Samuel Gompers, labor leader, came from England. Henry Villard, a railroad builder, came from Germany. Joseph Pulitzer, who came from Hungary, made the New York World into one of the most brilliantly edited American newspapers. Carl Schurz, from Germany, helped to promote the cause of civil service reform. A young man from Denmark, William S. Knudsen, became president of General Motors. These are a few names, picked almost at random, but they are names which would bring honor to the record of any civilized country in the world. In later years, particularly after World War I, steps were taken to restrict immigration. The greatest pressure for such restriction came from organized labor, because laborers feared the competition of the newcomers, and also because new immigrants were slow to join unions. We can take up this new policy later. There is still some question as to the wisdom of this restriction. American workers united to seek social justice. The human side of big business in America is found in the story of the workers. It is concerned with their problems and their hardships, their plans and hopes for improvement, their struggles with unsympathetic employers. In these efforts the organized laborers sometimes found the national government taking the side of the employers, without looking into the merits of the case. Industrial laborers had real problems, but some employers, the government, and even the people overlooked the seriousness of these problems. Then the constant arrival of new workers weakened the unions. At the same time these new arrivals made some valuable contributions to American life. The Japanese made no secret of their resentment over our protests against their policies toward China and Siberia. During the 1920's the Japanese did not care to light for their claims. Time was of no particular value to them, and they could afford to wait. But they were bitterly resentful over our opposition to their land grabbing program. They also found fault with the size of our navy at the close of World War I. It was larger than theirs, and still growing. Furthermore, we had such great resources that we could easily out build the Japanese if they really wanted a naval race. By 1921 the situation in the Far East looked ugly. The Japanese complained that we were opposing their interests in China and Siberia. They also argued that our large navy—built up during World War I—was a threat to their peace and security. At the same time Australia and Canada were finding fault with the Anglo-Japanese alliance. These British dominions wanted to end the alliance. Being sensitive people, the Japanese made a great show of hurt feelings over this failure to appreciate their good qualities. Actually it was not racial discrimination which moved the British dominions, as the Japanese charged, but a clear understanding of the danger of Japanese conquest. Something had to be done to work out a fourpoint international policy in the Far East which all the powers could accept. The rights and territory of China had to be guaranteed. Japanese fears of our navy had to be ended. The Anglo-Japanese alliance had to be terminated, without offending the Japanese. And some way had to be found to prevent war in the Far East. The British government wanted to reduce the cost of their navy, the Japanese wanted complete control of Asia and the western Pacific, and the United States wanted peace. In the summer of 1921 Secretary of State Hughes sent out invitations for a conference at Washington for the purpose of discussing limitation of armament and the problems of the Far East. In November, 1921, the conference opened with representatives present from nine governments having interests in the Far East: namely, the United States, Great Britain, Japan, China, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Portugal. The sessions lasted until February, 1922. Secretary Hughes proposed that the governments agree to build no first- class battleships for 10 years. Then he listed the names of ships to be destroyed, or scrapped. Some of these were actually in service, some were in process of construction, and some were only in the planning or blueprint stage. The idea was to leave the three leading navies of the world, those of England, the United States, and Japan, in the ratio then existing, 5-5-3. That is, for every 5 tons of capital ships allowed to England, the United States might have 5 and Japan 3. Japan and England had nothing to lose. The United States on the other hand sacrificed our standing as the top naval power. The Japanese would not accept the 5-5-3 ratio until the other powers agreed not to increase the strength of their naval bases in the Far East. This arrangement gave the Japanese unquestioned naval superiority in the Far East. Then the proposal was adopted. The Washington Conference did not place any limitations on smaller craft, such as cruisers, submarines, destroyers, nor upon airplanes. For dealing with other problems in the Far East the leading powers agreed to a Four-Power Treaty between the United States, Great Britain, France, and Japan. This agreement was a substitute for the Anglo-Japanese Alliance which was brought to an end. In addition a Nine-Power Treaty was adopted to preserve Chinese independence and to protect that country against aggression by outside powers. The parties to this treaty promised to respect Chinese territory, and to uphold the "open door." At the same time Japan promised to withdraw from Shantung. In 1922 the Washington treaties, particularly the one providing for limitation of naval armament, were praised as great contributions toward the cause of world peace. Recent years have proved that naval limitation at that time was a terrible blunder. If the Japanese had been honest, the treaties might have done some good. But they were not honest. Japanese policy was a combination of aggression and lies. As somebody put it, you don't prevent fires by abolishing the fire department, particularly when your neighbor has plans all made to burn down your house. England and the United States threw away the power which they actually had, and by so doing cleared the way for further Japanese advances. Two more steps should be considered in this summary of Far Eastern affairs. In 1924 Congress planned the Johnson-Lodge Act for restricting immigration. For the future, newcomers would be admitted under a quota: two percent of the nationals from any foreign country residing in the United States in 1890. For example, if there had been 100.000 Swiss living in the United States in The tremendous force of Japan's military strength was revealed to the world at Hickam Field, Hawaii, on December 7, 1941. 1890, in 1925 or any other year we could admit two percent of that number, that is 2,000. As first submitted to Congress this immigration bill proposed to exclude absolutely all aliens not admissible to American citizenship. This section applied chiefly to the Japanese. The Senate committee in charge of the bill had planned to amend it, so as to put Japan under the quota. Then the Japanese ambassador, Hanihara, wrote a threatening note to Secretary Hughes. "I realize, as I believe you do, the grave consequences which the enactment of the measure retaining that particular provision would inevitably bring upon the otherwise happy and mutually advantageous condition between our two countries." In the language of diplomacy, the term "grave consequences" was practically a threat of war. This threat made it impossible for the. Senate to put Japan under the quota. So the Senate voted to exclude all Japanese immigrants. When he realized the effect of his blunder Hanihara apologized, but it was too late. The bill passed, and Japanese immigrants were barred from our shores. Japanese newspapers complained bitterly of ill treatment, and again urged war. Japanese resented this exclusion act, because they felt that it placed them in the position of an inferior people. From the American point of view it was not a question of superior or inferior people, but simply a matter of likes and dislikes. Some Americans did not want any more Japanese in this country. They said the Japanese were dishonest and aggressive. Japan had already begun her program to get control of the Far East and had taken over Korea without the slightest right. Japan treated the inhabitants with carefully planned cruelty which—in the days before Hitler—had no equal in modern times. Americans who lived in Japan found their Japanese friends exceptionally cordial and courteous. But the Japanese ruling class was dominated by the higher officers of the army and navy. They were the ones who decided upon and enforced Japanese policy. These officers had no more scruples against killing off Japanese civilians who got in their way than they had in killing Russians in an undeclared war in 1904, or Americans in another undeclared war in 1941. It sounds unbelievable, but the rulers of Japan actually believed they, could conquer the world, and they made plans for doing so. In 1927, three years after Congress passed the Johnson-Lodge Act, a group of Japanese businessmen, public officials, and officers of the armed forces held an important conference. The topic of discussion was Japanese foreign policy. Baron Tanaka, the Japanese prime minister, was the principal figure. After considerable discussion the members drew up a report for the emperor, a document now known as the Tanaka Memorial. This Memorial was a blueprint of conquest. First the Japanese would occupy Manchuria, and then China. Next they would take the Pacific islands, such as the Netherlands East Indies, and the Philippines. Then they would conquer Asia Minor and Europe. And finally, so the Memorial ran, the Japanese would crush the United States. Of course the Japanese did not intend to let the world know about this amazing plot, but some Chinese officials got a copy of the Memorial and made it public. The Japanese called it forgery. But as far back as 1857 and the Townsend Harris Treaty some of the Japanese were talking of world conquest. They began to carry out their program in 1894,1904, and 1914. In 1931 they conquered Manchuria, in 1937 they attacked China, and in 1941 they attacked the United States. That story will come later. The Tanaka Memorial was entirely consistent with Japanese history and Japanese action. It merely gave further, fuller proof of Japanese aggression. Denial of its genuineness was typical of Japanese official character. If we had paid any attention to the Memorial in 1927, which we did not, we would probably have had a more comfortable time in 1941 and after. On December 7,1941, Pearl harbor day, the American people learned, the hard way, what Japanese plans were. We might have learned earlier, and with far less cost. World War II gave rise to two descriptive terms: "ideological warfare" and "fifth column." The first is an attack upon basic beliefs and convictions; the second refers to the agents who make this attack. Both terms refer to enemy activity carried on -within the limits of a given country, in advance of and in preparation for possible invasion. Fifth columnists circulate enemy propaganda and carry on activities designed to give the enemy a preliminary grip on the country. These enemy agents may be aliens, or they may be disloyal citizens. Some one aptly described fifth columnists as termites that bore from within. In Norway the invaders were greatly helped by fifth columnists. Fifth columnists did not work at random, but in accordance with a carefully drawn plan. They tried to break down the spirit of resistance and destroy the will to fight. Once people lost confidence in themselves and their cause, conquest would become easy. In 1940, large numbers of French people had been filled with defeatism even before the army collapsed. Again, these fifth columnists tried to undermine popular confidence in the existing government. Another ob jective was to destroy confidence in possible allies. In general, ideological warfare created discord and controversy among the people: it tended to keep them confused and divided on current issues. Fifth columnists fought countless shrewd ideological battles. Their clever operations were in striking contrast to the blundering, stupid efforts of German propaganda agents in World War I. During the first part of 1942, evidence concerning such work in the United States was brought to light in numerous periodicals. The beginning of this campaign in the United Slates can be traced back to 1933, the year that Hitler came to power in Germany. The German Ministry of Propaganda prepared a document entitled "General Instructions Concerning German Propaganda Action in the Two Americas." This program was supposed to be kept secret, but the general staff of the French Army secured a copy of it, so it got into partial circulation. This document described the course which German agents would follow in building up a strong body of pro-Nazi opinion in the United States. It explained how trained investigators were sent over here to discover issues over which the American people were divided. Other agents were then put to work to strengthen these divisions. The worst of these Nazi organizations was the German-American Bund, of which Fritz Kuhn was the leader. There were also American organizations with American leaders working openly for the Nazi cause. Among the better known was the Christian Front, under the leadership of Mr. George W. Christians of Tennessee. On January 1,1942, Christians put out a "plan" for agitation during the war, the purpose of which he said was "to finish the demoralization and disintegration of the existing order and create a REIGN OF TERROR" He published quantities of subversive propaganda. In the same category with Mr. Christians was Mr. William Dudley Pelley, publisher of the Galilean and founder of the pro-Nazi organization of the "Silzer Shirts." After the war came to the United States, Pelley published a line of pro-Nazi, seditious, defeatist propaganda. He held the administration responsible for our getting into the war, and he urged the voters "to rectify the New Deal diplomatic blunder and bring the war to a graceful conclusion with as little further loss to American territory and sovereignty as may be contrivable_The prospects are that the war will be brought to a fairly swift close, the moment the anti-Nazi fire eaters can be excused politically from power. And that is a consummation devoutly to be wished." Pelley was the man who proclaimed: "The time has come for an American Hitler and a pogrom [massacre of Jews]." Another pro-Nazi rabble rouser was Robert Noble, who proclaimed his admiration for Germany and for Hitler: "I am for the Axis powers because they are the liberators of the world." After the publication of these statements, Noble, Pelley, and Christians were arrested under orders of Attorney-General Biddle. Another major problem of the war was to be found in the large number of enemy aliens, and, in the case of the Japanese, of American-born citizens who also held citizenship in Japan. Because of the Japanese record of dishonesty and the nature of the attack on Pearl Harbor, Americans had every reason to be suspicious of the Japanese. In theory, the policy of our government toward enemy nationals was simple. Those who had resided here for a long time, and who had become loyal Americans, should not be made to stiller for the misdeeds of their own government. On the other hand, enemy agents were to be interned, and enemy plotters and criminals were to be severely punished. In the main, this is the policy which the administration started to follow. When the war began, there were approximately 1,124,000 enemy aliens residing in the United States. On the Pacific Coast there were 112,553 Japanese, of whom 40,899 were born in Japan. The great majority of these were in California. The Californians were worried over these people. Up to April 16, 1942, the F.B.I. had arrested 8,010 enemy aliens: 4,443 Japanese, 2,440 Germans, and 1,127 Italians. Also in 1942, the War Department advised the Department of Justice to arrange for the removal of all aliens from areas vital to defense in the regions of San Francisco and Los Angeles. All Japanese, citizens and aliens, were moved out of the prohibited areas into concentration camps. In putting all Japanese residents into concentration camps, the government violated constitutional rights. But the problem was a hard one, and the emergency was serious. Early in 1942 the balance between defeat and victory was still delicate, and it might tip either way. The ruling class in Japan had behaved in such a way as to give all Japanese a reputation lot- evil. This was not deserved in all cases, but it was easy to understand. Our government had not forgotten how the Japanese had lied out of the Panay affair [page 684], and the treacherous attack on Pearl Harbor was still fresh in everybody's mind. Because of the unprincipled record of Japanese officials, entirely innocent American citizens of Japanese ancestry had to suffer. Many of these American-born Japanese served with distinction in our armed forces during the war. Most Americans who stayed at home found something to do on the "home front." During the early part of the war, in fact before we entered, the Office of Civilian Defense worked out plans to protect our cities against enemy bornbing raids. Volunteer watchers were on duty night and day, with orders to report any strange plane to the nearest "filter center." Every city block had air raid wardens and deputies. Cities experimented with "blackouts" in preparation for possible air raids. Fortunately no enemy bornbers attacked our cities but in 1942 nobody could afford to overlook the danger of attack. To help produce more food, people in towns and cities were urged to plant victory gardens and to can vegetables for winter use. Some of these amateur gardeners surprised everybody, including themselves, at the amount and quality of vegetables which could be produced in a cutback yard. The Red Cross trained thousands of people in first aid, and. under the direction of the Red Cross, hospitals established and maintained blood banks for use in case of enemy attacks. Most of the people went into these efforts with remarkable enthusiasm. They wanted to do something in the war effort. 