 A HISTORY OF 
               
               
COU NTRY       
Breakfast in New York, luncheon in Kansas City, dinner in        
Los Angeles. The aviator now covers the three thousand miles     
from the Atlantic to the Pacific coast in less than a summer's   
day. Passing in the first hour of his flight across the narrow   
Atlantic plain (the home of the thirteen original states'), with 
its many rivers flowing south and southeast, he soars above the  
wooded Appalachian range of mountains, extending from the        
Adirondacks in New York to the state of Alabama, and then        
has before and beneath him the thousand and more miles of the    
great Mississippi basin. Over the eastern half of the basin,     
once covered with dense forests, he looks down upon cities and   
farms and a network of railroads and highways; but not long      
after he crosses the Mississippi, the prairies begin to replace  
the timbered land, the rivers become shallow and sand-choked, the
settlements grow sparser, and the Great Plains stretch wider     
and drier to the foothills of the Rockies. Another flight of     
nearly a thousand miles carries him above the majestic snow-     
capped peaks of the Rockies and the Sierras, with the high       
plateaus between the ranges, and then he descends into the sunlit
gardens of the Pacific coast.                                    
What the aviator has done in the smooth flight of a single       
day took our pioneers more than two centuries to accomplish, as  
they toiled through the forests with ax and rifle, floated down    
the “western waters” to the Mississippi, led their wagon trains    
across the prairies and deserts, fought the stealthy Indians of    
the forest and the fierce Indians of the plains, and left the bones
of their animals and comrades to bleach in the hot sands or to     
be buried in the drifts of the blizzard. The westward march of     
the pioneers is the pageant of American democracy. The trader      
followed the explorer, and the settler followed the trader. The    
steamboat replaced the raft and flatboat on the rivers. The        
railroad succeeded the stagecoach and the express rider across     
the plains and mountains. Ar each new western frontier opened      
up new resources (rich bottom lands for farms, vast stands of      
timber, mines of gold, silver, copper, lead, and iron, apparently  
exhaustless deposits of coal and oil) each contributed to the      
story of American life, affecting not only our methods of pro-     
duction, manufacture, trade, and travel but also our laws, our     
politics, our schools, our churches, our literature, our speech,   
our diet, and our dress.                                           
About one hundred and thirty million people now live               
in the forty-eight slates which form our Union. If they were       
equally distributed over the three million square miles of the     
country, there would be a little more than forty inhabitants to    
the square mile. But our population is very “spotty.” The          
tiny state of Rhode Island has five hundred and sixty-seven        
people to the square mile, while the state of Nevada, ninety       
times as large, has less than one inhabitant to the square mile.   
If the United States were as densely populated as England          
(seven hundred per square mile), it would contain more than        
the present total population of the world. The four industrial     
states of New Fork, Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Illinois, occupy-      
ing less than seven per cent of the area of the United States,     
hold nearly thirty per cent of the population. The four moun-      
tain states of Montana, Wyoming, Utah, and Nevada, with            
fifteen per cent of the area, have only one and one-tenth per cent 
of the population. Leaving to one side the eleven million eight    
hundred andfifty thousand Negroes, most of whom are descended     
from the. slaves imported into the country, and the three hundred 
and thirty-two thousand Indians who have survived the relent-     
less march of the white men across their continent, we find that  
our population has grown from two main sources: fir st, from the  
natural increase and constant westward migration of the settlers  
who came to our shores (mostly from the British Isles') in the    
colonial days; and, second, from the heavy European immigra-      
tion to this land of promise during the nineteenth century. In the
seventy years before the World War more than thirty million       
immigrants arrived in America. Two thirds of them came            
from Germany, Italy, Ireland, Poland, and Russia. By the          
census of 1930 there were over thirteen million whites of foreign 
birth in the United Slates, and twice that number of foreign      
or mixed parentage, that is, with either father or mother or both 
born in alien lands.                                              
America has been called the “melting pot” because of these        
millions of people of foreign speech and customs who have been    
thrown in with our native colonial stock, to be fused into a new  
type of American. Some students of society (sociologists) think   
that the process has injured our country by introducing a base    
alloy. Others point to the benefits which the brains and the      
hands of the immigrants have brought. There is much to be         
said for each side of the question. But all are agreed that the   
mixture of peoples in the American melting pot, like the variety  
of soil and climate in the vast American continent, has had a     
constant influence upon our history.                              
Let us now see why and when and how people from the Old           
World came to discover and settle the land of a New World.        
                     THE ENGLISH SETTLEMENTS                     
The history of the United States really began not with the       
Declaration of Independence of July 4,1776, but with the found-  
ing of the English colonies in America in the seventeenth cen-   
tury. For the groups of homemakers who then settled on our       
shores from New England to the Carolinas brought with them       
the seeds of culture w’hich grew into the harvest of our national
life. Many other peoples came, to be sure, to add variety and    
richness to the harvest; but they did not supplant it by the     
institutions of their homelands. The language, the laws, the     
forms of government, the ideas of the rights and duties of free  
citizens as contrasted with unprivileged subjects, even the      
models of literature, architecture, dress, and manners, --- all  
these w'ere of English origin. They, of course, suffered a "sea  
change ” by being brought across the wide ocean into the wilder- 
ness of the New World. But they persisted and took root and      
spread out over mountains and rivers and plains until our whole  
land from sea to sea was dominated by a civilization which had   
been derived from the British Isles. Therefore, though the       
stories of the Spanish conquerors and the French explorers and   
missionaries are exciting and picturesque, the more sober        
chronicles of English settlers deserve our chief interest. We    
shall study in this chapter the reasons why the English came to  
America, and the forms of government which they established      
here.                                                            
England Takes to the Sea. At the beginning of the seven-         
teenth century no one would have dreamed that England was        
destined to build the greatest colonial empire of modem times,   
with possessions on every continent and in all the seas. For     
when the last of the Tudor sovereigns, Queen Elizabeth, died     
47                                                               
king’s appointed officials. They forced one governor to resign   
and another to dissolve an ’’old and rotten” House of Burgesses  
which he had brought under his thumb. And when Governor          
William Berkeley refused to defend the outlying settlements of   
the colony against the Susquehanna Indians in 1675 (because of   
his personal profit from the fur trade), a popular young planter 
named Nathaniel Bacon raised an army of three hundred vol-       
unteers on his own account and not only defeated the Indians     
but drove Governor Berkeley out of his capital, Jamestown,       
and set it on fire. Bacon died of fever (or poison) at the moment
of his victory, and his "rebellion” collapsed; but, as the first 
armed resistance to the behavior of English officials in the     
American colonies, it was prophetic of the great rebellion which 
took place exactly a century later.                              
The Pilgrim Fathers. While Virginia was founded as a             
business enterprise by a company of London "adventurers,”1       
the second English colony in America had a religious origin.     
The Separatists (p. 50) were so "harried” by King James’s        
spies and sheriffs that in the year 1608 about a hundred of them 
from the eastern part of England fled to Holland, which was      
at that time the only country in Europe where men were not       
persecuted for their religious beliefs. But these exiles were not
entirely happy in their new home, in spite of their freedom to   
worship as they pleased. Being mostly farmers, they found it     
hard to adapt themselves to the industrial life of the city of   
Leiden, where they were settled. Besides, they did not want      
their children to grow up in a foreign land, where they would    
forget their native tongue and be tempted to neglect their       
strict observance of the Sabbath day. They felt like "pilgrims   
and strangers,” longing for a home under the English flag.       
America beckoned; but the Pilgrims had neither money nor         
supplies, nor friends at court.                                  
Indignation against Andros had reached a high point when the    
welcome news arrived in Boston in April, 1689, that James II    
had been driven from his throne by the "glorious revolution.”   
Andros, left unprotected by the fall of his master, was seized  
and imprisoned by the outraged leaders of the colony. The       
town meeting of Boston assumed the government, appointed        
a committee of safety, and sent envoys to London to learn the   
will of the new sovereigns, William and Mary of Orange. The     
"empire” of Andros was broken up. Connecticut and Rhode         
Island were allowed to resume self-government under their old   
charters. New York (where a certain Jacob Leisler had seized    
the power on the news of James Il’s downfalll) and New Jersey   
received new royal governors. Massachusetts was given a new     
charter in 1691, which altered the independent Puritan charac-  
ter of the colony in three important respects: (1) the governor 
was to be appointed by the king instead of elected by the free- 
men of the colony; (2) liberty of worship was guaranteed to all 
Protestant sects; (3) the ownership of property and not mem-    
bership in a Puritan church was made the basis of political     
rights. Under this charter the Massachusetts colony lived until 
the American Revolution.                                        
The Proprietary Colony of Maryland. Virginia, Plymouth,         
and Massachusetts, however varied the motives which brought     
their settlers to America, had all been financed by trading com-
panies which invited investors to buy their stock. In 1632 ap-  
peared the first successful colony of a type which was to super-
sede the trading company entirely and become the pattern for    
the colonies founded under the later Stuart kings, Charles II   
and Janies II (1660-1689). It is known as a "proprietorship.”   
The king granted to a man or a small group of men (generally    
courtiers) a tract of land with large powers of government. The 
proprietors appointed the governors, judges, and councilors of  
their colonies, organized the courts, authorized lawmaking as-  
which provided that "no person in this province professing to     
believe in Jesus Christ shall be in any ways troubled ... for his 
or her religion ... so that they be not unfaithful to the lord    
proprietary or molest or conspire against the civil government    
established.” This is the first act of religious toleration in the
American colonies, though by excluding non-Christians it ivas     
less tolerant than Roger Williams’s complete religious freedom    
in Rhode Island. Lord Baltimore even went so far as to appoint    
a Puritan governor of Maryland in deference to his large ma-      
jority of Protestant subjects. The strife between Catholics       
and Protestants in Maryland continued until James II was          
overthrown in England. Then Maryland was taken away from          
the Baltimores and put under a royal governor. The Anglican       
Church was established, and the Catholics, who comprised less     
than io per cent of the population, were deprived of their po-    
litical rights. However, when the Baltimores turned Protes-       
tant the colony was restored to them (1720), and it remained      
a proprietary province until the American Revolution.             
The Carolinas. Owing a debt of both gratitude and money to        
the Cavaliers who had helped him regain his throne, Charles II,   
in 1663, granted to a group of eight courtiers the huge tract of  
land between Virginia and the Spanish settlement of Florida,      
extending westward to the "South Sea.” The object of the          
proprietors was to build up a prosperous trade in semitropical    
products, such as silk, wine, ginger, rice, and indigo. They      
published A Brief Description of the province, with a map,        
setting forth "the Healthfulness of the Air, the Fertility of the 
Earth and Waters, and the great Pleasure and Profit [that] will   
accrue to those that shall go thither to enjoy the same.” Settlers
from Barbados and the British Isles, together with some Ger-      
man and French Huguenots (Protestants), were attracted to         
the colony by its growing industries and its policy of religious  
toleration, until by the end of the seventeenth century it had a  
population of more than fifty thousand.                           
But the colony did not prosper politically. An elaborate con-     
stitution, the "Grand Model,” composed by the great English       
philosopher John Locke, proved utterly unfit for the govern-      
ment of a sparse colony in the American wilderness. The            
northern settlers on Albemarle Sound and the southern group        
around Charleston, separated by three hundred miles, went          
their own ways, until they were recognized in 1711 as the colo-    
nies of North Carolina and South Carolina, with a governor for     
each. Pirates preying on the rich islands of the West Indies       
used the sheltered coast of North Carolina for their lairs. The    
Spaniards, who claimed the Carolina territory as their own,        
incited the Indians to attack the colony on the south. The         
proprietors, according to the charter, owned the land as feudal    
lords; and when the assembly of South Carolina tried to take       
it out of their hands and sell it to settlers, they vetoed the act.
The assembly then rebelled against the proprietors and peti-       
tioned King George I to be taken under his protection as a royal   
province (i7r9). The petition was granted, and ten years later     
the proprietors sold their rights and interests in both Carolinas  
to the crown for £50,000.                                          
The Dutch Colony on the Hudson. The best place on the              
Atlantic coast for the establishment of a colony was the site of   
New York, with its splendid harbor and bay and its great river     
leading up to the heart of the fur country. Yet it was not the     
English but the Dutch who took possession of this choice region.   
In September, 1609, in search of a passage to Cathay, Henry        
Hudson, an experienced English navigator in the service of the     
Dutch East India Company, sailed up the river which bears          
his name, bartering trinkets, liquor, and firearms for the valuable
furs which the Indians brought out in their canoes to his little   
vessel, the Half-Moon. Five years later Fort Orange was built      
on the present site of Albany. The States-General of Holland       
created the Dutch West India Company to govern the colony,         
which was called New Netherland.                                   
The first director-general (governor) arrived at Manhattan         
in r623, the date taken to mark the founding of New York City.     
Shortly afterward the third director-general, Peter Minuit,        
bought from the Indians the island on which the greatest           
metropolis of our country now stands, paying for it sixty Dutch    
guilders (twenty-four dollars), or about one tenth of a cent an    
Under Dutch rule the colony had had no representative as-         
sembly, nor was it until 1683 that the new English proprietor     
yielded to the pressure (especially from the towns on Long        
Island founded on the New England model) to grant one. Two        
years later, on coming to the English throne as James n, he       
revoked this grant and made New York the pattern of absolute      
government to which he tried to make all the colonies north of    
Maryland conform. How his viceroy Andros failed in this plan      
we have already seen (p. 63). After the confusion following the   
overthrow of James H and the tragic fate of Leisler (p. 64) was   
past, New York went on for the rest of the colonial period with   
governors sent over by the king and with an assembly elected      
by the people. The Anglican Church was established, but other     
Protestant sects were allowed to worship freely. Two interesting  
facts were noted by visitors to New York even in the seventeenth  
century, namely, the great variety of peoples and languages to    
be found there, and the absorption of the inhabitants in money-   
making.                                                           
The Jerseys. Even before he had driven the Dutch from his         
new province, the Duke of York leased the lower part of it,       
between the Delaware and the Atlantic, to two of his friends,     
Lord Berkeley and Sir George Carteret. The latter had been        
governor of the island of Jersey, in the English Channel, and it  
was in honor of him that the province was called New Jersey.      
The new proprietors immediately published " Concessions ” for     
their colony --- a liberal constitution granting religious liberty
and a popular assembly with the control of taxation. The          
proprietors divided their province into East Jersey (Carteret’s)  
and West Jersey (Berkeley’s). Their right to establish a govern-  
ment was constantly disputed by the governors of New York,        
and their attempts to collect rents from the land were resisted   
by settlers, many of whom were Puritans from New England.         
Finally both proprietors grew tired of the strife and sold out    
their claims to groups of Friends, or Quakers, who, in spite of   
their peaceful doctrines, could not bring order and harmony       
into New Jersey politics. In 1702 East and West Jersey were       
united into a single royal colony, which for thirty-six years     
in 1682 and laid out the town of Philadelphia ("brotherly love”),  
with its streets at right angles and with ample house plots. A     
year later there were four thousand "industrious husbandmen,       
carpenters, masons, weavers and other mechanics in Pennsyl-        
vania”; and before the end of the seventeenth century it was       
the largest and most prosperous colony in America. Its exports     
of bread, flour, lumber, and beer made those commodities "a        
drugg in all the markets of the West Indies.” Evidently the        
"holy experiment ” was a worldly success.                          
Nevertheless, after Penn’s death there were frequent quarrels      
between the proprietors, the assembly, and the people of the       
colony. The Scotch-Irish and Germans who were filling up the       
western land complained, like the frontiersmen in all the colonies,
that they were not getting their fair share of representatives in  
the legislature at Philadelphia. Moreover, these frontiersmen,     
who were natural-bom fighters, had to bear the attacks of the      
French and Indians on the border in the wars of the eighteenth     
century, while the wealthy pacifist Quakers who controlled the     
government were slow to appropriate money for the defense of       
the colony. Still another cause of complaint was the exemption  
of the extensive lands of the Penn family from taxation. Enough 
of the spirit of the founder prevailed, however, to carry the   
colony over its difficulties.                                   
The Colony of Georgia. To complete the list of the English      
colonies which became the thirteen original states of the Union,
we must mention Georgia, though it was founded long after the   
Stuarts had been driven from the English throne. In the year    
that George Washington was bom (1732) James Oglethorpe ob-      
tained a charter from King George II granting to a body of trus-
tees for a term of twenty-one years the southern, unsettled part
of the old Carolina territory lying between the Savannah and    
Altamaha rivers. Oglethorpe was a philanthropist who wished     
to provide a home in the New World for the victims of the harsh 
English laws which threw a man into prison for a small debt.    
The Church was eager for the conversion of the Indians on the   
Carolina borders. Capitalists hoped to make profits out of silk 
and wine industries introduced into the province. And the       
English government, drifting into a war with Spain, was glad    
to have the frontier extended southward to Spanish Florida.     
So Parliament, the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel,   
the Bank of England, and many private citizens contributed      
toward founding the new colony on the banks of the Savannah     
in 1733. Slavery was forbidden in Georgia in the early days;    
also the traffic in rum. Still the colony did not prosper as its
founder had hoped. Silk and wine culture proved unsuited to     
the land. When war between England and Spain broke out,         
Oglethorpe twice descended upon the Spanish post of St. Au-     
gustine, in Florida, but was not able to take the fort.         
It was not till the close of the French and Indian War, in 1763,
that the quarrel over "the debatable land” was ended by the     
transfer of the province of Florida from Spain to England.      
Meanwhile, ten years earlier, the trustees of Georgia had been  
glad to surrender their charter to the king. The valiant Ogle-  
thorpe lived till 1785, to see the colony which he had founded a
state of the Union, whose independence was recognized by Great  
Britain and the other powers of Europe.                         
families. Huguenots (Protestants) expelled from France by        
Louis XIV’s revocation of the Edict of Nantes (1685) came to     
New England, New York, and South Carolina. The defeat            
of the Scotch supporters of the Stuart cause in 1715 and 1745    
sent many Highlanders to America. Germans, fleeing from the      
devastation of the Rhinelands by the French armies, flocked      
to Penn’s colony at the rate of nearly two thousand a year       
from 1727 to 1754. Protestants from the north of Ireland (the    
Scotch-Irish), oppressed by the harsh English laws against their 
industries and commerce, came over to fill in the frontier region
from New Hampshire to the Carolinas, until there were nearly     
four hundred thousand of them here at the time of the Revolu-    
tionary War. Altogether, the non-English stocks made up more     
than a quarter of the population in 1776.                        
If the colonies were still far from the idea of a political union
for the common good in the first three quarters of the eighteenth
century, they were, nevertheless, coming closer together in      
many ways. The spaces between the earlier patches of settle-     
ment were filling up. Stage lines and post-office routes were    
inertial centers had a flourishing trade with the West Indies.   
The English islands alone could not furnish sufficient molasses  
for the rum distilleries of Massachusetts and Rhode Island;      
nor did they provide a large enough market to absorb the fish'   
lumber, horses, and wheat exported from mainland colonies to     
the Indies. If trade with the foreign islands were killed, the   
American merchants could not find the money to pay for the       
manufactured goods which they imported from England, some        
of which, such as woolens, hats, and iron products, the colonists
were forbidden to make for foreign or intercolonial trade.       
The colonies therefore defied the Molasses Act, and for the      
next thirty years the English ministers were wise enough not to  
attempt to enforce it. The chief reason for this prudent course  
was doubtless the rapid increase in the population and wealth    
of the colonies in the eighteenth century. At the beginning of   
fliat century there were not more than three hundred thousand    
inhabitants scattered from New Hampshire to South Carolina;      
but by 1760 the number had grown to over a million and a half’   
In 1700 the total trade of the continental colonies with England 
was £635,000, or less than one half of the trade between         
England and the West Indies; but, again, by 1760 the foreign     
trade of the mainland colonies had increased to £3,000,000,      
and the imports of these colonies from England were double       
those of the West Indies. Communities as prosperous as these     
were not inclined to subordinate their commercial interests to   
those of the British Empire in general, much less of the West    
Indies in particular. " If the King of England were encamped on  
Boston Common with twenty thousand men,” said James Otis,        
?’he could not enforce these laws.”                              
The French Menace. Besides defending their local govern-         
ments and their growing trade against too much interference      
by acts of Parliament and royal officials, the colonists also    
rendered valiant aid to the mother country in defending their    
borders against the French and the Indians. The year after       
Jamestown was founded, Samuel de Champlain, resuming             
Jacques Carder’s work of seventy years before (p. 42), estab-    
lished the beginning of the French empire in America bv the      
glance at the condition of the country in 178g, we shall study    
in this chapter the way in which the chief problems were met.     
The United States in 1789. The country over which Washing-        
ton was unanimously called to preside in 1789 contained a free    
white population of 3,200,000, with 600,000 Negro slaves,         
scattered along the Atlantic seaboard from New England to         
Georgia. Philadelphia, the largest city, had 42,000 inhabitants;  
New York followed with 32,000; Boston, Charleston, and            
Baltimore had each passed the 10,000 mark. A steady stream        
of immigration was pouring into the valleys of the Ohio and       
the Cumberland across the Alleghenies. In the very summer that    
the statesmen at Philadelphia were framing the Constitution,      
a traveler reported that 900 boats had gone down the Ohio         
from Pittsburgh, carrying 18,000 settlers with their horses,      
sheep, and cattle, to take up the farm lands which were to be     
had for a dollar or two an acre. The census of 1790 showed a      
population of more than 100,000 in what had been the trans-       
Allegheny districts of Virginia and North Carolina; and these     
hardy pioneers, imbued with the idea of self-government, were     
preparing the machinery for statehood and clamoring to be ad-     
mitted to the Union. North of the Ohio the settlement was         
somewhat slower, because the 45,000 Indians of that region,       
encouraged by agents from Canada who wished to keep the           
fur trade in the hands of the British, were better organized to   
resist the American advance. All the country west of the          
Mississippi, as well as the entire shore of the Gulf of Mexico,   
belonged to Spain. Our country’ was then but one third the        
size of the present United States and contained less than one     
thirtieth of our present population.                              
Industries and Commerce. What is now a land of great cities       
joined by a network of railroad and airplane lines, and humming   
with the whir of thousands of factory wheels and millions of      
automobile engines, was in Washington’s day a land of forests     
and farms. Over 90 per cent of the inhabitants were tillers of    
the soil. Shipping and fishing were the only industries of im-    
portance. There were, to be sure, a few iron foundries, tanneries,
pottery works, and textile mills; but the “Industrial Revolu-     
treaty cf 1778 and authorized our ships to prey on French com-      
merce. In the two years 1798-1800 a state of war with France        
existed, and over eighty French ships were captured. But            
neither country wanted war. When Talleyrand saw that he             
could not browbeat the United States, he hastened to assure         
our minister to Holland that a new American commission would        
be received with due respect by the French Republic. Adams,         
to his everlasting credit, resisted the clamor of the Hamiltonian   
faction for war, and sent envoys to France to reopen negotia-       
tions. Four days after they had sailed from Philadelphia,           
Napoleon Bonaparte overthrew the corrupt Directory. Intent          
on establishing his despotic power in France and Europe,            
Napoleon wanted no complications with the United States.            
He readily agreed, in September, 1800, to a convention by           
which he gave up the treaty of alliance of 1778 in return for our   
government's abandonment of all claims for damages to our           
shipping by French cruisers since 1793. It was a fair bargain,      
anti it enabled us to enter the nineteenth century at peace with    
all the nations of the world.                                       
The Alien and Sedition Acts. The Federalists rendered great         
services to the country during the first decade of its history under
the Constitution. They set our finances in order and strengthened   
our credit at home and abroad; they encouraged domestic             
manufactures and stimulated foreign trade; they maintained          
the honor of the United States while bringing to a peaceful con-    
clusion serious controversies with England, France, and Spain       
By the year 1800 the new government was firmly established.         
But already the Federalists had signed the death warrant oi         
their party. In the heyday of their power, in the exciting sum-     
mer of 1798, they had sought to crush the Republican opposition     
and secure their own party hold on the government by passing        
a set of laws that caused their downfall.                           
Since most of the foreigners who came to the country joined         
the Republicans, the Federalists passed a Naturalization Act,       
increasing from five to fourteen years the period of residence      
necessary' for a foreigner to become a citizen of the United States.
Two Alien Acts followed which gave the President the power for      
weekly levees were succeeded by informal receptions, to which       
the public thronged to shake the President’s hand. The Brit-        
ish minister Merry was shocked when Jefferson received him          
in negligee, with slippers wom down at the heels, and Merry’s       
secretary compared the President to "a tall, large-boned            
farmer,” --- a description which Jefferson would probably have      
considered flattering, since he believed that the independent, self-
respecting farmers were the saving element in our population.       
Jefferson’s Moderation. It soon appeared that the scare-            
mongers who had prophesied a revolution in case Jefferson were      
elected had grossly misjudged their man. In his inaugural           
address the new Presidait praised our "just and solid republican    
government” as a "successful experiment,” and declared that         
Federalists and Republicans were all brethren in their common       
devotion to the Union. He promised "equal and exact justice         
to men of every shade of political and religious opinion ”; friend- 
ship with all nations, but no alliances; respect for the rights of  
the states, while still preserving ’* the general [national] govern-
ment in all its constitutional vigor ”; freedom of speech, press,   
and elections; and economy and honesty in the management of         
the country’s finances. If Jefferson’s opponents feared or his fol- 
lowers hoped that he would attack the financial system which        
Hamilton had set up (Bank, tariff, public funds), they were         
equally mistaken. The Naturalization Act (p. 204) and a tax on      
whisky which had started a riot, known as the Whisky Rebel-         
lion of 1794, among the farmers of western Pennsylvania, were       
repealed. The offenders imprisoned or fined under the Sedition      
Act were pardoned. The army and navy were reduced, and              
Jefferson’s Secretary of the Treasury, Albert Gallatin, a native    
of Switzerland, applied the savings to the payment of the           
public debt, which he estimated would be entirely paid              
off by the year 1817. These reforms could hardly be called a        
“revolution.”                                                       
Hectoring the Judges. There was one point, however, at              
which Jefferson made a direct attack on the policy of his prede-    
cessor. At the very close of Adams’s administration the Federal-    
ists, defeated in the elections for the Presidency and Congress,    
to 80,000,000 pounds in 1811, and to 177,000,000 pounds in          
1821. Because cotton culture exhausts the soil rapidly, the         
planters were always looking for fresh lands. They quickly          
spread into the fertile regions of the Mississippi Territory (which 
Andrew Jackson had freed from the Indian danger), and by 1821       
more than a third of the cotton crop was being raised in the        
states west of the Alleghenies.                                     
Since manufacturing was excluded from the South by the              
plantation system, there was no need for a protective tariff.       
The planter bought his clothing, tools, furniture, and other manu-  
factured goods from the North or from Europe. The tariff was        
a burden upon him, because it raised the price of every such        
article that he bought, thus enriching the Northern manufac-        
turer at his expense. That the tariff made higher wages possible    
and so increased the buying power of the laborers was no argu-      
ment in its favor; for his laborers were slaves to whom he paid     
no wages, but for whom he had to supply tools, clothing, and        
food. He was not particularly interested in the prosperity of       
the New England cotton mills, because they used only about          
one fourth of the Southern cotton crop. The planter’s chief         
markets were in Europe, and he wanted to exchange his cotton        
freely for the manufactured goods of Europe and the North at        
prices which were not increased 10, 20, or 30 per cent by the       
tariff.                                                             
• The New West. In contrast to the industrial system of the         
East and the plantation system of the South, the West presented     
a pioneer society, with its own peculiar needs and interests.       
The ever westward-moving frontier has been one of the most          
important influences in American history. The frontier bred         
a type of settlers who, in their struggle to subdue the wild forests
and the wilder savages, became self-reliant, resourceful, and       
courageous. As it had little attraction for people of wealth or     
social distinction, it developed a stark democracy. One man         
was as good as another politically and socially. The real test      
was whether he could swing an ax, tame a horse, bring down a        
squirrel with his long-barreled rifle, meet the wily attack of the  
Indian, and keep steady under a load of com whisky. When the        
The New Democracy. The masses who hailed the advent of              
Andrew Jackson were not mistaken in their belief that a new         
type of democracy had come into power. The '‘revolution”            
of 1828 was more thorough than the "revolution” of 1800, be-        
cause, while Jefferson held that the common man should be           
given the opportunity through education and training to fit         
himself to take part in the government, Jackson declared that       
such education and training were of trifling account. "The          
duties of all public officers are ... so plain and simple,” he said,
"that men of intelligence may readily qualify themselves for        
their performance.” Jefferson, the aristocratic Virginian scholar   
and statesman, believed that the competent should rule, subject     
always to the vigilant and free criticism of the people at large.   
Jackson, the assertive, self-made frontiersman, believed that       
government should be by the people as well as for the people,       
and hence that the offices should be "passed around,” in order      
to give as many as possible a share. It was chiefly the growing     
influence of the new West that gave strength to the Jacksonian      
democracy- By 1828 nine of the twenty-four states of the Union      
lay west of the Allegheny Mountains, and they contained more        
than one third of the 12,600,000 inhabitants of the country’. In    
these pioneer communities differences of social rank disappeared.   
The voice and opinion of the Western pioneer were worth as          
much as those of any aristocratic merchant or planter in Boston     
or Charleston. These Westerners were, in Professor Turner’s         
phrase, "men with bark on.” Though not one in a hundred had         
probably ever heard of Emerson, they would have readily agreed      
with his saying " Europe extends to the Alleghenies; America        
lies beyond.”                                                       
The Labor Class. The West was not the only factor in the          
development of the new democracy, however. The growth of          
manufactures in the Eastern states since the second war with      
England had given rise to a laboring class (swelled by immigra-   
tion from Europe) which was becoming conscious of its strength    
and was demanding legislation for its social and economic im-     
provement. The factory system took away the independence          
of the worker and made him a cog in a great machine. He was       
no longer the master of his own tools but the servant of the      
expensive tools owned by the capitalists. He had to enter the     
factory gates when the whistle blew, and had to work from         
twelve to fifteen hours a day in such quarters and for such wages 
as the management provided. Women and children generally          
toiled beside the men to eke out a living. Women comprised        
half the operatives in the cotton mills of New England, and       
children of six or eight years of age worked from daylight to     
dark for a dollar a week, "growing up,” as one pathetic petition  
put it, "as ignorant as Arabs of the desert.”                     
Trade unions had existed for many years, and strikes had not      
been infrequent; but they were feeble and local affairs before    
the extension of the suffrage gave some political influence to the
working class. In the very year of Jackson’s election the trade   
unions of Philadelphia organized a Workingmen’s party and put     
up candidates for local offices. What was more natural than that  
the class which was demanding higher wages, shorter hours of      
work, free public education, and more sanitary conditions in      
mills and factories should flock to the support of Andrew Jack-   
son, the plain man of the people? It was their votes in the       
industrial section of the country that ensured his election.      
Without his votes from New York and Pennsylvania he would         
have been defeated.                                               
Reform Movements. The age was marked also by a numbei             
of efforts for the improvement of the physical, moral, and mental 
condition of the people. Excessive drinking was a curse of        
American society in the early nineteenth century. Vast quanti-    
ties of raw com whisky were consumed by the Western frontiers-    
men, while rum. brandy, fiery punches, and strong wines were      
Dess.” Once let men become herded in cities (the plague spots      
of civilization), they would degenerate into an idle, vicious,     
turbulent "proletariat” easily led by demagogues. Just the         
thing that Jefferson feared was beginning to take place in the     
Jacksonian era. The factory system was gathering hundreds of       
thousands of " hands ” into the industrial centers of the North.   
Immigrants from Europe, attracted now not so much by the           
land as by the chance for a job in a mill, began to pour in by the 
tens of thousands to take the place of the Americans who pre-      
ferred to go West rather than work for a boss.                     
These immigrants furnished a cheap labor supply, and, being        
rapidly naturalized and enfranchised, offered the politicians a    
rich harvest of votes. Politics, the science of government, came   
to be more and more the game of capturing the offices. The art     
of flattering the people rather than of instructing them was       
cultivated. All the tricks of political advertising --- catchwords,
cartoons, badges, banners, stump speeches, clubs, and rallies ---  
were used to catch votes. And public office, w-hen once attained,  
was looked on not so much as an honorable position of civic        
responsibility as a source of patronage with which to reward the   
faithful "party workers.” William L. Marcy, of New York, in        
a debate in the United States Senate in 1832, made the remark.     
"To the victors belong the spoils.” This famous proverb, bor-      
rowed from the Romans, gave the name to the vicious "spoils        
system,” which cursed our government for half a century after      
Jackson’s accession. It meant that with every change of ad-        
ministration the civil servants of the defeated party, however     
long or faithful their service had been, were turned out of office 
to make way for adherents of the victorious party.                 
The New President. The man who was elected to the Presi-           
dency at this important time of ferment, which marked "the         
rise of the common man” in politics and industry and social        
planning, was a sharp contrast to his predecessors, not only in    
speech and manners but in his ideas of the nature of the first     
office in the land. Our former Presidents had considered them-     
selves as “executives,” to carry out the laws made by Congress.    
They respected the "checks and balances” of the Constitution,      
Missouri, pushing their canoes into the creeks to reach the                   
beaver lodges, and bringing down to St. Louis thousands of                    
dollars’ worth of furs for the markets in Europe. There was                   
little attempt made to settle the region between the Missouri                 
and the Rockies, which contained hardly a thousand white in-                  
habitants by the middle of the nineteenth century. Except for                 
the trails of the hunters and an occasional military exploring                
expedition, it was given over to the dense herds of bison and                 
the fierce tribes of the Plains Indians. From the time of Mon-                
roe’s administration our government had been moving the                       
Indian tribes from the eastern side of the Mississippi to reser-              
vations across the river, where they were guaranteed the pos-                 
session of their inferior lands "forever.” 1 They were thought to             
be beyond the frontier of American settlement.                                
Major Stephen H. Long, returning to St. Louis from an                         
expedition to the headwaters of the Platte and Arkansas rivers                
in 1820, reported the country as "almost wholly unfit for cul-                
tivation and, of course, uninhabitable by a people depending                  
upon agriculture for their subsistence. .. . The scarcity of wood             
and water, almost universally prevalent, will prove an insuper-               
able obstacle in the way of settling the country. . . . This region,          
however, viewed as a frontier, may prove of infinite importance               
to the United States, inasmuch as it is calculated to serve as a              
barrier to pre rent too great an extension of our population west-            
ward”! Such pessimistic descriptions of a region now smiling                  
with fields of wheat and com served to retard for years the de-               
velopment of the Western plains and to cause them to be                       
labeled on the maps of a century ago as "the Great American                   
Desert.”                                                                      
The Santa Fe Trait The year after Major Long made his                         
discouraging report, exciting news came from the Southwest.                   
Mexico joined the long list of Spanish-American colonies in the               
New World in throwing off the yoke of the mother country and                  
' The removal of the tribes was not always an easy matter. The Sacs and Foxes,
under their remarkable chief Black Hawk, defended their lands in Illinois in a
war in which Abraham Lincoln served as a captain (1832). The Seminoles in     
Florida resisted removal beyond the Mississipni for more than a decade.       
The New Far West. An area larger than the United States        
of 1783 or the Louisiana region purchasefl from Napoleon in    
1803 was added to our territory between 1845 and 1848.1 The    
land varied in value. Between the rich cotton areas of Texas   
and the smiling valleys of California lay the arid plateaus and
majestic canyons of the Rockies. In Oregon fine timber and farm
lands were awaiting the settler. The sudden acquisition of the 
Pacific coast from Puget Sound to San Diego opened upon our    
view the great western ocean and made us neighbors of China    
and Japan. The new region, though sparsely populated by        
white men, was still not entirely unknown ; for ever since the 
days of Levis and Clark’s expedition adventurous explorers     
and emigrant trains had been beating into roads the Indian     
trails to Santa Fe, Oregon, and California. Groups of immi-    
grants, obeying the American instinct for self-government, had 
set up little "republics” on the Columbia, the Sacramento, or  
the Rio Grande, waiting for the United States to take them     
under its protection. Now that the whole Far West was ours     
by formal treaties, it was incumbent upon the government at    
Washington to provide for its proper political organization.   
President Polk had already urged Congress in his message of    
December, 1846, to erect Oregon into a territory, and as soon  
as we acquired New Mexico and California he recommended a      
territorial government for these provinces also.               
Cass, Douglas, Clay, and Webster talked of the destiny of the     
American flag to float over the whole continent from Hudson       
Bay to the Isthmus of Panama, and of the superiority of our free  
democratic government over the "effete monarchies” of the Old     
World. The failure of the potato crops in Ireland in 1845 and     
1846, and the revolutions of 1848 which convulsed the leading     
states of continental Europe, sent to our shores hundreds of      
thousands of immigrants who were welcomed to the " land of        
liberty.”                                                         
Our government was quick to express its sympathy for peo-         
ples struggling for their freedom from European despotism.        
In December, 1850, our Secretary of State, Daniel Webster, sent   
a defiant reply to the Austrian representative at Washington,     
who had complained of the sympathy we showed to Hungary' in       
her struggle for freedom: "The power of this Republic at the      
present moment is spread over a region one of the richest and     
most fertile on the globe, and of an extent in comparison with    
which the possessions of the House of Hapsburg are but a patch    
on the earth’s surface.” When the Hungarian patriot, General      
Louis Kossuth, came to America the next year, he was received     
by Congress and the people with a welcome only less enthusiastic  
than that given to Lafayette a quarter of a century before.       
In the summer of 1853 Douglas made a trip abroad and prob-        
ably expressed the sentiment of a large proportion of his fellow  
countrymen when he wTote: " Europe is tottering to the verge      
of dissolution. When you visit her, the objects which enlist your 
attention are the relics of past greatness, the broken columns    
erected to departed power.” And Henry’ Clay, on his deathbed,     
wrote to Kossuth that "for the cause of liberty, we should keep   
our lamp burning brightly on this western shore, as a light to all
nations.” The Americans of the mid-century were no more           
modest than was Woodrow Wilson at the time of the World War       
in their idea of the role of the United States as an example of   
justice to an erring world.                                       
We Become interested in an Isthmian Canal. The most im-           
posing work of man in the Western Hemisphere is the Panama        
Canal, through whose locks and Gatun Lake and Culebra Cut         
over two billion dollars’ worth of bonds, most of which were in    
the hands of the bankers, who were permitted by law, as we         
have seen (p. 438), to use them as a basis for Ioans to the man-   
ufacturers, the railroad-builders, the oil-refiners, and the other 
“captains of industry.”                                            
Again, unrestricted immigration brought swarms of aliens to        
our shores after the war to supply “hands” for the new indus-      
tries. A law’ of Congress passed in 1864 allowed the unlimited     
importation of laborers. In 1863 only 80,000 immigrants had        
come to America. The number rose to 320,000 in 1866, to 380,000    
in 1870, and to 420,000 in 1873, before the great panic came to    
send the figures down below the 200,000 mark. In Philadelphia      
alone over 180 new manufacturing plants were established in        
the last two years of the war. The value of our manufactured       
products increased 200 per cent in the period from i860 to 1880,   
and certain sections of the country became great centers of        
special industries, such as the steel region about Pittsburgh and. 
the textile sections of southern New England.                      
The Standard Oil Company. It would take volumes to de-             
scribe the formation and operation of these various combina-       
tions, or "trusts,” in transportation, banking, and lumbering,     
and in the steel, coal, petroleum, leather, whisky, sugar, textile,
and other industries. We may select the Standard Oil Company       
as one of the oldest and most typical of them. Toward the          
close of the Civil War, John D. Rockefeller, a successful young    
business man in Cleveland, Ohio, became interested in the          
possibilities of petroleum, which had begun to "gush” from         
wells drilled in w’estern Pennsylvania in 1859. Rockefeller set    
out to control the petroleum business. In 1865 his Standard Oil    
Company of Cleveland was operating on the modest capital of        
one hundred thousand dollars. Five years later he organized        
the Standard Oil Company of Ohio, with a capital of one million    
dollars, and had control of most of the refining business of the   
state. Another five years and he had absorbed the important        
refineries in New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore, and wras      
controlling nearly 90 per cent of the refinery business of the     
country. In 1882 the great Standard Oil trust was incorporated     
vigorous, and efficient administration. He insisted on fair terms    
to China in the act of 1882 for the restriction of Chinese immi-     
gration to the United States.1 He tried to prevent the raid on       
the Treasury by his veto of "pork barrel ” bills, which appropri-    
ated huge sums for small harbors and unnavigable rivers. He          
advocated a fair revision of the tariff. He laid the foundation      
for our modern navy of ironclads. Most significant of all,           
though he had been dismissed from the New York customhouse           
by Hayes for his abuse of the patronage, three years later he        
signed the act which has been called " the Magna Carta of Civil      
Service Reform.”                                                     
Guiteau’s pistol shot had roused the country to a realization        
of the disgraceful state of the civil service. Following the recom-  
mendation of Arthur in his Presidential message of December,         
1882, George H. Pendleton, a Democratic Senator from Ohio’           
introduced a bill providing for a commission to classify the         
grades of the civil service and devise a system of competitive       
examinations for the selection of the candidates. The bill also      
forbade political assessments, as well as removals from office       
for failure to make "voluntary” contributions to political           
campaigns. The bill was passed by large majorities in both           
houses and signed by Arthur (January 16, 1883). The President        
showed his sincerity in the cause by appointing an ardent re-        
former as chairman of the Civil Service Commission, promulgat-       
ing a set of rules for the faithful execution of the act, and himself
putting about fifteen thousand government employees into the         
classified service before he left office.                            
Pension Bill which granted a pension of twelve dollars a month     
to every dependent soldier and sailor who had served three         
months, regardless of whether he had received any injury or        
had even participated in a battle. So great was the abuse heaped   
upon him by certain officers of the Grand Army of the Republic     
that he canceled his engagement to visit their encampment at       
St. Louis. Congress upheld his veto, however, and even the         
rank and file of the veterans at St. Louis approved it by a vote   
of 318 to 173.1                                                    
Labor Unrest. The middle years of the decade of the 1880’s         
were vexed by so many conflicts between capital and organized      
labor that they have been allied the period of "the great          
upheaval.” Strikes increased from 485 in 1884 to 645 in 1885       
and 1411 in 1886, involving in the latter year nearly ten thousand 
establishments and a half a million workers. The situation was     
made worse by the arrival of radical agitators in the flood of     
immigrants who came to our shores, lhe social revolutionists       
and anarchists of Chicago had formed the International Work-       
ing People’s Association in 1883 , advocating violence in the class
struggle. Their membership was largely recruited from the          
embittered revolutionaries of continental Europe. Of the eight     
anarchist newspapers published in the city, only one was           
printed in the English language. The labor strife culminated       
in a deed of horror on May 5, 1886. An open-air meeting in         
Haymarket Square, Chicago, called by the anarchists to protest     
against the forcible repression of a strike in the McCormick       
reaper works and to demand an eight-hour day, was ordered by       
the police to disperse. The reply was the explosion of a dyna-     
mite bomb thrown into the midst of the police squad, killing       
one man instantly and mortally wounding seven others.              
The Western Land Boom. To understand that storm we must          
note the experience through which the agricultural West was      
passing in the decade of the 1880’s. Encouraged by the home-     
stead grants, the opening of new lines of railroads, the flood of
immigrants from Europe, and the return of good times after       
the panic of 1873-1878, a stream of settlers had poured into     
the states west of the Missouri. The population of Kansas was    
364,000 in 1870; by 1890 it had reached 1,427,000. Nebraska      
grew from 122,000 to 1,058,000; Dakota Territory, from 14,000    
to 511,000. "A territory greater than the original area of the   
United States was peopled in half a dozen years,” wrote Senator  
Peffer of Kansas in the Forum of December, 1889. A spirit of     
unbounded optimism seized upon the settlers. Mr. Bryce, who      
made a trip to the great wheat lands over the newly completed    
Northern Pacific Railroad in 1883, wrote: "The confidence of     
these Westerners is superb. Men seem to live in the future rather
than in the present. . . . They see the country not merely as it 
is but as it will be twenty, fifty or a hundred years hence.”    
hood and began the process of converting the Caribbean Sea.      
into an American lake.                                           
The island republic of Santo Domingo had become bankrupt         
through successive revolutions. Its revenues were less than one  
third of the interest on its debt of thirty-two million dollars, 
and its European creditors threatened to collect by force unless 
the United States w’oukl guarantee the honest and efficient      
management of the finances of the republic. Roosevelt an-        
nounced in his message of December, 1904, to Congress that in    
case of "chronic wrongdoing or impotence” on the part of a       
Latin-American state we were bound by the Monroe Doctrine        
to intervene, "however reluctantly,” and to "exercise an in-     
ternational police power.” With the consent of the president of  
Santo Domingo, he negotiated a treaty making the United          
States the receiver for the bankrupt republic and appointed an   
official to collect the revenues. The Senate refused to ratify   
the treaty; but Roosevelt went on with the policy under an       
"executive agreement” until the Senate gave way in 1907-         
Under our management of her finances the solvency of Santo       
Domingo was restored and her creditors were satisfied. Hereto-   
fore we had only forbidden Europe to interfere with the gov-     
ernments of the republics of the New World; now we stepped       
in ourselves. This exercise of the "police power” to prevent     
disturbances in Latin America is called "the Roosevelt corol-    
lary’ of the Monroe Doctrine.”                                   
In the same year that the Senate ratified the Santo Domingo      
treaty, Roosevelt and President Diaz of Mexico co-operated in    
establishing the Central American Court of Justice, to which     
the five republics between Mexico and the Isthmus of Panama      
agreed to submit all their disputes with one another. In 1908    
a further step toward the security of the Caribbean countries    
was taken in the creation of a Central American International    
Bureau to further the interests of education, trade, agriculture,
and industry.                                                    
A Controversy with Japan. Serious trouble with Japan was         
threatened in 1906 when the board of education of San Fran-      
cisco ordered Japanese, Chinese, and Korean children to attend   
Municipal Reform. As far back as the 1880’s James Bryce            
called the government of our cities "the one conspicuous           
failure of American democracy,’’ and twenty years later his        
severe judgment was echoed and confirmed in Lincoln Steffens’s     
Shame of the Cities, lire Industrial Revolution was so rapidly     
converting America into a land of city dwellers that by 1910       
more than a third of our population lived in cities of over twenty-
five thousand. Immigrants crowded into the slum districts of       
the great urban centers. The foreign-bom formed only 7.5 per       
cent of the population in the country regions, but in the cities   
of five hundred thousand or over they comprised 33.6 per cent.     
They were sometimes naturalized at the rate of one a minute,       
and tens of thousands of ignorant voters (coming in ever-greater   
numbers from the poorer countries of southern and eastern          
Europe) remained in the large cities to become the easy prey       
of political bosses and a difficult problem for the agencies of    
America Station.                                                   
three years of its existence the board averted strikes on forty-  
two Eastern railroads and adjusted over sixty labor controver-    
sies. A Seamen’s Bill greatly improved the condition of the       
sailors in our merchant marine in respect to quarters, food, and  
wages. The Smith-Lever Act made an appropriation of five          
hundred thousand dollars a year, to be divided equally among      
the states in aid of the "land grant’’ colleges, which had been   
established in 1862 for the promotion of education in agriculture 
and the mechanical arts. Congress also provided a civil govern-   
ment for the Panama Canal Zone, and repealed an act of 1912       
which violated the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty of igoi (p. 567) by      
exempting American vessels in the coastwise trade from paying     
tolls for passage through the canal. Measures were introduced     
to aid the farmers by the construction of better roads, the es-   
tablishment of farm-loan banks, and the extension of rural        
credits.                                                          
Li August, 1914, the President wrote to Representative            
Underwood, "The American people have been served by this          
Congress as they have never been served before”; and ex-          
President Eliot of Harvard, reviewing the first year and a half   
of the administration in an article in Harper's Weekly, agreed    
with this judgment. At the same time, the very volume and         
variety of legislation aroused opposition, which, combined with   
criticism of Wilson’s foreign policy (especially in regard to     
Mexico), led to a large gain for the Republicans in the mid-term  
election of November, 1914. The Democratic majority was           
reduced from 147 to 29 in the House, and the Republicans re-      
gained control of several of the state governments. This was      
due partly to the fact that many of the Progressives of 1912      
were returning to the Republican ranks, the vote for Progressive  
candidates in 1914 being only 1,800,000 as against 4,126,000      
cast for Roosevelt in 1912.                                       
Diplomatic Problems. While he was holding Congress to its         
long task of reform legislation, the President had a number of    
difficulties to settle with foreign countries. In April, 1913, the
Japanese ambassador, Baron Chinda, protested against the          
proposed law of the California legislature to exclude aliens from 
Great Britain, France, Germany, and Italy. The precarious        
structure of peace, built on the old doctrine of the " balance of
power,” fell like a house of cards. Bulgaria and Turkey joined   
the Central Powers; Japan and Italy came to the side of the      
Allies. Eventually, of all Europe only the Scandinavian coun-    
tries, Holland, Spain, and Switzerland remained neutral.         
Wilson’s Proclamation of Neutrality^ The United States, of       
course, had no part in the European rivalries, fears, and hatreds
that had precipitated the war. We cared little whether Slav or   
Teuton controlled the Balkan Peninsula. Probably not one in      
ten thousand of our citizens could locate Bosnia or Baghdad on   
the map. Three thousand miles of " cooling ocean ” lay between   
US and inflamed Europe. Moreover, our land was the hospitable    
refuge of immigrants from all the belligerent countries. Nearly  
9,000,000 of our population were either of German birth or of    
German parentage. Russians, Italians, Poles, Hungarians, and     
Irishmen worked side by side in our mines, mills, and factories. 
The very year of 1914 was the peak year of immigration, bring-   
ing 1,200,000 foreigners to our shores.                          
Two weeks later the Attorney-General went in person to           
Chicago and secured from a Federal judge an injunction for-      
bidding the strikers to picket shops, to hinder the inspection   
or repair of locomotives or cars, to obstruct the movement of    
trains, to trespass on the premises of the railroads where repair
work was going on, to intimidate any of the employees of the     
roads, or even to communicate by telegraph or telephone to       
encourage to strike. This "most sweeping injunction ever is-     
sued in the history of labor disputes in America” was assailed   
by labor as a violation of constitutional rights and an attempt  
to reduce the workers to a "condition of slavery.” The strikers  
had committed no crime, said Mr. Gompers, in "quitting work      
when conditions became intolerable.” But the courts upheld       
the injunction, as in the case of the Pullman strike of 1894.    
The shopmen’s stride was quelled by this drastic action of the   
government. According to figures made public early in 1924       
by the Department of Justice, it had caused nineteen deaths by   
violence, wrought the destruction of millions of dollars’ worth  
of railroad property, reduced the income of the roads by 20 per  
cent in 1923, and cost the government nearly two million dol-    
lars for special deputies sworn in by the Attorney-General to    
preserve order.                                                  
The Immigration Laws. Because America has made it her            
boast to be a land of refuge for the oppressed and of opportunity
for the seekers of new fortunes, our doors have until quite re-  
cently stood wide open to the immigrants from the Old World.     
In 1914 the high-water mark was reached, with a total of         
1,218,480 immigrants, of whom more than 800,000 came from        
Italy, Russia, and Austria-Hungary, and 260,000 were illiterates 
of fourteen years of age or over. During the war the numbers of  
immigrants fell off; but when the war was c$lr, there was        
danger that we might be flooded by refugees from the distressed  
countries of Europe. "The world is preparing to move to          
America,” w’rote the Commissioner of Immigration. The war        
had also revealed some alarming facts in regard to our foreign   
population. Many immigrants were neglecting to become            
naturalized American citizens, retaining their real allegiance to
the lands from which they had come. Radical labor agitators       
were suspected of "taking their orders from Moscow.” Over         
one thousand newspapers in the United States were pnnted          
in foreign languages, and over io per cent of the people here     
could not speak English. American labor leaders were dis-         
turbed over the influx of hordes of foreigners who were accus-    
tomed to work for low wages, and patriotic citizens generally     
were alarmed at the numbers of newcomers who had no knowl-        
edge of American institutions or ideals. If we were not to become 
what Theodore Roosevelt called "an international boarding-        
house,” some step must be taken to limit the unrestricted immi-   
gration of the prewar days.                                       
The method adopted was the quota system. On May 19,1921,          
President Harding signed the Emergency Quota Act, which           
limited the number of immigrants that any country could send      
to the United States in any given year to 3 per cent of its peo-  
ple who were here according to the census of 1910. But this       
law was unsatisfactory, because a large number of immigrants      
from the eastern and southern countries of Europe had come        
here before 1910 and hence had large quotas (Russia, 34,284;      
Poland, 25,827; Italy, 42,057). To turn the balance more in       
favor of the northern countries, such as the British Isles, Ger-  
many, Norway, and Sweden, which had sent us so many welcome       
immigrants in the nineteenth century, a new law was passed        
in 1924, fixing the quota at 2 per cent of the number of the      
nationals of each country in the United States according to       
the census of 1890. The new law cut down the Russian quota        
to 2248, the Italian to 3845, and the Polish to 5982, v^dle it    
permitted 63,574 1° come from the British Isles, 51,227 from      
Germany, and 9561 from Sweden. The new law also provided          
that after July 1, 1927, only 150,000 immigrants should be ad-    
mitted annually, divided among the several countries in pro-      
portion to the numbers of their nationals here according to the   
census of 1920.                                                   
Because the act of 1924 forbade the entrance into our country     
of all aliens who were ineligible to citizenship, it drew from the
Japanese ambassador at Washington a respectful but force-         
even a small fraction of the huge indemnity. The British broke     
off diplomatic relations with Mexico, but Secretary Hull, es-      
                                         pecially to avoid discord
                                            during the coming Lima
                                           Conference, adopted the
                                               more patient way of
                                          notes of protest, hoping
                                         ' that Cardenas would re-
                                         cede from his rash policy
                                             when he saw into what
                                       difficulties it was leading
                                            him. Mexico lacked the
                                          managerial talent to run
                                           the oil properties suc-
                                           cessfully, and the gov-
                                            ernment had difficulty
                                         in marketing the " stolen
                                              oil,” which was boy-
                                           cotted by Great Britain
                                              and some other Euro-
                                            pean countries. In the
                                         year following the expro-
                                          priation Mexican foreign
 trade fell off by 40 per cent, and her imports, over 60 per cent  
   of which were from the United States, declined by $60,000,000.  
        Finally, we had a trump can! in our silver purchases from  
      Mexico, the stoppage of which would embarrass her more than  
                                      the loss of her oil market.  
Japanese-American Relations. Before the World War much             
anxiety was felt in our Pacific-coast states over the heavy Japa-  
nese immigration (see pages 576, 626, 774). But during and         
after the war the Japanese turned their attention to the main-     
land of China, to find an outlet for their crowded population      
and to extend their domination over that unfortunate country       
tom by civil war. Shortly before the advent of Roosevelt to the    
Presidency, Japan seized Manchuria and made it into the puppet     
