The effect of immigration on labor. Wages were kept low because of the arrival of large groups of immigrants from foreign countries. The captains of industry in America subscribed to the laissez-faire policy and to individual enterprise. That did not prevent them, however, from seeking assistance from the government in the form of a high tariff to keep out foreign products and at the same time advocating liberal immigration laws which would bring in foreign workers to compete with domestic labor. In 1864 Congress passed an alien contract immigration law which permitted contractors in this country to import foreign workers and bind them to work for a term to pay their passage money. During the period of rapid industrial growth from 1880 to 1900, 9,000,000 immigrants came to this country in search of work and improved living conditions. Laljor organizations, however, demanded immigration restrictions to avoid the competition of these foreign immigrants who had a lower standard of living and would work for low wages. In some of the Eastern factory towns immigrants with large families remained unemployed and were anxious to accept work under any physical conditions and however low the wages. According to a report from Holyoke, Massachusetts, in 1873, "There is one pitiful and miserable sight which we have seen night after night in front of the fruit and vegetable stands. ... It is a drove of poverty stricken children, often girls, clad only in one or two ragged dirty garments, down on their hands and knees in the gutters, greedily picking out of the mud and dirt and eating the bits of spoiled and decayed fruit which had been thrown away as worthless. The appearance of Helen Hunt Jackson's book, A Century of Dishonor, led to strong humanitarian protests against the mistreatment of the Indians and induced President Cleveland to recommend appropriate legislation. In 1887 Congress passed the Dawes Act, which provided for the division of land among individual Indians. Each head of a family was allotted 160 acres, and single adult persons received 80 acres. Toward the close of the '80's, the education and assimilation of the Indian became important. Influence of immigration. Throughout this period there was a tremendous increase in the population of the United States as a whole. In 1870 there were about 38,500,000 people in the United States, and by 1900 the number was close to 76,000,000. It is not surprising that many of these people went to the West. During the last forty years of the nineteenth century about 14,000,000 immigrants from foreign countries came to America. Their interest in America was stimulated by glowing reports of this country circulated in Europe by the propaganda agencies of trans-Atlantic steamship lines. Poor crops during the '70's in some of the European wheat growing regions likewise induced many peasants to leave their native countries for America. European wars which imposed compulsory military service on most European men also encouraged many to come to America. Immigration was stimulated by the Federal government, which established a Bureau of Immigration. Foreigners contributed hard labor to the building of our railroads, and many of them were employed in our newly developed industrial plants. Some of the Western states maintained immigration bureaus also, and employed foreign agents to encourage migration to this country. America was painted as a land of opportunity, where farmland could be obtained free and where wages were high, where there was freedom of religion and no artificial caste system. In America every'' man had an opportunity to rise according to his ability. Here also was freedom from military service, and from all those old restrictions which had kept many Europeans on a low standard of living. It is not surprising that foreigners came from many countries to this land of opportunity. As the type of immigrant changed, the American attitude toward immigration changed also. A few of these immigrants preached radical economic doctrines. Also, organized labor protested against immigration because it tended to keep wages down. Commodore Lawrence Kearny kept a squadron of American ships in Chinese waters during the conflict. When, as a result of the war, Great Britain secured the use of several Chinese ports and other commercial concessions, Kearny asked the Chinese authorities to give American citizens the same commercial privileges as those granted to the "most favored nation." The principle of the most favored nation was incorporated in a treaty in 1844, which was negotiated with China by Caleb Cushing, the first American commissioner to that country. The treaty also contained an "extraterritoriality" clause, which granted American citizens in China who violated Chinese laws the right to be tried according to the laws of the United States rather than those of China. Chinese immigration. The first Chinese to come to America were welcomed because they came at a time when labor was scarce. Large numbers came during the years immediately following the War between the North and the South and were employed in building the Western railroads. The Burlingame. Treaty was negotiated in 1868, giving China the right to unrestricted immigration into the United States. California received the greatest number of these Chinese immigrants. During the depression following the panic of 1873 there was much unemployment and the Chinese laborers became unpopular, Chinese exclusion was widely discussed, and Congress passed an exclusion act prohibiting Chinese immigration for ten years. China had agreed to the principle in a treaty which had been signed two years earlier. This was followed by a more restrictive law in 1892. The legislation excluding Chinese was the beginning of a new American immigration policy. The United States, in the years to come, was gradually to cease being the land of opportunity for the oppressed of other lands, as a stricter immigration policy was adopted. Origin of Pan-Americanism. The people of the United States have for a long time had a profound interest in the welfare of our neighbors to the South. The early history of the Latin American countries was similar to our own. The people of the United States obtained their independence after a long struggle against British oppression. They could understand why the people in Spanish American countries were dissatisfied with Spanish oppression. They sympathized therefore with San Martin, the "Liberator of the South," as he struggled to free Argentina, Chile, and Peru from Spanish rule, and with Simon Bolivar, the "Liberator of the North," as he freed Venezuela, Colombia, and Ecuador. Following their liberation, Simon Bolivar was interested in uniting these republics into a strong nation. In this he failed, but he continued in his efforts to establish better relations between all the American republics, both north and south. Pan-American Congress, 1826. In 1826 Simon Bolivar issued a call for a meeting in Panama of all the nations of the Western Hemisphere to discuss their common problems. Secretary of State Henry Clay was enthusiastic and persuaded President Adams to appoint delegates to the conference. Opposition developed in the Senate, however, and the delegates were delayed, awaiting their confirmation. In the meantime, the Pan-American Congress met in the summer of 1826 and finally adjourned without having accomplished any of its aims. For more than half a century following the Panama Congress little effort was made to develop closer co-operation between the American republics. In 1881, however, Secretary of State James G. Blaine acted to revive United States interest in the affairs of Latin America. His principal reason was an economic one. The United States was purchasing raw materials from the Latin American countries, but the Latin Americans were buying most of their manufactured goods from Europe. Blaine wished to correct this unfavorable balance of trade by establishing closer commercial relations with Latin America. He supported the creation of an International American Conference winch would promote peace and trade. President Arthur granted permission to invite the Latin American republics to such a conference. Immigration restriction. Restrictions on the number of immigrants who could enter the United States continued to be made. More than 1,000,000 immigrants came to die United Slates in 1905. That number dropped to about 325,000 in 1915; less than 300,000 in 1925; only some 35,000 in 1935; and about 38,000 in 1945. Restriction began in 1907, when the United States and Japan negotiated the "Gentlemen's Agreement," halting the immigration of Japanese laborers to America. The first important change in our immigration policy came in 1917. Congress in that year passed a law over President Wilson's veto requiring that immigrants lx- able to read and write. A more radical change in immigration policy was decided upon in 1921. Europe was badly disorganized as a result of the war and many of the people were poverty stricken. This caused Europeans to migrate to America in larger numbers and led Congress to enact the Emergency Quota Act of 1921. The law provided that the number of immigrants of any particular nationality be limited to three per cent of the number of individuals of lhat nationality living in the United States in 1910. This emergency act was extended in 1922 for two more years. A permanent Quota Law was passed in 1924, It restricted immigration from July 1, 1924, to June 30, 1927, to two per cent of the number of persons of a given nationality living in the Lhiitcd States in 1890. After June 30, 1927 (this was later continued until 1929), the quota was to be "that proportion of 150,000 which the number of persons of a given national origin residing in the United States in 1920 bears to the country's total population in 1920." A women who was prominent in American educational life is former Dean Virginia Gildersleeve of Barnard College. Here she is meeting with the Earl of Halifax and Harold Stassen, all three members of the United Nations General Provisions Commission. New immigration law passed in 1929 (increased the number of immigrants slightly to a quota of 153.000 annually. These quotas did not apply to natives of Canada, Mexico, and Central and South America. Immigrants were anxious to come to the United Slates after World War II. Officials at the American Embassy in Greece estimated in 1947 that they had enough applications from Greeks to fill the immigration quota of that country for ninety-nine years. The story was similar in Italy, where it was believed that 14,000,000 Italians would come to the United States if it were possible. The same was true of many other nations. But the bars were up, and only a few were permitted to enter. A new epoch in American life had begun in 1924. America was no longer the "melting pot" where the oppressed people of other lands could come and I live together. The American population of the future would be almost solely native-born, though many were of foreign stock. 