American civilization arose in part from European inquisitiveness about this spinning sphere on which mankind lives. This inquisitiveness grew during the Crusades, those interesting pilgrimages by Europeans to the Near East for religion, conquest, and trade. These pilgrimages were the prolog to that unique era in the history of geography when men of daring and high endeavor braved undreamed hardships and dangers to search out the arrangements and the features of the earth on which they lived. The first voyage of Columbus etched the pattern of the age of geographical discovery. The explorer was followed by the trader, the missionary, the adventurer, and the settler. Monarchs of the European nations with borders on the Atlantic Ocean declared vast regions overseas to be their possessions, although no habitable land was found without inhabitants. For three centuries these rulers—Spanish, Dutch, Portuguese, French, and British—vied one with another to possess these lands, until near the close of the eighteenth century England emerged with the most virile and powerful world empire. But the expansion of Europe continued until European culture and control had been carried into every continent of the globe, leaving few corners untouched by European customs and devices. The roots of American civilization strike mainly into those British settlements which arose along the Atlantic seaboard, while its growth was modified greatly both by the new surroundings and by people of other •stocks, notably Scotch-Irish, German, and French. Settlers in British colonies, wherever they came from, usually sought a freer life in America than they had enjoyed in Europe. Such freedom was commonly desired in religion, in government, and in the conditions for making a living. A new world opened before Europeans who came to live in America. They had left behind them in Europe roads worn smooth by the feet of generations, great cities hoary with age, and dwellings made comfortable by years of living in them. In America they found a wilderness; no inn or cottage, no road or city awaited them. All the physical parts of culture had to be built afresh in a new world. Hard work was master, for only hard work could build a permanent civilization in the virgin country. There was little to encourage the deep-rooted class distinctions and privileges of the Old World. Each man had to win a living from soil, forest, or sea. Villages and plantations came to be self-sustaining to an extent not readily realized today. The settlement of Jamestown was as far in the past in 1775 as the Battle of Banker Hill is from us today. Over two million people were then living in the thirteen English colonies. The communities in which they lived were very different from those of the pioneers. The rude life of a new settlement had developed into the complex and varied existence of an established society, but always with a pioneer fringe along the western edge. During the early years of the colonial period, the culture of Europe had been brought to America. The New World has continued to borrow from the Old, but even before 1775 it was beginning to create a culture of its own. Probably two-thirds of the colonists of America in 1775 had been born here, and most of them had never seen another country. Naturally their point of view was different from that of their parents or perhaps of their great-great-grandparents whose early years had been spent in England or on the Continent. Nevertheless, the customs and traditions of the various stocks from which they had sprung were still powerful. The English basis. The majority of the first settlers were English, and English blood and English traditions remained dominant. Two early non-English settlements, the Swedes on the Delaware and the Dutch along the Hudson, were small; nearly all the other colonists were English until after 1680. This early population was reinforced by a relatively small but constant stream of newcomers from England. The French Huguenots. Toward the end of the seventeenth century several other nationalities came in significant numbers. When the revocation of the Edict of Nantes (1685) drove the French Protestants into exile, many of them came to America. They settled in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New York, Virginia, and especially in South Carolina. These Huguenots were an able group, made up of many highly skilled artisans, merchants, and physicians. French migration, however, did not continue in large numbers. The German settlers. A group of Germans attracted by Penn's tolerant attitude concerning religion were among the first settlers in Pennsylvania. The migration of the Germans, unlike the French, continued with newcomers every year. The numbers were small at first, but after twenty or thirty years the trickle became a torrent. Something like 40,000 Germans landed in the first half of the eighteenth century. They made settlements in most of the colonies, but the greatest number came to Pennsylvania, where at times they considerably outnumbered the English. Since most of them were frugal farmers, they tended to move toward the frontiers, where land was more fertile and less expensive than along the coast. They brought with them more advanced ideas on agriculture than the English, and they formed an industrious and stable element in the life of the colony. The Scotch-Irish. Large numbers of Scotch-Irish came during the eighteenth century. They were the descendants of the Scots who had settled in northern Ireland in the seventeenth century. There were 6,000 Scotch-Irish in Pennsylvania alone by 1729, and 6,000 more came in that year. Whole towns in Ireland were deserted, and many new towns established in this country. The Scotch-Irish, like the Germans, went to the frontier where land was cheap and plentiful, but unlike the Germans, they were restless and politically ambitious. They frequently came into conflict with the Indians and also with the colonial authorities. As one colonial governor sadly wrote, "(they | frequently sit down on any spot of land they can find without asking questions." On their own behalf they said, "It is against the law of God and nature that so much land should be idle while so many Christians want it to labor on and raise bread." This was the typical frontier point of view. Besides the Scotch-Irish, immigrants came directly from Scotland, and Scots who were prisoners were shipped here by the government. During Cromwell's time some Irish prisoners had been shipped to this country, but the number of Irish was not great during the colonial period. Why they came. Nearly all of these newcomers were in one sense or another refugees; many of them fled from far worse conditions than the English had suffered. The French Protestants, many of the Germans, and the Scotch-Irish Presbyterians had endured at least as severe religious persecution. The great wave of German migration was occasioned by the devastation of their homeland in wars with the French. Economic conditions in rural Germany at that time were so difficult that with the utmost industry a man could scarcely keep alive, and it was practically impossible for him to rise above the position in which he was born. Several distressing years of flood, drought, or severe frost had made people desperate. The Scotch-Irish had been prosperous until the woolen industry, which was their chief occupation, was forbidden by act of Parliament (1699). The years following brought troubles of bad weather and difficulties over land titles as well as official interference with their religion. They came to America with a lively hatred of Great Britain and an intense dislike of government in general. English attitude toward settlement. Unlike France or Spain, England left the settlement of her colonies almost wholly to private initiative, permitting anyone to settle in them. She encouraged settlers from other nationalities by giving foreigners who had lived four years in an English colony the same rights as native-born Englishmen. This was an unusual provision in those days. Scarcity of free labor. So long as every man in the colonies could own land, it was difficult to hire workers. All the early groups of colonists brought servants with them, but the menservants soon found it possible to make a living for themselves, and the women were speedily sought in marriage. Innumerable letters to England advised prospective settlers to bring servants with them, but warned them that the latter would not remain long in service. In New England where the small farm was typical, the farmer and his family did most of the work. In other sections where large estates or plantations were the rule, the intense demand for labor was met at first by indentured white servants, who were gradually supplanted in the southern sections by Negro slaves. Everywhere apprentices were common. This scarcity of free labor throughout the colonial period lasted until the end of the nineteenth century, when the frontier disappeared. It had a profound effect upon the development of America. Apprentices. The English system of apprenticeship was established early in the development of the colonies. Under this system the master was responsible for the teaching, support, and moral training of the apprentice for a specified number of years. Most apprentices were children whom their parents bound out to receive training in a special line of work. Usually at least one son followed his father's trade; but, if there were several sons, it was advantageous to apprentice some of them to skillful persons, whose sons probably were too old or too young to follow in their fathers' footsteps. Girls were also sometimes apprenticed to learn the mysteries of weaving and dyeing, or the making of butter, cheese, and candles. In the days when trade education and vocational training were unknown, and most work was done in the home, the system had much to recommend it. On the whole it worked well. Indentured servants. The indenture, by which a man bound himself to work a specified number of years for his transportation, was the bridge between poor people in Europe, eager to come to this country, and well-to-do farmers and others here who needed their help. An able-bodied adult was usually bound for from four to seven years, with the assurance of a little equipment and often some land at the end of his time of indenture. The lot of the indentured servant depended largely on the kind of master he happened to get. Frequently he went into the home of a fellow countryman, even an acquaintance, where he was treated well and given a substantial start when his time was ended. In other cases he fared worse than a slave. The master took no interest in him beyond the period of his indenture, and if he tried to run away or otherwise behaved badly, his time would be extended. The system was unsatisfactory in many ways. Indentured servants lacked the incentive to work possessed by free men. Some had poor backgrounds and their position was difficult. In most communities a large proportion of the crimes were committed by people of this class. Nevertheless a great many, probably the majority, acquitted themselves reasonably well and prospered after they became free. Immigration agents. Unfortunately the coming of indentured servants was not wholly the result of supply and demand. It was also profitable, and in the eighteenth century it became a recognized business. Agents known as newlanders traveled about in Europe painting glowing pictures of the New World. They described it as a country of high wages, free land, and perfect climate, where the farmer lived like a lord. Many of those who responded to these inducements had money enough, as they thought, to pay for their passage. Since it was more profitable to bring indentured servants than ordinary passengers, the agents and the ship captains sometimes conspired to cause delay and to make the journey more expensive for the passengers than they had anticipated. In this way many an unfortunate person who had expected to land in America with enough money to keep his family together and to buy a farm, found his family scattered and sold into bondage for a term of years. Kidnaping. An even more reprehensible method of obtaining servants for the colonies was by kidnaping or "spiriting," as it was called. This was most common in the latter part of the seventeenth century. It is reported that in a single year ten thousand persons were kidnaped and sent to America (1670). Efforts were made to stop this outrageous practice, and toward the close of the century it disappeared. Transported prisoners. About 40,000 prisoners were sent to the colonies (1717-1775), mostly to Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, and the West Indies. The English authorities sent them as bond servants, usually for longer terms than the ordinary indentured servants. Large numbers of them had committed only trifling offenses; others were political prisoners, and still others were poor starving wretches who had deliberately committed a petty crime in order to be deported. Yet some were hardened criminals, and the colonies cannot be blamed tor objecting strenuously to receiving them. Slavery. Negro slaves were first brought into Virginia in 1619. Their numbers increased slowly toward the end of the century, but for some years longer they were less numerous than indentured servants. Even though there was much opposition to the importation of slaves, Colonel William Byrd stated that there were at least ten thousand in Virginia (1736). The Negroes, however, met an economic need. The supply of white servants was never sufficient and was always changing. Consequently, slavery increased in spite of the fears of Byrd and others. It existed in all the colonies until the Revolution, and slaves made up one-fifth of the entire population of the colonies by 1770. There were few slaves in the North, where small farms were the rule and fairly skilled labor was essential. A person traveling south would have observed different conditions. Negroes formed one-fourth of the population of Maryland, and one-third of that of Virginia. In South Carolina the development of rice and indigo culture in hot swampy fields made Negro labor apparently a necessity, and by the middle of the eighteenth century slaves greatly out-numbered the whites. Education was considered valuable in colonial days chiefly on religious grounds. It was only later that leaders such as Franklin, Washington, and Jefferson emphasized the fact that it was essential in a republic. These great leaders saw that a successful democracy required a citizenry capable of rendering intelligent rather than merely emotional judgment of civic and social problems. The idea that education was a necessary preparation for work or was important to broaden and enrich the individual came later still. The Massachusetts law (1647) was passed for the purpose of outwitting "the old deluder Satan" by making it possible for everyone to read the Bible. Schools varied widely in quality in the different colonies, with Massachusetts in the lead. New Jersey, Maryland, and the southern colonies had a combination of private tutors, small pay schools, and an occasional endowed free school or academy. The Dutch in New York established parochial schools, and the Quakers and German sects had schools more or less under the supervision of the church. In the eighteenth century the "Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts" did much to encourage education throughout the colonies. It founded six or eight schools in New York alone. A more effusive American writer said of a mill started in Connecticut (1807): The children were delighted with the new occupation, and thought the glittering machinery the prettiest thing in the world. There is also some testimony on the other side. A song sung by striking mill girls in Lowell (1836) included the following lines: Oh isn't it a pity that such a pretty girl as I, Should be sent to the factory to pine away and die? Most of the evidence, however, indicates that the erection of a factory in a neighborhood was eagerly welcomed, and that it gave a new opportunity to earn money under conditions which were not considered unduly irksome. Conditions began to change about 1850, when immigrants were pouring into the country in large numbers. Many of them went to work in factories for lower wages than native Americans would accept. Thus the native born were crowded out and began to regard factory work as beneath them. Conditions then became worse than they had been in the early days. Early labor unions. Soon after the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, workers in a few city trades, particularly printers and shoemakers, formed unions for the purpose of safeguarding their interests, that is, to obtain higher wages, shorter hours, and better working conditions. For a time they were able to accomplish little. Men were sent to prison for attempting to strike, until 1825. In, the early 1830's, however, the union movement made considerable progress. A number of local unions were formed, and the first trade union council met in New York (1833). The serious financial panic (1837) threw thousands out of work; wages were cut as in the depression after 1929 (see p. 722), and labor unions were crushed and unable to regain their strength for many years. Nevertheless, by the middle of the century local unions of printers, hat finishers, iron workers, and machinists were organizing in federations. Workers and the suffrage. During the early years of the factory movement, workers seldom had a vote, because of the qualifications regarding residence and property. They soon became discontented with this situation and added their voices to that of the frontiersmen in demanding the franchise. The suffrage was being greatly extended by the end of the first quarter of the nineteenth century (see p. 531). Within a decade or two nearly all laborers had the privilege of voting, and they promptly used the ballot to improve their conditions. A New Age Even more striking than the total growth was the shift in population in the settlement of the West and development of towns. Between 1840 and 1850 the number of people in the country as a whole increased by 36 per cent, but the number of those living in towns of 8,000 or more inhabitants nearly doubled. Only 3 per cent of the population lived in the West in 1790, but this proportion increased rapidly to 32 per cent in 1820 and to 44 per cent in 1850. The shift from country to city has been characteristic of the United States down to very recent times. This increase in population was due both to a high birth rate and to immigration. Families of eight to twelve children, which had been the rule in colonial days, were still common, and somewhat easier conditions of life enabled a larger proportion to survive. During the Napoleonic Wars in Europe and later, immigration to the United States was small, but it began to increase rapidly about 1830. Under these circumstances the growth of towns and the development of the West were not only possible, they were inevitable. Newcomers from Great Britain. The natural increase of native Americans was always reinforced by migration from overseas. The largest number of early immigrants came from England, Scotland, and Wales. These newcomers fitted readily into the life here and were scarcely regarded as foreigners. They belonged to all classes and were to be found in all parts of the country, but large numbers settled as farmers in the Northwest Territory. Another large group recruited from factory operatives in the old country entered the newly-opened factories in the East. These immigrants helped to keep the United States in touch with labor and reform movements in Great Britain. The Irish. More striking was the influx of Irish. The annual number of these newcomers increased steadily, and in the late 1840's, following the potato famine in Ireland, it leaped to unprecedented figures. Conditions in Ireland even before the famine were desperately hard, and most of the immigrants landed without funds. Fortunately jobs were at hand. The opening of the West and the rapid growth of eastern cities made imperative a large supply of laborers who could handle a pick and shovel and who would go where they were needed. Thus the Irish were cordially welcomed by the contractors who were laying sewer and gas mains in eastern cities, or building roadbeds and canals farther afield. Irish strength played a large part in making possible the rapid development of the country during this period. As long as the Irish worked on construction gangs, no one objected to their presence. As soon as jobs such as the construction of canals were finished, the men who had been employed on them usually settled in near-by towns. They liked to live together in groups; they would accept work in the factories or elsewhere at wages below the customary rate. Genuine tolerance for differences has never been a conspicuous American trait, and at this time Roman Catholicism, the religion of most of the Irish, was often regarded as something European and hostile to democracy. When a Catholic church began to rise in a town, and the earlier residents found the Irish taking over their jobs, the combination of circumstances aroused deep resentment. Mob violence, to which the Irish were not slow to respond, often resulted. Rioting, especially at elections, became a regular feature in some localities. The Irish and politics. The Irish in the United States early showed an aptitude for politics, particularly in municipal affairs. By the 1820's they were active in Tammany Hall in New York City and before long they controlled it. The Irish furnished most of the police in eastern cities, and a large proportion of other city officials and contractors. They became Democrats in the time of Jackson, and most of their offspring have remained Democrats. In national politics their cohesion and interest made them influential out of proportion to their numbers. As the Irish were deeply hostile to Great Britain, their presence in this country did much to revive the bitterness resulting from the War of 1812. This showed itself particularly in the frequency with which certain politicians "twisted the lion's tail." Many scathing orations of the time were really not prompted by the speaker's personal resentment but by the thoughtful eye which he kept on the Irish in his audience. In the hope of detaching the Irish vote from the Democratic party, rival politicians often almost outdid the Democrats in the zeal with which they assailed 'John Bull." They attained little success; the Democratic party, in the large eastern cities at least, still claims the enthusiastic loyalty of most citizens of Irish descent. People of Irish blood have made an important contribution to American life. Many Irishmen fought on the Northern side in the Civil War, and they furnished a number of distinguished military and naval officers. Other Irishmen have done notable work as newspaper men, actors, musicians, and teachers. Victor Herbert, the well-known composer, and Augustus St. Gaudens, America's foremost sculptor, were both of Irish birth. The Irish sense of humor, bigness of heart, and sympathetic understanding of the other person's point of view have woven a colorful thread into the fabric of American life. Migration from Germany. A steady stream of settlers had come from Germany to America during the colonial period, but it almost ceased at the time of the American Revolution. The failure of liberal uprisings (1830, 1848) gave impetus to a second migration. Among the newcomers were many men of superior education and ability and of liberal ideals. At the same time economic conditions in Germany were difficult; the peasant farmers who made up threequarters of the population saw little hope of improving their position, and many of them turned eagerly to the United States as a land of opportunity. With them came large numbers of skilled mechanics who had been displaced by the newly-built German factories and machinery. Some Germans with special skills or interests such as musicians, watchmakers, or importers stayed in the eastern cities; but the great majority pushed westward. Many went to the cities in the Ohio Valley. Germans formed one-third of the voters in Cincinnati (1840). Later, increasingly larger numbers sought the Great Lakes region. Many settled in growing cities such as Milwaukee, St. Louis, and Chicago, while others became pioneer farmers. In general they kept together in groups. Industrious and successful German communities were soon to be found in northern Indiana and Michigan, northern and central Illinois, throughout Wisconsin, at scattered points in Iowa, and in a few communities farther south. These German settlers had not only the industry and ability needed to build economically sound communities, but they also included many leaders of high culture and liberal enthusiasm. Francis Lieber was a distinguished student of criminal law and of the science of government. Carl Schurz, a general in the Civil War and Secretary of the Interior under President Hayes, was a nationally-known figure in the reform movements of his time. Germans added strength to the movements for the abolition of slavery, prison reform, and education. They also brought to this country musical taste and skill of a high order little known here. Their interest in education seconded that of the New England pioneers and contributed to the development of the remarkable state educational systems in the Middle West. Their opposition to slavery was an important factor in holding the West in the Union; and many of them fought in the Northern armies during the Civil War. Other national groups. People from other nations also came to the United States, but in less significant numbers. French Canadians began to move across the border to work in the new mills. Standards in etiquette and in art in this period were borrowed from France rather than from Great Britain, and a small but influential group of Frenchmen served as teachers, dancing masters, and chefs. Colonies of Dutch, Belgians, and Swiss settled farming communities in the Northwest, and the handful of Scandinavians who came dining this period were the advance guard of a movement which was to become important in later decades. The United States would have become a very different country had it been cut off from Europe. On the one side of the Atlantic was opportunity for work in the new factories and for farming in the new West; on the other were hosts of people in Europe eager to come to the New World. The work of the immigrants in the factory or on the farm was important. It was even more important to have a rapidly growing population which could absorb the products of large-scale industry and agriculture and exploit the regions beyond the frontier. These newcomers, moreover, brought with them ideas and interests which modified those of the earlier stocks, helping to make American life a fabric woven of many-colored strands. The struggle for statehood. Utah was within the boundaries of Mexico when Young settled there, but within two years it was transferred to the United States by the terms of the treaty which concluded the Mexican War. Denied immediate statehood, it was organized as a territory with Brigham Young as governor (1850). The United States played a generally friendly role while these changes were taking place. Until difficulties arose over the admission of Japanese laborers to the United States, relations between the two nations were excellent. Continental expansion completed. The acquisition of Oregon (p. 206) and the lands formerly belonging to Spain rounded out the boundaries of the United States. With the purchase of Alaska (1867), her continental expansion was completed. In looking at the map today one may feel that ''manifest destiny" was then fulfilled. In 1854, however, it seemed that merely one more step had been taken. Destiny appeared still to beckon. Indeed the word was used more often after than before the middle of the century. Expansion through trade continued with little interruption, but geographic expansion, like many other forces, had been caught in the sectional clash over slavery. For the time, at least, it ceased to be a national urge and became a party slogan. Southern attitudes toward slavery. Once convinced that slavery was essential for prosperity, many Southerners stopped thinking of it as an evil. While abolitionist sentiment was growing in the North, a belief spread in the South that slavery was a positive benefit. It was pointed out that the Bible sanctioned slavery and laid down rules for the conduct of masters and slaves. At the same time Southerners circulated information on the evils connected with factory towns which had grown up in England and in the North. They argued that slavery was good from every point of view. The Negroes had been rescued from savagery; as slaves, they were sure of care in sickness and old age. The masters, relieved of all manual toil, could devote themselves to intellectual pursuits and to the direction of government; and society had no grave problems of industrial unrest and real poverty as it did in the industrial North. Some Southerners did not accept this view of slavery, but they were in the minority. Southern indignation was unbounded when Hinton R. Helper of North Carolina published his The Impending Crisis, depicting the injury slavery had done to the "poor whites," a class from which he sprang. Southern officials burned all copies that fell into their hands. Uncle Tom's Cabin. With such beliefs held generally in the South and a growing conviction in the North that slavery was morally wrong, the novel, Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852), fanned the flame of sectional antagonism. The author, Harriet Beecher Stowe, had no first-hand knowledge of the South, but she presented a vivid, although exaggerated, picture of slavery. In the South the book was regarded as an insult, but it was accorded a place near the Bible in antislavery circles of the North. Many a youth who shed tears over the trials and tribulations of Uncle Tom was shedding blood ten years later in a war that this novel had helped to make possible. Control of Congress. As the North and South developed along their own particular lines, both sections thought it essential to control Congress in order to protect and further their own particular interests. The control of Congress rested on two bases, population and the number of states. When immigrants showed a decided tendency to seek homes where labor was free from slave competition, the South realized that it could not hold its own in population and therefore could not control the House. From the Southerners' viewpoint this made it all the more necessary that the number of slave states should keep pace with the free, for in that way the South could block jn the Senate high tariffs, internal improvements, ship subsidies, and other forms of hostile legislation. This struggle for control of the Senate was back of the demand for new territory and the disputes which arose over its status after its acquisition. Slavery and the federal government. The Constitution had given certain powers to the federal government and had left others to the states with specific limitations on the powers of each. Tt had made no clear provision, however, as to what should be done if a difference of opinion arose between the federal government and one or several states. Slavery came within the jurisdiction of the states, and the right of a state to sanction slavery was implicit in the Constitution. The great majority of Northerners recognized this fact and took it for granted that slavery could not be interfered with where it already existed. The South, however, was not satisfied with this negative toleration. According to the slaveowners' point of view, their rights demanded federal protection at several points. Among these were the tariff, both foreign and interstate slave-trade, the return of fugitive slaves, and the extension of slavery in new territory. State rights versus federal supremacy. As early as 1789 the Democratic-Republican legislatures of Kentucky and Virginia had declared the Alien and Sedition Laws unconstitutional (p. 155). They set forth the theory that whenever in their opinion the federal government exceeded its constitutional powers, the individual states had the right to decide how to obtain redress. A few years later the Federalists of New England at Hartford used the same arguments in opposing acts occasioned by the War of 1812 (p. 198). The most striking appeal to this doctrine before the Civil War came when South Carolina defied the "Tariff of Aborninations" (p. 246). The failure of her attempt to vindicate state rights through nullification popularized the idea of secession as the ultimate resort. There was a strong tendency to unite slavery and state rights in the years just before the Civil War, when it appeared certain that the slave states were in a permanent minority (p. 303). Yet no one did so consistently. Southern state rights advocates threw their principles to the wind when they forced fugitive slave laws upon the North, and so did the northern upholders of federal supremacy when they nullified and obstructed these laws by the personal liberty bills. Lincoln succeeded in holding them by a combination of force and leniency. For some time they were not compelled to furnish their share of the army. Federal troops were sent to strategic points to help the local Unionists. In Missouri, which had a small civil war of its own, German companies of militia played an important part in holding the state in the Union. Several states of the Confederacy had strong Unionist sections; this was particularly true of Virginia. Her western counties were settled chiefly by people of Scotch-Irish and German stock, who owned few slaves and were in constant opposition to the eastern aristocracy. Aided and encouraged by federal troops, they set up a separate state government (1861). Two years later Congress admitted "West Virginia" with a constitution which provided for the gradual abolition of slavery. A map may show which states seceded and which stayed with the Union, but no line can be drawn to show the sympathy or the activities of the people. Thousands of men from Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri fought in the southern armies, and men from every seceded state served with the Union. A "northern" admiral came from Alabama; a Confederate agent went to Europe from Massachusetts. While Robert E. Lee reluctantly accepted the command of the Confederate troops, his nephew served in the Union navy. Mrs. Lincoln lost three brothers fighting for the South. Mrs. Jefferson Davis had close relatives in the northern armies. Raising a federal army. In times of peace the United States had followed the policy of keeping its standing army exceptionally small. It numbered only 16,000 at the beginning of the war. In the first flush of enthusiasm volunteers poured in to enlist in response to Lincoln's call to serve three months, and states hurried their militia forward to protect Washington. After these raw recruits were severely defeated at Bull Run (July 21, 1861), training began in earnest, and further calls were issued for volunteers for longer terms of service. During the same month the federal government offered a bounty of one hundred dollars to all who would enlist. As voluntary enlistments became increasingly inadequate, the federal government tripled the bounty. The states also paid a bounty in order to keep up their quotas for the army. Notwithstanding these efforts the federal government found it necessary to pass a draft law (1863) to apply to those sections that did not keep their quotas filled. The draft act aroused much opposition. Many considered it unconstitutional and others objected because it did not exempt special groups such as persons with dependents, workers in essential industries, and individuals who objected to war on conscientious grounds. Any drafted man could purchase exemption by contributing three hundred dollars to pay the federal bounty for a volunteer. This feature of the act caused resentment among poor men who could not raise the amount no matter how much they were needed at home. Immigration. At the same time immigration was encouraged, with the triple purpose of peopling the national domain, enabling manufacturers to replace native laborers who moved west or joined the army, and helping to replace soldiers killed in battle. Congress established an Immigration Bureau (1864), and passed a law permitting immigrants to pay for their passage by pledging their wages in advance. Although this law allowing a revival of indentured service was soon repealed, the practice, known as contract labor, persisted illegally for several decades. Industry and labor. Northern industry was thus assured a plentiful labor supply and an expanding market in the growing West. In addition to these advantages manufacturers were benefited by the high protective tariff which made it possible for them to fill the government's vast war orders without undue foreign competition. Before the war manufacturers had begun to combine many processes in one huge factory. This large-scale production was increased during the war by the government's method of taxing manufactured goods. Cloth made by a large company which did spinning, weaving, and dyeing was taxed only once, whereas cloth produced by several concerns, each handling only one process, would be taxed several times. A tax levied on a product each time it was sold naturally encouraged large-scale industries. Thus small manufacturers were forced out of business in competition with big companies, and capitalists rather than workingmen or society at large obtained the lion's share of the rewards. The general tendency for prices to rise in war time was furthered by the use of depreciated paper money. Profits increased tremendously, and wages rose somewhat, but not as much as the increase in the cost of living. Unskilled laborers and those on salaries felt the decrease in buying power the most. Skilled laborers began rapidly to unionize. Almost fifty new unions were represented at a meeting held in New York City (1863). Strikes, lockouts, picketing, and boycotts became common occurrences. The problem of adjustments between labor and capital in this country was made much more acute by the Civil War. Emancipation. The conflict between North and South had been brought on by the question of extending slavery. After war began Congress maintained that hostilities were not for the purpose of overthrowing slavery, and as late as August, 1862, Lincoln said that if he could save the Union without freeing a single slave he would do so. Lincoln had not changed his mind in regard to the evils of slavery. He hoped to develop a plan for gradual emancipation whereby the slaveowners would be compensated and the liberated The Victorious North and West cultivate the tract for five years. Confederate soldiers alone were excluded from profiting through the benefits of the Homestead Act. In the same year, by the Morrill Act, each state received a large tract of public land within its boundaries as an endowment for a college of agriculture and mechanic arts. Between 1862 and 1871 numerous railroads were chartered by Congress, each with lavish aid in the form of grants of land along its right-of-way. By the later date these grants totaled 129,000,000 acres, an area about three times that of New England. The land grants were made to the states and to the railroads as a source of revenue. Both states and railways were so eager to hasten settlement that they advertised their huge tracts of land extensively and offered them at low prices. The cost of the land varied according to the desirability of the tract and the eagerness of the owner to dispose of it, but the greater part of these grants was sold in small holdings at less than five dollars an acre. Immigration had lagged somewhat during the war, but at its close it became greater than ever. Nearly one-fifth of the population of 40,000,000 were foreign born (1875). Capitalists contracted for laborers from European countries and from China. The steamship, just coming into common use, made the journey easier and cheaper than before, and adverse conditions in Europe made the opportunities of the New World particularly attractive. A panic in England (1866), land troubles in Ireland, and the Austro-Prussian War furnished incentives for thousands to emigrate. British, Irish, and Germans, in the order named, remained for some time in the lead, but other groups such as Slavs, Bohemians, and Italians began to come in increasing numbers. About 100,000 Italians entered this country (1870-1875), most of them to seek work in railroad building. The earlier settlers carried on effective propaganda in Norway, Sweden, and Denmark to induce their countrymen to emigrate. They were so successful that no less than 125,C00 migrated (1870 1875). Most cf them settled in Wisconsin, the Dakotas, Iowa, and especially Minnesota, playing a similar role in building up this region as the Germans in Missouri before the Civil War. The first transcontinental railroad. At the close of the Civil War the railroads were quite inadequate for the expanding business of the country. Some lines had been built or extended to transport troops and to secure grain from the upper Mississippi Valley, but the population, particularly in the Middle West, had far outstripped railroad facilities. After the war railroad building was taken up with vigor. The need of a railroad to connect California with the East had been recognized in the 1850's, but it had become so deeply involved in the sectional discord that nothing could be done. Both sections desired a railroad: the South insisted upon a route through Texas, while the North wanted one through Nebraska. Secession cleared the way for this northern route. As early as 1862 Congress began making arrangements for such a road. Yet in spite of lavish grants of land and a subsidy for each mile constructed, not a rail was actually laid until after the war. Then work went forward briskly. The western end, the Central Pacific, was built chiefly by cheap Chinese immigrant labor. The eastern end, the Union Pacific, starting at Omaha, was constructed principally by Irish and German immigrants. When the two construction gangs met (May 10, 1869) near Ogden, Utah, and drove the last spike welding the two lines, the event, flashed all over the country by telegraph, was celebrated with great rejoicing. The first engines to run on this track were small, gaily-painted affairs, fed W'ith chunks of wood, and belching sparks as they wheezed along. They dragged dingy little wooden coaches lighted by kerosene lamps and heated by stoves. But they served their purpose; they bridged the continent and linked the oceans together. Additional routes. In the enthusiasm of this initial success, plans were begun at once for other transcontinental lines. The depression following 1873 retarded new developments for a few years, but a burst of railroad building came at the end of the decade. The Southern Pacific had been constructed (1884) from New Orleans across Texas to the coast along the route so eagerly desired by Southerners in pre-war days. Two additional northern lines—the Northern Chapter XXIII While the slaves were being freed and the supremacy of the national government was being established, economic changes just as far reaching were taking place. The new industrialism that had dawned a generation earlier now spread rapidly, involving even greater changes. A Republican President occupied the White House three-fourths of the time for the thirty years following the Civil War. During this period a majority of the party stood for protective tariffs, sound money and banking, liberal land grants to stimulate railroad building, a liberal immigration policy, and a free rein for business. These were policies which appealed to industrial leaders, who were usually to be found in the Republican ranks. To vote Republican seemed natural to the following groups: the holders of government securities, immigrants who took up land under the Homestead Act, and soldiers who had fought in the northern armies. The farmers in the East and in the Middle West and the business men in towns of these two sections often voted the Republican ticket, too. Republican leaders promulgated widely the theory that if big business concerns were "making money" not only the industrial workers would benefit, but small business men and farmers also would prosper. In fact, if their theory worked out in practice everyone would enjoy prosperity. In times of stress when the "soft" money advocates or the "tariff reformers" threatened Republican supremacy, the leaders who made a virtue of party loyalty appealed to voters not to forsake the party that had saved the Union. When the power of the southern planters vanished, the Democratic party was greatly weakened. For some time also it was regarded with suspicion as having favored secession. Even if the party rarely elected a president, it had control of the House of Representatives a fair share of the time between the Civil War and the turn of the century. When in the minority, the party protested vigorously against corruption in office and denounced the supremacy of industrial over agricultural interests. The skillful leader had no difficulty in creating an effective political "machine." The large number of recent immigrants in most of the industrial cities were easily controlled. Many of them could not read English, and most were quite inexperienced in democratic politics. The political leader, or his assistant who spoke their language, was often the only person to take any sort of interest in them. He found jobs for them, aided them in taking out naturalization papers, and helped them if they were sick or in trouble. Voting the way he advised was a natural return for his kindness. No one group should receive all the blame for the corruption of the time. Native as well as foreign-born persons accepted favors and sold votes. Too often the corporations stood ready to buy the kind of laws they wanted, and unfortunately, there were individual legislators not only willing to be bribed, but ready actually to blackmail the interests into buying them. They sometimes introduced measures which would harm the corporations for the express purpose of being bought off. Existing laws did not fit the new conditions created by the growth of big business, and new ones had not yet been made. A somewhat similar situation followed the World War. During a period of rapid change and consequent social confusion, evils are apt to increase until public ethics and new machinery of social control have been developed to meet the new conditions. The Civil War like the World War brought changes so rapidly that the public did not realize what was happening. Municipal corruption. Municipal politics were on a particularly low plane at this time. In New York City, Tammany Hall, the local Democratic machine, worked hand in glove with the state Republican political machine. For several years at the close of the war, William Marcy Tweed, Grand Sachem of Tammany, did what he liked with New York City. A subservient governor granted a new charter for the city which made it easy for Tweed and his friends to control finances. With the aid of dishonest contractors of all sorts, the Tweed Ring robbed the public of sums estimated at from $45,000,000 to $200,000,000 before such robbery was stopped. The 424 Historic Currents in Changing America This was the first election in which the tariff was outstandingly the chief issue. The Republicans charged that the Democrats planned to abolish the tariff entirely and painted an alarming picture of the chaos which would result. To avert this disaster they successfully solicited heavy contributions from wealthy manufacturers. The Irish vote was appealed to by claiming that tariff reduction was a surrender to British manufacturing interests. Cleveland had given the country a good administration, and his attitude on the tariff was popular in the agricultural districts. Yet he had offended many influential groups, especially Tammany Hall. He had offended the professional politicians of his own party by favoring civil service reform. An extensive canvass supported by liberal contributions was made. In the election he received a plurality of more than one hundred thousand votes. Harrison, however, carried many large states by small majorities and won by 233 to 163 electoral votes. (See chart, p. 425.) Harrison's administration. The new Republican Congress began to reduce the surplus. Pension grants were greatly increased, and the money collected from the states in direct taxes during the war was repaid. Large stuns were spent on public buildings, rivers and harbors, and coast defense. So extensive were the appropriations for the navy that during Harrison's administration the country advanced from twelfth to fifth place in naval rank. The "billion dollar" Congress of 1890 showed such zeal for spending that the surplus of more than $105,000,000 (1889) was reduced to less than $10,000,000 two years later. Meanwhile the problem of how to reduce national income without reducing tariff protection had been solved. The McKinley tariff (1890), named for its author, William McKinley of Ohio, was openly protective. The general level of duties was raised more than 10 per cent, yet the returns were lowered by various devices. Some articles such as cotton and woolen cloth and metal products were so highly protected that practically none were imported. The duty on raw sugar was dropped, but American growers were paid a bounty of two cents on each pound produced. The internal taxes on tobacco and alcohol were also reduced. The law contained a novel "reciprocity^' feature. Secretary of State Blaine, who was eager to improve relations with South America, realized that a high tariff injured export trade. He induced Congress to drop the duty on some articles imported in large quantities from Latin America, such as molasses, coffee, and hides, and at the same time to give the President power to tax them if the exporting countries laid "unjust or unreasonable" duties on goods which they imported from the United States. Since this reciprocity feature was in effect both Houses, however, favored repeal and after weeks of wrangling it was accomplished. Cleveland's stand on silver was deeply resented by large sections of his own party, and it was a major reason why he was unable to persuade Congress to follow his recommendations in regard to the tariff (p. 422). Cleveland found the gold reserve was low and still decreasing. It had fallen to $70,000,000 (1894) and a year later it had declined 40 per cent more. At this critical period the President summoned J. Pierpont Morgan, the financier, to the White House. At this conference Morgan agreed that he and his foreign associates would buy $62,000,000 of government 4 per cent bonds and pay for them with gold drawn from abroad. This step saved the country's credit, and with the defeat of Bryan (1896), confidence in the currency was restored. The radical wing cf the Democratic party never forgave Cleveland for his "deal" with Wall Street. The Populists. While the struggle over silver was most bitter, the prices of agricultural products continued to fall. A government investigation showed that the current prices of com and wheat did not cover the actual costs of production. The farmers could not help getting more heavily in debt, and mortgages were foreclosed in great numbers. About 75 per cent of the land in fifteen counties in Kansas was owned by loan companies. Conditions were no better in the South. Cotton which had held at about eleven cents a pound during the 1880's, dropped below nine cents a decade later. The conditions which surround us best justify our co-operation; we meet in the midst of a nation brought to the verge of moral, political, and material ruin. We have witnessed for more than a quarter of a century the struggles of the two great political parties for power and plunder, while grievous wrongs have been inflicted upon the suffering public. We charge that the controlling influences dominating both these parties have permitted the existing dreadful conditions to develop without serious effort to prevent or restrain them. By the middle of the nineteenth century the Industrial Revolution was entering a new stage. Factories housing the ever-improving power machinery were growing larger and entering a stage of expansion where one man's money or one family's money was no longer sufficient to provide the necessary capital. Personal relationships between the owners and the workers were becoming less close. Corporations were soon to be formed. Steamships were unloading thousands upon thousands of immigrants with their racial differences and their peculiar customs. Many of them became factory workers and hastened the growth and congestion of the industrial cities and mill towns. Others sought farms where the new agricultural machinery—the cotton gin, the reaper, the gangplow, and the threshing machine—were transforming the countryside and making it possible for the city population to be fed. Lincoln's life spanned the first stage of the Industrial Revolution and saw the beginning of the second stage. Unlike Washington, Lincoln traveled to his inaugural from his home in Illinois by rail. He read his daily newspaper by a kerosene lamp or a flickering gas jet. His state papers were not written on a typewriter for the typewriter was still to be invented, but his secretaries did not stop to sharpen quill pens. They used steel pens. Lincoln could not talk to the members of his Cabinet over the telephone, but he could send telegraph messages to points beyond the Mississippi River. Many of the Civil War veterans lived to witness changes so remarkable that they far surpassed the most far-fetched predictions of Lincoln's day. Those who survived until the end of the first quarter of the twentieth century became familiar with skyscrapers, electrically-lighted streets, moving pictures that "talk," long-distance telephone calls, and radio programs transmitted from foreign lands. They could travel from coast to coast in automobiles over stretches of admirable roads, or in air-conditioned trains, or fleet airplanes. They could cross oceans in luxurious liners. They ate vegetables and fruits transported from far-distant sections in refrigerator cars. They watched their daughters and granddaughters using electric sweepers, washers, ironers, and dozens of appliances which made housework less drudgery. When they became ill they could call in a doctor who inoculated them or who took X-rays of their internal organs. The great liners of today furnish all the luxuries of the most palatial hotels, making the trip from New York to European ports in from five to six days. They are used for business and pleasure alike. When immigration to the United States was curtailed following the World War, steamship companies remodeled their immigrant quarters and opened them as "tourist third class." The popularity of the service has increased rapidly. Ocean travel of all kinds has grown to a striking degree. The well-to-do travel on luxurious cruises to the West Indies, the Mediterranean, or around the world. People of all ages with all kinds of interests flock to Europe by the thousands every summer. Americans are rapidly on the way to becoming a well-traveled people. The conquest of the air. Man's first attempts to fly were made in lighter-than-air machines, that is, in balloons. As early as 1851 a balloon made a flight driven by power furnished by a steam engine. By the turn of the century Samuel Langley and the Wright brothers were experimenting with heavier-than-air machines. The Wright brothers succeeded in developing an airplane which was practical for short distances (1905). Planes had become reliable enough to be used for military purposes before the World War. The combatant countries experimented with new types and their possibilities during the war. Since the World War there has been great development of the airplane for passenger traffic and for carrying mail. The nations of Europe have well-developed air routes for travel. The United States was somewhat slower in this development, but she now has regular routes between all important points and one of the best air services in the world. During the next eighteen months the world was astonished by a series of overwhelming Japanese victories. The corruption and inefficiency of the Russian government was revealed. At the same time Japan was exhausting herself in the struggle, while slow-moving Russia had limitless resources. Realizing this situation, the Japanese Emperor sent a secret message to President Roosevelt, asking him to take the initiative in proposing negotiations for peace. This the President did, with the happy result that the two nations signed a treaty of peace at Portsmouth, New Hampshire (1905). According to the terms of the treaty both belligerents were to withdraw from Manchuria. The lease of Port Arthur was given to Japan, and her paramount interest in Korea was conceded. As a well deserved recognition of his work in bringing the war to an end, Roosevelt was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, given annually to the person rendering the greatest service to the cause of world peace. Japanese-American relations. The relations between Japan and the United States had been almost uniformly cordial. During the Russo-Japanese War, American sympathy had been strongly with the Japanese, but the extent of the Japanese victory resulted in a reaction in America. A fear that Japan might become too powerful began to grow. Several factors also cooled the warmth of Japanese feeling toward the United States. The Japanese people,not realizing as the government did, that it was impossible to continue the war much longer, were bitterly disappointed that the peace terms were not more favorable to Japan. Quite unjustly, they blamed Roosevelt, and in thousands of Japanese homes his picture was turned to the wall. Japanese immigration. A far more serious factor in the situation grew out of Japanese immigration to the United States. Japanese laborers had been coming to California in considerable numbers. They were excellent workers, but as their living standards were lower than those of the American workmen they threatened to reduce the scale of wages. Consequently, an intense anti-Japanese feeling spread along the Pacific coast. Unable to legislate directly regarding immigration, the state of California began to pass restrictive laws. In particular, Japanese were forbidden to own land, and Japanese children were excluded from schools attended by white children. These acts aroused intense resentment in Japan. The federal government cannot exert much direct influence on purely internal problems of a state. President Roosevelt and his successors were only partially successful in obtaining the modification of California laws. The situation was relieved by a "Gentlemen's Agreement" concluded between President Roosevelt and the Japanese government. This was not an official document, and it was not made public at the time. It was a promise on the part of Japan that she would not issue passports to laborers except to those who had been here previously or whose families were here. This agreement was faithfully observed, and it reduced Japanese immigration to a low figure. Yet the anti-Japanese groups were not satisfied until the federal immigration law of 1924 (p. 684), although placing other nationalities on a quota, excluded Asiatics. This law made little change in the number of newcomers, for the Japanese quota would have been only about 150 annually, but it gravely offended Japan. Tension between the two nations has not been relieved; on the contrary, it has increased as a result of commercial rivalry and Japanese activity in northern and central China since 1931. When John Smith prophesied (1614) that the fish of the New World would ''afford as good gold as the mines of Guiana and Potassie," he did not foresee what a source of contention they would become. Scarcely a generation has passed without a dispute over the right of Americans to fish in Canadian waters. It will be recalled that the Convention of 1818 granted certain privileges to American fishermen forever, but there were disagreements as to the exact meaning of the treaty. New agreements to cover the disputed points were made from time to time. Industry and labor. The question of labor was of vital importance. For two years before the United States entered the war, factories had been running full time and overtime to turn out war materials. Immigration had declined, and there was a scarcity of labor. Wages had risen and workers were prosperous, but strikes and lockouts were frequent. When the United States entered the war and vast numbers of men were drafted, the scarcity of labor became intense. With more than four thousand strikes in one year (1917), a War Labor Conference Board was appointed early the following year to deal with labor disputes and to prevent the closing of plants because of labor troubles. This object was not wholly achieved, but strikes became somewhat less frequent. The cost of living. In spite of the government's power to fix prices, the cost of living rose rapidly. The enormous demands for foodstuffs to feed the army and to make up for the devastated farms in Europe sent agricultural prices soaring. Some articles cost four or five times as much as normal. In 1918 it took $1.57 to buy as much as could be obtained for $1.00 four years earlier. Creditors and persons on fixed incomes or salaries found themselves hard hit. The restriction of immigration (p. 684) was in part a further manifestation of the fear of radicalism. Military training in educational institutions. The change in attitude also affected education. The land-grant colleges and universities established by the Morrill Act (1863) had been required to offer two years of military training under United States Army officers. For so doing, the institution received $50,000 a year. Before the World War fifty or more land-grant institutions were giving military training to about 23,000 young men.When the World War broke out in Europe, the United States military authorities viewed with alarm their small standing army and limited number of officers. In order to prepare for an emergency, Congress passed the National Defense Act (1916) and strengthened it four years later. Under this Act provisions were made for a skeleton army of about two million men. To provide trained officers, the law stated that Reserve Officers Training Corps could be established in universities and colleges and even in high schools. The Ku Klux Klan. The anti-foreign, anti-radical feeling of the post-war years was largely responsible for the rapid spread of the revived Ku Klux Klan (for original Ku Klux Klan, see p. 370). The modern Klan was formed in Atlanta, Georgia (1915). It had points of similarity to the Ku Klux Klan of Reconstruction days, whose name it appropriated, and also to the "Know Nothing" movement of the 1840's. It was directed against Negroes, Roman Catholics, Jews, and internationalists, anti-prohibitionists, labor radicals and pacifists, and spread rapidly over the whole country. Immigration before the war. The position of labor might have been even more unsatisfactory had not a policy of restricted immigration been in force. The number of newcomers was tremendous during the first decade of the century. An increasing proportion came from southern and eastern Europe. Many were brought over by American or foreign labor agents, acting in the interest of steamship companies and American employers; others were sent by philanthropists. Americans began to feel that the "melting pot" could not possibly take care of so many newcomers at a time. Their presence was resented by American workingmen, who saw their jobs taken and their rates of pay often undercut by these new and unorganized laborers whose living standards were necessarily lower. Several restrictive measures were attempted. In 1917 a law, passed over President Wilson's veto, required that every adult immigrant be able to read in some language. It also raised the head tax to eight dollars, excluded all Asiatics, and extended the provisions for deportation. Immigration since the war. During World War I immigration almost stopped. When the Armistice was signed, it seemed likely that it would be resumed in great numbers. To forestall this, a new act was passed (1921), introducing the so-called "quota" system. It limited the annual admission of each nationality to not more than 3 per cent of the number who were living in the United States in 1910. Three years later the quota was lowered to 2 per cent, on the basis of the 1890 census, and the total number of quota immigrants to be admitted from non-American countries was not to exceed 150,000 in any one year. The law provided also that arrangements should be made, wherever possible, to have the examination for admission conducted in Europe. This procedure, it was thought, would save the immigrant the hardship of crossing the Atlantic only to be rejected upon his arrival on this side of the ocean. By treaties with a number of countries this humane change has been effected. It was provided further that after 1929 the quotas should be distributed proportionally, according to the national origin of all inhabitants of the United States. Under the act of 1921 only those of English or German birth counted in fixing the number admitted from England and Germany. Under the later provision all the native Americans of English or German ancestry helped to swell these quotas. These changes were intended to favor the admission of immigrants from northern and western Europe. With the coming of the depression (1929), emigration to the United States declined. More foreign born persons left the country than entered it (1931). At the same time restrictions were applied more stringently; the prohibition on admitting persons who might become public charges was rigidly enforced. Renewed activity in deporting aliens was instituted by Secretary of Labor Doak in President Hoover's administration. None of the immigration acts applied to the countries of this hemisphere. With immigration from Europe sharply reduced, the unskilled immigrant labor was largely recruited from among FrenchCanadians and Mexicans. After 1924 about half of the newcomers were non-quota immigrants, with the proportion from Mexico on the increase. Statisticians expect this decreasing rate of growth to continue. They estimate the United States will reach its maximum size with 148,000,000 about 1965, and will become fixed at about 140,000,000 by the year 2000. The effects of a stable population would be far reaching. It would give a larger ratio of old to young people than at present. This would mean less demand for schools and playgrounds, and greater need for provision for the aged. It would change the demand for many kinds of goods; for example, there would be fewer baby-carriages and more easy chairs. With a stable population, change of most kinds would come less rapidly and, consequently, there would be less opportunity to acquire great wealth; yet the general standard of living might be higher. 