A Textbook for Secondary Schools American history in our high schools to-day is a very different subject from that taught twenty or even ten years ago. This change is reflected both in the textbooks used and in the methods of teaching. No longer is our history presented as a series of unrelated facts grouped under successive presidential administrations. Modem textbooks aim to select from the mass of historical occurrences those facts which are important as illustrations or explanations of what the past was, and of how the present grew out of it. In other words, they seek to eliminate minor and relatively unimportant topics, and to correlate and emphasize the major events which have influenced our country's development. This method of presenting past events serves to throw more light on the great problems of the present day, by showing them in their historic setting; it therefore aids in revealing the fundamental truth that the present is deep-rooted in the past. Obviously the main events of American history cannot be changed, but there are new points of view, new heights of vision from which one may look backward upon the winding road. And so events which bulked large to a former generation of history students are to-day frequently reduced to smaller dimensions; while other events formerly deemed of slight significance are found in die light of modem experience to be full of meaning. The agitation of a comparatively small group of women for social and political reforms appeared of slight importance in the age before the Civil War; but to-day such achievements as prison and temperance reform, equal suffrage, and the restriction of child labor, loom larger and larger. Hence the modem textbook which neglects the influence of American women on American history tells less than half of the story. Further, the marvelous industrial age in which we live suggests the need of greater emphasis upon the economic side of history. The development of the wealth derived from what Nature had bestowed on a new and amazingly productive country; the potent influence of economic issues on our history and politics; the problem of setting bounds to the power of industrial combinations and Population and immigration. In the middle of the eighteenth century about 1,500,000 people were living in the thirteen English colonies scattered along the Atlantic seaboard. Virginia ranked first in population, with 350,000 people; while next in order came Massachusetts and Pennsylvania. Of our large cities of to-day, Philadelphia and Boston each had a population of 25,000 in 1750, while New York had only one half that number. The New England colonists were nearly all of English stock, as were most of the settlers in Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas. In the Middle Colonies were many Dutch, Swedes, Gennans, and Scotch-Irish, i However, all of the colonies were so thoroughly English that settlers of a different nationality were regarded as foreigners. During the eighteenth century more of these foreigners came to the colonies than ever before. Many of them fled from religious persecution at home; while others sought refuge in the New World from the wars and oppressive conditions in Europe where the land was owned by a few people, and the laborers were little better than serfs. After the failure of the rebellions of 1715 and 1745, many Scotch Highlanders came to the colonies, large numbers of whom settled in North Carolina. There were also many Scotch-Irish, people whose ancestors had originally lived in Scotland but who afterwards moved to the northern part of Ireland. The Scotch- Irish settled in the mountain valleys of Pennsylvania, Virginia, and the Carolinas. They were sturdy backwoodsmen, living in log cabins and cultivating their small fanns without the aid of slaves. There were French Protestants or Huguenots in all of the colonies, especially in South Carolina. But the most numerous class of foreigners were the Gennans from the Rhine Valley. The great Gennan migration to the colonies began about 1717, and continued until the American Revolution. There were two chief i In New York, the Dutch and Swedish settlers lived side by side with an almost equal number of Englishmen. The Rhine provinces had been so devastated by wars that many of the inhabitants were compelled to find new homes. Moreover, in their own country the German peasants could not hope to rise above the condition in which they were born, whereas in the New World they could obtain free land and might become independent fanners. Establishment of towns in New England. For a number of reasons the first New-England colonists settled in small communities known as towns, instead of scattering over larger areas. Most of the New Englanders were Puritans in religion, and their first settlements were made by church congregations, each headed by its minister. Hence they naturally wished to have their homes near together so that all might worship at the common church. The economic conditions also favored the development of towns. The New England coast is indented by many bays and harbors; the rivers are generally rapid and unfit for navigation; the stony soil is not adapted to the cultivation of large estates. Hence many of the people settled on small farms, raising little more produce than they themselves needed; while others engaged in commerce and fisheries, which likewise favored close settlement. Moreover, the Indian tribes were likely to be hostile, and it was easier to defend a compact community against their raids. Frequently each little town was surrounded by a stockade, and provided with a blockhouse in which the people could take refuge in case of sudden attack. The town included not only the group of dwellings within the stockade, but also the outlying fields cultivated by the colonists. Hence the word "town " as used in New England does not mean a small village, but a district with an area of from twenty to forty square miles. In the center of this district was the meeting house, the town hall, the village store, the inn, and the schoolhouse. The people lived close together, and were sociable and friendly. There were few slaves in New England, for both climate and industry were unfavorable to negro labor; and the absence of a slaveholding class helped to make life more democratic. The government of the town was a pure democracy; local laws and regulations were made by the people themselves instead of by their representatives. The men met in town meeting for the discussion of matters of common concern, such as the defense of the community, the construction of roads, the support of the school, and the care of the poor. On these and many other matters, the town meeting made laws called bylaws; it also levied taxes and elected the town officers. Life in the Southern Colonies. Conditions in the Southern Colonies were quite different. The men who came to Virginia did not come as church congregations seeking a land where they might worship freely; the first settlers, especially, came in the hope of finding gold. The people lived on large plantations, so that many a Southern gentleman had to ride at least a mile to reach his nearest neighbor. The soil of the South was fertile, the rivers were slow and navigable, and many plantations had their own wharves where English ships could exchange their cargoes of manufactured goods for American tobacco. The warm climate was favorable to African labor; and once introduced, the system of slavery spread rapidly. The natural result of slavery was to degrade manual labor, thus preventing the rise of a prosperous middle class; and a wide social distinction separated the plantation The advance of the frontier. The westward movement is the story of a series of frontiers which the American pioneer reclaimed from nature and the Indians, each frontier in turn becoming the startingpoint of a new westward march of the population. The winning of our first frontier came as the result of the establishment of the thirteen colonies along the Atlantic coast; and by the middle of the eighteenth century this frontier line was advancing toward the Alleghenies. After the Revolution our people began the task of occupying the country between the Alleghenies and the Mississippi, a movement that gave us the new States of Kentucky (1792), Tennessee (1796), and Ohio (1803). By the year 1810 one million people, or about one seventh of the total population, were living between the Alleghenies and the Mississippi; and this Western population more than doubled during the next decade. The westward movement. Conditions in the Eastern States were largely responsible for the westward tide which set in so strongly after 1814. The long Embargo, followed by war with Great Britain, practically destroyed our commerce and paralyzed the industrial life of the seaboard States. With the return of peace, and while New England was in the throes of business depression, a steady stream of settlers was pouring across the Alleghenies. Harrison's victory at Tippecanoe had opened up the fertile lands of Indiana and Illinois to a host of Eastern fanners; and population increased so rapidly that these Territories became States in 1816 and 1818, respectively. Jackson's conquest of the Creek Indians had like results for the Southwest. The rich cotton lands of the Gulf region attracted thousands of settlers, and the admission of Louisiana in 1812 was soon followed by that of Mississippi (1817), and Alabama (1819). Immigration from Europe. Not all of these pioneers came from our Eastern section. New types of faces began to be seen; for after Napoleon's downfall, thousands of emigrants left battle- scarred Europe to try their fortunes in America. Coming at a time when the seaboard States were going through a period of hard times, they joined the procession moving toward the West. As the newcomers traveled through the rich fanning regions of Pennsylvania and Ohio, they were amazed at the signs of prosperity. "This be a main queer country," said a Yorkshireman who with his family was on his way to Zanesville, Ohio. "This be a main queer country, for I have asked the laboring folks all along the road how many meals they eat in a day, and they all said three and sometimes four, if they wanted them. We have but two at home, and they are scanty enough. And only think, sir, many of these people asked me to eat and drink with them. We can't do it in Yorkshire, sir, for we have not enough for ourselves." Routes to the West. The routes to the West were determined largely by the points at which the mountain barrier could be easily pierced. (1) In the North there was a natural highway across the mountains by way of the Mohawk Valley; this led to die upper Allegheny, and that in turn to the Ohio and the Mississippi. After 1825 the Erie Canal became a more convenient northern route for emigrants from New England and New York. (2) Farther south, many pioneers followed Braddock's old road through the Potomac Valley to Cumberland, Maryland, then along the course of the Monongahela River to Pittsburgh, and from this point down the Ohio. In later years the National Road followed this route from Cumberland to Pittsburgh and became the great highway to the West, especially for settlers from the Middle States. (3) From Virginia and the South, the favorite route was along the Appalachian Valley, and out through the Cumberland Gap or the Valley of the Tennessee. (4) Finally, the West might be easily reached by way of New Orleans, crossing the strip of lowland along the Gulf coast. Methods of travel. In going West, the favorite vehicle was the Conestoga wagon, a veritable prairie schooner with its arched canvas top and curved bottom which prevented the load from slipping. The roads were generally poor even in the Eastern section, while west ol the mountains they were little more than rough tracks winding in and out of the forests, across streams and swamps. Breakdowns were frequent, and fifteen or twenty miles were considered a good day's journey. The inns were almost as poor as the roads, but most of the travelers cooked their own food, and camped along the roadside at night. The rapid peopling of the West was due in large measure to the liberal land policy of the National Government. The early policy of using the public lands as a source of revenue soon gave way to the system of selling them in small tracts to actual settlers. In 1820 Congress put an end to the credit system and provided that lands should be sold in eighty-acre tracts at a minimum price of $1.25 an acre. From 1790 to 1870 the total land sales, including grants under the Homestead Act of 1862, were 176,488,000 acres. Settlers in the open prairies frequently built their first house of sods, the cheapest and most convenient material. purpose of settlement, immense tracts of the public domain were granted to encourage internal improvements, for educational purposes, and as direct gifts to individuals and States. The abundance of cheap, fertile land attracted thousands of settlers from the East, and drew thousands more from the crowded countries of Europe. Conditions in the Old World contributed to swell the tide of immigration to our shores. The failure of the potato crop in Ireland in 1845 helped to supply the labor which built our railroads and canals; and the defeat of the liberal movement in Germany in 1848 helped to people our Western farms. The largest number of immigrants in any one year before the Civil War was 427,000 in 1854; the total volume of immigration during the twenty years from 1841 to i860 was 4,311,465. Nearly all of these newcomers were from northwestern Europe; that is, from Great Britain, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries. Besides cheap land the Western pioneer was aided by new agricultural machines. Until about 1825 nearly every part of the work on the farm except plowing and harrowing was done by hand. Grain was sown broadcast, reaped with a cradle, and threshed with a wooden flail. Hay was cut with a scythe or sickle, and raked and pitched by hand. The period from 1825 to i860 was marked by the invention of mechanical devices for plowing, sowing, cultivating, reaping, and threshing. The cast- iron plow replaced the clumsy plow of colonial times. Threshing machines appeared as early as 1821, and by 1840 they were in general use in place of the primitive flail. The first mowing machine was patented by William Manning in 1831; and in the same year Cyrus H. McCormick built his first reaper in a blacksmith shop in the Shenandoah Valley. The McConnick reaper made it possible for one man with a team to cut as much grain as twenty men using cradle scythes. There were also new machines for sowing the grain and cultivating the soil, seed-drills, horse-hoers and cultivators, which enabled the fanner to substitute animal power for hand labor. In i860 the total value of the new agricultural implements manufactured in the United States was $17,800,000. Agricultural development. With these labor-saving machines, and with a boundless supply of fertile soil, agriculture increased by leaps and bounds. In 1840 the value of our agricultural products was $1,000,000,000; while twenty years later, they were worth nearly $2,000,000,000. Throughout the West, wheat, com, and live stock were the chief products. These were shipped down the slave labor competed successfully with the small farm and finally supplanted it, just as factory production eliminated domestic production at the North. The small fanner then retreated to the poorer lands, where he grew a few acres of cotton, raised some live stock, or engaged in mixed fanning. Slavery degraded free labor, so that the poor whites of the South were despised alike by slaveowners and by negroes. They themselves looked upon the large slaveowners with feelings of sullen envy; yet when election day came, the whites who were without money and without slaves did the bidding of the lord of the plantation. The slaveholders took the political offices; the man who worked with his hands was seldom chosen to represent the South in the halls of Congress. The Southern political system was really a government of the few, maintained by and for the slaveholders. In many other ways slavery was working harm to the South. It prevented the growth of its population. The population of the North and the South was almost equal in 1800; but in i860 the North had 19,000,000 people, the South about 12.000. 000. Political troubles in Europe and the discovery of gold in California brought large numbers of Englishmen, Irishmen, and Germans to the United States. In the decade from 1850 to i860, nearly 3,000,000 of these immigrants entered our country. The newcomers avoided the South, for they would not compete with slave labor. They peopled the great industrial cities of the North, they took up farms in the Middle West, they mined its coal, built its railroads, and developed the resources of that section. The South was rich in natural resources, in deposits of iron and coal, in timber and water supply, but these resources were untouched until after the Civil War. Slave labor could not develop them, and free labor would not while slavery existed. Thus slavery confined the industry of the South to agriculture and prevented the development of its natural resources, at the very time when free labor was making the North a great industrial region. King Cotton. In the year i860 less than five per cent of the 8.000. 000 whites in the South owned the 3,500,000 slaves of that section; so that Southern society may be compared to an inverted pyramid. The apparent prosperity of the South was the prosperity of the small slaveholding class. The success of cotton culture by slave labor gave to the Southern planters a unique position as producers. Upon their supply of raw cotton depended not only the mills of New England, but those of France and England as well. Not without reason the planters believed that Europe would never tolerate the cutting-off of the raw material so essential to its industrial life. Realizing the strength of their economic position, Southerners could not tolerate the loss of political power threatened by the more rapid growth of population in the North. Their attitude was reflected in a speech by Senator Hammond of South Carolina in 1858: "Without firing a gun, without drawing a sword, should they make war on us, we could bring the whole world to our feet. What would happen if no cotton was furnished for three years? I will not stop to depict what every one can imagine, but this is certain, England would topple headlong, and carry the whole civilized world with her. No, you dare not make war on cotton. No power on earth dares to make war on it — cotton is king." Spread of the factory system. Although agriculture was our dominant industry during the period from 1815 to i860, manufactures were developing rapidly, especially during the twenty years immediately preceding the Civil War. The factory system of production, which began with Slater's first mill and Lowell's factory at Waltham, made rapid headway, i From the textile industry it spread to other employments, and by 1840 the household production which characterized our earlier industrial life had become a thing of the past. Leather tanneries, silk and paper mills, flour, grist, and saw mills, iron factories, sugar refineries, establishments for the manufacture of boots and shoes, of clothing, hardware, and agricultural implements — all were operated under the new plan. The factory system became the most important industrial event of the century. Its chief results were: (1) An immense increase in production, at a greatly reduced cost. (2) The employment of women and children whose labor had been almost entirely in the home, but who now abandoned the household crafts and followed the industries into the factories. (3) The creation of a laboring class, as distinct from the class of employers. (4) The growth of factory towns and industrial cities. Growth of manufactures. In contrast with the brief list of manufactures noted by Secretary Gallatin in 1810,2 the census Switzerland. One arbitrator was to be appointed by the United States, one by Great Britain, and one each by the Governments of Switzerland, Italy, and Brazil. The treaty laid down three important rules concerning neutrality by which the court was to be governed in making its decision: (i) A neutral government is bound to use due diligence to prevent the fitting out, equipping, or sailing of any vessel which it has reasonable grounds to believe is intended to cruise or carry on war against a power with which it is at peace. (2) To use due diligence not to pennit either belligerent to make use of its ports or waters as the base of naval operations against the other. (3) To exercise due diligence in its own ports and waters, and, as to all persons within its jurisdiction, to prevent any violation of the foregoing obligations and duties. The arbitration tribunal met in March, 1872, and after listening to the arguments in the case, spent several months in weighing the evidence. The arbitrators rejected our claim for indirect damages, but held that Great Britain had failed in her duty as a neutral with regard to three cruisers — the Alabama, Florida, and Shenandoah; and the sum of $15,500,000 was awarded to the United States as damages. Great Britain paid the money promptly, and in due time the United States paid it over to the individuals who had suffered from the depredations of the cruisers. The outcome of the arbitration was an undisputed victory for the United States. More important still, the two great English-speaking nations were again on friendly terms, and had given to the world the greatest example in history of the value of arbitration as a substitute for war. Treaties concerning naturalization. Few immigrants came to the United States during the war, but, beginning with 1866, more than 300,000 foreigners were arriving each year. Nearly all of these persons wished to become citizens of this country, but there was a serious obstacle to their naturalization. The time-honored rule and practice of European nations was that no individual could renounce his allegiance without first securing the consent of his former Government, i Anxious to receive this host of immigrants into full citizenship, our Government took the position that these persons should have the right to renounce their allegiance after a period of residence here, without being compelled to secure the consent of their home Governments. In the years from 1868 to 1872, the United States negotiated treaties with many European countries embodying this new principle of naturalization. However, these treaties did not prevent controversies, especially with the German Government, concerning the status of young men who had fled to this country to escape military service. Germany insisted that these men were in fact lawbreakers, and that notwithstanding their naturalization they were liable to arrest if they returned to their native land. In this building are held frequent conferences between the Secretary of State of the United States, and the ministers from the countries of South America. The idea is to promote mutual understanding and welfare. In the hall shown in this illustration, each country has placed a bust of its national hero, and its national flag. Relations with Latin America. The relations between the United States and Latin America became more cordial during die years following the Civil War, as our southern neighbors became less suspicious of the motives and policy of this country. The friendly services of the United States were offered and accepted as mediator during the conflict between Spain and her former colonies, Peru, Chile, and Ecuador. On several occasions the United States was called upon to act as arbitrator between countries of Latin America. For example, Argentina and Paraguay finally settled the quarrel. The tripartite arrangement came to an end in 1899 when the islands were divided, the United States taking the island of Tutuila with the harbor of Pago-Pago, the other islands passing under German rule. The Samoan quarrel showed the need of a stronger navy to protect our rights. Congress appropriated $40,000,000 for new warships, and the United States soon rose from twelfth to fifth rank among naval powers. Arbitration of the Bering Sea dispute. The year 1893 marked the settlement of a protracted dispute with Great Britain over the Bering Sea fisheries. When Russia owned Alaska, she claimed exclusive rights in Bering Sea; and the United States maintained that as purchaser of Alaska we had acquired Russia's exclusive rights and jurisdiction over these waters. This claim ran counter to our historic policy, which had always favored the right of free navigation of rivers and bays. Moreover, in 1824 the United States had joined with Great Britain in an effective protest against Russia's claim that Bering Sea was a closed sea. Hence the British Government vigorously denied the claim which Secretary of State Blaine now attempted to assert, and insisted that our jurisdiction extended only to the international three-mile shore line. At length it was agreed to arbitrate the dispute. The arbitration tribunal met at Paris, and consisted of representatives from Great Britain, the United States, France, Italy, and Sweden. This tribunal decided against the United States; it held that our possession of Alaska did not warrant closing the waters of Bering Sea to other nations, and that we should pay damages for the seizure of British vessels. At the same tune rules were laid down to prevent the extermination of the seal herds. A revolution broke out in Hawaii in 1893, when the native ruler tried to overthrow the constitution and rule as an absolute monarch. American settlers living there deposed the Queen, and, after setting up a republic, asked to have Hawaii annexed to the United States. President Harrison sent an annexation treaty to the Senate, but it was near the close of his term and the Senate failed to act on it. Unfortunately, the question of annexation became an issue in domestic party politics. The new President, Grover Cleveland, took an unfavorable view of the Hawaiian revolution, which, as he pointed out, had been aided by the timely landing of American marines. He withdrew the treaty from the Senate, and annexation was delayed until the Spanish-American War. On the farther side of the Pacific our commercial interests declined in the years immediately following the Civil War, due to the passing of our merchant marine and the substitution of petroleum for whale oil. However, the United States continued to develop diplomatic relations with Japan and China. In 1866 we joined Great Britain, France, and the Netherlands in demanding that Japan revise her tariff rates so as to conform to her treaty obligations. With China our relations were cordial. Burlingame, sent by President Lincoln as minister to China, was so highly regarded there that in 1868 he returned to the United States as accredited Chinese minister. Representing China, he concluded with this country the Burlingame Treaty. The most important provision was the one prohibiting the importation of Chinese coolies, thousands of whom were being brought to the United States to aid in constructing the Pacific railroads. This prohibition was the result of the growing sentiment on the Pacific coast against Chinese immigration. It marked the beginning of the policy of exclusion of Asiatic peoples which, in the case of the Japanese, afterwards led to serious disputes. One of the most famous assertions of the Monroe Doctrine was that made by President Cleveland in 1895, arising out of the controversy between Great Britain and Venezuela. For many years a dispute had existed between these two countries over the boundary of British Guiana, and matters reached a crisis when gold was discovered in the Orinoco Valley. On several occasions Venezuela tried to induce Great Britain to arbitrate the question, but without success. Finally, when Great Britain was on the point of forcibly seizing the territory in dispute, Secretary of State Olney made a vigorous protest on behalf of the United States. He asserted that, if Great Britain were really encroaching upon Venezuelan territory, her action was in violation of the Monroe Doctrine; and that succeeding to the Presidency was reflected in his attitude on appointments. Although formerly a spoilsman, his first message to Congress called attention to the imperative need of refonn in the civil service. The tragic murder of President Garfield by a disappointed office-seeker served to emphasize the evils of the spoils system, under which public offices were distributed as rewards for party services. This demoralizing system had been introduced during President Jackson's administration, and was continued for more than half a century. Each new administration changed hundreds of federal officers; while if a different political party came into power, the removals were numbered by thousands. Finally in 1883 public opinion compelled Congress to pass a measure designed to make appointment to subordinate executive offices depend upon individual merit, rather than upon partisan service. This act created the United States Civil Service Commission, consisting of three persons (not more than two belonging to the same political party), appointed by the President with the consent of the Senate. Other important provisions were as follows: (1) It provided for open, competitive, practical examinations for all applicants for positions in the classified service. (2) These positions were to be filled by selection according to grade from among those applicants standing highest on the examinations, a period of probation to precede their final appointment. (3) Appointments were to be apportioned among the several States and Territories according to population. (4) No appointee was to be required to contribute to any political fund or to perform any political service. The number of officers included under the original act was about 14,000. Later Presidents, especially Cleveland, Harrison, and Roosevelt, extended its operation by executive orders until at present the total number of federal employees subject to the merit system is about 330,000. The classified service now includes nearly all the clerks in Washington (the so-called departmental service); officials in the postal service, including postmasters, letter-carriers, and clerks in post-offices and in the railway mail service; together with employees in customs houses, in the revenue service, the Government printing-office, and the Indian service. The merit system of appointment has greatly improved the public service, and a similar method prevails in several States and in many cities. The control of immigration. Until 1882 immigration to the United States was free from any restriction by federal law. In that year Congress passed legislation intended to exclude the pauper, criminal, and insane classes of aliens, as well as Chinese laborers; and a few years later (1885) the Alien Contract Labor Law was passed. Under these and later acts the classes of aliens debarred include idiots, insane persons, paupers or persons likely to become public charges, epileptics, persons suffering from contagious disease, criminals, polygamists, anarchists, persons whose passage is paid by another (with certain exceptions), laborers under contract made previous to emigration to perform labor or service in the United States, and the Chinese and Japanese. For the most part these restrictions on immigration are sanitary measures to protect this country from immigration of the diseased and criminal classes. The prohibition of the Chinese and Japanese, and of contract laborers, is based upon social and economic considerations — to prevent the introduction of a dangerously low standard of living; and — in case of the Chinese and Japanese — of a people incapable of assimilation. Immigrants not qualified to enter are returned at the expense of the steamship company bringing them, this liability continuing for a period of one year after landing. The administration of immigration laws is entrusted to the Commissioner-General of Immigration of the Department of Labor. Inspection by United States officials is provided for both at the point of departure and at the port of entry in this country. Factors promoting immigration. Except during two decades, immigration has steadily increased since 1820. Beginning about 1847, the annual arrivals were more than 200,000; during the fifties the annual average was nearly 300,000; while for the decade 190010, the total immigration was 8,795,386. This large influx of foreigners has been due partly to the opportunities for employment offered in this country, and partly to industrial and political conditions in Europe. Thus the famine in Ireland brought one million and a quarter of Irish immigrants to the United States during the decade 1845-55. Our large German immigration was the result of political and economic factors, such as the revolution of 1848, and the severe industrial depression in Gennany from 1873 to 1879. Besides the Germans and the Irish, the races which contributed the largest number of immigrants prior to 1882 were the English and the Scandinavian. These immigrants from the countries of northwestern Europe were from the same stock as our own people; they quickly adopted American standards of living and became assimilated with the native population. But, beginning about 1882, a change occurred in the character of our immigration which has had effects of profound importance. This change was the shifting of the sources of immigration from the countries of northwestern Europe to those of southern and eastern Europe. In 1882 Europe sent us a total of 647,000 immigrants, of whom 87 per cent came from northwestern Europe, and 13 per cent from southern and eastern Europe. During the following years this ratio was almost exactly reversed; in 1902 only 22 per cent of our immigrants were from northwestern Europe, while 78 per cent were from southern and eastern Europe. In other words, the great volume of our immigration in this later period was drawn from Russia, Italy, Hungary, the Balkan countries, and Turkey, instead of from Great Britain, Ireland, Gennany, and the Scandinavian countries. We were no longer recruiting our population chiefly from Teutonic stock, but from Slavic, Semitic, and Mongolian sources. These recent immigrants were from peoples allied to us neither by race, language, nor civilization; and their percentage of illiteracy was ten times as high as that of immigrants from northwestern Europe. The great majority had lived under absolute monarchies and were not familiar with representative government; and they came from countries where industry was still carried on largely by hand, where agriculture was in a backward state, and where the population was removed from serfdom by scarcely more than a generation. Social effects of unrestricted immigration. In spite of the danger to American institutions from immigration of this character, Congress was slow to adopt restrictive measures. Our time-honored policy was to regard America as the haven of the oppressed, notwithstanding that the haven was frequently abused by aliens who had no sympathy for American institutions. The tendency of immigrants to concentrate in our large cities, where they live apart in racial groups, presented a serious obstacle to their Americanization. Investigation also disclosed the fact that the foreign- born furnish a larger relative percentage of the criminal and pauper classes than is the case with the native-born population; while the illiteracy of the immigrants placed a heavy burden upon our public schools. The demand for the exclusion of illiterate immigrants led Congress on three occasions to pass bills establishing a literacy test, but these measures were vetoed in turn by Presidents Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson. Finally in 1916 Congress passed a measure of this character over the executive veto. Recent legislation. During the World War public sentiment became aroused over the presence in this country of millions of aliens who apparently had no intention of becoming American citizen. Investigation disclosed 1,500,000 persons in the United States, ten years of age or over, who could not speak the English language; while our total foreign-born population was in excess of 13,000,000. Fifty-six per cent of this foreign-born population was in die States east of the Mississippi and north of the Ohio Rivers. In our large cities, between seventy and eighty per cent of the population was either foreign-born, or immediately descended from persons of foreign birth. Conditions in Europe likewise emphasized the need of some effective check upon our immigration until the great numbers of aliens already in this country could become Americanized; for at the close of the World War, hundreds of thousands of Europeans were preparing to emigrate to the United States. Accordingly, in 1921 Congress adopted a stringent measure to restrict the number of arrivals during the ensuing year.i The number of aliens admired annually was limited to three per cent of the number of persons of each nationality already in the United States, as determined by the census of 1910. Under this act not more than 355,000 immigrants were permitted to enter the United States in any one year. Of this number, approximately 200,000 were allotted to the countries of northwestern Europe, and 150,000 to the countries of southeastern Europe. The battle of the tariffs. Throughout the Civil War the imperative need for revenue, together with the desire to offset the heavy internal revenue taxes on manufactures, led to repeated tariff enactments, each increasing the rate of duties. After the war most of the internal revenue taxes were repealed, but the high protective duties remained and became the permanent economic policy of the country. The tariff question formed the leading issue in the presidential campaign of 1884. The Democrats maintained that only articles of luxury should be heavily taxed, and that articles of necessity should be admitted free of duty. Their presidential candidate was Grover Cleveland, who had made an excellent record as governor of New York State. The Republicans nominated James G. Blaine, who had served as Speaker of the House of Representatives, as Senator from Maine, and as Secretary of State under Presidents Garfield and Arthur. This law was continued in force until 1924, its original time limit having been extended. These independent Republicans, who were promptly nicknamed "Mugwumps." refused to support Blaine because they did not approve of his political record. The campaign that followed was one of the most exciting in our history, and for the first time since the Civil War the Democrats won the victory. But they could not carry out their campaign promise to lower the tariff rates, since the Senate was Republican. In the campaign of 1888 the tariff was again one of the principal issues. The victory of the Republicans led to the enactment of the McKinley Tariff Act of 1890, a measure which extended the protective principle and increased rates to a point higher than the Civil War tariff. By one provision of this act the President was empowered to impose duties upon certain commodities, such as sugar, molasses, tea, coffee, and hides, provided any country exporting these commodities placed discriminating duties upon products of the United States. Another feature of the McKinley Tariff Act was the provision for reciprocity, or lower duties granted to countries which made favorable rates on American products. The Wilson Tariff Law, 1894. The growing demand for lower tariff rates carried the Democratic Party to a sweeping victory in the presidential election of 1892. Accordingly, during President Cleveland's second administration the Democrats were in a position to keep their pledge to reduce the tariff. The House Committee on Ways and Means drew up the Wilson Tariff Bill which lowered the duties on many articles, and placed sugar, iron ore, wool, lumber, and coal on the free list. As amended in the Senate and finally accepted by both houses, this measure made only slight reductions in the tariff rates, while wool was the only important raw material left on the free list. President Cleveland denounced the amended measure as "a record of party perfidy and dishonor"; but believing it better than the McKinley Tariff, he permitted the bill to become a law without his signatures. This boundary had been established in somewhat ambiguous terms by the treaty between Russia and Great Britain in 1825. The title of the United States to the strip of land in dispute was not questioned until the discovery of gold in the Klondike region in 1897, after which the question of jurisdiction became an important one.i By agreement with Great Britain, each nation appointed three members of a tribunal which decided on all important points in favor of the United States. This favorable award was the result of the impartiality of England's Chief Justice, Lord Alverstone, who voted to sustain our claim. Great Britain accepted the award in spite of Canada's vigorous protest. Relations with Japan. In the summer of 1905 the eyes of the world were turned toward the Peace Conference at Portsmouth, New Hampshire. In the Far East, Russia and Japan had been waging a bloody war for nearly eighteen months over their respective claims in Korea and Manchuria; but, although defeated, Russia was not ready to yield. President Roosevelt finally offered the friendly services of the United States in arranging a meeting for the discussion of peace terms. Russia and Japan replied by sending representatives to Portsmouth, New Hampshire, where a treaty of peace was signed. In the year 1896 rich deposits of gold were discovered near Klondike Creek in the remote Canadian territory of Yukon, a region almost within the Arctic Circle. Still larger deposits were soon discovered in the Nome district of Alaska, and the msh to the new gold fields was like that to California in 1849. During the six years that followed the discovery, Alaska yielded $132,500,000 in gold; and the treasure-seekers learned that the Territory held immense coal deposits, besides a large supply of valuable timber and a vast area suitable for agriculture. Shortly after the Peace of Portsmouth, our traditional friendship with Japan was put to a severe test. Japan's aggressive attitude toward China aroused our suspicions, her expanding trade threatened our commerce in the Pacific, and the immigration of Japanese laborers to California created bitter hostility. A serious controversy arose in 1906 when the Board of Education of San Francisco passed a resolution requiring Japanese and Chinese children to attend separate schools, instead of being educated with the white children of that city. Japan protested against this action as a violation of her treaty rights with the United States, and as an affront to her as a nation. A compromise was brought about in 1907 by President Roosevelt. San Francisco agreed to admit to its ordinary schools all Oriental children under sixteen years of age; in return the Japanese authorities promised to withhold passports from laborers who planned to settle in the United States. The real issue in this controversy was not the question of school attendance, but the right of the Japanese to migrate to the Pacific Coast States and enjoy there the same privileges as other aliens. Hence a new crisis was precipitated in 1913 when California passed a law prohibiting the purchase of lands by aliens ineligible to citizenship. Japan protested against this measure on the ground that it was aimed especially at her subjects, who are ineligible to citizenship under our naturalization laws. The controversy was finally dropped after a fruitless exchange of diplomatic notes, but Japan's protest was not withdrawn and has recently been renewed. The United States is clearly within its rights both in barring Japanese immigrants and in excluding the Japanese from citizenship; and any State has a legal right to prohibit aliens from owning land within its borders unless this legislation conflicts with some treaty provision, i Our country is not alone in adopting the policy of protecting itself from the menace of Oriental immigration, since Canada, Australia, and other British dominions have passed even more stringent measures, his services in the cause of international peace. The President devoted the proceeds to furthering the cause of industrial peace in the United States. i In the year 1922 the United States Supreme Court decided that the Japanese are ineligible to citizenship under our Naturalization Act which restricts naturalization to white persons and persons of African nativity or descent. Population and industrial life. The period since the Civil War has been an era of marvelous growth and prosperity. Since 1865 our population has trebled, and to-day 105,710,000 people live in the United States. A large part of this increase is due to immigration, for Europe has sent us 23,000,000 of her population since 1870. The peopling of the West has added twelve new States to the Union, which now includes forty-eight Commonwealths. Progress in industry has been even more rapid than the growth in population. The value of our agricultural products is seven tunes as great as in 1865, while the value of our manufactures has been multiplied by twelve. Until the close of the Civil War, agriculture was still our dominant industry, but to-day the United States is the foremost manufacturing nation of the world. This industrial supremacy is the result of many advantages. (1) Our vast territory, with its immense agricultural and mineral resources. (2) A magnificent system of inland waterways, supplemented by the largest railway system in the world. (3) The concentration of manufacturing in large plants, making possible large capital, expensive machinery, minute subdivision of labor, and the many economies of large-scale production. (4) The American genius for invention. (5) The energy and efficiency of our workers, trained under a system of free public education. Progress in manufacturing. The capital invested in our manufacturing industries grew from $1,009,000,000 in 1865 to $22,790.0. 000 in 1914. During the same period the number of wageearners employed in manufacturing increased from 1,500,000 to 7.036.0. and the value of manufactured products rose from $1,885.0. 000 to $24,246,000,000. The phenomenal growth of our manufactures since the Civil War is even more strikingly shown by the increased production of coal, iron, and copper, the essential materials in modem industry. He endeared himself to all by his upright character, his kindly goodwill, and earnest devotion to the duties of his office. Vice-President Calvin Coolidge at the time was visiting his boyhood home in Plymouth, Vermont; and there in the early hours of August 3,1923, he took the oath of office as the thirtieth President of the United States. The new President requested the members of the Harding Cabinet to continue in office, and declared that he would endeavor to carry out the policies of his predecessor. President Coolidge announces his foreign policy. The first message of President Coolidge was delivered orally to the two houses of Congress, December 6, 1923, and was notable for its and its positive stand on many public questions. Like his predecessor, President Coolidge announced himself in favor of membership in the World Court, with reservations clearly indicating our refusal to join the League of Nations. Concerning recognition of the Soviet Government of Russia, he asserted that the United States would not enter into relations with a regime which refuses to recognize the sanctity of international obligations. The President declared that the cardinal principle of American foreign policy is to attend to our own affairs and avoid foreign entanglements. Nevertheless, he pointed out that we have a direct interest in the economic recovery of Europe, not only because of the twelve billion dollars owed us by foreign governments, but also because of our desire for the stability of civilization and for the welfare of humanity. "We have reiterated our desire to see France paid and Germany revived. We have proposed disarmament. We have earnestly sought to compose differences and restore peace. We shall persevere in well-doing not by force, but by reason." Domestic problems declared paramount. Our main problems, the President pointed out, are domestic problems. He recommended the curtailment of expenditures through strict economy and close adherence to the budget system; the reduction of federal taxes, especially those on earned incomes, and the revision of brevity, its directness. President Coolidge favored extension of hospital relief and vocational training, with adequate compensation for disabled veterans and support for their families; but, said he, "I do not favor the granting of a bonus." On the question of immigration, the President's stand was equally explicit. He declared that it is necessary to continue the policy of restriction, and that "new arrivals should be limited to our capacity to absorb them into the ranks of good citizenship." Concerning public improvements, he pointed out the necessity of controlling the flood waters of the Mississippi and Colorado rivers; of continuing the policy of federal aid for the improvements of highways; and he emphasized the importance of developing the St. Lawrence-Great Lakes waterway as a means of bringing ocean-going ships to the ports of the Great Lakes. The bonus and federal taxation. As indicated in the President's message, the big problems before the Sixty-eighth Congress were those of taxation, the bonus, and immigration. Secretary of the Treasury Mellon announced that if the bonus bill was passed, tax reduction must be postponed for a long time to come; in other words, that the country must choose between lower taxes and the bonus, but could not have both. However, Congress did not accept this view, and passed both measures early in the year 1924. The bonus bill was vetoed by President Coolidge, and repassed over the veto by a two-thirds majority in each House. It provided for twentyyear endowment insurance certificates for all ex-service men except those entitled to less than fifty dollars, who were to receive cash. The new taxation law made substantial decreases in income tax rates, especially on smaller incomes. It also provided for publicity of tax returns, reduced the surtax on larger incomes, and repealed certain miscellaneous taxes, the total reduction being estimated at $400,000,000 annually. Our immigration policy. Public opinion in the United States has apparently decided that this country cannot in the future take care of so many newcomers alien in race and tongue as it has attempted to absorb in the past. The immigration law passed by Congress in 1924 has as its underlying principle the curtailment of immigration from the south and east of Europe, while encouraging that from northern and western Europe. Accordingly, the census of 1890, rather than that of 1910, was taken as the basis for the quota of immigrants who may come to this country each year. The reason for selecting the earlier census was that the great majority of our immigrants from southern and eastern Europe came subsequent to 1890. Hence, by restricting immigration to two per cent of our race elements as shown by the census of 1890, the quota admitted from southeastern Europe would be considerably reduced. Another important provision of this law excluded Chinese and Japanese immigrants. Chinese laborers had been excluded since 1882, and the "gentleman's agreement" with Japan in 1907 was intended to prohibit the immigration of Japanese laborers. Now, over the protest of Japan, Congress adopted a provision which definitely excluded Japanese as well as Chinese immigrants. This was accomplished by the clause which allows a quota only to those countries whose natives are eligible to citizenship in the United States. The immigration law of 1924 continued in force until July I, 1929, when it was superseded by the "national origins" plan for restricting immigration. Under this plan, the percentage of immigrants allotted to each country is based on the numbers which that country is computed to have contributed to the total population of the United States. Upon this basis, about 150,000 immigrants may be admitted annually from Europe, as compared with approximately 164,000 under the quota law of 1924. Of this number, 70 per cent are allotted to Great Britain, Gennany, and the Irish Free State, and about 15 per cent to the countries of southeastern Europe. Creation of naval oil reserves. The legislative program of the Sixty-Eighth Congress was delayed by investigation of the charges of corruption and bribery in connection with the leasing of government oil lands to private interests. Several years ago the United States Geological Survey reported that there were valuable oil deposits on ungranted government lands. Since all warships built since 1915 use oil as fuel, the importance of conserving this supply for our navy was clear. Accordingly, President Taft created in California two naval oil reserves, while the district known as Teapot Dome in Wyoming was later set off by President Wilson. By an act of Congress passed in 1920 the custody of the naval reserves was assigned to the Secretary of the Navy; but an executive order made public June 1, 1921, based on an opinion by Attorney-General Daugherty, transferred the naval reserves to the Department of the Interior. Secretary Fall, of the Interior Department, signed a lease of the Teapot Dome (April 7, 1922) to the Sinclair oil combination, and also leased one of the California reserves to E. M. Doheny, another oil magnate. Under these leases the Government reserved a moderate oil royalty — about one third — the rest going to the oil promoters. The Senate investigating committee. A special committee of the United States Senate was appointed to investigate the circumstances under which these leases were signed, and startling disclosures followed. Doheny testified before the committee that he had loaned Secretary Fall the sum of $100,000 a few days before the leases were signed; and counsel for the Sinclair oil interests testified that Fall had received $25,000 as a loan from Sinclair. President Coolidge announced that the Government would prosecute any one who appeared guilty of fraud or corruption; and he appointed special counsel to institute proceedings to cancel the oil leases and to prosecute any wrongdoers. Secretary of the Navy Edwin Denby, against whom there was no intimation of corruption, next became the target of attack because of his part in transferring the administration of the oil reserves to Fall's care. The Senate passed a resolution calling on President Coolidge to demand his resignation. The President refused to comply, denying the Senate's right to make such a demand, but soon afterward Secretary Denby voluntarily resigned. The Senate committee next undertook an investigation of the official conduct of AttorneyGeneral Daugherty, whose resignation was finally requested by President Coolidge. Cancellation of the oil leases. The civil suits brought by the Government for cancellation of the oil leases finally reached the United States Supreme Court. That tribunal held that the leases and contracts granted to Doheny by ex-Secretary of the Interior Fall were illegal and fraudulent, "brought about by means of collusion and corrupt conspiracy between Doheny and Fall." The Doheny oil companies were not allowed to recover any part of the more than $11,000,000 expended on improvements "because everything done by the companies was done fraudulently." A similar decision was rendered in the case of the Teapot Dome lease to Sinclair. 