A History of American Civilization: Economic and Social is the third of the Rugg Textbooks in the Social Studies. To Europe, however, the Explorations of the New Continents made a Vast Difference As a result of the knowledge of the New World brought back by the adventurers, men's thoughts began to extend beyond the narrow horizons of the Middle Ages. Many of them saw hope and promise for the future in the unknown world beyond the Atlantic. Did they wish to escape laws that bound them, or rulers that oppressed them? . . . There was the great continent of North America waiting for settlement. Were they ambitious to give up their small trading and risk their fortunes for larger returns from big enterprises? . . . There lay the New World with its opportunity for wealth and independence. Were they eager for freedom to worship God as they desired? ... In the wilderness of North America they could set up their own churches unmolested by Catholic Pope or Anglican king. After 1G00, therefore, the men of Europe turned from exploration to settlement. We find them packing their belongings, selling their houses, and disposing of their estates — to venture all in the first settlements in North America. After this time increasing numbers of Englishmen, Germans, Hollanders, Frenchmen, and Swedes turned their backs upon Europe and cast tonic lot with the New World. What led these Europeans to embark upon this unusual adventure? To understand their reasons for going, let us look back into the lives of some of the emigrants from England. Let us look at the home of a small farmer-craftsman. There we can get a horn spoon. She and Thomas, after a hard day of labor in the fields, were about to sit down to their evening meal — a stew of lentils, cabbage, onions, and dried peas. She straightened as Thomas entered the room, wiping her hot face on the comer of her apron. "Hast put. the lambs in the fold, Tom?" she asked.. "Aye, that 1 have, blast them!" exclaimed Thomas. "These silly sheep be the cause why we're having to leave our cozy cottage." Betsy glanced about the one bare room. It looked like a palace to her at that moment, though it had no floor but the bare ground and the autumn wind howled dismally through the lattice. Every gust threatened to send the thatch roof flying. Many times she had complained to Thomas that they would be homeless if a spark should light the thatch. But now that she had to. leave it, her home seemed very dear to her. "The squire's a hard man to drive us oil' our land," sighed Betsy. "Aye, lass, we've worked hard at Kenelm Priory. 'Tis cruel to think a fine lass like you, born to the land, should be leaving it. Inclosing the commons, indeed!" he snorted. " An' my people, the Rogerses, have held it since the days of good King Alfred." "Never ye mind, Tom," said Betsy consolingly. "There's not a better wood-carver in the whole shire than ye be. An' if I must say it, there's naught better than the wool I spin and weave. We'll not lack work in London." "Nay, my dear," said Tom, shaking his head. "There be plenty of strong folk like you and me a-starving in London streets. There's not a task left for a body to turn a hand to." "Well, old man," replied Betsy with spirit, "we'll not starve along with ethers. We've saved up a pretty penny. Ere we dawdle like timid folk hungry in London, we'll move to America. I'm thinking we'd not be long there before we'd have a cottage as pretty as this. What think ye?" . "Aye, lass, ye're a great one. I'd been thinking those very thoughts myself, but I didn't like to tell ye. I feared ye might be thinking of Redskins or the risk of going hungry there." "If I must starve," retorted Betsy, "I'd rather be doing it in the new land. But methinks folk with strong backs like ours will not go hungry while there's good land to sow and reap. More likely we'll soon be rich there." In many villages and towns of England cottagers and craftsmen, facing starvation, were discussing the same plans. But it was not only the poorer artisans that talked of America in those trying days. Discontent was also spreading among the more well-to-do people of England. Dissatisfaction grew rapidly at the deeds of the tyrannical government of England. Everywhere there was unrest over religion as well as over politics. To understand that side of the conditions, we must glance at the religious changes that had taken place in Europe. Religious Trouble in England made Many People Uncomfortable and Unhappy For hundreds of years, throughout t he Middle Ages, most of the people of Europe held the same religious beliefs. They belonged to the Roman Catholic Church, which was ruled over by the Pope. No one thought seriously of belonging to any other church. Protest against it would have been severely punished. As early as the 1300's, however, people in England began to rebel against the authority of the Pope, for he had great control over the lives of all the people in Europe. In other countries, also, as nations grew stronger, voices were raised against the Roman Church. By that time people of different countries were communicating more freely with one another. They were exchanging ideas and were trying to shake off old ways of thinking. In 1519 a German monk named Martin Luther suggested that some of the ways in which the church was conducted be changed. The Pope promptly put him out of the church. Very trying and revolutionary years followed, and finally a new church, -called the Lutheran Church, was founded in Germany. The beliefs of the new church spread not only through Germany, but in Holland and Scandinavia as well. During the same years, in Switzerland, France, Scotland, and England, other new churches sprang up. A great movement for reform swept over Europe. This movement lies been called by historians the Reformation. Kings and princes who had been partly under the rule of Rome took up the work of the church reformers. The new churches were called Protestant churches because they all were formed as protests against the Roman Catholic Church. In England King Henry VIII did not at first take part in the Reformation. Later, however, serious quarrels arose between him and the Pope. The Pope refused to grant certain things which Henry asked of him. In the end Henry threw off his allegiance to Rome and declared the English church separate, with himself as the head. He called it the Church of England or the Anglican Church. This became the Established Church throughout England and all Englishmen were compelled to belong to it. But many Englishmen were not entirely pleased with this new- state of affairs. Some of the English Catholics who had never liked the Reformation felt that it was not right for King Henry to separate from the Pope of Rome. These people wanted to restore the old Catholic religion, so they refused to recognize the Anglican Church. Many other Englishmen differed from the King in other ways. These people did not want to see the Roman Church restored, hut they were not entirely satisfied with the new one. They felt that Henry's church was only a halfway measure. They wanted to do ■away with everything that resembled the Catholic Church. Their aim was to purify the church, so the} - called themselves Puritans. Many people of the middle class in England joined these Puritans. Some of them who were very independent banded together to break aw-ay from the church entirely. These radicals were called Dissenters. They w-anted to choose their own church officers and to -worship very simply. Most of the Dissenters did actually form sects of their own. Many of them still exist today and are very influential throughout Europe and America. For example, there was one group led by John Calvin, a Frenchman, living in Geneva, Switzerland, which found many followers in England, and especially in Scotland. Later they became known as Presbyterians. Another sect, following the teaching of the Englishman George Fox, called themselves Friends. They were given the nickname Quakers, however, because their enemies said they quaked or trembled as they preached. These Friends believed that all men should live together in peace. They hated war and violence of any kind.i There were two other important groups: one called Baptists, led by John Smith (or Smyth) of England; the other called Methodists, formed by John Wesley. Naturally Henry VIII and his successors, who were responsible for the Church of England, looked with great dislike and distrust upon those who joined the new churches. Nor were the Catholics, who clung to the past, more popular than they. It is interesting to note that Herbert Hoover, the thirty-first president of the United States, is a member of that organization today. During the religious persecutions, many people escaped from England and made their way to America. When they learned that colonies might be formed in America, many of these people decided to seek peace and freedom overseas. Having some wealth, they were able to provide themselves with necessities for the trip, and to form prosperous colonies later. Let us glance into one of the Puritan homes when they and their friends were being persecuted. " Cock-a-doodle-doo! " called the cock from the barnyard. "Faith! ConstanceP called Dame Riyner. "'Tis time to be stirring. Hasten! " Faith opened sleepy eyes to see the same old, four-poster bedstead which had met her gaze since she could remember. She snuggled deeper into her feather bed and closed her lids again. "Wake up, Faith! It must be past five and father will be angry if we are late for prayers," whispered Constance. "Oh, bother!" exclaimed Faith as she jumped from bed and hastily started to dress. In a few moments the two sisters ran downstairs to the drawing room. They were just in time to see their father take down the heavy family Bible. The servants were drawn up in a line. John Ryner read from the Scripture. Then he said a long, long prayer. Faith could not help fidgeting before he had finished. She was so eager to be out of doors. At length Master Ryner dismissed the servants and turned to his wife. "Prudence, I am going to look at the pastures which have just been drained. Do you take notice whether the fish ponds arc well stocked." Dame Ryner nodded, thinking of the many, many tasks awaiting her attention as mistress of the household. Several hours later the two daughters were busily studying their ABC's when Constance whispered to Faith, "Patience Godwin is going to America." "Oh, everybody's going. I wish we were too!" cried Faith. "Sh-h-h!" whispered the governess. "Children should be seen, not heard." Just then John Ryner's deep voice was heard from the doorway. "How are my pets?" he called. "Oh, father, did you know that Patience Godwin is going to America?" "Is this true?" asked John of his wife, who was spinning in the pattern of light which came from the many leaded panes Of the large window. "I fear it is. Mistress Godwin has brought over her silver and asked me to keep it for her." The father signaled to the governess to take the girls into the garden. He did not wish them to hear his conversation. Then he turned to his wife. "It's becoming worse and worse," he sighed. "How much longer will this King persecute us? Bah! A King who takes from an honest man his hard-earned money! A King who throws away gold and pretends he is spending it on a navy to light the Spanish! Worse yet, Bishop Laud has been appointed to hound us loyal Puritans out of the land. Government, religion, politics! That is all one hears today! A man must hold his tongue or lose his head. And our wonderful church meetings must be kept secret and our mouths closed! God grant the day may come when we can worship openly in peace." "God grant it," echoed Prudence. Faith and Constance rushed in from the garden. " What is it, girls?" asked the father as they ran into the room. "Oh, there's a Maypole at Mistress Deane's! How jolly it is! Such bright colors. Everyone is dancing and singing!" "Constance! Faith!" said the mother sternly. "The Maypole is the devil's handiwork. Dancing is a sin in the sight of the Lord." To her husband she said: "We cannot have the girls living where sights so disgraceful occur. Oh, I wish we could live where people would fear God and be righteous." "Let us look into the matter of going to America where we can live and worship us we please," replied John soberly. "We shall talk to the Godwins tonight." Political Disturbances also racked England The Godwins went, the Ryners went, and man}" other middle- class Englishmen went to America during those trying years. As you will learn later, it was these middle-class people who played the leading part in establishing the colonies of New England. Nearly a quarter of a century later another group of Englishmen were unhappy at home. These people were of the country- gentleman class — people who had inherited wealth through then- families for many generations. They believed that they were members of a privileged class, born to rule. They were proud of their wealth and their ancestors. Unlike the Puritans, who believed in hard work, they loved to spend their time in hunting, gambling, and dancing. The Puritans thought that they spent money too freely and wastefully. Religion was not so important to this group, either, as it was to the Puritans. The}" did not feel their duty to God very deeply, and church was largely a matter of form and custom. Nevertheless, they disliked the Dissenters and feared that the latter might get into power and make them change their ways of living. These lordly people, therefore, supported the King and the Church of England. They ignored and despised all those who did not have position and wealth — merchants and business men as well as the poorer classes. The hated business men, however, were not disturbed by the scorn of the gentleman class. As they accumulated wealth from their businesses, they gained more and more power in the government. England had had a Parliament, the law-making body, for many centuries, but until now these people could not become members. Now, however, they began to be numerous in Parliament and to play a strong part in the government by being elected to the House of Commons, which was the lower house of Parliament. As these tradesmen became powerful enough, they objected to the high-handed methods used by the King and the House of Lords. For example, when James I (1603-1025) insisted upon levying heavy taxes to be spent as he pleased, the House of Commons protested. This was the beginning of a quarrel between the King and Parliament which was to last for over half a century. Charles I, the son of James, followed him on the throne. He also j taxed the people heavily and spent their money extravagantly. Charles refused to yield to the demands of the Puritan Parliament, and a civil war finally broke out. Then Parliament took matters into its own hands. Charles I I was beheaded (1649), and Oliver Cromwell, a Puritan, became head of the government. The House of Commons desired to make England a republic and persecuted the gentleman class as the Puritans had been persecuted. The religious question was as bitter as ever. Cromwell tried to make the gentlemen landlords give up the Church of England and become Puritan. Two years after Cromwell's death, however, Charles II (son of Charles I) J was put on the throne, and the monarchy was once more established. Then the Puritans began to lose their power. The peace which came was only temporary. Parliament was not satisfied. Id had gained new powers, but not enough. After ruling 2/> years, Charles II died, and Ids brother became James II of Great Britain and Ireland. Trouble broke out again. Parliament had shown several times that it was growing strong — powerful enough even to remove a king from his throne. James IL was driven into exile, and a new King and Queen, William and Mary, were invited to take his place. William was not an Englishman, and when asking him to take the throne Parliament greatly limited his powers. For example, he was not permitted to tax his subjects; that was to be the business of Parliament alone. These changes greatly upset many of the gentleman class. They had always been supporters of the king and of the Church of England, and of the class to which they belonged. Hence they were greatly dissatisfied with conditions in their native land. So it developed that these people formed the third of three groups of Englishmen who were ready to emigrate to America. The first were the farmer- craftsmen and the second were the middle-class merchant group. As reports of the new land spread, therefore, man}' people of all classes prepared to uproot their homes and begin life again there. Here is a glimpse of one of these homes which shows that even during Cromwell's time these people were beginning to be dissatisfied with their life in England. They too were turning their thoughts to the new lands. "Zounds! What a man this Roundhead Cromwell is! " boomed the deep voice of Sir Robert Digby from the head of the long table, "lie is not content with murdering our good King Charles, may God grant him peace, but now he must murder all our King's friends too!" He glanced round the table heaped high with spiced meats, breads, and delicious cakes. It was a colorful group which was gathered there. Ladies, with elaborately dressed hair, were beautifully gowned in embroidered Fig. 33. A banquet hall in an English manor in the 1 GOO's. It was not only the poor arid the middle class people who thought of America as a future home. Many of those who lived in such luxury as the picture shows timed to America for safety as the merchant class gained in power. (From Coffin's Old Times in the Colonies, 1880) silks, satins, and fine laces. Fine, white hands played with the rich fare. To the right of every lady sat a gentleman no less well dressed than she. Long, glossy curled wigs, rich velvets, brocades, delicate lace cults, silk hose, all indicated the high social rank of the wearer. "He asks us to sign his Covenant to put the Puritan religion in the place of our good King's Church of England. Of course I refused! Think you I would disgrace my family which for centuries- has served the royal family?" exclaimed a guest indignantly. "Nor 1, though it cost me the land which the first Sir Robert Digby received from Mem-v IV/' returned the host. "If it must be,— and pray God, never, I will go to tins new land America, of which wo hear such strange and wondrous tales. Mot Cromwell himself nor all his armies can force me to break my faith with our murdered King." "How would you enjoy America, Elizabeth?" asked a young gallant of his pretty neighbor. "Imagine Indians eight feet tall, and dragons and five-headed cannibals!" Elizabeth's eyes grew round at mention of such horrible curiosities. "May God help us— never!" she cried with a shudder. "And why is my little daughter praying to the good Lord?" called Sir Robert, who had overheard the last remark from the head of the long table. "'Tis of that fearful land, America, that Randal is speaking. I would not leave England." "Nor I, little one. May God forbid it. Yet Randal is but teasing you about this new land. Barbarous and savage the Indians may be, yet the land is rich and fertile. Many good Englishmen will surely go there to remake their fortunes." "Is it not odd that these Dissenters seem to mind not at all leaving their homes? I hear that more than 20,000 of them left for the colonies between 1630 and 1640," remarked Chaplain Clark. "It is because many of them are newly rich, these wretched tradesmen, merchants, and artisans!" remarked young Dari Digby with heat. "Most of them are of no family. The land they own is not that which their ancestors have held for centuries. They do not love English soil as we do." "Aye, Tis true. And a radical people they are. Trying to force their gloomy ways of living down our throats, crying 'Down with the Church of England!' and then putting our kings off their thrones! " Softly Sir Robert Digby added: "God grant that they do not enforce their new laws against us. I pray my home may be a home for Dari and his children, and their children's children. Yet. if things go on in this way, we cannot remain here much longer. America will give us freedom." There was a fourth group of people who were eager to leave England in the early 1600's. They were not the God-fearing, respectable Puritans, nor yet the aristocratic landlords, nor the sturdy yeomen. They were debtors and prisoners in the jails. Many of them were hard-working, honest people who were the victims of unjust laws. Poor people, especially in London and Fig. 34. Conditions in the English prisons of the 1600's were shocking. Many poor people, unable to pay their debts, were crowded into prison cells which were dirty and airless. There they stayed until they were able to pay what they owed or were released by death. (From a painting by William Flogarth) the larger English cities, who were not able to pay their debts were thrown into prison until such time as they should be able to do so. This treatment was cruel and shortsighted, for people who were jailed were thus prevented from earning money to win their release. Innocent people had spent years, even a lifetime, in prison for the crime of being poor. The number of such debtors during these early days was very large. Prisons had become terribly overcrowded and conditions were shocking. Prisoners lacked air, light, even water with which to keep clean. They were not provided with food except by relatives or friends. They shared the same rooms with the worst criminals, who were awaiting trial. Some people died there, waiting to be set free. During the reign of Queen Elizabeth, laws were passed to banish certain of these prisoners to foreign lands. Later King James I ordered over 100 people transported to the new America. After the colonies were established, a system gradually grew up by which men could make a contract with debtors in prison. They would agree to transport the deb tom to America, and in return the debtors were to serve a term as laborers, or bond servants, to any colonist who would pay the contractor the amount of the passage. This term would last from seven to fourteen years. At the end of that time they were to be given their freedom, and might become citizens of the colony. This system proved to be a convenient means of ridding England of petty offenders and debtors who crowded jails and workhouses. It was also a welcome plan to colonists who needed laborers. In the end it was beneficial to the unfortunate bond servant, for he thus had an opportunity to work out his freedom and to get a new start. So, as we have seen, the century following the exploration of America by Europeans was a time of great unrest in England. People were eager for change. Thousands of Englishmen turned their thoughts to establishing colonies. Rich and poor alike wanted to build themselves new homes, to create a ''New England" in America. Two Important Questions First: Were there Englishmen ready to brave the dangers of New World settlement? The little glimpses we have had of the unrest and discontent in England in the 1 GOO's will help us to understand why tens of thousands of Englishmen left their native land to struggle with homebuilding in the North American wilderness. Great courage and unfaltering determination were required: first, to undergo the two months' ocean crossing in a little sailboat, and then to face the dangers of frontier life on the unfriendly Atlantic shore. Conditions in England had made many courageous and freedomloving people willing to undertake the task of emigration. As you have already learned from Changing Civilizations in the Modern World, England lacked neither sturdy yeomen- farmers, skilled craftsmen, strong unskilled laborers, nor well-to-do educated leaders. There were many experienced owners of small farms, skilled in agriculture, wanting to better their condition by farming the soil of the New World. There were thousands of farm laborers of the peasant class who had been cut loose from the soil and were working for starvation wages in the handicraft shops of the towns. Still others were dragging out unhappy lives on the manors. These laborers were eager to risk their lives in the adventure of emigration. England of all countries in Europe was prepared to lead in establishing permanent settlements in the New World. Furthermore, the women of the farming and artisan class — indeed of the more well-to-do and cultured classes — were equally prepared and ready to move to America. The mass of English women were used to hard Work. For centuries they had worked in the fields as farm laborers and spun yam and woven cloth in their homes. They were even working in the crafts of English towns. These women were not afraid to venture into the unknown lands beside their fathers, their brothers, and their husbands. So in 1600 it was becoming increasingly clear that things had been made ready for the establishing of a "New England" in North America. Religious persecution, tyrannical governments, and the difficulties of making a living had brought thousands of Englishmen to the decision to emigrate. But more was needed to build a permanent "New England" in America than willing workers, no matter how courageous and experienced they were. Money was needed also, money in large amounts — money to buy and fit out ships, money to provision the ships and to feed the colony while the first crops were being produced from the soil, money to equip the colonists with farm tools, implements, and weapons. Large amounts of money, indeed, for it was estimated that to move a family to America and establish it safely in a new home would cost several thousand dollars. Was the necessary money available? Were there persons in England who had enough capital to establish colonics in North America? Were these persons willing to risk it in such ventures? Yes, in 1G00, capital was at hand — large amounts of capital made in sheep-raising, in wool-manufacturing and many other crafts, and in England's growing foreign trade. To understand how this had come about we must recall from our earlier studies the conditions of living in western Europe. Let us recall first how trade had developed. In the 1300's Europe had had its eyes opened to a new life which trade would bring about. Europeans began to realize that their lives had been cramped. So trade between East and West increased through the 1300's and 1400's. Expensive goods were brought in, in large quantities, and traders made great profits from their dangerous sea voyages. By 1G00, trading companies had been formed by merchants and other people — the East India companies of the English, the Dutch, the Portuguese, fishing companies, and many others. People invested money in them. Some fortunes were lost, but often larger ones were made. Recall how craftsmanship grew in England as the demands for trade increased. Many people left their little manors and went to live in towns. Gradually people began to have somewhat better homes, better food, and better clothing. The standard of living slowly rose. Money became more common. Even craftsmen and small farmers acquired small independent means. Steadily a larger number of people accumulated savings which they were willing to risk in new business ventures — even perhaps in the trading companies formed to send settlers to the new America. Remember how England was building up a thriving shipping business and the world's most powerful navy. England, of all countries in Europe, to become Mistress of the Seas! England, which throughout the Middle Ages had been situated on the edge of the known world. Now, because of the new western explorations, she was becoming Lire center of world trade. On the map of figure 58 notice the fine location of the city and of the great colony which grew out beyond it. Penn was the governor of the entire province with power to make laws, appoint officers, and grant pardons. He had a body of elected freemen to help him govern, however. The story of the first years in the colony is a happy one. The Quakers were free at last to follow their consciences. Persecution was ended. A new life was beginning. The world looked fair enough, and the people were happy. They were also industrious, An early German settlement in Pennsylvania They started to build good red-brick houses. While then homes were being built the settlers had to live in bark huts or caves on the river bank. Yet even that was an adventure, like a summer vacation in a tent. There was little sickness and no famine. Within two years Philadelphia grew to be a thriving port town of 2500 people. Soon Philadelphia became a charming little town. Everything looked neat and cheerful, for the Quaker women were good housewives. Their brick houses looked gay in the sun. Along the water front was a jolly tavern called the Blue Anchor, where British naval officers mingled with Quakers, who were not opposed to good living in spite of their sober ways. Below the tavern on the water's edge squatted rows of solid- looking brick warehouses. Ships were always lying at anchor in the harbor, and there was much movement and excitement in the town when an English ship, bearing newcomers and welcome news from England, came into port. People swarmed to the wharves to watch the arrival of passengers and the loading and unloading of boats. So it was that the town of Philadelphia, like Boston and New York, centered about the harbor. Many ships were built by the Philadelphians themselves for fishing and trading. Boys took to the sea early and many became prosperous skippers. The Back Country was settled by People of Many Nationalities and Religions At the time that William Penn received the grant from King Charles, he tried to encourage settlers from other countries to come to America. He sought to attract settlers from Germany, Holland, Ireland, and Wales, where he was well known. First came a party of Welshmen, prosperous, middle-class people from the west of England. To them Penn gave a tract of land, 40,000 acres in extent, just west of Philadelphia. They were allowed to live unmolested as they had wished to live in their own country. Second came a great horde of German settlers. Of all the people in Pennsylvania the Germans were most numerous. Many poor peasants in Germany were delighted to accept Penn's invitation to start life afresh, for their farms had been laid waste by years of warfare with France and Austria. Troops had tramped back and forth across their once green fields, many of their friends and families had died of starvation or bad been killed in battle, and many of them belonged to Protestant sects which were being cruelly persecuted in Germany. News of a land where farming was excellent and where no man questioned another's faith was a message of hope. Eagerly the poor people of Europe read Penn's advertising circulars. Eagerly they took passage for America during the late 1000's and early 1700's. For 100 years Germans poured into Pennsylvania to reap the benefits of Penn's kindly attitude toward all men who were persecuted. Criminals from the jails as well as free peasants were glad to sell themselves as indentured servants in order to get to the New World. The German immigrants who were not bound over as indentured servants settled on the land as freemen. There they lived as they would have liked to live in Germany — a life of useful work, peace, and thrift, but a life of freedom. At t ho end of their terms many of the indentured servants also settled on the land and built homes of their own. It is estimated that by 1750 half the population of Pennsylvania was German. Then came the Scotch-Irish to the Back Country The Scotch-Irish who swarmed into Pennsylvania were very different from the quiet, stolid Germans. They were just as different from the peace-loving Quakers. A life of uninterrupted peace did not appeal to them at all. To be sure, these fighting people were not easy to live with. How could they be peaceful? For years they had fought English domination in Scotland, and when they moved over to Ireland during the time of Cromwell they had fought Irish Catholics with no less zeal. In religion they were followers of John Knox, stanch Presbyterians. When they were not fighting Irish Catholics they were fighting Anglican landowners, who tried to force the Church of England upon them. So to the New World they brought their hardy spirit and their hatred for interference of any kind. They were sturdy men "with a chip on their shoulders" for Indian, Quaker, German, or Englishman. Such bold courage was that of the Scotch-Irish that they soon swept to the front of the westward movement across North America. And at the front they remained as the tide flowed across the continent. Those of the Scotch-Irish who were not sold as indentured servants did not linger long on the seaboard. Some of them settled in New Jersey* to be sure, but most of them hastened to the western frontier in the mountain back country. There they "squatted" on the land ; that is, they merely settled there. The Southern colonies, with the most important towns and their dates of settlement. The line which follows the Appalachian range is the point beyond which in 1703 settlement was forbidden by England out so much as a "by your leave" from anyone. They set to work at. once, hewing trees to build their rude cabins and clearing the land, and they threw themselves into the life of the frontier. This completes our brief story of the first settling of the seven Northern colonies — Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New Hampshire, New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. In the meantime, toward the south, six other English colonies were being settled —• Virginia, North and South Carolina. For 200 years the history of the A American people was a history of the conflict of sections. Even in colonial limes three rather distinctive sections formed: the southern section of tobacco, rice, and cotton planting; the northern section of handicraft, trade, shipping, and diversified farming; and the back country, a frontier stretching along the westward fringe of settlements, from Maine to Georgia. Geographic factors had helped to make ways of living in one section different from those in the others. After the Revolution the country still continued to form into three fairly distinct sections: South, North, and Western frontier. In Unit VII we shall study the development of two of these, the Northern industrial zone of manufacturing and the Southern cotton kingdom. In Chapter XVII we shall learn how the Northeastern slates turned more and more to machine manufacturing, how cities and towns grew rapidly, and how more and more people made a living by making and selling things. In Chapter XVIII we shall study the different development in the South. We shall sec how a few thousand wealthy planters developed a great cotton kingdom, based on black-slave labor. Again ere shall see how geography helped to bring about sharp differences between the two sections. In Chapter XIX we shall note that at last these differences between the North and South brought a great civil war, and that that in turn brought about a new Industrial Revolution. More than any other single factor, the war between the Northern and Southern stales started the great industrial expansion and the age of Big Business. The first half-century of our country's independent life saw remarkably swift changes in ways of living. Everything was changing — methods of producing food and clothing, of building homes and public buildings, of transporting people and their goods, of communicating, and of buying and selling. Even the amusements and the play life of the people were changing. Population was growing rapidly In 1790 there were about 4,000,000 people in the United States. In I860 there were about 31,000,000. Thus in 70 years the population of the country doubled and doubled and nearly doubled again! It was an undreamed-of development! There were several reasons for the astonishing growth of population. During the years of the westward movement most American families were large, commonly numbering eight to twelve people. Furthermore, as life became more settled, health conditions became better, — cities became more sanitary and medical men learned how to preserve life more efficiently, — so that the proportion of people who lived to old age became larger and larger. Another reason for the increase in population was the tremendous immigration into the United States from Europe, especially after 1S20. With the building of railroads, canals, roads, and factories, there came a demand for more and more laborers. Conditions in Europe were forcing many peasants out of their homes at the very time that America was offering golden opportunities, and into the Eastern seaports poured hordes of immigrants of many nations. The bar graph of figure 172 shows you that until 1SG0 the population of our country nearly doubled Population of the United States, 1790-1920 The world had never known such a rapid growth of population as that which took place in the United States in these years. You have already read in An Introduction to American Civilization how three cities (Providence, Pittsburgh, and Schenectady) grew up in the industrial section. Let us consider two or three other examples, to show more fully how communities were growing from coast to coast. On the eastern seaboard we shall have a fleeting glimpse of Boston and New York about 18(30. Then we shall sec what was happening in Chicago. As you read the accounts of these growing cities, try to imagine that to a certain extent the same things were happening in other towns and cities of the new industrial section, and that they were to happen again and again in other sections. 1. Boston In 1783 Boston was little more than a large town. It was orderly and trim, more like an English town with hundreds of years of history behind it than like the crude frontier towns of the Western country. Many of the houses were charming dwellings. People were slowly breaking away from some of the narrow Puritan traditions, and were beginning to live a more gay and cultured life. Well-known artists were founding an American school of art. Wealth had accumulated there. In 1850 Boston had become a city of 136,000 people and the largest trading center of New England. It carried on business with the thriving cities of Lynn, which was making shoes, Lowell, Lawrence, Pall River, and other textilefactory towns. It was still an important seaport and center of fisheries. Although Boston began to fall behind New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and New Orleans in trade, it became the cultural center of the United States. The city had had a public library since 1653. In the early 1800's the new Boston library received many excellent collections of Prench books from Paris and gathered a store of rare and fine books from Spain and England. Since I7S0 Boston had also been the home of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. There also were to be found the Society of Natural History and the Massachusetts Historical Society. Across the Charles river, in Cambridge, was Harvard and more attractive furniture. Modem heating appliances were introduced, saving labor and protecting homes better against the weather. Quality and styles of clothing also improved markedly. It became possible for the laborer and his family to have a little more leisure, and there was a little money with which to enjoy it. It was in this period also that the American school system grew up with universal elementary education for all. The number of children staying on through high school grew rapidly, and even by 1900 tens of thousands of youth from the artisan- mechanic-farmer class were going to college and to professional schools. This half-century from 1850 to 1900 was indeed the most important single period in the economic advance of the common man. It is important to remember, of course, that throughout the period there were hundreds of thousands of people, especially the unskilled laborers of industry, who were able to obtain only a bare living. Loss of time from work and expense caused by sickness or accidents were disastrous to them. For these people life was mere existence — long hours of labor, little leisure, and constant anxiety as to how to make ends meet. After 1890 two factors tended to make conditions of the worker worse. After 1890 the worker's standard of living was still high, but his wages failed to increase as rapidly as the prices which he had to pay for his food, shelter, clothing, education, and recreation. Hence the purchasing power of his wages began to decline. The explanation for this is exceedingly difficult to understand. Such problems you will study carefully in later years of the high school. At this time we can merely hint at the explanation. Two factors more than all others probably kept the laborers' wages down: first, the steady disappearance of free land in the West; second, the hordes of immigrant laborers brought into the United States from Europe. You know now the story of the westward movement and the claiming of the free land of the country. You know that decade after decade adventurous Americans went West, staked out homesteads, farms, ranches, mines, railroads, and townships. And you know that by 1890 there was practically no free land left. What was the connection between that and the amount of wages paid to laborers in industry? Again it is not an easy problem to understand, but it is an important one. Remember that, until the later 18(K)'s, laborers in Eastern factories who did not like the wages they were receiving could pack their belongings into a wagon, go West, and stake out a farm. Throughout more than a century millions of Easterners did that very thing. This had a direct influence upon industries in the East. It kept the number of workers down, and hence employers were compelled to pay higher wages. But when the free or cheap land was gone, the price of farm land in the West rose. Through the 1870's, the 1880's, and the 1890's, it became more and more difficult for a discontented laborer to leave his job. He was compelled to accept the wages which his employer was willing to pay. This fact also helps to explain why the membership of labor unions increased so rapidly after 1900. The workers could thus better protect themselves from the more powerful employers. But even more important than the disappearance of free land in the West was the influence of immigration upon the wages of the American workingman. Even from the early 1800's employers had used cheap laborers in their factories, for example, child apprentices. Often when strikes were threatened employers lured boy apprentices. These apprentices would work at half or less than half the wages which the grown-up mechanics were receiving. Hence in the years before the Civil War one of the constant demands of labor unions was the reduction of the number of young apprentices. That problem was fairly well solved by the time of the Civil War, however. In the meantime the unions were compelled to fight the employers who brought in strike-breakers and cheaper employees from Europe. Emigrant companies w-ere formed "to import laborers, especially skilled laborers, from Great Britain, Belgium, France, Switzerland, Norway, and Sweden for employers of labor in America' By means of these companies employers could be quickly furnished with great numbers of workers either skilled or unskilled. Decade after decade the labor unions, aided by humanitarian leaders, protested against the bringing in from Europe of contractlaborers. Finally, in 1885 Congress was persuaded to pass a law which forbade that sort of thing. In the meantime, however, as you have already learned, voluntary European immigration was increasing by leaps and bounds. Hundreds of thousands of northwestern Europeans were entering our ports each year. Many of these, of course, were going out into the farms of Illinois, Wisconsin, and Missouri. But many were also going to work in the mines, in the factories, and on the railroads. Thus native American labor constantly faced the danger of lower wages. The millions of new laborers seeking to take their places were willing to work for a very small amount of money. Standards of living were lower in European countries than in America, and emigrants who came here were willing at first to work for much lower wages than our native laborers were receiving. Then, after 1900, a new flood of immigration began. Italians, Russians, Slovaks, Armenians,— peoples from every country of eastern and southeastern Europe,— poured through our ports. Almost 1,000,000 a year they came. A vast proportion of these people went into the industries which were demanding unskilled laborers. These new European emigrants had lived at home on a standard of living even lower than that of Germany, England, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden. The result was that after 1900, millions of low-wage laborers entered American industries. The employers gained greatly, of course. But what about the laborers? Do you see what effect that would have on laborers' wages? Would not the cheap immigrant laborers keep wages low? Were they not arriving in such great numbers that their presence would reduce the standard of living of our native workers? Such at least is the belief of our careful students of industry. Increasing Numbers of Women went into Industry and Business By 1860 one third of the factory workers in New England were women. In the entire country about one eighth were women. In some industries as many as two thirds of the workers were women. At that time also, women workers in New England factories spent on; in average twelve hours a day at their machines. The factory quarters were unhealthful, and the home quarters of the girls were worse. An investigator of the times wrote: The young women sleep upon an average of six in a room — three beds to a room. There is no privacy, no retirement here; it is almost impossible to read or write alone, as the parlor is full and so many sleep in the same chamber. A young woman remarked to us that if she had a letter to write, she did it on the head of a band-box, sitting on a trunk, as there was not space for a table. So live and toil the young women of our country in the boarding houses and manufactures, which the rich and influential of our land have built for them. There were exceptions to these conditions, especially in the first years of the Industrial Revolution. Lowell, Massachusetts, was then a model factory town for women workers. The girls who worked in the textile mills there were well housed and fairly well clothed. Their condition was a contrast to that of textile workers elsewhere even at that time. Later, however, the conditions in Lowell became as bad as everywhere else. During the 30 years between 1870 and 1900 the number of women workers steadily increased from one eighth to nearly one fifth of all the workers. In 1900 women were working in every occupation excepting that of soldier, sailor, marine, street-car operator, fireman, apprentice to roofers, steamboiler mechanic, and brass-worker. The wages of women and children during those 30 years were shockingly low. In 1860 the women factory workers averaged about $20 a month. The American Federation of Labor stated later that the workers did not receive enough to keep body and people than the workers and employers directly involved. In 1922, when many of the railroads stopped running for a few days because of a strike, great numbers of people in all parts of the country began to suffer almost immediately. The great coal strike of the same year caused much suffering during the following winter. Some means of avoiding strikes in settling labor disputes is very essential. Workingmen have used the Ballot too Workingmen have also secured many of the things they desired by using the power of their votes. At times they have organized labor parties and have nominated labor candidates for offices. The first of these was the Workingmen's Party, organized in 1828. Its principal aim was to elect public officials who would favor the ten-hour day. Another party was the Socialist Labor party which nominated a candidate for president in 1892 and in succeeding years, but never received many votes. Although in England the Labor party has become one of the strongest political groups, twice in control of the government, in this country no Labor party has ever gained much strength; yet the laboring people here have secured many things by political means. By casting their votes for candidates who would agree to work for things they desired, they have had a large part in securing laws for their own benefit and often for the benefit of the whole country. They have worked for such things as the following: the extension of free education, laws restricting the labor of women and children, laws assuring a laborer compensation when injured at his work, a limitation of the length of the legal working day, a short day for public employees, laws protecting life and health in mines and factories, woman suffrage, the creation of a national Department of Labor, and many other things. The Importance of the Farmer in the New Industrial Age Agriculture expanded rapidly during the very years when the great industries were growing. Indeed, it was only the increase , in farming that made possible our great industrial development. Regiments of men could be brought together into factories, mines, stores, and offices only if sufficient food was at hand to feed them. Furthermore, the great agricultural industries — meat-packing, milling, and canning — could develop only as the farms of America developed also. The great growth of agriculture was brought about by the same four factors which we have so often studied before: abundance of cheap land, favorable climate, rapid increase in population, and the invention and widespread use of farm machinery. The rapid increase in population and in the number of farmers, especially by European immigration In 1860 the population of the United States was 31,443,000. In 1910 it was 91,972,000. Between 1860 and 1910 approximately 24,000,000 people emigrated to the United States, chiefly from European countries. Between 1880 and 1910 over 19,000,000 came; and between 1890 and 1914 nearly 1,000,000 people entered the ports of the United States every year. Before 1900 large numbers of these immigrants went to work as farmers. In the 1860's to 1880's hundreds of thousands of Germans became farmers in the Middle West. After 1880 many Swedes,- Danes, and Norwegians took up farms in the Dakotas, Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Iowa. After 1900 several million Italians entered the country. Many became fruit-growers and truck farmers outside of the cities, in the eastern and central sections of the country. Millions of Slavs came, also, after 1900. Although most of them went to work in the factories, mines, and mills, and on the railroads, many took up farms in the middle and northeastern prairies. The widespread use of farm machinery changed farm work and farm life Plows and reapers were two of the most important of the earlier machines for use on farms. In the 1870's factories in the Middle West offered "chilled steel" plows for sale at a fairly low price. Improvements were also made in harvesting machines. In 1878 F. F. Appleby invented the twine-binder—an attachnow being carefully designed. We shall see how city engineers and architects study their problems scientifically, — for example, in the designing of business and industrial districts, in the provision of wide and well-arranged streets, parks, and playgrounds, and in the designing of urban buildings with respect to the needs of population and the arrangement of land space around them. 7. Serious problems of crime, especially in our largest cities. Accompanying the invention of the automobile and the rapid growth of metropolitan districts, crime has mounted in ever widening proportions. The proportion of crime in well-to-do America far exceeds that in any other country of the world. Herein lies a serious problem for the student of law, for the courts, and for communities. We shall study it carefully in Volume V. 8. Serious dangers to American homes. Since the World War many women have entered industry or have become wage-earners in business. Increasing numbers are acquiring a college education and going into the professions. Such developments, together with the widespread use of the automobile and the startling growth of cities, have already produced important changes in American homes. Elders and youth alike spend less time in the home and more time in hurried outside recreations. Some students think there is clear evidence of a serious problem in the changing American home. These problems must also be studied in later phases of our work if we are really to understand American life. 9. Difficult problems of immigration. We still continue to admit annually to the United States several hundred thousand European immigrants, and in addition many thousands of others who cross our borders illegally. Here are more problems for the scientific students. How shall we take into American life what these immigrants offer us from Old World civilizations? How shall we also Americanize them — develop in them a feeling for the spirit, opportunities, and responsibility of the new America? 10. The increasing indifference of the average citizen to matters of government. As our towns and cities have grown, fewer eligible voters have cast their ballots in local, state, and national elections. In our larger cities the average citizen is unacquainted with his representatives in the councils, boards of aldermen, and other legislative and executive branches of the government. Increasingly, citizens are bewildered by the complexity of governmental machinery and correspondingly lose interest in it. How shall these important problems be understood and solved? 11. Lack of interest among the American people in world affairs. Since the World War, with the refusal of America to enter the League of Nations and with other similar occurrences, it is becoming increasingly clear that many Americans have little interest in current events and conditions in other parts of the world. Nevertheless, the entire modem world is one great economic family, each part dependent upon the others. Our students of international affairs are trying to apply their scientific ways of thinking to these problems. One of our tasks, therefore, will be to consider how a vital interest in world affairs can be aroused in our people. 12. The increasing restlessness of the American people. We have already seen signs of the manner in which the automobile and other outstanding factors in our industrial civilization have speeded up life in America. There is a growing air of hurry, of rushing about. Millions of people are spending their leisure hours in automobiles, in the "movies," in listening to one snatch after another over the radio, and the like. Scientists warn us that nervous tension among the people may be increasing. Here, then, is another important problem for scientific study. 13. A modern civilization tending to make the people act alike and think alike? The same news is printed in the newspapers of all parts of the country at the same hours. The same voices, words, and music are transmitted over the radio to 30,000,000 listeners. The same books are read and the same opinions uttered in communities remote from one another. Does this represent a growing danger of the standardization of our people — of making them too much alike? This too is a question which we must take up in our later studies. 14. The growing commercialism of sports, the theater, and the arts. These cultural activities are organized and carried on in ways much like those of mass production in industry. Numbers, size, cost, are emphasized, not the excellence of the game, the ability of the players, the sportsmanship of the contestants, the artistic qualities of the performers. 