Exploring American History The English Merchants Form Companies. Wealthy as the merchants were, however, no one of them had enough money to buy and stock ships to send to distant parts of the world. So merchants joined in companies. One of the oldest of these traded with the German towns along the Baltic Sea and with Flanders. Another was called the Levant Company, whose ships sailed through the Strait of Gibraltar and the length of the Mediterranean, trading with the cities of southern Europe, and with those ancient centers of trade, Damascus and Antioch, where ended the caravan routes across the desert from Asia. English merchants soon captured the trade which had once made Genoa and Venice rich. Other English merchants, joining to form the Muscovy Company, sent trading expeditions to the villages and cities of Russia and beyond Russia to Persia. Russia was known to Vikings and Irish before Leif Ericson discovered Vinland (see page 41. In 1600. ships of the East India Company followed the route of Da Gama about .Africa and began trading at Calcutta in India and in the towns along the banks of the Ganges. These English merchants were taking the profits which had once made Portugal rich. They laid the foundation of England's power in India, which has continued to this day. Wealthy English Merchants Wanted to Invest Money in America. At the opening of the seventeenth century Englishmen were traveling over the known world to trade. Along London's busy streets hurried merchants. These men would gather in their shops or in the coffee houses to exchange news. One would tell of a ship in which he was interested that had been lost with a valuable cargo while coming about the southern tip of Africa. Another would describe a marvelous fair which he had attended in the heart of Russia. While there he had seen goods that had been brought in from hundreds of miles around to be sold, and there he had filled his money bags with fat profits. Still another might tell of a letter recently received from a friend who Lived in Spain describing the gold and silver, the spices and valuable goods, that came pouring into that country' from the New World. Perhaps these English merchants might fall to talking about the New World. Why should not Englishmen find gold there? Surely the Spaniards had proved that America was rich. Who feared the Spaniards now that Drake had defeated their proud Armada? Certainly no king of Spain would be strong enough to stop Englishmen from going to the New W orld to search for gold, to trade, or to build homes But America had more riches than merely gold. Had not the explorerwho had sailed along its shores brought back news of endless forests' In these Englishmen could find tall, straight trees for masts, and tar, and turpentine. The great folk were the rich planters of the South and the merchants of the North who played an important part in the management of the affairs of the colonies. They were the ones who were privileged to put " Mr." and "Mrs." in front of their names. There was one section of the colonies where only the humbler people lived and where very few of the great folk were to be found. This region was the frontier. A New Frontier Develops. Leaving Charleston, James Edward returned to Boston on horseback, riding through the back country' or frontier. At the beginning of the seventeenth century most of the people living in the English colonies in North America dwelt near the sea or along the banks of the great rivers like the Connecticut and Hudson, up which seagoing ships could sail. American settlements, therefore, were a fringe along the coast. As the years passed, however, and the population near the shore grew denser, many families began to move west into the forest country. They were the new pioneers. The children and children's children of the first English I pioneers who came to America chopper! farms out of the forest farther j to the west and close to the Appalachian Mountains. Germans Settle on the Frontier. Not all the new pioneers, however, | had been born in America. In the early years of the eighteenth century the people in two regions of the Obi World were suffering terrible I hardship. Many parts of Germany had been swept by war, and times were hard. Many German farmers were in danger of starving. They had heard of America. So in the first half of the eighteenth century thousands of Germans from the Rhine valley and even from Switzerland crossed the Atlantic to make their homes in the New World. A few settled in the Mohawk valley in the colony of New York. Most of them, however, landed at Philadelphia and went to the frontier to dear their farms in the forest. Some pushed southward from Pennsylvania into the Shenandoah valley of western Virginia and still farther into the western country of North and South Carolina. The frontier of the eighteenth century became the home of many German families speaking the German language. One of the most interesting of the German settlements was at Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, made by a religious group known as Moravians. Before many years had passed, Bethlehem became one of the most famous musical centers in North America, where an orchestra made up of many different instruments played the compositions of the great German comjwser, Bach. The Scotch-Irish Come to America. In the north of Ireland lived Scotchmen who in the early years of the eighteenth century had also fallen on hard times. Dry spells injured the crops. English landlords who owned the farms wliich these Scotch tilled began charging higher 1 higher rents. Finally the English government began to persecute these people because of their religion. They were Presbyterians. Many of these Scotchmen in Ireland, Scotch-Irish as they were called, ! starvation as did the Germans. Shiploads of Scotch-Irish sailed to America to start life over again in the New World. The Germans had interest in England and no loyalty to the English king. The Scotchhated England and Englishmen because of their sufferings in i the English had had so large a part. A tombstone in the Shent valley marks the grave of one of these Scotch-Irish immigrants tells that he killed an English lord who owned land in Ireland, .came to America and laid out the town of Staunton in the Shenoah valley and gave five reasons to fight in the American Revoluion against the English. Like the Germans, the Scotch-Irish scattered along the frontier from Pennsylvania to South Carolina. Many the great men of American history are descended from them. On the frontier of the eighteenth century, therefore, people born in America came to live side by side with Germans and Scotch-Irish. Children played together and, when they grew up, married, the frontier appeared a mixture of blood, men and women who part English, part Scotch, and part German. In the colonies French, Swedes, Welsh, and some Swiss aided in the work of new communities. As these different nationalities married one another there came into being the typical American whose have never all been able to agree at any time just how high it should be. Other tilings help to make America the leading manufacturing nation in the world. Although immigration has been almost completely cut off, the United States has an abundance of labor. It has become a habit in most American factories to make many goods with few workmen. One great machine will often do the labor performed by twenty men. Every year more and more of these wonderful new machines appear and perform the most difficult tasks without ever getting tired. America has more such machinery' than any other nation. This machine for making nails seems almost to have brains and skill. The only work man needs to do is to feed the machine and cam' away the nails. Compare this machine with the picture of the match factory on page 379. Eugene Hutchinson. To invent and build such machines requires much knowledge, the knowledge of the engineer. With its great system of schools—grade schools, high schools, universities, and business and trade schools— the United States is training its youth to be makers of machines and managers of the corporations which use them. In 1926 Hoover remarked, "We have trained . . . [workers] in every avenue of production and distribution upon a scale vastly larger than that possessed by any other nation." Trained men, from the manager in the shop. When the American colonies won their independence, most of the people dwelling in the United States were the children or grandchildren of persons who had come to the New World from the northern countries of Europe, particularly the British Isles and Germany. The people from these different nations, by marrying one another, created the American stock. The United States was a melting-pot for different European peoples. After the close of the War of 1812 an increasing number of people left their farms in Ireland and journeyed to the land of promise west of the Atlantic. They were poor, and life was hard in Ireland. There were seasons when the potato crop did not do well and people went hungry. In the terrible year 1848 almost no potatoes were raised, and the folk of Ireland were face to face with a famine. Thousands came to America to escape starvation. After 1830 the Germans began coming again in considerable numbers. Many Germans did not like the kind of government under which they lived. They were unwilling to endure the tyranny of their rulers. In 1848 many Germans tried to change the government so that the people would have a voice, through elected representatives, in their government, as in Great Britain and America. The attempted reform failed, and many Germans fled to America to escape the wrath of their kings and princes. To the suffering people of Ireland and Germany, America offered an opportunity to start life again, exactly as in the seventeenth century it had held out such a prospect to Englishmen. Not until after the World War did America practically close its doors to the stranger who desired to make his home within its boundaries. Today, in the second quarter of the twentieth century, the United States is a land of great cities. While the population speaks English in the main, many other languages are also spoken. Among the people are to be found both the rich and the poor, the educated and the ignorant. Society is vastly different from the society of the Indian village or even the society of America before the Civil War. The twentieth century has brought forth a new America. The problems of today are different from those before the World War and very different from those before the Civil War. Immigration Between the Civil War and the World War. The Irish who came to America before the Civil War tended to settle in the eastern cities. Many of them worked at building the canals and the new railroads. On the other hand, the many Germans who arrived after 1848 tended to live on the land. They established their homes on farms in Michigan, Iowa. Wisconsin, Missouri, Texas, and other States. Carl Schurz, who was secretary of the interior under President Hayes, was the greatest of the Germans who came in 1848. Three different influences in the latter part of the nineteenth century' caused the flow of immigrants into the United States to increase to a flood. First, America in these years offered great opportunities, particularly in the swiftly developing industries. Second, the cost of transportation across the ocean was reduced by the new steamships to a very low figure. Before 1850 most immigrants came to the New World by slow-going sailing-ships. After the Civil War they came on the new steam-driven liners and during the trip were usually herded like cattle in the steerage of the ship. Third, life continued to be so hard in Europe and Asia that thousands of people sought America to escape poverty and tyranny. Until 1896 a majority of the immigrants came from the countries of northern and western Europe: The two Jugoslavian women on the station platform are saying good-by to friends who are immigrants to the United States. Hope for the future mingles with sorrow at parting. Florence Cassidy. Great Britain, Germany, Norway, Sweden, and Denmark. After that date the people from southern and eastern Europe began to outnumber the Northerners greatly. Thousands of immigrants came from Poland, Russia, Austria- Hungary', Turkey, Italy, and the Balkan Peninsula. After the surrender of I Lee almost every year saw a greater number of 1 immigrants landed at Ellis Island in New York Harbor, where government officials carefully examined the newcomers. Many who for one reason or another could not comply with the rules were sent back at the expense of the steamship company which had brought them. More than a million a year came between 1900 and 1914, when the outbreak of the World War in Europe stopped the sow of immigrants. Immigrants on board. Edward A. Steiner, who traveled across the Atlantic many times in the steerage, described h 1906 some of the things he had seen. Emigrants leaving Europe in the '50's—years when Irish and Germans came in large numbers. In the foreground a wife with a baby in her arms says good-by to her husband. "Harper's Weekly June 26, 1858. "The day of . . . [starting from Hamburgl finds an excited crowd with heavy packs and heavier hearts, climbing the gangplank. [A] crew [without tesy] directs the . . . travelers to their quarters, which in the older are far too . . . [small] and in the newer ships are, if anything, . On some ships the immigrants are . . . packed like cattle, making walk on deck when the weather is good, absolutely impossible, while to the clean air below in rough weather, when the hatches are down is . . . '5y impossible]. . . . The food ... is dealt out of huge kettles into dinner pails provided by the steamship company. When it is distributed, : stronger push and crowd. . . . "Homesickness ... is a real presence in the steerage; for there are the n and women who have been torn from the soil in which through many 628 THE MACHINE CHANGES AMERICAN H'.tFS OF LIVING generations their lives have been rooted. . . . Tire greater the distance which divides the ship from the fast-fading dock, the nearer [in imagination! comes the little village with its dusty square, its plaster-cast saints and its little mud huts. "From far-away Russia a small pinched face looks out and a sweet voice calls to the departing father not to forget Leah and her six children, who will wait for tidings from him, be they good or ill. From Poland . . . comes a 'God be with you, Brayte (brother), strong oak of our village forest and our dependence.' . . . 'Hie Slovak feels his Maryanka pressing her lips against his while she sobs out her lamentation. . . . Silent are the . . . Italians, whose glorious Mediterranean is blotted out by the . . . gray of the Atlantic; they shall not soon again see the . . . moon shining upon the bay of Naples. . . . "{After many days] on yonder fringe of the sea . . . far away trails the low-lying smoke of the pilot boat [at the entrance to New York Harbor] and but little farther off is—land—land. None but the shipwrecked and the emigrants, these wayfarers who come to save and be saved, know the joy of that note which goes from lip to lip as it echoes . , . [again and again| in thirty languages, yet with the one word of . . . joy,—land—land— AMERICA." The Immigrant in the United States. Most of the immigrants after the Civil War went to the cities to live. At first the people from each country naturally tended to settle in a section by themselves. Steiner in the same book described "Little Hungary" in Cleveland, Ohio, as it was in 1906: "In Cleveland some twenty thousand Magyars live together round alwut those giant steel mills which send their black smoke . . . over that . . . city. .Although street after street is occupied solely by them, 1 have not seen a house that shows neglect, and the battle with Cleveland 'dirt is waged fiercely here, judging by the clean doorsteps, window-panes, and white curtains which I saw at nearly every house. ... A weekly pajier keeps the Hungarians in touch with one another and with the homeland. . . . They cling ... to the fatherland, in w hich they have a just pride, and whenever the opportunity offers itself they show how much they love it."1 Steiner talked to a little group on shipboard who were going back to visit the home village. " ' I love the old country,' said one of them, ' but I love America more.' " Immigrants Have a Hard Time. The industries of the United States, although they were growing swiftly, could not provide immediately for the hundreds of thousands of immigrants who came each year. Because there were too many laborers, wages were low. If a man had a job which paid only a little, he was wise to keep it as long as he could, for so many newcomers were seeking work that often there were not enough jobs to go around. In 1873 and 1893 Americans suffered from panics. The condition of newly-arrived immigrants who knew little about the country and Immigrants in the '70's on the deck of a ship have just sighted America. Note the crowded conditions on shipboard. "Harper's Weekly," June 3, 1871. Id not speak English was often pitiful. Not only were men out of work during the hard times of 1873 and 1893, but these periods of recession made wages unusually low. The Strike Years of 1877 and 1894. Few of the workmen understood reasons for the hard times or the low wages. Naturally they blamed employer. There were employers, in this age when Americans learning how to build up and manage great industries, who peritted bad conditions to grow up in their factories. The years of 11 and 1894 were darkened by terrible strikes, accompanied by ting and bloodshed. These struggles accomplished little except to "property loss, to increase suffering, and to make for bad feeling between employers and employees. They did, however, bring to the of the people the fact that many Americans were suffering though industry was growing. The Rise of Labor Unions. In an effort to improve factory's conditions and to secure increased wages and an eight-hour day, wage-earners banded themselves together in unions. Labor unions had appeared before the Civil War, but none of them had lasted for more than a few years. After this war, when industry was growing more rapidly, stronger unions appeared. Perhaps the oldest of the labor organizations still in existence is the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, founded in the 1860's. These acts include measures requiring the use of safety devices in and about factories; limiting the hours of labor, particularly for women; excluding women and children from certain "dangerous" industries such as those in which poisons have to be used; limiting or abolishing child labor; requiring frequent payment of wages; compelling the maintaining of cleanliness in factories or workshops; and many things besides. In all this lawmaking one of the chief concerns of the State has been to guard the health of its people. The Immigration Law of 1924. Perhaps no law of the United States or of any State has benefited American wage-earners so much as the Immigration Law of 1924. From 1914 until 1918 immigration into the United States was practically stopped by the World I War. When peace came, a temporary measure was passed which kept out all but a small number of immigrants. In 1924 the new immigration policy of the United States was shaped. After five years of temporary provisions this law went into full force on July 1, 1929. It provides that immigration into the United States shall be limited to 150,000 newcomers each year. No immigrants from China, Japan, and India and only a few from Africa are permitted. The yearly quota allowed to each country is fixed by the per cent, of the 150,000 which corresponds to its share of the population of 1920. The quota of the British is the largest because a very large percentage of the American are descended from persons who came originally from that one. The German quota is large for the same reason. The Greek quota is small, because the Greeks began coming to America late in nineteenth century, and the number of persons in the United States descended from Greeks is small. No limit is put on the number immigrants who may come to the United States from the Philip' es, Canada, or Latin America. Practically no immigrants, however, y come from islands of the West Indies not possessed by the United tes. A folk dance in Roumania. When people like these emigrate to the United States, many are homesick for the good times of the old country. In America they eventually cease to be Rouma- nians and become Americans. Florence Cassidy. Reasons for the Immigration Law of 1924. During the World War the people of the United States discovered that many of the immigrants who had come to the New World lived in communities by themselves where the customs of the homeland were continued. Some of these people naturally remained loyal to the nations from which they had come. The American people felt that the immigrants should give up their loyalties to their home countries and become Americanized. The war made Americans believe that immigrants were coming into the country faster than they could be Americanized. A demand arose that the immigrant flood be stopped, so that the immigrants already here could be absorbed into the life of the country. Another reason for the law was the demand of the lay ring people. American wage-earners received high wages after the war because there were not too many of them for the positions industry offered. If a flood of laborers came to the United States from other countries, wages would be reduced. There was danger that America would have too many wage-earners, as in the latter part of the nineteenth century. This condition would mean a return to the poverty and suffering of those days. So the immigrant flood of more than 1.000,000 a year before 1014 was reduced to 150,000 a year. The Development of Education. Thomas Jefferson believed that only educated citizens were capable of governing themselves. Before the Civil War steady progress was made in the development of public schools of both primary and higher grades. In 1862 Congress passed the Morrill Act. noted on pages 598, 599. This was the foundation for most of the State universities of the present. In these great institutions young men and women can secure practically any kind of higher education they desire. Some of these State institutions are among the largest universities in the world. They are training their students for all sorts of human work. Their doors are open to any student who will pass the necessary tests and obey their rules. In 1926 Secretary Hoover A country schoolhouse in the early nineteenth century. Notice the crude stove, benches, and blackboard. Compare with country on next page. In the following year the American government passed the Immigration Law of 1924. (See pages 637,638.) This ended the Gentleman's Agreement and kept from the United States all Japanese as well as other immigrants of the yellow race. The Japanese people were hurt and angered, because they thought the Americans regarded the yellow race as inferior to the white race. The American Congress in passing the measure desired to have Japanese immigrants shut out by law rather than by agreement between the two nations. Since the passing of the measure the American government has continually tried to show the Japanese people that Americans do not regard them as inferior. The relations between the two nations have continued friendly. Commercial relations give an idea of the strength of the ties binding the two nations. In 1930 Japanese exports to the United States were more than twice as much as those to any other country and were about one-third of all the goods that Japan sold abroad. At the same time Japanese imports from the United States were almost three times as great as those from any other country and a little less than a third of the imports of the Mikado's empire. The United States and European Debts. One of the principal problems which arose from the World War related to the debts owed by European nations to the government of the United States. Before 1917 England had lent heavily to the governments associated with her in the struggle against Germany and Austria-Hungary. After America entered the war, the United States government lent vast sums to Great Britain, France, Italy, and several other nations. When the war was over, the United States was rich, while all the nations to which she had lent money were poor as a result of the terrible conflict. Nation after nation sent commissions to Washington, and arrangements for paying the debts were agreed upon. The American government scaled down the debts as far as American tax payers would permit. Many Europeans said openly that the United States should forgive the debts entirely. Some bitter feeling against America resulted. President Hoover in 1929 reminded Europe that the United States had been generous in its treatment of the nations in debt and that Americans had been compelled to sacrifice because the debts were scaled down. 