A Mural Decoration in the Library of Congress, by Frederick Dielman PREFACE A text in American history that has been in circulation for a considerable period of time cannot be properly revised and brought up to date simply by lopping off here and tacking on there in wholesale fashion. If nice proportions are to be preserved, there must be changes in space allotments that will affect the treatment in almost every part of the book. Accordingly when preparing this revised edition of my Advanced American History I thought it best to recast the work from beginning to end and write a book that in many of its features is entirely new. In the making of America, pioneers and farmers and inventors and business men and teachers and reformers, far removed from the scene of politics, worked with all their might to develop the resources of the nation and to lead the people toward higher things. If American history, therefore, is to be read aright it must give an account of our social and economic as well as of our political growth. This text accordingly is more than a narrative of the camp and the senate, more than a history of the Federal Government. Besides giving a liberal treatment to the political factor it tells the story of our social and industrial life. It shows how our religious and educational systems have come to be what they are; it follows the pioneer as he moves toward the West transforming the wilderness into an abode for man and bringing State after State into the Union; it gives the story of the corporation and shows how captains of industry marshaled the forces of capital and created the monopolistic giants called Trusts; it follows the efforts of working-men to match the combinations of their employers with combinations of their own; it describes the reforms which promoted the welfare of toilers and established agencies for social betterment. The treatment of topics bearing upon our economic development is unusually ample for the reason that this theme is of the highest practical importance. By portraying the evolution of our commerce and industry we help the student to think more clearly about problems that are of tremendous import and that young voters will presently be called upon to solve. While preparing the book the author received from the officers of the Library of Congress courtesies for which he is deeply indebted. "Montreal the chase, and at night "red wine and white wine, rum, champagne, and cider, were mingled with game, story, song, and laughter.". Spottswood entered the valley near the present site of Port Republic, and on the bank of the Shenandoah River buried a bottle in which there was a paper declaring that the river and the valley belonged to the king of Great Britain. It was the purpose of Spottswood in taking possession of the valley to check the eastward movement of the French. Although the first settlers in the Shenandoah Valley were Virginians, the first settlers who came in largest numbers were the Pennsylvania Dutch and Scotch-lrish. The Pennsylvania The Dutch were not Dutch at all, but were Germans who in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries emigrated to America. Some of these immigrants left the Rhine country because it was devastated by war. In 1689 the French determined to depopulate completely the Rhine valley. "The Commander," says Macaulay, "announced to nearly half a million human beings that he granted them three days of grace and that within that time they must shift for themselves. Hand in hand with the Germans in the settlement of western ScotchPennsylvania and the Shenandoah valley went the Scotch-lrish. These were not Irish at all but simply Scotchmen who had lived in Ireland. Most of them were Presbyterians. They had left their homes in the north of Ireland because they had not been well treated by the English Government. In 1698, upon the demand of the English manufacturers, Parliament by a series of repressive acts destroyed the woolen industry of northern Ireland. As a result of this legislation, twenty thousand of the Protestant citizens of Ulster, deprived of employment, left Ireland for America. This blow to the industry of Ulster was followed in the reign of Queen Anne by laws which persecuted the Scotch-lrish on account of their religious beliefs. Hence this poor people had good reason for leaving Ireland. The Scotch-lrish began to emigrate to America in the early years of the eighteenth century, and it is probable that by 1770 half a million had settled in the colonies. They settled in all parts of British America, and there was hardly a colony upon which they did not leave their mark. But most of the Scotch-lrish settled in Pennsylvania. In 1729 the governor of this colony became alarmed lest these newcomers should make themselves the masters of his province. "It looks," said the governor, "as if all Ireland would send all its inhabitants hither, for last week not less than six ships arrived." The Scotchlrish were the best of pioneers, and they soon were out on the frontier, making settlements wherever they could find good vacant lands. They paid but little attention to the claims of the Indians, for they thought "it was against the laws of God and nature that so much good land should be idle while so many Christians wanted it to work on and to raise their bread. They pushed out in Pennsylvania in almost every direction, but during the first years of the eighteenth century they moved along for the most part with the Germans and settled in the Cumberland and Shenandoah valleys. Georgia were men of pure English blood. The settlement of this colony was due to the enterprise of James Oglethorpe, who The may justly be regarded as the father of modern philanthropy. OgleThe peculiar object of Oglethorpe's care was the suffering of thorpo the insolvent debtor class. The laws of England at this time bore very hard upon a man who could not pay his debts, and in the prisons of London were men whose only crime was that they could not meet their obligations. Oglethorpe proposed to take a colony of imprisoned debtors and other unfortunate people and plant it on the Atlantic coast south of Carolina. His scheme was received with favor, and a charter for the colony was granted by the king. In November, 1732, Oglethorpe's colonists-114 in number -left England, and by February of the following year they were on the banks of the Savannah River laying the foundations of Savannah and of Georgia. The charter under which the colony was planted established a modified proprietary government. There were to be a governor and a board of trustees, but there was to be no representative assembly. Oglethorpe was the first governor of the colony as well as its personal leader. Although the colonists did not possess even the semblance of self-government, nevertheless the spirit of democracy prevailed. No one could be the owner of more than five hundred acres of land, and all the houses were built exactly alike. Even Oglethorpe himself had no better house than the others. All were required to work a certain number of hours in the day at some useful labor, a rule which Oglethorpe himself faithfully observed. Absolutely forbidden, and intoxicating liquors were prohibited. Indians were to be dealt with in the spirit of kindness and justice. The religious interests of the colonists were not neglected: through the influence of Oglethorpe, John and Charles Wesley and George Whitfield, three of the most distinguished preachers of the time, visited the colony. In 1743 Oglethorpe left Georgia and never returned. The Georgia colony felt his absence keenly, for he had been its guide, de- Province fender, and support. Now that the colonists were left alone. The population Boston, Charleston, Baltimore, and Albany, of Philadelphia in 1786 was 32,000; of New York, 24,500; of Boston, 14,600. The combined population of these three places therefore was about equal to the present population of Wichita, Kansas. So the civilization of the new nation was so completely rural that it can almost be said that, measured by our present standards, there were no cities at all. The character of the population was such as has been already described (p. 103), yet the admixture of races was so complete that there was no distinct foreign population such as exists to-day. Immigration was on such a small scale that it was hardly perceptible. There were many of non-English origin to be sure, but almost everybody was an American. "Whence came all these people?" asked a traveler in 1782. "They are a mixture of English, Scotch, Irish, French, Dutch, Germans, and Swedes. From this promiscuous breed the race called American has arisen. As in colonial times so now agriculture was the basic industry. More than nine-tenths of the people were farmers. But the soil was poorly tilled. As an art agriculture had advanced little beyond the point it had reached in Europe in the fifteenth century (p. 4). Fertilizers for improving land were seldom used. When a piece of land would no longer yield a crop, it was abandoned for a better piece, for land in almost every State was abundant. The plow was still made mostly of wood. On the rudely constructed wooden mold-boards were fastened the blades of old hoes, thin strips of iron, or worn-out horseshoes. The beam was a simple straight stick. The handles were cut from the branches of a tree. The methods of harvesting crops were as primitive as the method of tilling the ground. The grain was still cut by the sickle, although the scytheand-cradle was coming into use. Grain was still threshed from the straw by the flail or tramped out by the slow feet of oxen. Commerce, which next to agriculture was the leading interest Commerce of the nation was suffering. For with the winning of independence serious commercial troubles arose, colonial ties were severed Americans were suddenly deprived of the trade with the West Indies (p. 105). Even before the treaty of 1783 had been signed England proclaimed that henceforth all trade between the United States and the British West Indies. But there was one class that had not been assimilated with the main body of American society-the negro slaves, who numbered about one fifth of the population. In 1783 slavery had a legal existence in all the States except Massachusetts and Pennsylvania. But slavery as an institution was now declining. At the opening of the nineteenth century every State north of Mason and Dixon's Line had either abolished slavery or had in 1783 taken steps that would lead to universal freedom. In the South, too, there was a strong sentiment against slavery. Before 1800 Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia had all forbidden the importation of slaves, and in some of these States there were movements for the emancipation of the black race. Thomas Jefferson was almost bitter in his opposition to slavery, while Washington by his last will emancipated the slaves on his plantation. Indeed, public opinion was moving so surely in the right direction that it seemed the day was not far away when slavery would be done away with throughout the whole extent of the nation, should be carried in British-built ships owned and navigated by British subjects. The blow dealt by England was quickly followed by another dealt by France, for in August, 1783, the French Government excluded American vessels from the ports of the French West Indies. The immediate effect of these prohibitions was to cut off the people of the United States from a most profitable source of trade and to cause their commerce to languish. A few days later Morse's telegraph was used to send to Washington a despatch informing members of Congress that Polk had been nominated by the Democratic national convention, which was in session at Baltimore. A congratulatory reply to the despatch was received twenty minutes after the nomination. Still another triumph of this brilliant decade was the successful use of anesthetics. For thousands of years physicians relied upon alcoholic drinks to diminish the sufferings of surgery, but a safe method of producing complete insensibility to pain was not discovered until 1842. In that year Dr. Crawford W. Long of Georgia removed without pain a tumor from a patient to whom ether had been administered. In 1846 Dr. W. T. Morton of Massachusetts administered ether in an operation at the General Hospital at Boston; and before many years had passed anesthetics were in use in all the hospitals of the world. It would be difficult to overestimate the importance of these inventions and discoveries. They influenced profoundly the course of affairs not only in America but throughout the whole of the world. The appearance of the reaper was the greatest event in the history of agriculture. It made the United States the paradise of the farmer, and it increased the food supply of Europe, for thousands of McCormick's machines were sent abroad. And thousands of Howe's sewing-machines were sent abroad, with the result that men and women were everywhere better clad. Morse's telegraph was the first of a long series of electrical contrivances that in time annihilated distance and made the world a whispering-gallery. Responding to the improved plow and the reaper was a greater abundance of cheap land. In 1841 Congress passed the Preemption Act. Preemption acts had been passed as early as 1830, but the law of 1841 gave permanence to the preemption policy. It encouraged pioneers to push out into unoccupied on lands and begin the actual work of settlement. By the law of 1841 if a settler entered upon a tract of land not greate: than 160 acres, built himself a house, and began the tillage of the land, he was given the right of preemption; that is, he had the first right against all comers of purchasing his tract from the Government on the most favorable terms and at the established price, which was in most cases still $1.25 per acre (p. 236). Under the workings of this law the homeseeker could select an eligible tract of unoccupied land, improve it, and feel assured that his land would not be sold away from him and that the labor bestowed upon his farm would not be lost. That the opportunity for settlers was boundless was shown by an official report of 1845 which stated that nearly two hundred and fifty million acres of public lands were subject to entry. The cheapness of land acted as a lure to the immigrant. In the early years of our history immigration was small. In the thirty years before 1820 hardly more than 250,000 aliens had sought homes in the United States, and in the fifty years before 1840 hardly a million immigrants had landed upon our shores. But in the forties conditions began to favor immigration. Steamships were making regular trips across the Atlantic, and the immigrants could make the long voyage in reasonable comfort and at little expense, and political unrest in Europe gave an impulse to emigration. In parts of Ireland the potato was almost the only food of the people. "Whole generations grew up, lived, married, and passed away without ever having tasted flesh meat." So the Irish in vast throngs emigrated to the United States. Moreover, in 1848, in most of the countries of Europe, especially in Germany, there were political upheavals that resulted in sending large numbers of emigrants to America. These contributing forces raised the number of immigrants far beyond the highest point it had ever reached. Hitherto immigrants had come to America by the tens of thousands, but now they came by the hundreds of thousands, decade more than 1,700,00o came; of these 260,000 were English, 435,000 were German, and 780,000 were Irish. Along the Upper Mississippi and around the Great Lakes, westward at the rate of thirty miles a year. A scene of marvelous development in the forties was the country bordering upon the banks of the Mississippi and upon the shores of the Great Lakes. Into this region poured settlers not only from Europe but from almost every part of the Union, especially from New England and the Middle States. The Iowa country was the first to be opened up. The settlement of this beautiful region did not begin early, because it was occupied by savage tribes. But piece by piece the red man lost his lands. Many settlers left the Wllamette Valley to seek their fortunes in the gold fields of the Sacramento region. But the tide soon turned toward Oregon again. In 1859 it had a population that was sufficient for statehood and was admitted to the Union. But the full significance of the westward movement in the fifties is to be seen not in the new States and Territories that were organized, but in the wonderful development of the Western States that had already been formed. The population of the United States in 185 was 23,191,876; in 1860 it was 31,443,321. The increase in population of the whole country was a little more than 8,000,000; the increase in the Western States alone was more than 4,000,000. The center of population moved a greater distance westward in the fifties than in any other decade in our history. In 1800 the center of population was about eighteen miles west of Baltimore; by 1840 it had crossed the Alleghanies; in 1850 it had reached Parkersburg, West Virginia; and in 1860 it was half-way across the State of Ohio. The population of Michigan increased in the fifties from 397,654 to 749,113; that of Wisconsin from 305,391 to 775,881; that of Illinois from 851,470 to 1,711,951; that of Iowa from 192,214 to 674,913. Much of this increase was due to immigration, for the stream of immigrants that began to flow in such volume in the forties flowed in even greater volume in the fifties. In the ten years before 1860, 2,598,214 foreigners came to our shores-a greater number than came in the thirty years before 1850. Nearly a million of these new-comers were Germans, and nearly another million were Irish. Of the Germans, great throngs made their way directly to the States of the Northwest and began to give their brain and brawn to the building up of the country. A glance at the every-day life of our people in 1860 would have revealed conditions widely different from those that prevailed in the early years of the Republic (pp. 152-163). Civilization was beginning to take on the complexion it is wearing to-day. In the largest cities, where the price of land was high, there were houses of five and six and even seven stories. In a few places elevators were in use. Cities and towns were full of factories, and there was steam-driven machinery with its smoke and rattle and din. Streets were well paved and, in the large places, lighted by gas. Matches and stoves and hot-air furnaces had come into general use. In the largest cities there were street-cars drawn by horses. The steamboat and the steam-car were the ordinary means for transportation both for freight and passengers. The Pullman palace-car was making travel a delightful experience. Express companies had been organized and were doing a thriving business. In the stores, piled high on the counters, were articles of every-day use, which, thanks to new processes and inventions, could be purchased at reasonable prices. A sewing-machine could be bought for $25; a carpet-sweeper for $2; a pair of women's shoes of the finest calf for $2.75; a copy of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1500 illustrations and 1250 pages, for $6.50. Education was making good progress. The "little red school-house" was becoming one of the most popular institutions of America. The educational movement begun in the early part of the century (p. 291) acquired greater force year by year, and by 1860 there was in most of the States a wellestablished system of fairly good common schools. This was true not only of the older States but of many of the newer States as well. In the fifties, Wisconsin, Iowa, Texas, Tennessee, Kentucky, California, and Oregon all made provision for elementary schools that should be free to all white children. But a school of the Middle West in the fifties was a primitive thing The Panic of 1857. Accompanied by an over-investment in land and excessive railroad construction, with the result that in 1857 the country suffered a panic. Many of the Western railroads went into bankruptcy, and business failures numbered nearly five thouThe rapid development of the West in the fifties was The panic, however, was of short duration. In 1857 a slight reduction was made in the tariff, and some writers assert that the change was partly responsible for the financial crisis of that year. Governors of the different States calling for militiamen to the number of 75,000 to aid in suppressing combinations of men in the South who were obstructing the execution of the laws of the United States." I appeal," he said, "to all loyal citizens to favor, facilitate, and aid this effort to maintain the honor, the integrity and existence of our national Union.' The effect of this call to arms was to cause men to take sides and decide whether they were for a Union consisting of all the States, the Union which Lincoln was trying to uphold, or whether they were for letting the seceding States depart in peace. For now all that the South asked was that it be allowed to withdraw in peace, that it be let alone. In the North the people rose almost as one man in support of the Union. The New York Times voiced Northern sentiment as follows: "The people will respond to this demand [for volunteers] with alacrity and exultation. They ask nothing better than to be allowed to fight for the Constitution which their fathers framed. Whatever may have been their political differences, there has never been a moment when they were not ready to sink them all in devotion to their common country and in defense of their national flag." The response came not only from native-born Americans but from foreigners who had only recently come to our shores. Out of the Eastern cities came the Irish who left their old home to escape famine. Out of the West came the German immigrants of '48 (p. 314) who had left the Fatherland to escape tyranny. The rush to arms was as prompt as it was universal. Massachusetts was ready on the instant, and within a day after the call was received, her Sixth Regiment mustered on Boston Common and started for the scene of action. The popularity of Lincoln's action may be measured by the response; in answer to the first call for 75,000 volunteers and to a subsequent call made a few weeks later for 40,000 more, there were by July in the field at the command of the Government 310,000 men. enlisted. The response for the stars and bars was as hearty as it was for the stars and stripes. "The anxiety among our citizens," said Howell Cobb of Georgia, "is not who shall go to the war, but who shall stay at home." The flower of Southern men took the field in support of the Confederacy, feeling that they were going out to fight for a just cause. By the middle of July more than 100,000 men were enrolled for the ariny of the Confederacy, and more than 50,000 were under arms, organized with battalions and regiments. During the first months of the secession movement eight slave States- loosely known as border States-Delaware, The Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee, States Arkansas, and Missouri, wavered between loyalty to the Union and loyalty to the Confederacy. What these States would do was a question of the utmost importance, for if they all went over to the Confederacy it would have fifteen States and its territory would exceed in area that of the settled portion of the Union that remained. Missouri was saved to the Union largely through the energetic action of General Nathaniel Lyon, who drove the Confederates out of the capital and made it possible for the State to decide against secession some weeks before the call for troops. The firing on Sumter made it necessary for the other doubtful States to decide either for union or disunion. Delaware quite promptly decided for the Union. Maryland hesitated and at one time seemed to be on the brink of secession, but at last she decided that a State had no right to withdraw from the Union. Kentucky remained in the Union, although she tried to pursue a course of neutrality. Arkansas seceded and were admitted into the Confederacy. So four of the border States remained with four went over to the Confederacy. Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Lincoln's call for troops was accepted by the South as a challenge for war. 32,000 men in addition to 21,000 volunteers who had already Lincoln's call for the troops was regarded in the South as a declaration of war. Accordingly, on May 6, 1861, the Confederate Congress passed an act recognizing the existence. The outlook was all the brighter for the opportunities that lay in the West. At the close of the Civil War there was west of the Mississippi a wild, uncultivated region more than a million square miles in extent. During the war the development of this Western country was retarded, but as soon as the struggle was over the tide of population began to flow westward again. In this movement immigration was a powerful factor. The law of 1864 (p. 412) not only exempted the immigrant from military service but provided means for assisting newly arrived foreigners to reach the end of a western journey with as little trouble and expense as possible. The favorable legislation brought to America in the four years following the war nearly a million immigrants, chiefly Germans, Irish, and Scandinavians. The Irish for the most part remained in the East, but the Germans and the Scandinavians pushed out to the West far beyond the Mississippi. Large numbers of them remained in the East, where as artisans and skilled workmen they took their places in shops and factories. But large numbers also were farmers, and these for the most part sought the free land of the West. Many were Swedes and Norwegians who went to the Northwest and helped to build up Minnesota and Dakota. Up to this time immigration had always been an easy come. During this period, however, foreigners were coming to our shores in such great numbers that we began to feel that unlimited and unrestricted immigration was no longer desirable. So we began to place restraints upon the admission of foreigners. On the Pacific Coast Dennis Kearney led a movement against the further admission of Chinese, and in response to this agitation Congress, in 1882, passed a law excluding Chinese laborers from the United States for a period of ten years, an exclusion that was renewed in 1892 and again in 1902. In 1882 Congress also ordered the deportation of all immigrants who by reason of physical or mental defects were found to be unable to take care of themselves. In the development of the new South the negroes were doing their full share and were rendering better service than they had rendered in the days of their bondage. "We have found out," said a distinguished Southerner, Henry W. Grady, in 1886, "that in the general summing up the free negro counts for more than he did as a slave." Another powerful factor in the development of the period was the continued advance of the railroads upon the wilderness of the Far West. By 1880 the Northern Pacific (p. 440) had been built from Duluth clear across Minnesota and Dakota, and in 1883 trains bearing guests from Chicago and from Portland met at a point in Montana where a spike was driven to mark the completion of the great northern highway. This Contract Labor Law seems to have had some effect, for in the years immediately following its passage immigration part played by these roads in the development of the West will receive special attention in a subsequent chapter. The lands opened up by the railways invited the immigrant, and quickly the immigrant that succeeded the period of panic (1873-77) brought an influx of immigrants such as the country had never before seen. Between 1878 and 1885 more than 4,000,000 foreigners sought to improve their condition by coming to the United States. In the single year 1882 immigration reached the enormous total of 788,000. The problem was solved in July, 1921, when Congress passed a joint resolution providing : "that the state of war declared to exist between the Imperial German Government and the United States by the joint resolution of Congress approved April 6, 1917, is hereby declared at an end." In the treaty it was declared that the United States was not bound by any provisions of the Versailles Treaty relating to the League of Nations, and that it was not committed to any of the subsequent actions of the League. So in this treaty we virtually washed our Peace with Germany The immigrant stream. The next important law related to immigration. The war had The hardly begun before it became plain that there was present in Stream the United States a large body of foreigners who might easily become a menace to the country. In the opening years of the twentieth century, Italians, Greeks, Russians, Poles, Magyars, Slovaks, Serbs, rushed to America in greater throngs than was ever known in the history of immigration. In the twelve years before the outbreak of the war in Europe the tremendous number of 12,000,000 foreigners came to the United States, In a single year (1907) there were admitted into the United States nearly a million and a half immigrants. The result of this sudden and mighty influx went far toward changing the character and complexion of the American population. At the outbreak of the war with Germany, one-third of our people were classified as being of foreign parentage, while the foreignborn numbered one-sixth of all the adults in the country. The several countries from which most of them came may be learned from the following table, an inspection of which throws a great deal of light not only upon the subject now before us, but also upon the whole story of immigration for eighty years. It is, therefore, a table that is worthy of careful study. Although the value of the immigrant's labor was beyond calculation, there was a feeling that the alien invasion was resulting in lowering the American standard of living, and in grants introducing into American life millions of men and women who were complete strangers to that life, and who cared little or nothing at all for America. So there arose a demand that the bars against immigrants should be raised higher than previous restrictive laws had put them (p. 467). The movement for restriction met with much opposition. When a bill providing a literacy test for immigrants was passed by Congress in 1896, it was vetoed by President Cleveland. President Taft vetoed a similar bill in 1913. Again a bill with a literacy test was passed in 1917, and again it was vetoed by the President; but this time it was passed over the Presidential veto. The law of 1917 shuts out "all aliens over sixteen years of age physically capable of reading, who cannot read the English language or some other written language or dialect, including Hebrew and Yiddish." The influx was due chiefly, of course, to a hope of economic betterment; the immigrant came because here wages were higher than at home, and because standards of living were higher. He was invited, indeed he was urged, to come because his labor was needed. And he gave a good account of himself in the industrial world. It seemed that the country might be flooded with immigrants seeking an escape from the distressing conditions which prevailed in Europe, Congress again was called upon to deal with the immigrant question. In May, 1921, it passed a restrictive measure providing that the number of aliens who should be allowed to enter in any fiscal year should not exceed three percent, of the number of foreign born persons of the same nationality already living here, taking the census of 1910 as the basis of computation. In 1924 the law was changed so that the census of 1890 should be the basis. The law of 1924 also expressly forbade the admission of Chinese and Japanese immigrants. That these restrictive laws were effective was shown by the fact that in 1925 the total of all immigrant aliens admitted was only about 200,000-less than one-sixth of the annual number that was sometimes admitted before the bars were laws and to report the result of their investigation to the President and Congress. The clause giving to the President this power of changing the rates was criticized as being unconstitutional, on the ground that it delegated to the President a power that belonged solely to Congress (44). Nevertheless, the President did not hesitate to exercise from time to time the power conferred by the "flexible" clause. Without waiting for the passage of the Fordney-McCumber Hard Bill, Congress passed (May, 1922) an emergency tariff measure, for the the chief purpose of which was to protect American agricultural products from foreign competition. The lawmakers felt that aid to the farmer must be prompt, for he was now in a bad way. During the World War he enjoyed a dazzling prosperity, but no sooner had the struggle ended than misfortune began to overtake him. Between 1919 and 1922, his beef fell from 20 cents to 10 cents a pound; his wheat from $2.40 to $1.25 a bushel; his bacon from 21 cents to 17 cents; his lard from 31 cents to 12 cents. While prices were tumbling in this manner he was at the same time being hard pressed for the payment of his debts. He had borrowed heavily during the war in order to purchase land and farm implements, and had paid war prices. Now he was suddenly called upon to discharge his debts at a time when the market was glutted and the value of his crops was declining. To add to his distress he was compelled to pay higher prices for the manufactured articles which he bought. In order to better their condition the farmers turned to plans for marketing farm products on a cooperative basis. While there was considerable opposition to the policy of keeping out foreign laborers, the policy of keeping out foreign goods by means of a protective tariff was faithfully adhered to. No sooner had the Republicans regained the reins of government than they took up the task of undoing the work of the Underwood Bill (p. 569), a measure that had not really been fairly tested, for just after the world had been thrown into a demoralized condition by the upheavals of the Great War. After a discussion which lasted twenty months, the Underwood Bill was set aside for the Fordney-McCumber Act, which was signed by President Harding in September, 1922. The new law restored the high duties of the Dingley and Aldrich laws, and even surpassed them in the high protection given. Indeed it was the highest protective tariff measure ever enacted. And it quickly gave promise of being the best revenue producer ever enacted. In the first year after it went into effect it brought into the Treasury a larger sum than had ever been raised in a single year by any previous law, and in each successive year (up to 1927) the sum kept rising. A most important feature of the Fordney-McCumber Act was the section that provided for a "flexible" tariff. Under the authority of this section, the President, when he finds that the rate of duty fixed upon an article by the act of 1922 is not sufficient to equalize the costs of production of that article between the United States and the principal competing foreign country, may fix a rate which will equalize the cost of production, and the rate thus fixed shall go into effect in lieu of the duty specified in the act. He cannot, however, increase or decrease any rate of duty more than fifty per cent, of the amount named in the act, nor can he change a rate until after an investigation of the differences of the cost of production at home and abroad has been made by the United States Tariff Commission, a bi-partizan body consisting of six members, whose duty is to investigate the fiscal and industrial effects of the tariff. 