England the Motherland. For more than three centuries the tide of immigration has been flowing from Europe to America, and today more than one third of the inhabitants of the United States are either foreign-born or the children of foreign-born parents. These immigrants, coming from every quarter of Europe, have landed on our shores with little, if any, knowledge of our language, laws, customs, and ideals, yet the great mass of them have been eager and proud to become Americans in order to enjoy the protection of our laws and the opportunities here for the improvement of their economic condition. In 1776 Thomas Paine in his "Common Sense," written to urge the immediate separation of the American Colonies from Great Britain, said, "Europe, not England, is the parent country of America." From the point of view of population alone, Paine was right. For even at that early date almost a quarter of the inhabitants of the colonies were of non-English descent (Germans, Scotch, Dutch, French, Irish); but from the point of view of institutions he was wrong. Our courts of justice, our common law, our code of manners, our standards of culture, our language and literature, were English. We severed our political connection with England by the Revolution, but we did not lay aside the culture or destroy the institutions in which our fathers had been trained for generations. Therefore, since the colonies established in the seventeenth century along the Atlantic seaboard, which developed into the thirteen original United States and gradually expanded to the shores of the Pacific, were (with the exception of temporary New Amsterdam on the Hudson and New Sweden on the Delaware) planted by the English. Virginia planters and merchants no more numerous than a London parish owned an acreage larger than the whole of England. Though negro slaves had been brought to the colony as early as 1619,'their numbers were few in the seventeenth century. The laboring class was composed partly of vagrants kidnaped in the streets or alehouses of London, offenders against the barbarous criminal laws of England, who were mercifully sentenced to transportation by the judges rather than delivered to the executioner for stealing a sheep; and, most numerous of all, the so-called "indentured servants," or men who sold their services for a term of years in payment of their passage to the new land of opportunity. The people of Virginia were very loyal to the Stuarts. When the quarrel between king and Parliament in England reached the stage of civil war (1642), and Charles I was driven from his throne and beheaded (1649), many of his supporters in England, who were called Cavaliers, emigrated to Virginia, giving the colony a decidedly aristocratic character. And when Charles IT was restored to his father's throne in 1660, the Virginian burgesses recognized his authority so promptly and enthusiastically that he called them "the best of his distant children." He even elevated Virginia to the proud position of a "dominion," by quartering its arms (the old seal of the Virginia Company) on his royal shield with the arms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The burgesses were very proud of this distinction and, remembering that they were the oldest as well as the most faithful of the Stuart settlements in America, adopted the name of "The Old Dominion." Bacon's Rebellion. Though there were actually many occasions of dispute between the governors and the burgesses, only one incident of prime importance occurred to disturb the peaceful history of the Old Dominion under its royal masters. In 1675 the Indians were harassing the upper settlements of the colony, and Governor William Berkeley, who was profiting largely by his private interest in the fur trade, refused to send a force of militia to punish them. He was supported by an "old and rotten" assembly, which he had kept in ent, congregations. A law of Elizabeth (1593) punished with imprisonment, exile, and loss of goods any person who persistently refused to attend the services of the Anglican Church. Elizabeth's successor, James, though he had been brought up by the Presbyterians in Scotland, proved to be even more zealous against the Puritans, or Nonconformists. He would make them conform, he said, or "harry them out of the land." In ten years more than a thousand persons were arrested in Middlesex County alone for refusing to attend the services of the Church of England. The Pilgrims. One little congregation of Separatists at Scrooby, in the eastern part of England, after having their houses "besett and watcht night and day" anti some of their numbers "taken and clapt up in prison " by the authorities of the Church, decided to escape into Holland, where religious dissent was tolerated. As it was unlawful for them to take their goods out of England without permission, they had to go by stealth ; and it was only after several attempts that they finally eluded the officials and got away to the Dutch shore. They were about a hundred in number when they assembled at Amsterdam in the autumn of 1608. The next year they moved to Leyden, where they I remained for more than a decade under their beloved pastor, John Robinson. But they grew more and more discontented with their surroundings and fortunes. Being a simple farming folk, they found it hard to adapt themselves to the industrial chartered the West India Company, which proceeded to organize the colony on the Hudson. The New Nederland arrived at Manhattan in 1623 with the first governor (or director general) of New Netherland. And in 1626 the third director general, Peter Minuit, bought from the Indians the island on which the Empire City of our country stands today for sixty Dutch gilders ($24), or about one tenth of a cent an acre. Interested less in the establishment of a colony than in the profits of the fur trade, the company turned over the work of settlement to a few wealthv proprietors, or "patroons." Each patroon who brought fifty or more settlers to the colony was granted a domain extending for either sixteen miles on one bank or eight miles on both banks of the river with the privileges of a feudal lord. Besides charging his tenants a substantial rent for their land, he could require of them dues in the shape of a tenth of their farm products, supplies of cut firewood, and a certain number of days' with horses and w'agons. The people of the colony fretted under the economic control of the patroons and the political despotism of the governor at New Amsterdam. When a convention of the settlers from towns on Long Island and the mainland met in 1653 and drew up a " Remonstrance and Petition," complaining of the inefficiency of the defense against the Indians, the large grants of land made to favored individuals, and the "uncertainty of laws made by the director and his council without the approbation of the country," the crusty old despot, Peter Stuyvesant, refused to hear their plea for self-government and dispersed the convention with the defiant words: " We derive our authority from God and the Company, not from a few ignorant subjects, and we alone can call the inhabitants together." 60. The Dutch dash with their Neighbors. Not only were the Dutch trespassing on territory granted by James I to the Plymouth Company in 1606, but they also claimed the land on the Connecticut and Delaware rivers. They had built Fort Good Hope on the Connecticut near the present site of Hartford, which they tried to hold against the emigrants from Massachusetts. Finally, unable to defend their position against stiff-necked colony of Massachusetts [52], was no longer willing to grant the almost unlimited powers which he had bestowed upon Lord Baltimore and the Carolina proprietors. The Penn charter contained provisions that the colony must always keep an agent in London, that the Church of England must be tolerated, that appeals to England from the decision of the colony courts must be allowed, that the king might veto any act of the assembly within five years of its passage, and that taxes might be laid on the colony "by act of Parliament in England." Penn persuaded the Duke of York in 1682 to release to him the land which Stuyvesant had wrested from the Swedes on the Delaware in 1655 and which, in spite of Baltimore's protest, had been held as part of New York ever since the English conquest of New Netherland (1664). This territory, called the "Three Lower Counties," Penn governed by a deputy. The lower counties were separated from Pennsylvania in 1702 and, as the colony of Delaware, were given their own legislature; but they remained under Penn's governors and a part of the proprietary domain of the Penn family until the American Revolution. 65. Penn's " Holy Experiment." William Penn was the greatest of the founders of the American colonies. He had all the liberality of Roger Williams without his impatience, all the fervor of John Winthrop without a trace of intolerance, and all the tact of Lord Baltimore with still greater industry and zeal. He was far in advance of his age in humanity. At a time when scores of ofTenses were punishable by death in England, he made murder and treason the only capital crimes in his colony. Instead of filthy dungeons, Penn made his prisons workhouses for the education and correction of malefactors. His province was the first to raise its voice against slavery (in the Germantown protest of r688), and his scrupulous and fair dealing with the Indians saved the colony from the horrors of savage raids and massacres. Penn called his undertaking a " holy experiment " — believing that a peaceful and prosperous society could exist under a humane government, welcoming men of various nationalities, and tolerating the worship of various creeds. 66. Politics in Pennsylvania. Nevertheless there were inevitable causes of discontent and wrangling, due partly to the high degree of freedom and prosperity in the province and partly to the diversity of races and creeds represented. Penn himself once wrote to the colony "for the love of God, me, and the poor country, be not so governmentish, so noisy and open in vour dissatisfaction"; and his successors in the eighteenth century' were often at odds with the governors and people of the colony. As the Scotch-Irish and Germans began to fill up the western lands, there were the usual quarrels between the new frontier and the old seaboard region over the division of political power; for the five frontier counties of Pennsylvania had only ten members in the assembly as against twenty-six members from the three original counties near the Delaware. Another source of continual friction was the exemption of the proprietor's enormous tracts of land from taxation. And still another was the dominance of the assembly by the Quakers, whose principles forbade them to fight or to support war. This threatened to lie a very serious matter when the French and Inman War at the middle of the eighteenth century struck the province, and the belligerent Scotch-Irish on the frontier found themselves thwarted by the pacifist Quakers, who controlled the legislature. But in the end the patriotism of the Quakers overcame their scruples. In some cases they voluntarily retired from the assembly and in others they voted grants to the government without inquiring too closely' what was done with the money. On one occasion they voted £4000 for "bread, beef, pork, flour, wheat, and other grains." The governor, interpreting "other grains" liberally, used a large part of the money to buy grains of gunpowder, and the Quakers did not protest. The liberal influence of William Penn was lasting, and his family remained in honored possession of the province down to the outbreak of the American Revolution. Even then the new state of Pennsylvania allowed the Penn family to retain their ownership) of most of their landed property. 67. The Colony of Georgia. For the sake of completeness we must mention among these proprietorships the colony of Georgia, though it was founded long after the Stuart dynasty had given place to the House of Hanover on the English throne. In the year that George Washington was born (1732) James obtained a charter from the king granting to a body of trustees for twenty-one years the unsettled part of the old Carolina territory lying between the Savannah and Altamaha rivers (map, p. 63). Oglethorpe wished to provide an opportunity for poor debtors and criminals to work out their salvation in the New World. The Church was anxious for the conversion of the Indians on the Carolina borders; capitalists expected to make profits out of the silk and wine industries introduced into the province; and the government, drifting toward a war with Spain, was glad to have the English frontier extended southward to Spanish Florida. So Parliament, the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, the Bank, of England, and many private citizens contributed toward the new colony which was established on the banks of the Savannah in 1733 and named Georgia after the reigning king, George H. Slavery was forbidden in the new colony, also the traffic in rum. But the convicts were poor workers, and the industries started were unsuited to the land. Not wine and silk, but rice, indigo, and cotton were destined to be the foundation of Georgia's prosperity. In spite of Oglethorpe's zeal and his victories over the Spaniards by land and sea, he had not made a success of the colony when the lime came to surrender the charter to the king (1753). The founder of the last American colony lived to see the United States acknowledged by Great Britain and the other powers of Europe as an independent nation. The sugar planters of the British West Indies had a powerful "lobby" in Parliament and secured the passage of an act in 1733 to protect them against the competition of the French and Dutch islands. The act put heavy duties on rum, molasses, and sugar exported from the foreign West Indian islands to the mainland colonies of America, and if enforced would have ruined the trade of the Northern colonies and, as the New York assembly said, "have reduced us to Nakedness or to make our own Cloathing." For, in the first place, it was on the trade with the West Indies that the Northern colonies depended for the molasses of their distillery and the money to pay for the manufactures which they imported from England. And, in the second place, the British West Indies alone did not begin to furnish an adequate market for the breadstulTs, fish, barrel staves, and lumber which the Northern colonies exported to the Caribbean. The act was not enforced, but it remained on the statute books as a menace to the colonies, and its revival in 1764 was one of the first steps in the new British policy which led to the American Revolution. 75. The Prosperity of the Colonies. The remarkable growth in the population and prosperity of the colonies in the eighteenth century is sufficient proof that their industrial development was not seriously retarded by the measures of the home government. The following table shows the population as nearly as it can he estimated in the days before a careful census was compiled. Of this number 290,000 were negro slaves (who did not begin to come to the Country in large numbers unlit the eighteenth century). 78. The People. The earliest emigrants to the colonies were almost all Englishmen, but from the closing years of the seventeenth century America began to be the "melting pot" of the nations. It was chiefly the chance to begin life anew in a country where land was abundant that attracted the newcomers. Still, migration was hastened by religious and political persecution in Europe. Louis XIV's revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685 drove tens of thousands of Huguenots out of France, and the devastation of the Rhenish Palatinate by his armies a few years later made tens of thousands of Germans homeless. The defeat of the Scotch supporters of the Stuart cause in 1715 and 1745 drove many Highlanders to seek new homes. The American colonies were a land of promise for all who could afford the passage money and even those who were penniless could come as "redemptioners," by selling their services for a term of years after their arrival to pay their passage over. Most of the foreign immigrants went to the colonies south of New England. New York had its English Clintons, Scotch Livingstons, and French De Lanceys following the old Dutch Knickerbocker families. Germans came to Penn's colony at the rate of about two thousand a year from 1727 to 1754 and constituted a third of its population at the time of the American Revolution. ScotchIrish also came by the tens of thousands until there were some three hundred and eighty-five thousand of them in the frontier lands of the colonies at the time of the Revolution. Their sons founded our first states west of the Alleghenies. The Huguenots were numerous in South Carolina. Indeed, in all the colonies from Maine to Georgia the names of families and towns remind us of the contribution made by the foreigners to American civilization. They made up more than a quarter of the white population at the time of the American Revolution. 79. Social Classes. There was no titled aristocracy in America at one end of the social scale, nor was there a mass of oppressed peasants at the other end, gaining a bare existence off the land of the nobles. 181. The United States in 1789. The United States which Washington was unanimously called to preside over in 1789 was a far different country from the United States of today. A free white population of 3,200,000 with 600,000 slaves was scattered along the Atlantic seaboard from New England to Georgia. Philadelphia, the gay capital of the Confederation, had a population of 42,000. New York had about 32,000; Boston, Charleston, and Baltimore had passed the 10,000 mark. A steady immigration. chiefly of Scotch-Irish stock from Virginia and North Carolina, had followed Daniel Boone and John Sevier across the Alleghenies, to found settlements in Kentucky and Tennessee. The census of 1790 estimated that 109,000 of these hardy frontiersmen were scattered through the rich valley of the Ohio and Cumberland rivers [156). 203. The Alien and Sedition Acts. The Federalists, however, had already signed the death warrant of their party. In the heyday of their power, in the exciting summer of 1798, they had sought to silence Republican opposition and make their own tenure of office secure by passing through Congress as foolish a set of laws as have ever marred our statute books. Since most of the foreigners who came to our shores swelled the ranks of the Republican party, a Naturalization Act was passed (June 18), increasing from five to fourteen years the term of residence necessary to make a foreigner a citizen of the United States. An Alien Act (June 25) gave the president power for a term of two years " to order all such aliens as he should judge dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States ... to depart out of the territory of the United States." A Sedition Act (July 14), to be valid till the close of Adams's administration, permitted that anyone writing or publishing " any false, scandalous, and malicious writings against the government, either House of Congress, or the President," or "of exciting against them the hatred to encourage the good people of the United States to stir up sedition," should be punished by a fine not exceeding $2000 and by imprisonment not exceeding two years. It is only fair to say that the wisest of the Federalists, like Adams, Hamilton, and Marshall, were opposed to these acts, which the "hyper-Federalists," as Adams called to meet this swollen budget were heavy. The Alien and Sedition Acts were unpopular, and, worst of all, the Federalists were split into the Hamilton and Adams factions. The Republicans, on the other hand, had been gaining steadily even in New England under the tireless and skillful management of Thomas Jefferson. After a campaign of violence and slander, in which the Reverend Timothy Dwight, president of Yale College, predicted that if Jefferson were elected "the Bible would be cast into a bonfire" and our country turned over to a mob of atheistical, murderous Jacobins, Jefferson and Burr received 73 electoral votes to 65 for Adams and 64 for C. C. Pinckney.1 But as all the Republican electors had written the names of Jefferson and Burr on their ballots, the two men were tied for first place. Of course the electors meant to vote for Jefferson as president and Burr as vice president. Had the latter been an honorable man he would have immediately conceded the presidency to Jefferson, instead of allowing the choice to go to the House of Representatives (Constitution, Art. II, sect. 1, par. 3). The Federalists controlled enough states in the House to keep Jefferson out of the presidency, and for thirty-five ballots they blocked his election. But, owing largely to the influence of Hamilton, who, much as he disliked Jefferson, despised Burr more, enough Federalists finally refrained from voting to allow Jefferson to be chosen. 206. The Downfall of the Federalists. The Federalists had bent the bow of authority too far, and it snapped. They never regained control of the government, although they continued to put a presidential candidate in the field and to poll a few votes until the election of 1816. In spite of their ungracious acts in the last days of their power, the Federalists had governed Republican victory was due immediately to Aaron Burr. The election turned on the 12 electoral votes of New York, and it was Burr who votes for his ticket by securing a solid delegation of Republicans from New York City to the legislature which chose the presidential electors. Adams had received the 12 electoral votes of New York in 1796, and had he received even half of them in 1800 he would have defeated Jefferson. The figures show, therefore, that, even with the handicap of the Alien and Sedition Laws and the split in the Federalist partv, Adams got more votes outside of New York in 1800 than he had in 1776. More than 10,000,000 of our 23,000,000 people were living in the great central basin Of the Mississippi, with a scant 120,000 in California and Oregon. The increase in our population was due almost wholly to the rapid reproduction of our native stock. Early marriages and large families were the rule, especially on the frontier, where homesteads were easy to get and sons and daughters grew up to a life of wholesome toil crowned by the clearing of their own new farms still farther west. Immigration. There were no accurate statistics of immigration in the first part of the nineteenth century. A law of 1819 required the collectors of customs in our ports to file with the Secretary of State a description of all foreign passengers landing in their districts. From these lists it appeared that fewer than 1,000,000 immigrants had come to our shores before 1840. During the decade 1840-1850, however, more than 1,700,000 came. This influx was due partially to the demand for laborers in the United States and partially to various forms of distress in Europe. The utter ruin of the potato crop in 1845 reduced Ireland to famine, and the revolutions of the famous year 1848 threw central Europe into a political turmoil. Irish and German immigrants in large numbers sought in America a land of plenty and a refuge for democracy. The Germans tended to move into the agricultural regions of the Northwest, where there were over 80,000 of them by the census of 1850. The Irish, on the other hand, were content for the most part to remain in the cities of the Atlantic coast. New York alone had absorbed 133,000 Irish immigrants by the year 1850, and Boston, Baltimore, Philadelphia, and other coast cities followed according to their capacity. The " Know-Nothings." We have already noticed some of the political effects of the concentration of the masses in our cities [279]. The coming of the foreigners precipitated racial and religious conflicts too. Much social persecution was directed against the Irish, who were devoted to the Roman Catholic Church. As early as 1834 a convent of the Ursuline Nuns near Boston had been sacked and burned. Anti-Catholic rioters in New York attacked churches and dwellings in 1842. 455. Prosperity Real and Fictitious. Much of the prosperity of the decade of the sixties was due to legitimate business expansion and the utilization of the immense resources of the country, which had lain almost neglected until the stimulus of the war, the discovery of petroleum and mineral deposits, and the rapid improvement of transportation facilities brought them into prominence. There was enough and more than enough room in the mills and factories, the mining regions and oil fields, the railroad-construction camps and meat-packing houses, to absorb the hundreds of thousands of men who returned from the war ready for new occupations. Immigrants began to arrive from Europe in large numbers. Within four days in the spring of 1865 over 6000 landed at the port of New York. More than 300,000 came in the year 1866, three quarters of them British and | German subjects, who were distributed almost equally between the farms and the factories. In Philadelphia alone one hundred and eighty new manufacturing plants were established in the years 1S62-1864, and the issue of more than five thousand patents in the latter year is eloquent testimony to the alertness of American industry'. "The nation," wrote the Commissioner of Revenue, "was infected with a spirit of enterprise which | redoubled its energies with every' additional burden put upon it" Yet there were sinister elements in the new prosperity. The desire for rapid and unearned riches outran business honesty. Fraudulent promoters sold worthless oil and gold stock to gullible investors. Rival money kings in Wall Street fought for the control of the railroads, not to develop them for the public service, but to put millions into their own pockets by ing the stocks and bonds. Plungers like Jay Gould and Jim" Fiske tried to corner the gold supply by bribing Grant's father-in-law and other men of influence about the unsuspecting President to keep the Treasury's surplus gold out. Speculation ran riot. 523. Immigration. At the same time a change was taking place in the type of immigrant that came to America. Until 1890 about four fifths of our immigrants were from the northern countries of Europe: the British Isles, Germany, and Scandinavia. Their assimilation was not a difficult matter, for they were essentially like the population already here, fanners and artisans with a spirit of individual initiative and a love of free institutions. But from the early eighties on immigration from Italy, Austria-Hungary, Poland, and Russia, which had constituted less than a half of 1 per cent of the total up to the Civil War, began to grow, until by the end of the century it exceeded the immigration from the northern European countries. The newer immigrants, coming from wretched conditions at home, were content to work long hours for low wages, debasing the standards of the American laborer. They were brought over in gangs to work on railroad construction or in the great mills. One in three among them was unable to read or write ascompared with one in thirty of the older type. 615. Immigrants crowded the slum districts of the great urban centers. The foreign-born formed 7.5 per cent of the population of the country districts in 1910, but in the cities of over 500.000 they comprised 33.6 per cent of the population. They were sometimes naturalized at the rate of one a minute. The tens of thousands of ignorant voters in the large cities were easily won for the political support of bosses and rings, who got control of the officers. At the same time, the concentration of wealth in the cities afforded the corrupt governments golden opportunities of plunder in connection with contracts for street paving, municipal buildings, and other public works. The budget of New York City, for example, is now approximately $500,000,000 a year — a sum equal to the entire expense of the government of the United States in 1890. It was an accident that started reform in the machinery of city government. Like a bankrupt corporation,' it was put into the hands of receivers. Mayor, council, board of aldermen, all the old political machinery, disappeared and a commission of five able citizens managed the city as a business proposition. The experiment of commission government was so successful that other cities took it up. The form adopted by Des Moines, Iowa, in 1908, has been most widely copied. The commissioners (usually five) are selected by the whole people of the city, and each one is the responsible head of an administrative department like finance, public works, or law. The initiative, referendum, and recall hold the commissioners responsible to the will of the electorate. The tide of immigration to the United States rose from 450,000 in 1900 to 1,285,000 in 1907, dropping temporarily as a result of the panic of the latter year, but rising to a new peak of 1,218,000 In 1914, when nearly one third of our population of 95,000,000 were foreign-born themselves or the sons and daughters of one or both parents foreign-born. It was not enough to naturalize the horde of aliens by law. They must also be taught to speak the English language, to read American newspapers, and to understand something of the democratic ideals by which our history had been shaped. New inventions and discoveries were following each other with bewildering rapidity, changing the habits of the people and the intercourse of the nation. A third of the more expenditure of $038,000,000 for improvements and equipment during 1918 and increased the wages of the railroad men that year by $300,000,000. Owing to the increase of wages and the rise of the price of materials, the railroads lost hundreds of millions of dollars under government management. The large express companies, also, were merged into a single concern to handle the government's shipments and the telephone and telegraph lines passed under the control of the Postmaster-General. Labor and the War. Because of the enormous demands on the industries of the country, labor assumed an importance in the World War which it had never had before. Men were being taken from the industries by the tens of thousands to fill the ranks of the army. Immigration, which had been above the 1,000,000 mark in the years 1912 to 1914, sank to a little over 100,000 in 1918. Women filled the gap to some extent, but still the shortage of labor led to serious difficulties in industry. Wages were raised to unheard-of levels by the bidding of the government and private firms against each other for workers. Agents of unscrupulous firms did not hesitate to "steal" labor from their neighbors. Extravagance in unwise expenditure arose from the increased buying power of the laboring class. Finally, to prevent the wasteful "turnover" in labor, the government went into the business of an employment agency and allocated to its most useful work practically all the skilled labor of the country. From the first, labor supported the war whole-heartedly. " This is labor's war," said Samuel Gompers, who was a member of the advisory board of the Council of National Defense. Under his leadership the labor unions agreed not to strike during the war. Early in 1918 a National War Labor Board was created, with ex-President Taft and F. P. Walsh as joint chairmen, to act as a supreme court in labor disputes. 708. Opposition to the War. So long as the United States remained neutral, any citizen had a right to oppose our entrance into the war. But once we were in it the attempt to obstruct the government in its prosecution of the war was equivalent to giving aid and comfort to the enemy. Over against the millions of our people who gave the war their loyal support there were a few hundred only who worked actively to make the war a failure. This small disloyal group was made up of extreme partisans or paid agents of Germany and Austria in this country and of certain radical elements among the labor agitators who condemned the war as a crime of the capitalist class against the workers. "Conscientious objectors" to war in any form or for any cause were allowed to perform noncombatant service in various departments (medicine, engineering, construction, and repair), while drafted men whose conscience would not permit them to serve in military uniform were allowed to work on farms under the surveillance of the War Department. To guard against danger from the treasonably inclined, enemy aliens were forbidden to approach within one hundred yards of wharves, to be found in waters within three miles of the shore line, or to ascend in balloons or airplanes. On June 15, 1917, an Espionage Act was passed, prescribing severe penalties for interfering with the recruiting or the disciplining of troops or disclosing information about places connected with the national defense. The Espionage Act was supplemented in May, 1918, by a Sedition Act, making it a crime to criticize by speech or writing the government or the Constitution. In the following October the Secretary of Labor was given the authority to send out of the country aliens who believed in the forcible overthrow of government. The Postmaster-General was ordered by the Espionage Act to exclude from the mails any seditious or treasonable publications. The property of enemy aliens in the country was seized to the amount of some $700,000,000 and turned over to A. Mitchell Palmer, the Alien Property Custodian, to hold as a trustee, its eventual disposition to be determined by Congress. During the year 1922 the government, through the revived War Finance Corporation, appropriated $433,000,000 to help finance the export of agricultural products, and in March, 1923, the Agricultural Credits Act extended the credit 0/ the Federal Land Bank to farmers who wished to borrow on the security of their live stock and of their crops on the way to market. Still, the farmers were by no means satisfied by these measures. The peak of their demands was reached in the McNary-Haugen bill for the creation of a National Agricultural Export Commission, with a capital of $200,000,000, authorized to buy up surplus farm products and sell them abroad for what they would bring, while the tariff on them was to be raised high enough to prevent their reimportation into the United States.1 Whether the government should, and how much it could, help the farmers' situation by further legislation are questions on which experts disagree. But the serious truth remains that unless the agricultural dags of the nation is sound, prosperous, and contented, all our great industrial and commercial wealth is threatened. For the farm is still the basis of the nation's prosperity. 726. The Immigration Laws. Because America has made it her boast to be the land of refuge for the oppressed and of opportunity for the ambitious, we have welcomed the immigrants from the Old World almost without restrictions until very recent days. Moreover, we have needed the labor of their hands on the arms, cattle ranches, and limiter ranges, in the mines, mills, and factories. During the decade preceding the World War over 10,000,000 immigrants came to America. We have noted in an earlier chapter the change in the type of immigrants since about the year 1890, when Italians, Hungarians, Poles, and Russians began to predominate over the more assimilable stocks. The McNary-Haugen bill, 6rst introduced into Congress in 1924, was passed in February, 1927, but was vetoed by President Coolidge a few days before the expiration of the 69th Congress. 