This book, The History of the American People, is more than a revision of the author's History of the United, States. It is a new text from cover to cover. Military history has been reduced to a mere outline of the more important campaigns; political history has been simplified by omission of many details ; and several new chapters have been added which deal with social, economic, industrial, and artistic development. "The New Industrial Revolution," which comprises Part VI, has over one hundred pages of entirely new matter. It describes the fundamental social and economic changes that have taken place since the Civil War -— changes which have introduced a new civilization based on science and invention, and on increased use of steel, oil, and electricity. Many new pictures and maps form a special feature of the new history. These are designed to make the book more interesting and easier to study and to teach effectively. For many of the improvements in this new volume the author is indebted to suggestions from experienced teachers who have used his older history in their classes. To all of these he wishes to express gratitude and the hope that the new book will in large measure meet their ideas of what a modem text in American history should be. In New York, Governor Nicholson was slow in acknowledging William and Mary, and Jacob Leisler headed a revolt and seized the fort. His self-constituted rule was unnecessarily harsh and severe, and when a new royal governor, Henry Slaughter, arrived in 1691, Leisler was, without real justification, tried and hanged for treason. During the eighteenth century the growth and expansion of the colonies was rapid. In 1700 the total population was about 275,000. By 1750 it had risen to 1,200,000 and at the beginning of the Revolution population, in 1775 it was about 2,600,000. Throughout the 1700 1750 colonial period Virginia had the largest population, numbering. in 1750,275,000. Massachusetts came next with 180,000; Pennsylvania third with 150,000 ; Maryland fourth with 137,000: and Connecticut fifth with 100,000. New York and North Carolina each had about 80,000. The relative rank in population was about the same at the beginning of the Revolution, except that North Carolina had risen to the fourth place. Of the cities Boston was the largest throughout the seventeenth century and continued to hold first place until the middle of the eighteenth century, when Philadelphia outstripped her. In 1760 Philadelphia had a population of 18,700, Boston of 15,600, New York of 14,000 and Charleston of 8000. Besides the natural increase of population during the eighteenth century there was a large immigration from Scotland, Ireland, England, and the continent of The German Europe. Germans were among the first settlers of immigration Pennsylvania, but the German immigration to that colony did not assume very large proportions until the eighteenth century, when, as the result of religious persecutions, German Protestants were encouraged by Great Britain to seek refuge in her colonies. The last and most important addition to the population of the colonies was the immigration of the Scotch-Irish Presbyterians which began about the close of the first quarter! of the eighteenth century. They came first to Pennsylvania and, finding the eastern part of the province already occupied, pushed rapidly to the west, and in time filled the Allegheny region. From western Pennsylvania they soon found their way into the valley of Virginia where they were followed by many German families. From the valley of Virginia the Scotch-Irish spread southward into North Carolina, Tennessee, and South Carolina, and in the period immediately preceding the Revolution, into Kentucky. Many of the later immigrants landed in eastern Virginia and in Charleston, and pushed their way westward. It is claimed by some authorities that as many as 500,000 Scotch-Irish had come to America by the beginning of the Revolution. Finding the tidewater and piedmont sections of the South already occupied, most of the Scotch-Irish were V forced to seek lands in the mountainous regions of the West! They were a brave, sturdy, frugal, and energetic race, well suited to the hardships and dangers of frontier life. They 1 played a most important part in the later French and Indian ■ wars and in the Revolution, and in the gradual conquest of the continent by the forces of civilization the Scotch-Irish were ' always found on the frontier. In fact, the history of the 1 American frontier is largely the history of the Scotch-Irish I in America. The plan for founding a colony in Georgia originated with James Oglethorpe, an English gentleman of good family who The found- ^ad served in the continental wars and later ing of entered the House of Commons. Early in his Georgia, parliamentary career he became interested in reforming the harsh laws against debtors, and the idea of colonizing the poorer class of debtors in America occurred to him. But this philanthropic feature was only one side of the scheme. Oglethorpe proposed to found a military colony on the southern frontier of South Carolina as a protection against the Indians and against the Spanish. He enlisted the sympathy of many prominent noblemen and clergymen, and in June, 1732, they received from the king a charter incorporating them as "the trustees for establishing the colony of Georgia in America." They were granted a strip of territory lying between the Savannah and extending from their headwaters westward to the South Sea. The government was to be proprietary in form for a period which Georgia was to become a royal province. In the plans of the trustees there were two novel features: slavery was prohibited and the importation of rum was forbidden. In 1749 the prohibition against Negro slavery was removed, and the following year the act prohibiting the importation of rum was repealed. After the removal of these restrictions, planters from South Carolina moved into Georgia with their slaves, and within two years nearly a thousand slaves had been brought into the colony. In spite of the efforts of the trustees to found a colony of small freeholders, the plantation system with its characteristic features soon developed. Growth of Sectional Differences The impetus of skilled labor Northern industries became more and more diversified, while the South was limited by its type of labor to a few staple products. The expansive agricultural system of the South demanded a liberal public land policy, while the North on account of the scarcity of labor tried to restrict the sale of public lands, and to retard the westward movement of population. In like manner the South favored territorial expansion, and the North opposed it. Immigration did not become a very important factor until the latter half of the period. The number of foreigners coming to our shores was not recorded until 1820. From that time on the figures by decades are as follows: 18201830, 143,439; 1830-1840, 599,125; 1840-1850, 1,713,251; 1850-1860,2,598,214. Many of these immigrants were skilled laborers, familiar with the industrial methods and processes of the old world, and they expanded further the naturally diversified industries of the North and West, changing the whole face of civilization, while the South remained fixed in its economic system. Immigration had a political significance equal to its economic one. The newcomers, imbued with European ideas of government and without inherited state or local ties, swelled immensely the forces that were creating American nationality. The South, it is true, expanded territorially, but the main features of its social and industrial system underwent scarcely any modification, while the rest of the country became more and more unlike that section in fundamental social structure. The South then was becoming isolated from the West as well as from the North and was beginning to realize the danger of being outvoted on vital questions of economic policy. The South, therefore, assumed the defensive and took refuge behind the doctrine of state sovereignty. A generation of Southerners grew up under the leadership of Calhoun, who stoutly opposed the new doctrine of national sovereignty as preached by Webster, and regarded the preservation of the Union on the terms of the original compact as the most vital of all issues. The population of the United States in 1830 was 12,866,000, showing an increase of about thirty-three per cent over the census of 1820. Each succeeding census showed as large a rate of increase until 1860, when distribution the total population of the country was 31,443,000. In 1830 there were 2,009,000 slaves and over 300,000 free blacks. The white population of the free states was at this time 6,871,000 and that of the slave states 3,660,000. Taking the white population by sections, the middle and New England states had 5,417,000; the slave states bordering on the Atlantic from Delaware to Florida had 2,116,000; while the remaining states, then constituting the West, had 2,999,000. The combination of the South and West was strong enough, with the aid of New York or Pennsylvania, to keep the Democratic party in power, and only twice between 1830 and 1860 did this party fail to elect its candidate for the presidency. Democracy became a political fact as well as a theory with the election of Jackson in 1828. The new era it introduced represented the triumph of western or frontier democracy over the conservatism of the eastern of western states. Jackson himself was totally different in democracy character, training, and experience from his predecessors. All of the other presidents had been reared amid scenes of culture and refinement and had been tried in high executive or diplomatic positions before being called to the highest office in the nation. Jackson was a product of the southwestern frontier and had lost little of the self-reliance, the restless activity, the intolerance of opposition. The period we are considering was the golden age of the American merchant marine. From 1820 to 1850 the famous dipper ships could outsail anything on the ocean. During these years a greater percentage of American commerce was carried under the American flag than in any other period of our history. But the supremacy of the American-built sailing vessel was not destined to last long. In 1838 the Great Western, an English steamship, made its first trip across the Atlantic and introduced the era of steam navigation on the ocean. It was, of course, several years before the supremacy of the sailing vessel passed. The iron hull, which was introduced a little later, gave England a great advantage over America, for she could build better and cheaper iron vessels than we could. These changes and the Civil War caused the decline of the American merchant marine, and it has never regained supremacy. Between 1830 and 1800 the population of the United States more than doubled, increasing from 12,866,000 to over 31,000,000. A large part of this increase in population was due to foreign immigration. In 1842 over 100,000 foreigners came to our shores, and in 1854 the number exceeded 400,000. This movement was due primarily to the famine in Ireland and the revolutions in Germany, but it was accelerated by the rapid extension of the American frontier. Some of the immigrants remained in the eastern states, where they took the place of the native-born Americans who were moving to the West. This was especially true of the Irish. The Germans, on the other hand, preferred going directly to the frontier, and they played an important part in the development of some of the western states. Between 1830 and 1850 six new states were admitted to the Union: Arkansas in 1836, Michigan in 1837, Florida and Texas in 1845, Iowa in 1846, and Wisconsin in 1848. The years 1828-1848 saw a rapid extension of the suffrage. When the new government was organized under the Constitution in 1789, complete manhood suffrage did not exist in a single one of the thirteen states. The right to vote was restricted by landholding or other property qualifications, and the right to hold office was similarly restricted. With the election of Andrew Jackson to the presidency in 1828 democracy entered upon a new phase. Within a few years state after state adopted manhood suffrage and abolished property qualifications for holding office. In many of the states the legislatures no longer chose governors and judges, this function having been surrendered to the people, and South Carolina was the only state in which the legislature still chose presidential electors. Roosevelt also withdrew from entry many millions of acres of oil and mineral lands, and also barren lands which could be made productive by irrigation. The reclamation of arid lands was authorized by the Newlands Act of 1902, which began the work of national irrigation. By this act all moneys received from the sale of public lands in certain western states were to be set aside as a special fund in the treasury to be used for the construction and maintenance of irrigation works. Conservation of natural resources was the most characteristic of the Roosevelt policies and the one on which he laid greatest emphasis. In 1908 he invited the governors of all states to a conference at the White House and urged them to cooperate with the national government in this important work. Roosevelt extended governmental supervision to the manufacture of foods and drugs. His attention was called by Upton Sinclair's novel, The Jungle, to the unsanitary conditions prevailing in the Chicago slaughterhouses. After a thorough investigation by a Acts committee, Congress passed, on the recommendation of the president, the Meat Inspection Act of 1906. Roosevelt also succeeded in forcing through Congress a bill to prevent the manufacture, transportation, and sale of "adulterated, or misbranded, or poisonous, or deleterious" foods and drugs. This measure met with determined opposition from the manufacturers concerned. The population of the United States is nearly all derived from European immigration, but the character of that immigration underwent great changes in the last quarter of the nineteenth century and the early part of the twentieth. Before 1880 three fourths of all persons who migrated to America came from the Celtic and Teutonic countries of northern and western Europe, mostly from Great Britain, Ireland, and Germany. About 1880 the numbers from southern and eastern (Latin and Slavic) Europe began to increase and soon assumed formidable proportions. In the year 1882 the number of immigrants entering the United States was 788,992, but this figure was not equaled again for twenty-one years. Because of differences of race, religion, and standards of living, the new groups of immigrants were less easily assimilated than the old. The restriction of immigration by legislation has been adopted but still presents many practical difficulties. The first restrictive acts were directed against the Chinese, but in 1885 Congress prohibited the importation of laborers under contract, and various other acts excluded convicts, prostitutes, lunatics, idiots, paupers, polygamists, anarchists, and persons suffering from contagious diseases. With the settlement of California Chinese laborers were welcomed to our shores, and they played a large part in the Chinese development of the coast states, particularly in exclusion building the Pacific railroads. The trade in coolies, a form of peonage, was prohibited by act of Congress in 1862. By 1880 the opposition to the Chinese on account of their lower standards of living was general among the other laboring classes of the United States, and a commission was sent to China to arrange for the restriction of Chinese immigration. The result was the treaty of 1880, by the terms of which the government of China consented to the exclusion of laborers, provided that teachers, students, merchants, and travelers should be allowed to come and go of their own free will, and that return certificates should be issued to laborers already in the United States for the purpose of allowing them to visit China. Congress promptly passed exclusion laws which were later made more stringent. The alleged fraudulent transfer of the return certificates to new immigrants led Congress in 1888 to suspend the privilege, a measure which was not only harsh, but in violation of the treaty of 1880. The Chinese exclusion laws have been administered with undue severity, and overzealous officials have too frequently subjected Chinese gentlemen of culture and refinement to unnecessary hardships and indignities. After the exclusion of the Chinese there was an increase in the immigration of Japanese laborers and an anti-Japanese agitation began on the Pacific coast. Matters reached a crisis in 1905 when the San Francisco migration school board undertook to exclude Japanese subjects from the schools attended by American children and children of European nationality, and assigned them to a special Oriental school. President Roosevelt brought about an adjustment of this question, but the school incident was evidence of a strong feeling of opposition to Japanese immigration. In view of Japan's position as a world power and of the remarkable progress made by the Japanese people, Congress hesitated to legislate against the admission of Japanese while we were admitting freely the subjects of the other great powers. The Japanese government relieved the situation by agreeing informally not to issue passports to Japanese laborers to come to the United States. This "gentlemen's agreement" was scrupulously kept by Japan. Immigration reached a high-water mark in 1905, when over a million foreigners reached our shores. President Roosevelt called attention to the fact that the number of immigrants who arrived in this single year exceeded the entire number of colonists who came to the colonies during the one hundred and sixty- nine years that elapsed between the first settlement at Jamestown and the Declaration of Independence. At the outbreak of the World War it became evident that the "melting pot" was not working as satisfactorily as had been sentimentally imagined and that our population of foreign birth had not been fully assimilated and Americanized. Organized labor had for years advocated a restriction of immigration, and at the close of the war it appeared that the country was in danger of being flooded with refugees from the disorganized and debt-burdened countries of Europe. Congress, therefore, passed an act in May, 1921, limiting immigration and establishing the quota system. The number of aliens admitted each year from any given country was limited to three per cent of the number of persons born in that country resident in the United States at the time of the census of 1910. Aliens Denied Admittance They failed to comply with the United States immigration laws, and are being sent back to their native land. Friends have come out in small boats to say good-by to them. A still more stringent law was passed in 1924, reducing the quota to two per cent and basing it on the census of 1890. The effect of going back to the census of 1890 was to cut down the quotas from the countries of southern and eastern Europe. This law furthermore provided for the total exclusion of the yellow races, including the Japanese. This abrogation of the "gentlemen's agreement" was entirely unnecessary, as under the quota system less than 250 Japanese would have been entitled to enter, and it was regarded by Japan as a deliberate insult. Difficult problems in foreign affairs faced President Wilson from the very first. His administration had scarcely begun when the anti-Japanese agitation again broke out in California. This time the state legislature wanted to deny to aliens who were ineligible to American citizenship the right to acquire agricultural land. The president sent Secretary of State Bryan to California to urge moderation upon the legislators, but his mission was not wholly successful. The act as finally passed safeguarded the treaty rights of aliens, but as the Japanese treaty did not specifically cover the point in question, the Japanese were left without redress. The dispute with England over the Panama Tolls Act was another question which the president had to handle The Panama care. The British government claimed that tolls the exemption of American vessels engaged in the question coastwise trade from the payment of toils was a violation of the Ilay-Pauncefote treaty. The president believed that the British interpretation of the treaty was correct, and he had the difficult task of persuading Congress to repeal the exemption clause of the Tolls Act. This was done June 15, 1914, on the eve of the World War. (For Topical References, see page 773.) When the World War broke out in August, 1914, President Wilson issued the usual proclamation of neutrality. No one foresaw how the vital interests of the United States would soon be involved. The first task was European to bring home the thousands of American tourists war who were stranded in all parts of Europe by the sudden mobilization of armies. The unexpected stop in international trade, particularly the export of cotton, caused a general business depression, and the country was saved from a serious financial panic only by the measures of the Treasury Department under the new' Federal Reserve Act. Before long business not only revived but boomed, when American firms began taking orders from England, France, and Russia for large supplies of arms and munitions of war. The sale of contraband was perfectly permissible under international law, but as the British navy controlled the seas, the Germans and Austrians were unable to get munitions from America, and denounced the trade in war supplies as one-sided and unnatural. Meanwhile the German invasion of Belgium had shocked the moral sense of the world and enlisted the sympathies of the great majority of Americans on the side of Germany's enemies. 