Columbus spent most of his days between 1492 and 1504 on the Atlantic Ocean. It was no longer the "sea of darkness" after his great work was finished. Columbus did not know that he was at the edge of a new continent; and supposing that the people whom he saw were natives of the East Indies, he called them Indians. It is not possible to say what island it was on which Columbus first landed. It is thought to have been what is known as Watling Island, one of the Bahama group. There is ground for thinking that a sailor named Leif, son of Eric the Red, in the employ of the king of Norway, made a long journey in the year 1000 to Greenland and to a place called Vinland. Vinland may have been some part of North America — perhaps New England or Nova Scotia. If so, the real discoverer of America was Leif Ericson. In any case, however, no further voyages were made by these Norwegians, — or Northmen, as they are often called, — and their discovery was of slight importance. The Labor Supply in Virginia. So much was to be done on the numerous plantations, there were so many buildings to be constructed and farms to be tilled, that young workmen were often brought over as "indentured servants." An indentured servant was one who had no money with which to pay for his journey to America, but who was willing to earn his way by serving a master for a period of years. The master paid the cost of the passage and kept the servant in food and clothes, while the servant worked for the master during the two or three or six or seven years of the agreement. As soon as the period of service was over, the indentured servant was free to work wherever he wished. Some of these young people were very able. One of them who came over at a later time was a graduate of an English university. In 1619 a new labor supply was found. A Dutch ship captain stopped at Jamestown and sold as slaves negroes whom he had stolen in the West Indies. It was a long time, however, before any considerable number of slaves existed in America. The incoming of so many colonists, and their scattering to the region about Jamestown, brought on the need of a better form of government. If an expedition was to be sent against the Indians, who should decide how many men must be supplied from each plantation? Who should decide how much money should be raised for the expenses of the colony, and how much each person should pay? These and many other questions were continually coming up. Accordingly in 1619 the Company sent over Sir George Yeardley with instructions to put into operation a new plan. Every plantation was to be allowed to send two persons to a meeting in the church at Jamestown. These persons, together with Yeardley and six men to represent the Com. Penn was a peaceful man and was careful to treat the Indians in a fair and gentle way. The result was that the Indians liked him and gave his colonists little trouble. His most important settlement was named Philadelphia, which means " brotherly love." He allowed the people to help decide as to what kind of government should be set up, although he was to be the owner, or "proprietor," himself. On account of its healthful situation there was no such suffering in Pennsylvania as there was in the first Virginia colonies. Delaware. The shores of Delaware Bay were occupied first by the Swedes, but were later captured and owned by the Dutch, and then by the Duke of York after his defeat of the Dutch. In 1682 Penn obtained the region from the duke and made it part of Pennsylvania. As this arrangement proved to be unsatisfactory, three counties in Pennsylvania were made into the separate colony of Delaware, although keeping the same kind of government that Pennsylvania had and having the same governor. Under Penn's direction the town of Philadelphia was laid out with broad streets running at right angles to one another. He hoped to make the spot beautiful by having each house surrounded by a garden. Within four years of the time when Penn got his grant from the king, Philadelphia had about six hundred houses. Many of them were built of brick. Penn was not so successful in keeping peace with his white neighbors. The lands given to Lord Baltimore for Maryland and to Penn for Pennsylvania overlapped. Each proprietor wished to get all the land he could, so that a boundary dispute started which lasted until 1760, long after Penn's death. A line was then agreed upon, and a few years later two English surveyors, Mason and Dixon, drew the boundary between Maryland and Pennsylvania as it still exists. The " Mason and Dixon line" was long famous as the dividing line between the North and the South. 1. Prepare a two-minute floor talk on the causes leading to the settlement of Pennsylvania. 2. Make a map of the middle colonies in 1700. Show New York,Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and -Delaware, the Hudson River, the Iroquois Indian country, Philadelphia, the Delaware River, German- town, and the Susquehanna River. 3. Account for the rapid growth of the Pennsylvania Colony. 4. Read the story "William Penn and the Quakers," in L. B. Evans's America First, pp. 63-67; also "The Quakers in Pennsylvania," in W. F. Gordy's Colonial Days, pp. 173-183. 3. How the People in the Middle Colonies lived What People and How Many? By 1700 there were perhaps forty thousand or fifty thousand people in the middle colonies. Most of them lived in two groups: one around the city of New York, the other around Philadelphia. But all the middle colonies were growing fast. Settlers were spreading up the Hudson, and out along the Mohawk valley from Albany. Farmers were pushing toward the west from Philadelphia into the Susquehanna valley. There was a greater variety of races here than in New England or in the South. In New York and New Jersey there were English and Dutch and Scotch and French. In Pennsylvania and Delaware the English were most common; but a few Swedes had come in, the Scotch-Irish were arriving, and so were the Germans — thousands of them. In fact, there were so many Germans in Pennsylvania that they had their own churches, schools, and newspapers. Landholding and Classes of People. We remember that in New England each farmer had a little farm of his own, and that in the South the plantations were generally large. New Settlers in the Middle Colonies. By 1763 there were about four hundred thousand people in the middle colonies, eight or nine times as many as in 1700. Many of the four hundred thousand were born in America, but two streams of immigrants helped to bring about the great increase: 1. There had been some wars in Germany which caused a great deal of suffering. Perhaps two thousand people left various parts of Germany every year to settle in America. 2. In northern Ireland were a great many people who had moved there from Scotland. Some of them were skilled in making woolen and linen cloth. Most of them were farmers. They did not get along well with the people of southern Ireland, and hence many of them were glad to move to a new country. If we could have flown over the middle colonies in an airship in 1763, we could easily have discovered where the new colonists settled. We should have seen a line of villages and farms up the Hudson River and out along the Mohawk valley into the middle of New York State, up the Delaware, the Schuylkill, and the Susquehanna, and all along the shores of the ocean. More Germans went to Pennsylvania than to any other colony. There they cleared farms in the Susquehanna valley and founded several towns. By 1763 a third of the people of Pennsylvania were Germans, and to this day the eastern part of the state shows the German influence in many ways. The Scotch-Irish also went into Pennsylvania in large numbers — so large that one man complained that all Ireland was moving to America. For example, about thirteen thousand Germans landed in London during 1709 without sufficient food and money and without much of an idea about where they wanted to go. Some of them were put in tents supplied by the English, and some were housed in empty buildings. The government and some generous English people furnished clothing and food. Some of the Germans were finally sent back home, but about five hundred migrated to North Carolina. There they took up farms in the river valleys and remained as long as they lived. Landholding and Self-government in the South. The great peculiarity about the South was the size of the farms, or plantations. It was the custom at that time for the owner of a plantation, at his death, to give all his land to his oldest son. None was given to the other children. The oldest son kept the plantation. Perhaps he added to it. One in Virginia was two hundred and eighty square miles in extent. Many were five square miles in size. So it came about that farmers who went to Virginia could not purchase land near the ocean or on the big rivers. They were forced to go to the western part of the colony, near the mountains (or the "uplands," as that region was called). When the Germans and Scotch-Irish from Pennsylvania moved southward in search of good land, it was along the upland country that they traveled. Many descendants of these people are to be found there to this very day. During most of the time from 1700 to 1763 the Southern colonies had governors appointed by the king. In some of the colonies (in Virginia, for example) there was a special fund of money which was used to pay the governor's salary. This fact made him a little more independent of the colonial legislature. Nevertheless the legislatures refused to raise money for other purposes unless the governor let them pass laws as they pleased. Hence the Southern colonies, like those of New England, became thoroughly accustomed to managing their own affairs. In doing so they had well-trained leaders, for many of the rich plantation owners sent their sons to the best universities and law schools in England. At the Forks of the Ohio. The smoke of this last contest had hardly cleared away when the French began building forts near the " forks of the Ohio," as they called the junction of the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers. Some Virginia colonists had their eyes on the same spot and had formed a company to send out settlers to colonize it. Then Governor Dinwiddie of Virginia heard that the French were already there. He decided to send a letter warning them to get out of the Ohio valley. As his messenger he picked a twentyone-year-old Virginia surveyor named George Washington. Washington's journey to the forks of the Ohio can now be taken in a few hours in a comfortable railway train, but in November and December, 1753, it took weeks of hard and dangerous traveling. The French were not to be frightened by a young man with a letter from the governor of Virginia; they built another fort close by, which they named Fort Duquesne. Thereupon Governor Dinwiddie sent Washington again, this time with some soldiers. At first Washington was able to defeat the French, but later he was beaten and forced to go back.1 Braddock's Defeat, 1755. This did not end the quarrel, however. In 1755 General Braddock was sent over from England with two regiments of troops. With Washington and some Virginia soldiers Braddock made his way over the mountains and through the thick forests toward that same Fort Duquesne, at the forks of the Ohio. He was met by some French and Indians near the fort. The Indians, accustomed to fighting in the woods, hid behind the trees and poured a deadly fire on Braddock's men. The English soldiers, not used to 1 It gives some idea of the difficulties met by young Washington to notice that Part of his task was to cut a road, fifty miles in length, for his troops to march over. Of course the road was a crude affair compared with modern highways, but the number of men that Washington had was small — only about three hundred. He did not have modern machinery for building his road; but undoubtedly his men were as skillful with the ax as anybody today, and they could clear a way through the trees in short order. this sort of warfare, stood their ground as long as they could; then they broke and ran. Braddock was killed, and nearly nine hundred of his twelve hundred men were either dead or wounded. It fell to Washington to collect the few men who had escaped unharmed and lead them out of danger. Braddock's successor then took command and ordered the troops back to the coast. The French and Indian War, 1756-1763. The battle near Fort Duquesne started the French and English to fighting again. In America the quarrel was known as the French and Indian War; in Europe several other nations took part in it, and the conflict was called the Seven Years' War. France and England fought each other all over the world: in the West Indies, where both had colonies; in India, which both wished to have; in Europe, wherever either side could find soldiers belonging to the other; and on the sea, whenever an English warship met a French vessel. It was well understood that each nation would take away from the other all the land and all the colonies and all the trade that it could. The strongest French fort in America was Quebec, situated on the top of a high, steep bluff on the St. Lawrence River. The city was surrounded by a wall with one hundred and six cannon mounted on it, and for several miles on each side there were earthworks behind which were nearly sixteen thousand French, Canadians, and Indians under General Louis de Montcalm. From the top of the cliff Montcalm could look for miles up and down the St. Lawrence as if he were in a balloon. General James Wolfe was sent by the king of England with nine thousand soldiers and a huge fleet of ships to see if he could capture Quebec. Late in June, 1759, he sailed up the river and landed within sight of the city. There he stayed, week after week, trying to find a way to defeat his enemy. The French tried to burn the English ships, but failed. One day the President came upon the English ship Little Bell, and a battle resulted in which the American ship was the winner. It gave great satisfaction to the United States to feel that at last a blow had been struck to prevent impressment. The second event, the battle of Tippecanoe, occurred in the West. The Indians had been getting restless and warlike. The Westerners believed England had been stirring up the red men and supplying them with arms. Finally, in 1811, a force of trained American fighters under William Henry Harrison met the Indians at Tippecanoe, in what is now Indiana. Although the Indians were beaten, the Americans blamed England for the danger they had been in. The third thing that brought England and the United States near war was the appearance of some new leaders in Washington. Late in 1811 there was a meeting of Congress in which there were several young members who favored war. They have generally been known as the "war hawks." Henry Clay, from Kentucky, and John C. Calhoun, from South Carolina, were the ablest among them. By 1811 most of the Revolutionary leaders were dead or in retirement. Washington and Hamilton were not alive; Jefferson and John Adams were out of office. The new leaders had grown up since the Revolution. They did not feel so much state patriotism, and could not remember the days when there was no United States. They wished to give up any further attempt to keep peace with England and see what could be done by war. The Declaration of War, June 18, 1812. In the meanwhile England was in a serious situation. The European war continued. Napoleon seemed unbeatable; England's business was in bad condition; her national debt was piling up; and her men were being killed by the thousand on the battlefields south which reached the sources of the Tennessee River. Furthermore, immigrants from the southernmost states could travel round the lower end of the Appalachian Range in Georgia. Experiences going West. It is impossible, of course, to relate even a small fraction of the many experiences which these hundreds of thousands of immigrants to the West had during the thirty or forty years which followed the War of 1812. A few of them will serve to illustrate what our ancestors did. One man, who was going through western Pennsylvania in 1817, told of seeing people with small wagons containing their bedding, provisions, and dishes. The children were walking along beside the wagon. Another immigrant had merely a horse which was carrying a pack. Still another had no animal at all, and owned nothing but what he and his wife and children could carry on t heir backs. A man who was traveling to the South in the same year saw a large group going to Alabama together. There were twenty wagons, twenty-nine herds of cattle, twenty-seven droves of hogs, and thirty-eight hundred people. Sometimes many members of a church or a town migrated in a group and founded in the West a new town to which they gave the name of their former home. When the roads were bad, as they generally were, the difficulties in getting ahead were tremendous. Sometimes there were mudholes where horses and even whole wagonloads of goods sank out of sight. When rivers had to be crossed, the travelers sought shallow places where the stream could be forded. Frequently, however, no ford could be found, or recent rains had swelled the river to such a height that it was dangerous to cross. Wagons would be overturned and lost attempting the passage; or they would wait for lower water until dozens or scores were packed in the road to wait, sometimes for days, before a crossing could be made. At night the travelers slept in their wagons, if they had them, or on the ground if the weather permitted. Other people stayed in the rough hotels, or taverns, when they could find them. A young woman going to Ohio in 1810 wrote home telling of the discomforts which she and other travelers suffered in these taverns. It is not surprising that in this newly settled country, good food and proper sleeping conditions were uncommon. It was difficult, if not impossible, for the tavern keepers to provide such food and accommodations as many travelers had known in the settled portions of the East. Another traveler spent a night with a private family. The supper consisted of three courses, each served in a large bowl: the first course was sour milk; the second, pork and pickled cabbage; the third, cold bread and milk. The members of the family and the traveler, each using a spoon, helped themselves from the common bowl. If the traveler could do so, he avoided many of these difficulties by making the journey in one of the famous Conestoga wagons. This was a heavy vehicle covered with canvas, the wheels being from four to six inches wide, and the harness heavy. It took from four to six horses to draw a wagon. The under part was always painted blue and the upper part red. It was most commonly used to carry freight from town to town, and its strong cover formed a protection against wind, weather, and the night. When the traveler reached the rivers which flowed toward the West, he made the rest of the journey on a flatboat, or ark. These were of various kinds, but a common type of / flatboat was forty or fifty feet long and shaped like a raft. It might be entirely covered over for protection against the weather, or it might have only a small cabin. It floated downstream guided by a big oar at the rear. When the traveler reached the end of his journey, he generally used the lumber of which the boat was made in building his cabin. The flatboat was also used for carrying goods down the rivers to such markets as New Orleans. Most of the flatboats were too heavy and awkward to be brought back up the river; but smaller boats would return with molasses, sugar, and coffee, which the settlers on the Ohio and the upper Mississippi wished to buy. The first telegraphic cable from America to Europe was laid in 1858. It broke down after a few days, but it was repaired and has been successfully operated since 1866. Never before had business been so prosperous. Even the government at Washington took in more money than it spent. In spite of the payments to Mexico for land and in spite of the expense of the Mexican War, the amount of the public debt became smaller and smaller. Imports from abroad grew bigger. More banks were started. People were spending more money than ever for clothes. Prices went up. Finally people began living beyond their means. Business men bought more goods than they could pay for and sell. In 1857 there were many failures in business. Banks had to shut their doors. Workmen lost their jobs, and for a year or two there was considerable suffering. Immigration. The twenty-one thousand miles of railroad that were built in the fifties did not build themselves, of course. Laborers had to be found to clear away the trees, to make and lay the ties and rails, and to build the engines, cars, and stations. The demand for workmen became so great that large numbers of immigrants came from abroad, especially from England, Ireland, and Germany. Possibly two and a half million came over between 1850 and 1860, although the exact number is not known. The English immigrants came chiefly because it was so difficult for poor people at that time to earn a living in England. Most of them settled in the North and West. The Germans came partly to earn a better living and partly to escape a tyrannical government in Germany. In 1848 there was a revolution in that country which the government put down. After that a large number of the people left for America. Many of them were farmers and went west to such states as Illinois and Wisconsin. Some of them became prominent citizens and were elected to government offices. At the outset the effect on farming was as bad as it was on manufacturing; for the armies, of course, called away many men from the farms. But then more and more labor-saving machinery was introduced. Bigger and bigger crops were grown. By the end of the war the farmers in the North were producing plenty of food. The effects of the war on the South were more severe. In order to fight the North, the South had to call upon practically all its men, because it had a much smaller population than the North. So the fields had to be tilled and the factories run by the old men, women, and slaves. Hence business did not prosper as it did in the North. The war was fought, for the most part, in the South. The few factories were one by one burned down; the railroads were torn up or worn out; many houses and barns were destroyed. When the war was finally ended, the Southern people were in a pitiable condition. Before the war the South had depended on the slaves to do most of the manual labor. Now the slaves were freed. They did not wish to work, and it was hard to get workmen of any kind. Hence for years after the war it was almost impossible to have work done properly. How the North profited by Immigration. We remember that most of the immigrants who came to America before the Civil War settled in the North. The great advantage of this fact to the North is seen in the number of officers who were born in Europe themselves or whose ancestors were born there. Some were Germans, like Carl Schurz and Franz Sigel; some were of Scotch or of Scotch-Irish descent, like the members of the McCook family, or were sons of Irishmen, like Philip H. Sheridan. Still others had Welsh or French or Spanish ancestors, like Admiral Farragut's father, who was born on the island of Minorca, in the Mediterranean Sea. More things happened in the United States during the thirty-five years between 1865 and 1900 than in any thirtyfive years in our history before 1860. It was a period of great activity. Everything was changing, and changing fast. The speed of railroad trains, for example, greatly increased. People traveled faster and went about more. They had more property, more clothing, a greater variety of food, more amusements, more luxuries — more everything. Before the Civil War most people lived on farms or in small villages. Life was about the same one year that it was the next. But after the Civil War things changed more quickly. Machinery that was the best thing to be found one year might be out of date within a year or two. Styles that were common one year might look strange and out of place the next year. Not all these changes, of course, took place in an instant. Nevertheless the thirtyfive years from 1865 to 1900 were years of rapid change in our United States. 1. What were the Great Changes in Population and Immigration? The rapid changes in population show what was going on. In 1900 there were forty-five states and three territories in the Union. Twenty-eight of these increased their population between 1870 and 1900 by at least half a million each. Thirteen of the twenty-eight received at least a million each. New York, Pennsylvania, Illinois, and Texas, which increased most quickly, each received about two thirds as many new people as there were in the entire United States when Washington became president. All this means that the same inflow of people into the United States that we saw going on in earlier days was taking place after the Civil War. The Immigrants and where they Settled. Many millions of the new people of America were immigrants from foreign countries. When famines occurred in Europe and business was good in America, more immigrants left home for the New World; when business was poor in the United States, then fewer came. Yet large numbers arrived every year, whatever the conditions. The steamship companies advertised widely all over Europe and gave low rates to immigrants in order to stimulate people to come. The following figures give some idea of the part played by immigration in the growth of the United States from 1870 to 1900: the smallest immigration during one year between 1870 and 1900 was 141,857 in 1877; the largest immigration during one year between 1870 and 1900 was 788,992 in 1882. Every year from 1870 to 1900, therefore, immigrants were coming to the United States by the hundred thousand. So great was the stream that by 1900 one third of all the white people in the United States were either foreign-born themselves or had parents one or both of whom were foreigners. For the most part the immigrants did not settle in the South. Many of them settled in the East, especially in the cities. The Irish, for example, frequently found work in the factories of Massachusetts and New York. The Germans went more often to the farms of Illinois, Wisconsin, and other Middle Western states. The Swedes and Norwegians went to Wisconsin, Minnesota, South Dakota, and even farther west, and, like the Germans, took up farming. The Change in Immigration. Besides growing in amount, immigration changed in another respect. Before 1882 most of the immigrants were from Germany, the British Isles, and the Scandinavian peninsula; that is, they came from northern and western Europe. After 1882 they began to come increasingly from Italy, Austria, and Russia; that is, they came from southern and eastern Europe. The great increase in the amount of immigration, and the change in the countries from which most immigrants came, led Congress to pass an immigration law in 1882. This law had two important provisions: Immigrants had to pay a tax when they entered the country. At first this was fifty cents, but later it was increased. Certain objectionable people, such as convicts and insane persons, were forbidden to enter under any conditions whatever. In the same year another law forbade the immigration of Chinese laborers. This law, with some changes, has been in force ever since. Immigration and the Public Land. Besides poor crops abroad, prospering business in America, and the advertising of the steamship companies, there was another reason for immigration. When the Civil War broke out, the United States still had immense amounts of public land in the West. In 1862 Congress decided to give this land to anybody who would settle on it. Hence the Homestead Act was passed. The law provided that a head of a family might claim one hundred and sixty acres; that he must actually occupy it for five years, and then the land became his. The ease with which good land could be obtained in the American West was a great temptation to the poor European farmer who could not pay the cost of a farm at home; hence he looked with longing eyes to America and came when he could. A man who lived in the West at this time said: "Trains swarming with immigrants from every country of the world were haltingly creeping out upon the level lands. Norwegians, Swedes, Danes, Scotchmen, Englishmen, and Russians all mingled in this flood of land-seekers rolling toward the sundown plain." The Immigrant's Part in American Life. The United States has met great dangers through having so many immigrants, but there have been advantages as well. Disadvantages. Sometimes immigrants collected in communities or neighborhoods and lived together without becoming Americans. These did not learn the American language, they did not take any interest in American government, and they did not take up American ways of living. Many of them were unwilling to obey American laws. Many of the immigrants were poor and had no skill in any trade or occupation; therefore they had to accept low wages and live in crowded houses in unhealthful surroundings. Advantages. On the other hand, the work of the immigrants was needed. They did a great share of the work in the cotton and woolen mills, the iron and steel factories, the clothing shops, and other places. About this time many cities were laying sewers and water pipes and paving their streets. Much of this hard work, if not most of it, was done by immigrants. Many immigrants have become useful citizens. Sometimes they or their children have held high offices — have been governors of states, members of the cabinet, and the like. Some have become leading authors, musicians, artists, educators, and business men. 2. How the West Filled Up Migration to the Middle West. The migration to the Middle West, which was noticed before 1860, continued after 1865. Hundreds of thousands of people went to the older states such as Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Kentucky, Tennessee, and to the southern Mississippi Valley. But the new migration went farther west. Iowa, which had been admitted as a state in 1846, increased fast after 1865; so also did Minnesota, Kansas, and Nebraska. A tremendous area of prairie land which had been called Dakota Territory was divided into two parts. These were admitted in 1889 as North Dakota and South Dakota. There was still room for many more people in the West, as most of the states were larger than all New England. North Dakota, for example, was more than eight times as large as Massachusetts, but its population in the year 1900 was scarcely more than half that of Boston. But because the number of people who settled between Missouri and the Rocky Mountains was small, they saw some interesting things which will never be seen again in the United States except in pictures. A View of the Great Plains. The map at page 502 shows the Great Plains. They were bounded on the west by the Rockies, on the north by the Canadian line, on the east by the settled parts of Iowa, Missouri, and Arkansas, and on the south by the settlements in Texas. The size of the plains is hard to imagine even for one who has traveled across them. So big was this unsettled country that if it were stretched out like a long, straight path or highway ten miles wide it would go nearly jour times around the earth. The prairie was a great grass-covered country. It was flat, for the most part, with few trees and not a great many rivers. In the parts where there was plenty of rain the grass was high — reaching to a pony's nose. It was dotted with the yellow of the wild sunflower, the blue of the larkspur, and other wild plants. Where rain was scarce the grass was poorer, and the ground was frequently covered with a dusty gray shrub called sagebrush. In summer the heat was intense; in winter the north winds blew cruelly down across the plains toward Texas. Indians, Buffaloes, Cattlemen, and Cattle. When settlers began to move out on the plains after 1865, they found the Indians already there, having been given land by the government. There were the Sioux in Dakota, the Blackfeet and the Crows in Montana, the Cheyennes in the south, the Navajos in New Mexico and Arizona, and others scattered here and there between. There were also the buffaloes — millions of them. These splendid animals roamed over the plains in huge herds, hundreds of thousands in a herd, munching the grass. The Indians killed them for meat, and used the hides for clothing and for protection from the weather. Here and there, too, were thieves, who made a living by stealing the possessions of travelers who went across the plains in stagecoaches or in wagons or on horseback. In 1863 a railroad was started to run between Omaha and San Francisco. It was finished in 1869, when the last spike was driven near Ogden, in Utah. If we could have crossed the plains in 1865, however, we should have seen something besides Indians, buffaloes, thieves, travelers, and workmen building the railroad. For there were the cattlemen, — the cowboys, — with their herds of cattle and their ponies. And thereby hangs a story. Roaming about on the huge, open plains of Texas and New Mexico were large numbers of wild cattle. 