The present volume represents the newer tendencies in historical writing. Its aim is not to tell over once more the old story in the old way, but to give the emphasis to those factors in our national development which appeal to us as most vital from the standpoint of today. However various may be the advantages of historical study, one of them, and perhaps the most unmistakable, is to explain prevailing conditions and institutions by showing how they have come about. This is our best way of understanding the present and of placing ourselves in a position to participate intelligently in the solution of the great problems of social and political betterment which it is the duty of all of us to face. Dr. Muzzey has not, therefore, tabulated a series of historical occurrences under successive presidential administrations, but has carefully selected the great phases in the development of our country and treated them in a coherent fashion. He has exhibited great skill in so ordering them that they form a continuous narrative which will secure and retain the interest of the student. There is no question at any point of the importance of the topics selected and their relation to our whole complex development. All minor, uncorrelated matters, such as the circumstances attending each colonial plantation, the tactics and casualties of military campaigns, the careers of men of slight influence in high office, are boldly omitted on the ground that they make no permanent impression on the student's mind and serve only to confuse and blur the larger issues. Some special features of the book are its full discussion of the federal power in connection with the Constitution, its emphasis on the westward-moving frontier as the most constant and potent force in our history, and its recognition of the influence of economic factors on our sectional rivalries and political theories. It will be noted that from one fourth to one fifth of the volume deals with the history of our country since the Civil War and Reconstruction. The Reign of "King Cotton" in the South. The wealth of the South seemed even more firm in its foundations and more rapid in its increase. An apparently limitless demand for cotton by the mills of America and Europe encouraged the cultivation of that staple to the neglect of every other form of industry. By 1850 the value of the cotton crop was over $100,000,000 annually, while the rice and sugar crops combined yielded less than $16,000,000. In the same year, of the total of $235,000,000 of exports from the United States, $112,000,000 (or 48 per cent) was in cotton, as against $21,000,000 (or 9 per cent) in grain and provisions. Such a trade naturally led the Southerners to believe that slavery was the basis of the prosperity of the country. " Cotton is king! " they said. "In the 3,000,000 bags of cotton that slave labor annually throws upon the world, we are doing more to advance civilization than all the canting philanthropists of New and Old England will do in a century." Increased Immigration to America. The demand for laborers in the United States, supplemented by various forms of distress in Europe, caused the migration of many thousands of foreigners to our shores in the middle years of the century. The utter ruin of the potato crop in 1845 reduced Ireland to famine, and the revolutions of the famous year 1848 threw central Europe into political turmoil. The Irish and German immigrants sought in America a land of plenty and a refuge for democracy.2 Even distant China, disturbed by war and rebellion, sent some 25,000 of her poverty-stricken laborers to our Pacific coast, where their low standards of living and their strange oriental habits caused economic and social friction. 1 The Southern writers were guilty of two serious errors in their economics: first, in mistaking the great wealth of a few planters for general prosperity; secondly, in thinking that free negro labor was impossible. There were about 75,000 large planters in the South in 1850, out of a population of 5,000,000 whites. Their prosperity was that of w a dominant minority," and was not diffused through all classes as in the North. Again, while the value of the cotton crop in 1850 with slave labor was #105,000,000, in 1880 under free negro labor it was #275,000,000, and in 1910 over #700,000,000. Slave labor produced 2,200,000 bales of cotton in 1850; free labor produced 10,650,000 bales in 1910. 2 American sympathy for the Hungarians, who were fighting for independence from oppressive Austria, was freely expressed. When Austria protested, Daniel Webster, our Secretary of State, in 1850, wrote a defiant letter to the Austrian charg6 at Washington, declaring n the right of the American people to sympathize with the efforts of any nation to acquire liberty." Louis Kossuth, the great Hungarian patriot, visited America as the nation's guest in 1851-1852, but failed to get substantial help for his cause. The Germans tended to move westward and helped to develop the agricultural regions of our country, while the Irish for the most part were content to remain in the cities of the Atlantic coast. From 84,066 in 1840, the immigrants increased to 427,833 in 1854. The Clayton-Bulwer Treaty. It seemed as though no decade of our history could pass without some new cause for ill feeling toward Great Britain. To the perpetual quarrel over the rights of our fishermen off the Newfoundland coast, and the disputes over our northern boundaries, there was added in the middle of the nineteenth century an important controversy in Central America. We had looked forward for years to building a canal cutting the isthmus which connects the two great continents of the Western Hemisphere, and had even made a treaty in 1846 with the Spanish-American republic of New Granada (now Colombia), in which we agreed to keep open to all nations, on the same terms, any canal or railroad built across the Isthmus of Panama. The discovery of gold in California shortly afterwards (1848) set American capitalists, headed by Cornelius Vanderbilt, actively to planning transportation routes across the Isthmus. Here they came into collision with the British, who had a colony in Central America, and were attempting to extend their "protectorate" over miles of the coast. After long negotiations Clayton, our Secretary of State under President Taylor, came to an agreement with the British minister, Sir Henry Lytton Bulwer, in 1850. The Clayton-Bulwer Treaty, which remained in force until the end of the nineteenth century, provided that the United States and Great Britain should jointly guarantee the neutrality of any canal built across the Isthmus. Each government pledged itself not to seek exclusive control over the canal, never to erect any fortifications upon it, or to acquire any colonies in Central America. Each promised that it would extend its protection to any company that should undertake the work of building a canal, and would use its influence with the governments of Central America to give their aid to such a project. Our Interest in Cuba. The most critical incident in our mid-century diplomacy, however, concerned Cuba. That rich island possession of Spain, lying just off our coast, had always been regarded with especial interest by our statesmen. Expansionists had wanted it for the United States: others had been afraid that it might pass. The Centennial Exposition at Philadelphia. The closing year of Grant's presidency (1876) was the centennial of American independence. The event was celebrated by a great world's fair at Philadelphia, the birthplace of the republic. Ten million visitors to the exposition grounds caught the inspiration of the wonderful achievements in science and invention which the years of peace were bringing forth. The Centennial Exposition was a pledge of the recovery of our nation from the political, industrial, and financial difficulties brought on it by the Civil War. Already the rule of the stranger was passing in the Southern states, and a Mississippi congressman had pronounced a eulogy over the body of Charles Sumner, exhorting his fellow countrymen to know one another that they might love one another (1874). Already the United States had passed a law pledging the payment of every dollar of its war debt in the precious metals of gold and silver (1875). Already a national convention had declared in its platform that "the United States of America is a nation, not a mere league" (1876). It had taken a full hundred years and cost a long and bloody war to decide that point. The century had seen the rounding out of our national domain. The railroad ran from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and all the area between had been organized into states or territories. The country was ready for new tasks, and the belted wheels, the giant shafts, the splendid specimen products of the farms, gardens, and wheat fields of the land, and the thousands of drawings and models of new inventions in implements and machinery, which were displayed at the Centennial Exposition of 1876, were all a witness and a prophecy of the new era of industrial expansion on which we were entering. Growth of our Productions, Manufacture, and Trade. Whatever chapter of the census reports we open for the decade following the war, we read the same story. Our coal output increased fivefold and our steel output a hundredfold in the period from 1865 to 1875. The wheat crop in Dakota alone increased from 1000 bushels in i860 to 3,000,000 in 1880, and the corn crop in Kansas from 6,000,000 to over 100,000,000 bushels. When the Civil War opened we were producing about $50,000,000 worth of precious metals annually ; twenty years later the single state of Colorado was taking from its mines over $1,000,000 worth of gold, lead, and silver per month. Nevada, which was a mining camp of less than 7000 inhabitants in i860, had grown by 1870 into a state of the Union with a population of 42,000. In the decade preceding the war the value of our manufactures increased 85 per cent; in the decade following they increased 125 per cent. The year of Hayes's election marks the permanent change in favor of the United States in the statistics of foreign trade. From the middle of the century to 1876 our exports had exceeded our imports in but three years (1857, 1862, 1874); since 1876 there have been but three years (1888, 1889, 1898) in which our imports have exceeded our exports. Our Wealth and Population. The wealth of the country grew from $16,000,000,000 to $43,000,000,000 between 1860 and 1880, and the deposits in our savings banks (the best index of a nation's prosperity) increased 600 per cent. During the same period our population grew from 30,000,000 to 50,000,000, while the liberal homestead laws and the development of the Western railroads attracted an unprecedented number of Irish, German, and Scandinavian immigrants to the fertile farm lands beyond the Mississippi. Between i860 and 1870 Arizona, Colorado, Dakota, Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming were organized as territories, and Kansas, Nebraska, and Nevada were admitted as states of the Union. Edmund Burke, in his famous "Speech on Conciliation with America," delivered in Parliament in 1775, had exclaimed, " Such is the strength with which population shoots in that part of the world that, state the numbers as high as we will, while the dispute continues the exaggeration ends." It seemed in 1875 as though the orator's enthusiastic language of a century earlier were fulfilled in sober fact. Effects of the Industrial Boom. With the recovery from the panic of 1873 our industries entered on a period of unprecedented expansion. New inventions followed each other in rapid succession — the electric light and trolley, the telephone, the phonograph, the bicycle, the typewriter. The elevated railroad began to appear in our cities; through trains to the West were operated with increasingly luxurious equipment; steel bridges were thrown across our rivers. Immigration, which had fallen to 70,000 during the war, almost reached the half-million mark by 1880. More and more the mills and factories, the commercial houses and the big shops, gathered the population into cities. When the first census was taken only 3.4 per cent of our people lived in communities of 8000 or over; by the census of 1880 the proportion had increased to 22.6 per cent. Already organized labor was facing organized capital with the consciousness of its interests as a class. Railway engineers, conductors, and firemen, bricklayers, cigar-makers, ironworkers, were gathered into unions, to oppose capital's "right to own and control labor for its own greedy and selfish ends." The Knights of Labor, a loose federation of workers with the motto "The injury of one is the concern of all," had nearly 150,000 members through the country. The Grangers, or Patrons of Husbandry, championed the cause of the farmer in the West and passed laws in the grain states (notably Wisconsin, Illinois, and Minnesota) regulating the freight rates on the railroads. The miners were demanding shorter hours and higher pay. The Difficult Position of President Hayes. It was high time for our government to have done with the old questions of the war and reconstruction, with petty partisan politics and sectional animosities, and to face seriously the great problems of the new industrial age. None realized this better than President Hayes, but he was hampered at every step. A Democratic House opposed him during his entire administration, and a Democratic Senate also during the last two years of it. For this opposition party he was a " usurper," occupying the seat rightfully belonging to Tilden. Nor was he the choice of the leaders of the Republican party. He had been nominated in the convention of 1876 only because the deadlock between the supporters of Blaine and the supporters of Grant could not be broken. His face appeared in the Democratic press with the word "fraud" written across his brow, while the men of his own party who were still devoted to the methods of " machine politics " sneered at his efforts for reform, called him a "goody-goody," a hypocrite, and a "Granny Hayes." Upright, industrious, and public-spirited, he lacked the genial and winsome traits of character which could conciliate political opponents; and, like John Quincy Adams, he pursued his lonely path of duty, confiding to his diary the rectitude of his conduct. His Excellent Administration. In spite of personal unpopularity, and in the face of political and economic turmoil, Hayes gave the country one of the cleanest and most courageous administrations in its history. He immediately withdrew the Federal troops that were still upholding the negro Republican governments in Louisiana and South Carolina, letting these states revert to the Democratic column. He still further incurred the wrath of the Republican machine by dismissing from their important offices Chester A. Arthur (collector of the port of New York) and Alonzo B. Cornell (naval officer), who with Thomas Platt and Roscoe Conkling made up the "big four" who ruled the politics of New York State. He sent a commission to China to prepare the way for the negotiation of a treaty which would protect the workers of our Pacific coast against the invasion of cheap Mongolian labor.1 He strove earnestly to repair the faith of the nation in the eyes of the Indian tribes of the Far West, wiio had been fed on rotten rations, deceived by false promises, robbed by unscrupulous agents, and goaded into uprisings that had cost our government over $22,000,000 and the lives of nearly 600 men since the Civil War. The Railroad Strikes of 1877. Hayes had been in office but a few months when railroad strikes of unprecedented violence Between 1850 and 1860 the Chinese immigrants to our shores had increased from 10,000 to 40,000. The work on the western end of the Union Pacific Railroad attracted tens of thousands more in the next decade. As these Chinese laborers lived on a few cents a day and were content with dirty quarters and poor food, they were a menace to the American laborer of the Pacific coast, who demanded "four dollars a day and roast beef." Mobs in California and Oregon organized to "run out of town" the Chinese coolies, in spite of the fact that our government, by the Burlingame Treaty of 1868, had guaranteed the Chinese visiting our shores protection in trade, religion, and free travel. In 1879 Congress repealed parts of the Burlingame Treaty, but Hayes vetoed the bill. Finally, through the efforts of the Hayes commission, an arrangement was made with China by which that country agreed to our regulation of labor immigration from her shores. 