                     
For many years, the Company had to struggle with dis-               
couragement and distress. Its pamphlets, urging people to           
buy stock, did not place emphasis on any hope of large divi-        
dends--- as we expect a prospectus of a commercial company to       
do --- but rather on the meanness and “ avarice ” of the man        
who would “ save ” his money instead of using it to extend          
English freedom and the kingdom of God. It was these high           
enthusiasms, far more than it was greed, that brought hundreds      
of the noblest of Englishmen to the rescue of the enterprise.       
So far we have considered only the motives of Englishmen            
who stayed at home, helping there to promote American coloniza-     
tion. Let us look now at the motives of the colonists.              
In 1600, Englishmen needed room. True, the island had               
still only a tenth as many people as to-day; but, as industry was   
carried on in that day, its four millions were more crowded than    
its forty millions are now. For the small farmers, especially,      
life had become very hard ;1 so these yeomen furnished most of      
the manual labor in the early colonies. Few of this class could     
pay the cost of transporting themselves and their families to       
America. Commonly they were glad to bind themselves by              
written indentures to become “ servants ” to some wealthy land-     
owner. That is, these “indentured servants” mortgaged their         
labor for several years ahead, in return for transportation and     
subsistence, and perhaps for a tract of wild land at the end of     
their term.                                                         
Captains a>ul capitalists, also, were needed in Virginia. These     
came from the English gentry class. Until the peace with Spain      
in 1(104, many high-spirited English volunteers had been fighting   
Spain in the Netherlands, for Dutch independence. Other such        
youths were “ gentlemen-adventurers ” who, under leaders like       
Drake, had paralyzed the far-flung domains of New Spain with        
fear. To such men, and to many younger sons of gentry               
families for whom there seemed no career at home, America           
beckoned alluringly as the land of opportunity. The period,         
                                                                    
 1 West's Modern Progress, 182-184.                                
too, like our own, was one of rapid rise in the cost of living;      
and the heads of some old families found themselves unable to        
keep pace with former associates. Some of them preferred the         
chance for leadership in the New World to the certain necessity      
of “ taking in sail ” at home.                                       
None of these “ gentlemen " were used to steady work, and            
they were restive under discipline; so sometimes they drew           
down abuse from strict commanders like the worthy Captain            
John Smith. Still they' were of that “ restless, pushing material    
erf which the world’s best pathfinders have ever been made."         
When they had learned the needs of frontier life, their pluck and    
endurance made them splendid colonists.                              
.Vo doubt, the chief loadstone for most early settlers of all classes
was some wild dream of wealth (Source Book, Nos. 8-9). In            
the first colonies, too, the expectations of sudden riches were      
more extravagant than in later attempts, and led for a time to       
disastrous neglect of the right sort of work. Yet the motive         
was a proper one. It calls for no sneer. In a later century          
the same desire to better one’s condition lured the descendants      
of the first settlers to people the continent from the Appalachians  
to the Golden Gate.                                                  
Moreover, the motive was not mere greed. The y’outh was              
moved by a vision of romance and adventure. He was drawn             
partly by the glitter of gold, but quite as much by the mystery      
of new lands bosomed in the beauty of unknown seas. Best             
of all, these motives of gain and of noble adventure were infused    
with a high patriotism. Englishmen knew that in building their       
own fortunes on that distant frontier, just as truly as when they    
had trod the deck of Drake’s ship, they were widening the jx>wer     
of the little home island.                                           
II. VIRGINIA A PROPRIETARY COLONY: 1607-1624                         
Four points in the Charter of 1606 call for notice:                  
1. The company of stockholders was divided into two sub-             
companies. One of these was made up mainly of Londoners,             
Welcoming the " First Supply ” at Jamestown in the fall of 1607. (The                                     
stockade flag is just visible behind the trees.) For many years the existence                             
of the colony depended on the prompt arrival every few months of a “ sup-                                 
ply.” and the colonists measured time from the ‘’First Supply” or the                                     
“ Third Supply.”                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
           
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
Proclamation by the London Company of a Lottery to raise funds for                                        
Virginia (February 22. 1615).                                                                             
The two sides of the Seal of Virginia are shown in the small squares near the                             
top. Between them are pictured bags of coin, indicating bulk of prizes.                                   
Only the upper part of the broadside is given here --- reduced to about one-                              
eighth the scale of the original. Lotteries long remained a common way of                                 
raising money for religious and charitable purposes in both England and                                   
America. They are still used to-day in some southern European countries.                                  
 SETTLEMENT AT JAMESTOWN                                21             
                                                                        
1607, and planted Jamestown on the banks of a pleasant river            
flowing into the south side of the bay. To avoid Spanish attack         
from the sea, they chose a site thirty miles up the stream. They        
were wearied by tiresome months of ocean travel, with cramped           
quarters, wormy food, and slimy water, and the green valley of          
the “James River” seemed a paradise---with its “faire med-              
dows and goodly tall Trees, with Freshwaters” and its "beau-            
tifull strawberries foure times bigger and better than ours in          
England.”                                                               
But the site of Jamestown was low, and the “faire meddows"              
proved to be fever-breeding swamps. The early years were a              
time of cruel suffering (Source Book, No. 19). Two thirds of            
the settlers perished the first summer, and the “ First Supply,”        
in the fall of 1607, found only 38 survivors. Indeed, for twenty        
years each new immigration lost, on the average, half its members       
the first season!                                                       
During the early years, the colony was one great “ plantation."         
The company of stockholders in England were proprietors.                
They directed the enterprise, selected settlers, appointed officers,    
and furnished transportation, supplies, and capital. The colo-          
nists were employees and servants. They did the work, ---               
cleared forests, built rude forts and towns, and raised crops, ---      
facing disease, famine, and savage warfare. The Council at              
Jamestown were not so much political rulers as industrial               
oxrseers, or housekeepers on a large scale.                             
The products of the settlers' labor went into a common stock.           
Lumber, sassafras, dyestuffs, and potash (from the logs burned          
in making clearings) were shipped to the Company to help pay            
expenses. Grain was kept in storehouses, to be guarded and              
distributed by the Council. Here, too, were kept the supplies           
from England, --- medicines, clothing, furniture, tools, arms and       
ammunition, seeds, stock of all kinds for breeding, and such            
articles of food as meal, bread, butter, cheese, salt, meat, and        
preserved fruits.                                                       
The most interesting figure during the first three years was            
the burly, bustling, bragging, efficient Captain John Smith.            
At Dale’s departure the colonists numbered 351. Of these,                  
65 were women or children, anti nearly 200 were “servants.”                
There were only 81 free men. To each of these Dale had set                 
off a small three-acre garden plot. This was wise --- but it did           
not amount to a change to a system of private industry, as some            
writers say.                                                               
Now a revolution took place in the management of the Lon-                  
don Company. That body had i>een seriously troubled by in-                 
ternal quarrels between opposing factions. In 1618, control                
passed finally to a progressive group led by the /iarZ oj                  
Southampton and Sir Edwin Sandys. These patriots had been                  
struggling gallantly in parliament against King James’ arbitrary           
rule in England;1 and they at once granted a large measure                 
of self-government to the Englishmen in America over whom                  
they themselves had authority. In 1619 this new manage-                    
ment sent out Sir George Yeardley as governor, to begin a                  
new era.                                                                   
With the arrival of Yeardley’s fleet the number of settlers                
was raised to a thousand. They were still mainly indentured                
servants, and were distributed now among eleven petty plan-                
tations. These were mere patches on the vast wilderness about              
them, scattered along a ribbon of territory (nowhere more than             
six miles wide) curving up the James for a hundred miles.                  
Yeardley at once introduced three fundamental reforms.                     
1.  He established private ownership. Each free planter                    
received too acres of land; and each new planter thereafter                
was promised 50 acres for himself and 50 more for each person              
whom he brought with him. (For many years longer, all grants               
were in strips fronting on rivers up which sea-going vessels could         
sail --- since there were no roads but such rivers.)                       
2. Martial law was set aside. Yeardley proclaimed, said a                  
body of settlers, “ that those cruell lawes by which we had soe            
longe been governed were abrogated, and that we were now                   
* West’s Modern Progress tells that story (pages r88-191) and explains also
all other references in this volume to European events.                    
lo be governed by those free lawes which his Majesties subjects           
live under in Englande.”                                                  
3. The settlers received a share in the government. A Repre-              
sentative Assembly was summoned, “ freely to be elected by                
the inhabitants, ... to make and ordaine whatsoever lawes                 
and orders should by them be thought good and profitable.”                
This first Representative Assembly in America met at James-               
town August 9,11619, and followed without hesitation the forms            
of the English parliament.1 Il contained two delegates from               
each of the eleven little settlements. In the same “ house ’’             
with these twenty-two “ Burgesses," however, sat the governor             
and the seven or eight members of his appointed council --- so            
this first Assembly was not purely representative. It passed              
laws against drunkenness, gambling, idleness, absence from                
church, and “excess in apparel,” and it “established” the                 
Church of England in the colony.*                                         
Jury trial and representative self-government were established upon       
■ lasting foundation in America in 1S19, while Virginia was still the only
English colony. These two bulwarks of freedom came as a gift; but         
once pven, the Virginians resisted firmly all later attempts to withdraw  
them. They were not then known in any large country except in Eng-        
land: and they were not to take root in the colonies of any other country 
until more than two hundred years later. Their establishment in Vir-      
ginia made them inevitable in all other English colonies.                 
The new management of the Company bestirred itself to                     
build up the colony on the material side also. To supply the              
labor so much needed, Sandys sought throughout England for                
skilled artisans and farmers, and shipped to Virginia many                
hundred “ servants ” to work for the Company. Several                     
cargoes of young women, too, were induced to go out for wives             
to the free settlers; and supplies of all kinds were poured into          
the colony with a lavish hand.                                            
1 The “Old Style” date was July 30. No. 30 of the Source Book explains    
Old and New Style.                                                        
’The Source Book gives the records almost in full.                        
To be sure, pestilence and hardship continued for a time, and       
in 1622 an Indian massacre left only eight hundred people in        
the colony --- though more than three thousand newcomers had        
landed within three years. But Virginia was soon to become          
prosperous. Two years later there were twelve hundred settlers      
again, distributed among nineteen plantations. The Indians          
had been crushed. The settlers were making fortunes in the          
new business of raising tobacco; and their homes were taking        
on an air of comfort. The period of experiment was past.            
Meanwhile King James had become bitterly hostile toward             
the libera] management of the Company. Sandys had lieen             
prominent in parliament in opposing the king. Indeed he was         
reported to be “ the king’s greatest enemye." An envious            
business associate testified, too, that Sandys had expressed a      
wish “ to make a free popular state [in Virginia] in which the      
people should have noe government putt upon them but by             
their owne consents.”                                               
When Sandys’ term as “ Treasurer ” expired, in 1620, the            
king sent to the “ General Court ” of the Company the names of      
four men from whom he ordered them to elect a new Treasurer.        
The Company (some hundreds of the best gentlemen of England         
present) remonstrated firmly against this interference with free-   
dom of election. So James yielded, exclaiming petulantly,           
“ Choose the Devil, and ye will; only not Sir Edwin Sandys! ”       
Sandys then withdrew his name; and the Company sent a com-          
mittee to his friend, the Earl of Southampton --- who was little    
more to the royal taste --- to inquire whether he would accept      
the office. “ I know the king will be angry,” said the Earl         
to his friends, “ but, so this pious and . . . glorious work be     
encouraged, let the Company do with me as they think g<M>d."        
Then, “ surceasing the ballot,”1 the meeting elected him “ with     
much joy and applause, by erection of hands.” Sandys was            
chosen Deputy Treasurer and remained the real manager. Two          
years later the king failed again in a like attempt. Small wonder   
                                                                    
 • On the customary use of the ballot, see Source Hook, No. 23.    
spent some years in his colony --- only to learn by bitter ex-           
perience that he had been misled cruelly as to its climate and           
wealth.1 Broken in health and fortune, he at last petitioned             
King Charles for a more southerly province. Before the new               
grant was completed, he died; but in 1632 the Charter for                
Maryland was issued to his son, Cecilias Calvert. Two years              
later this second Lord Baltimore sent two hundred settlers there.        
The charter of 1632 provided for representative self-govern-             
ment. It put the head of the Baltimore family in the position,           
practically, of a king over the settlers, but his vast authority         
was limited by one supreme provision (not found in the charter           
to Raleigh). In raising taxes and making laws, the proprietor            
could act only with the advice and consent of an Assembly of the         
freemen or of their representatives. (In Manland this term               
“ freemen ” soon became equivalent to “ landowners.”)                    
This recognition of political rights for the settlers, in a              
royal charter, is an onward step in the history of liberty.              
The creation of the Virginia Assembly, and the devotion of               
the Virginians to it, had borne fruit. Between 1620 and                  
1630, it liecame a settled conviction for all Englishmen (at             
last even for the court circle) that colonization in America             
was possible only upon the basis of self-government.                     
The Assembly soon won more power than king or proprie-                   
tor had meant it to have. The proprietors did not live in the            
colony. They ruled it through goverrfors, whom they appointed            
and dismissed at will and to w’hom they gave such part of their          
own authority as they chose. The governor was assisted by a              
small council, also appointed by the proprietor. This propri-            
etary machinery (governor and council) had been intended to              
be the controlling part of the government; but within twenty             
years, the Assembly became the center of authority.                      
'Source Book, No. 41. Trusting to “summer reports” (page 8),             
Calvert had called this bleak province Avalon---a name in English legend 
for a fairy land “ where never wind blows loudly ” --- and had used other
such names as “ Bay of Flowers " and “ Harbor of Heartsease."            
and all provissions.” The partnership was then to be dis-             
solved, and the common property divided.                              
The arrangement was clumsy, because it involved a system              
of labor in common, but it was generous toward the settlers.          
Penniless immigrants at Jamestown became “ servants ” (as             
friendless individuals) to work for seven years under overseers       
and at the end of the time to receive merely a little wild land.      
The penniless Pilgrims were “ servants ” for a time, in a sense;      
but only as one large body, and to a company of which they            
themselves were part. Their persons were controlled, and their        
labors directed, by officers chosen by themselves from their own      
number.                                                               
Two heart-breaking years had dragged along in these nego-             
tiations, and the season of 1620 was far wasted when (Sep-            
tember 16) the Mayflower at last set sail. Most of the congre-        
gation stayed at Leyden, with their aged pastor, to await the         
outcome of this first expedition. Only the more robust em-            
barked for the venture. The Mayflower carried 102 colonists,          
but more than half of them were “strangers” from London               
and its neighborhood. Among these recruits were such worthy           
spirits as Miles Standish and John Alden.                             
The immigrants meant to settle “ in the northern part of              
Virginia.” (See the map facing page 35.) But the little vessel        
was tossed by the autumn storms until the captain lost his            
reckoning; and they made land, after ten weeks, on the bleak          
shore of New England, already in the clutch of winter (Novem-         
ber 21). The tempestuous season, and the dangerous shoals off         
Cape Cod, made it unwise to continue the voyage. For some             
weeks they explored the coast in small boats, and finally decided     
to make their home at a place which an English map had already        
christened Plymouth.                                                  
Before landing, they adopted the Mayflower Compact. A                 
charter from the Virginia Company had provided that they              
should be “governed by officers of their own choosing.”1 The          
1 We know this from a passage in Pastor Robinson’s “ Farewell Ixtter ”
{Source Book, No. 4$). No copy of the charter is preserved.           
Commercial Beginnings. --- Many groups of English mer-         
chants were engaged in the New England fisheries, and some     
of them had tried to establish stations on the coast. One      
London group finally became incorporated as The Company for    
Massachusetts Bay. In 1628 this Company bought from the        
New England Council the territory between the Charles and      
Merrimac rivers (extending “ from ocean to ocean "), and       
during the summer it sent out sixty colonists under John Endi- 
(ott (a well-known Puritan gentleman) to a station near Cape   
Ann. A few “ old settlers ” whom Endicott found there were     
at first inclined to dispute his authority, but finally they   
recognized him peaceably as head of the settlement --- to which
accordingly he gave the Hebrew name Salem (Peace).             
A year later (March 14, 1629) the Massachusetts Company        
secured a charter from King Charles. At the time thia “ First  
Charter of Massachusetts Bay" was merely’' a grant to the      
proprietary company in England. It confirmed their title to    
the land they had bought from the New England Council, and     
it gave them authority over settlers, similar to the authority 
possessed by other colonizing companies in England.            
The Company now busied itself in collecting supplies of all    
sorts and in seeking out emigrants of various trades. In May   
of 1620 it sent out its second expedition, of some two hundred 
¡settlers, led by Francis Higginson, a Puritan minister. Soon  
after, a Puritan church was organized in Salem.                
                              47                               
Accordingly, the more dauntless of the English Puritans                  
turned their eyes to the New World. At Plymouth they saw                 
a colony of Separatists, not large, but safely past the stage of         
experiment. Close by was the prosperous beginning of the                 
Massachusetts commercial colony, controlled by a Puritan                 
company in England and managed on the spot by well-known                 
Puritans like Endicott and Higginson. How natural to try to              
convert Massachusetts into a refuge for Low-Church Puritanism,           
such as Plymouth already was for “ Puritans of the Separation.”          
But the leaders of this new movement had no idea of becom-               
ing part of a mere plantation governed by a distant proprietary          
company, however friendly. They were of the landowning                   
aristocracy of England,----justices of their counties, and, on           
occasion, members of parliament. August 25, a number of them             
gathered, by long horseback journeys, and signed the famous              
Cambridge Agreement (Source Hook, No. 58), promising one                 
another solemnly that they would embark for Massachusetts                
with their families and fortunes, if they could find a way to take       
with them the charter and the “ whole government.”                       
A proposal to transfer the government to America had been                
made a month earlier, at the July meeting of the Company in              
England. The plan was novel to most of the members, and it               
threatened them with financial loss; but in September, after             
long debates, it was approved?                                           
The new men of the Cambridge Agreement now bought slock ;                
many old stockholders drew out ; the old officers resigned (since        
they were not among those who wished to emigrate); and                   
John Winthrop, the most prominent of the new men, was                    
elected “governor.” The next spring. Winthrop led to Mas-                
sachusetts a great Puritan migration --- the most remarkable             
colonizing expedition the world had ever seen. For the first             
[time, too, a proprietary’ corporation removed to its colony.            
¡Indeed colony and corporation merged. Massachusetts became              
u “ corporate colony ” --- and a Puritan commonwealth.                   
I ‘The transfer of the charter is treated in the Source Book, No. 53, and
kommrnts. Sec also Nos. 54. 59.                                          
In May, 1629, Endicott had a hundred settlers at .Salem. In        
June, when Higginson arrived with two hundred more, another        
settlement was begun at Charlestown. The next winter killed        
a third of the colonists. Four fifths of the rest were “ servants ”
of the Company. In June of 1630, Winthrop found them de-           
moralized anil starving, and he gave them their liberty, rather    
than take responsibility for feeding them from his scanty stores.  
But in that summer, seventeen ships (counting Winthrop's           
twelve) brought two thousand new settlers. Then six new            
towns were started --- Boston, Dorchester, Watertown, Roxbury,     
Lynn (or Saugus), and Newtown --- which later became Cam-          
bridge. (Map facing page 71.)                                      
But the immigrants of 1630 found conditions sadly different        
from their expectations. Two hundred returned home in the          
same ships that had brought them over, and two hundred more        
died before December. Immediately on his arrival, in fear of       
famine before the next summer, Winthrop wisely hurried back        
a ship for more supplies. Its prompt return, in February, was      
all that saved the colony.                                         
Meantime the deserters spread discouraging stories in Eng-         
land --- so that emigration to Massachusetts ceased for two        
years. In 1633, however, it began again. Soon the famous           
ship-money troubles in England 1 gave it new impetus, and it       
went on, al the average volume of three thousand people a          
year, until the reforming Long Parliament met in 1640?             
Thus the eleven years of “ No Parliament ” (page 48) saw           
twenty-five thousand selected Englishmen planted in New England.   
This was the “ Great Migration ” of 1629 1640. In that list        
year the movement stopped short. Says Winthrop, “ The              
parliament in England setting upon a general reformation both      
in church and state . . . this caused all men to stay in England,  
in expectation of a New World ” there. Indeed, the migration       
turned the other way, and many of the best of the New England      
Puritans hurried back to the old home now that there was a         
chance to fight for their principles again in England itself. (A   
1 West's Modern Progress, 19S ÍT.                                  
From 1620 to 1640, quarrels between king and parliament had kept         
the English government from paying much attention to what went on        
in the colonies. In 1641 those quarrels grew into civil war. Parlia-     
ment and Oliver Cromwell defeated the king and beheaded him, and,        
from 1649 to 1660, ruled over England. This Puritan government was       
called the Commonwealth. It had a tenderness for the Puritan colonies,   
and it did not last long enough anyway to interfere seriously in American
affairs. In 1660 came the Restoration: weary of Cromwell’s military      
rule, the English people called to the throne Charles II, son of the dead
Charles I. The government of the Restoration at once showed a warm       
interest in colonial affairs.                                            
                 I. EXPANSION BY CONQUEST AND BY GROWTH                  
The years 1660 1690 saw a tremendous expansion of colonial               
territory. In 1660 the English held two patches of coast --- one         
about the Chesapeake, the other east of the Hudson --- with a            
total population of about 60,000. The two districts were sepa-           
rated by hundreds of miles of wilderness, in which two small dots        
might mark a little Dutch settlement on the Hudson and a                 
few hundred Swedes at the mouth of the Delaware. For more                
than twenty years, no new English colony had been founded.               
Thirty years later (1690) the English colonies formed an                 
unbroken band from the Penobscot to the Savannah. To the south           
of Virginia the Carolinas had been added (1663) ; to the north           
of Maryland appeared the splendid colony of Pennsylvania                 
(1681); while New York, New Jersey, and Delaware had become              
English by conquest. All the colonies, too, had broadened their          
                                   76                                    
During the years 1649-1660 (page 76), many of the defeated         
royalist gentry in England turned their faces toward the New       
World --- as the Puritans had done in their hour of gloom a gen-   
eration earlier. At the Restoration, the royalists who were still  
in England expected to get back the lands they had lost; but       
large numl>ers were disappointed in this hope, and the move-       
ment to America then received a further impulse. Nearly all        
this emigration went to Virginia. Between 1650 and 1670 the        
population of that colony rose from 15,000 to 40,000.              
This migration made Virginia “ the Land of the Cavaliers.”         
It brought the Harrisons, Lees, Masons, Madisons, Marshalls,       
Monroes, Nelsons, Nicholases. Pages, Peytons, Pendletons,          
Randolphs, Wythes, Washingtons, and other gentry families,         
soon to become famous in the “ Old Dominion.” Virginia had         
already had a noble history; but it was this Cavalier migra-       
tion which, a century later, flowered into her splendid galaxy’    
of Revolutionary patriots, and, a little later still, justified her
in her proud title “ Mother of Presidents."                        
The party epithets, Cavalier and Roundhead, should not             
blind us to the close likeness between the gentry elements in      
Massachusetts and Virginia. The Cavaliers were less inclined       
to strike out new ways in church and state than the Puritan        
leaders were; but they were not graceless hangers-on of the        
court, as enemies pictured them. Most of them were high-           
minded gentlemen, who had loved liberty only a degree less         
than they had feared anarchy --- robust, dauntless, chivalrous,    
devout. They belonged to the same social class and had much        
the same habits of thought as the Winthrops and Hutchinsons        
of the Bay Colony and as the Hampdens and Eliots in England        
--- with whom, indeed, they had stood shoulder to shoulder         
through a generation of constitutional struggle and from whom      
they had separated at last with mutual grief, when the great       
war came, dividing brother from brother.                           
Still, for a time, this immigration caused bad government.         
I. The people of Dutch New Netherland had had no seff-               
I government. They were ruled arbitrarily by a “Director             
■ General," who (with his council) was responsible only to the       
I Dutch proprietary' company or to the government in Holland.        
I There were a number of great landlords (palroons) in the colony ;  
I and, in local affairs, each patroon had great authority over the   
■ villages of settlers on his lands.                                 
I Settlers from Connecticut had established four English towns       
I on Long Island which afterwards passed under the rule of New       
I Netherland. In 1653 a meeting of representatives from various      
I parts of the colony was held, to demand some self-government.      
I r/«s meeting was inspired by those English towns, and their        
I delegates controlled it. Its “ remonstrance ” was drawn in the     
I English language, and the signatures are largely English names.    
I The Dutch governor, Stuyvesanl, in explaining the matter to        
■ the authorities in Holland, wrote: “ It ought to be remembered     
■ that the Englishmen, who are the authors and leaders in these      
■innovations, enjoy more privileges than the Exemptions of New       
■Netherland grant to any Hollander.”                                 
I Before true representative government grew out of this agi-        
■ ution.tame the English conquest of New Amsterdam in 1664.          
■King Charles gave most of the conquered province to his brother     
Duke of York, for whom it was renamed. The inhab-                    
Biants were mainly non-English; and, as a conquered people,          
■they had no constitutional claim to political rights. Ac-           
cordingly, the charter to James said nothing of any share by         
■hr people in the government. James, however, found himself          
Bhhged to satisfy the Long Island towns by promising them            
Ctivdeges “ equal to those in the New England colonies,”             
in 1682, it proved necessary to introduce a representative           
■taembly for the colony.                                             
■!. Pennsylvania belongs with Rhode Island and Maryland in           
I fte group of colonies that stood especially for religious free-   
■ los. The Quakers, or Friends, of all the new religious sects       
M> the seventeenth century’, were most offensive to church and       
government in European lands. They *' swore not at all,” not      
even to take the oath of allegiance to a king. As pacifists,      
they would not serve in the army. Believing all men equal         
“ in the sight of God,” they refused to doff their broad-         
brimmed hats even to royalty. Their “inner voices,” too,          
often inspired them to interrupt magistrates rudely (page 80).    
Many Quakers had sought to find homes in English America;         
but, except in Rhode Island, they had met with treatment at       
 least as harsh as they were                                     
 seeking to escape. Finally                                      
                                                                 
                                                                 
 some leaders among them                                         
 decided to set up a colony                                      
 of their own. For that                                          
 purpose they bought part                                        
 of New Jersey from the                                          
 English proprietors (page                                       
 qo). One of those leaders                                       
 was IIrilliam Penn, son of                                      
 a wealthy English admiral                                       
 who had become famous                                           
 some years before by con-                                       
 quering Jamaica from Hol-                                       
 land. While a student at                                        
 Oxford, the young Penn                                          
 had risked his prospects by                                     
 joining the despised Quak-                                      
 ers, but, happily, his father                                   
 did not disinherit him.                                         
Penn had in mind to try out what he called “ a Holy Ex-           
periment.” This, he decided, called for a larger and freer field  
than little New Jersey. Accordingly (in consideration of a large  
debt due his father from the king) he secured a large grant of    
wild territory stretching westward from the Swedish settlements   
on the Delaware---which were also included in the grant but       
under a separate government. King Charles pleasantly insisted     
on naming the wild district “Penn’s Woods,” or Pennsylvania.      
country." So he surrendered most of his own powers to the       
colonists themselves --- in the famous Charter of 1701, which he
gave them. This grant remained the constitution of the colony   
until 1776.                                                     
The people chose a one-house legislature each year, to meet     
at a date fixed by the charier. This Assembly (like those in    
Connecticut and Rhode Island) could be dissolved or adjourned   
only by its own vote; but the governor (appointed by the pro-   
prietor) could veto its acts. Freedom of conscience was guaran- 
teed to all who believed in “ one Almighty God ”; and the       
right to vote was given to all who accepted Christ as “ the     
Savior of the World ” and who owned 50 acres of land or £ 50    
of personal property. (During the eighteenth century, Penn-     
sylvania was the only English colony where Catholics could      
vote. Even Rhode Island disfranchised them in 1719.)            
on the south. Settlers in such new districts were always repeating        
the hard and dangerous experiences of the first comers to America.        
Growth was not so exclusively from immigration as before, but             
• it was largely so still. The 250,000 colonists of 1690 (page 77)        
had half of them been bom in Europe. In the next seventy                  
years the population increased sixfold --- to 1,600,000 in 1760.          
Only a third of these had been born in the Old World.                     
Non-English elements appeared in large numbers. The                       
largest one element came from unhappy South Germany. The                  
rulers there were driving out their Protestant subjects, and in           
the wars of Louis XIV the victorious French armies completed              
the ruin.                                                                 
The survivors of persecution by their rulers and of devastation           
by invaders began to arrive in .America about 1690. They                  
settled mainly in New York and the Carolinas and especially               
in Pennsylvania --- where many of their quaint Old World cus-             
toms survive, almost unchanged, among the “ Pennsylvania                  
Dutch ” of to-day. To this colony alone came more than                    
ioo.ooo German Protestants between 1700 and 1775.1 * * * * * * * *        
A small but highly valuable contribution to American blood,               
due likewise to religious persecution, was made by the Huguenots          
(French Protestants), driven from their homes by the perse-               
cution of Louis XIV. They7 came mainly to the Carolinas;                  
but some settled in New England, New York, and Virginia.                  
The names Paul Revere, Peter Faneuil, and James Bowdoin                   
suggest the sendees of their sons in Massachusetts.                       
More important even than the German immigration, and                      
next to it in numbers, was the coming of the Scotch-Irish                 
during these same seventy years. These men were really                    
neither Scotch nor Irish, but Saxon English, though there                 
had been some mixture with Celtic blood both in Scotland and              
1 It is easy to be misled by these impressive figures. Before 1700 the    
original 25,000 Puritan settlers of 1640 had multiplied to some 150,000 or
175,000, and by 1760 to at least 750,000. So, too, of the 40,000 Virginia 
settlers of 1670. Moreover, New England and Virginia, before 1700, had    
already shaped in large measure the course of future colonial growth.     
 Ireland. For centuries their fathers had lived in the Low-                                               
 lands of Scotland as frontiersmen against the Celtic Scots of                                            
 the Highlands. In the reigns of Elizabeth and James they                                                 
 had colonized northeastern Ireland,---frontiersmen against the                                           
 Catholic and' Celtic Irish.                                                                              
But after 1690 English                                                                                    
                                                                                                          
navigation laws (page 101)                                                                                
crushed their linen manu-                                                                                 
factures, the chief basis of                                                                              
their prosperity. English                                                                                 
laws against the Irish                                                                                    
i Catholics bore heavily                                                                                  
also upon these Presby-                                                                                   
I terian “dissenters” in                                                                                  
 Ireland. So, about 1700,                                                                                 
 with hearts embittered                                                                                   
 toward England, they be-                                                                                 
 gan once more to seek                                                                                    
 new homes,--- this time in                                                                               
 America.                                                                                                 
 To understand the im-                                                                                    
 portance of the Scotch-                                                                                  
 Irish in American history,                                                                               
 we must turn to the ap-                                                                                  
 pearance of a new “ West ”                                                                               
 in this same period. The                                                                                 
 colonics had always had                                                                                  
                        frontier, but now first the frontier became a distinct section                   
 in American life.                                                                                        
                                     Ow first frontier was the tide-water region, reaching fifty          
                                                                                                          
 efe, perhaps, up navigable streams. But by 1660, in places,                                              
■rttlement was growing fairly dense, and towns had arisen at                                              
|he mouths of rivers and on good harbors --- Boston, Portsmouth,                                          
Providence, New Haven, New York, and Baltimore.1                                                          
By that time, however, a second thin frontier had pushed          
farther up the streams, about a hundred miles, to the foothills   
of the Appalachians. Water-power was abundant there, and          
during the second half-century (or by about 1700), a new.line     
of towns grew up at the “fall line” --- Pittsfield,Trenton, Rich- 
mond, Raleigh, Columbia. (Identify all these on your maps.)       
So far, the moving frontier had always kept in touch with         
settled areas, but just beyond this “ fall line ” rose rugged,    
forest-clad mountains. By 1770, hunters and pioneer farm-         
ers were pushing over the first range of these into the long, nar-
row, north-and-south valleys that lay between the Alleghenies     
and the Blue Ridge. Here appeared our third frontier --- with a   
hundred miles of tangled wilderness between it and the nearest    
outposts of the settled areas. For these pioneers to bring sup-   
plies from the East, or to send back products in trade, was       
as hard as for the first settlers on the coast to trade with      
England.                                                          
Here, then, began our first true “ West and the dominant          
element among its settlers was this new American type, the        
Scotch-Irish. They came to America mainly through the ports       
of Philadelphia in the north and Charleston in the south.         
Many stopped in the settled areas; but a steady stream passed     
on directly to the mountains and over them. Reaching the          
Appalachian valleys in the far north and south, the two currents  
drifted toward each other, until they met in the Shenandoah       
Valley in western Virginia. Thence, just before the American      
Revolution, under leaders like Boone and Robertson (whose         
stories we shall read soon), they l>egan to break through the     
western wall, to make a fourth frontier at the western foothills  
and even farther west, in what we now call Kentucky and           
Tennessee.                                                        
They were hard, dogged farmers and reckless fighters and          
hunters---tall and sinewy of frame, saturnine, restless, dauntless
of temper. Other immigrants to the New World had forced           
themselves into the wilderness, for high reasons, with gallant    
                   resolution, against natural inclination. Bui these men loved the                    
                   vild, and its independent life, for itself. Unorganized and un-                     
                                                                                                       
                   captained, armed only with ax and rifle (in the use of which                        
                   weapons they have never Iteen equaled), they rejoiced grimly in                     
                   their task of subduing a continent. First of American colo-                         
                   nists, too, did they face away from the Old World in their thought,                 
                   and begin to look west toward the glorious destiny of the new                       
                   continent.                                                                          
                   These “ Scotch-Irish ’’ English of the West rank, in our early nation-              
                   making, alongside the Cavaliers of Virginia and the Puritans of New                 
                   England. Until about 1850 they were the typical American frontiersmen,              
                   especially in the middle West and Southwest. They have furnished,                   
                   too, many leaders to our national life, --- Andrew Jackson and “ Stone-             
                   wall" Jackson, Horace Greeley, Jefferson Davis, Patrick Henry,                      
                   William McKinley, and Woodrow Wilson.                                               
                                                                  II. THE CONQUEST OF NEW FRANCE       
                                                                                                       
                                    From 1689 to 1763, with only short pauses to take breath,         
                   France and England wrestled for the splendid prize of the Mis-                     
                   sissippi valley. This struggle with the French and their dreaded                   
                   Red allies made a somber background for all other movements                        
■in the English colonies. It was not for a moment to be forgotten                                     
■by the daring frontiersman shifting his home for better and                                          
■cheaju-r land, or by the Assembly man wrangling with a royal                                         
                   tuvemor for larger self-government.                                                
I For the most part the campaigns were fought in Europe; but                                          
Jat bottom the conflict was not settled on the battlefield. Two                                       
■kinds of colonization were at war; and the English system had                                        
B»t only made more populous colonies but had also made them                                           
Bnore interested in defending themselves (pages 6, 7). True, the                                      
Bespotic French governor could wield all the resources of New                                         
^fiance (though this advantage was offset in part by the official                                     
 femiption that always threatens such a system), while, among                                         
 ■he English, dissensions lie tween colony and colony many times                                      
 fest dear. But in the long run the despotic governor proved no                                       
 ■uAk for a self-governing people. Had the French ever suc-                                           
 feeded in seizing Boston (as they hoped to do), they could never                                     
just explained. No coins were struck in the colonies, except for                  
the “ Pine-Tree Shilling ” of Massachusetts (page 81); and there                  
were no banks, to issue currency. Trade was largely carried oh                    
not by money, but by barter; and in all colonies, especially in                   
the first century, debts were settled and taxes were paid in                      
produce (“ pay ”) at a rate for each kind fixed by law.                           
Wages and salaries were paid in the same way. Toward the                          
end of the colonial period the accounts of Harvard show that                      
a student, afterward president of the college, paid his tuition                   
with “ an old cow ” --- which had to be accepted at the same                      
value as a young and good cow. The following record of a vote                     
by a Plymouth town meeting in 1667 hints, too, at the difficulty                  
of getting “ good pay ” in such a method : ---                                    
“That the sume of fifty pounds shalbee alowed to Mr. Cotton [the min-             
ister! for this present yeare (and his wood). To be raised by way of Rate         
¡assessed as a tax] to be payed in such as god gives, ever onety to be minded that
a considerable parte oj it shalbec payed in the best pay."                        
In the need of a “ circulating medium ” (especially during the                    
French and Indian Wars, when the governments needed funds),                       
nearly all the colonies at some time after 1690 issued paper                      
money. The matter was always badly handled, and great                             
depreciation followed, with serious confusion to business. In                     
consequence, the English government finally forbade any more                      
such issues, to the great vexation of many debtors in America.                    
9. The deep-lying differences between the three great sec-                        
tions of colonial America were mirrored in certain external fea-                  
tures of their homes.                                                             
The South had few towns. Ordinary planters lived in white                         
frame houses, each with its long porch in front, often in park-                   
iike grounds, set at intervals of a mile or more apart. The                       
small class of wealthy planters lived on vaster estates, separated                
from neighbors by grander distances. In any case, a true                          
“plantation,” like a medieval manor, was a unit, apart from                       
the rest of the world. The planter’s importations from Europe                     
were unloaded at his own wharf, and his tobacco (with that                        
ginning of the War of 1812). English sea captains, angered at             
such protection to their deserters, searched American merchant            
ships, and seized not only former deserters but also other                
English-born sailors who had been legally “ naturalized ” in the          
United States. Indeed, either by mistake or of set purpose,               
they sometimes impressed our American-born citizens.                      
England denied the right of an Englishman to change his allegiance.       
" Once an Englishman, always an Englishman ” was an ancient maxim.        
The American contention that a man had a right to change his citizen-     
ship by naturalization marked an advance for freedom and civilization.    
It has come to be generally accepted.                                     
The “right of search " exists. In time of war, a war vessel of either     
power may stop and search a neutral trading vessel to find out            
: whether it really is a neutral vessel as its flag proclaims; (1) whether
it is bound for any blockaded port; (3) whether it carries “ contra-      
bind." If “ strong presumption ” is found against the vessel on any       
of these points, it may be carried to a “ prize court," for trial; and if 
there adjudged guilty, it becomes “ lawful prize.” But the right of       
search must always be exercised with discretion and without unduly        
embarrassing neutral trade, and, it is now agreed, it never extends to    
seizing people.                                                           
All these invasions of our neutral rights were attempted by               
other European belligerents also; but England's navy was the              
only one able to injure us seriously. In the spring of 1794, as           
scores of American vessels with valuable cargoes were swept into          
British prize courts, American feeling rose to war heat. But in           
rise disregard of popular feeling, Washington appointed John              
Jay special envoy to negotiate with England; and in November,             
1794. “Jay's Treaty ” was ready for ratification.                         
Impressment was not mentioned nor blockade defined. Eng-                  
lund had her way, too, as to contraband and neutral ships carry-          
ing an enemy’s goods; but she vacated the Northwest Posts,                
dropped her claims regarding compensation to exiled Tories, and           
paid American citizens for her recent seizures of ships and goods         
it sea (some six million dollars when the claims were all in). The        
United States dropped its claim for payment for the Negroes               
that had been carried to freedom in the British fleet in 1783,            
and agreed to pay out of its own treasury the pre-Revolutionary           
“ alien and sedition ” laws, repressive, tyrannical, dangerous      
to the spirit of free institutions.                                 
Aliens had been required to live in the United States five years    
before they could be naturalized: a new Naturalization act          
raised this perial to fourteen years. An Alien law authorized       
the President, without trial,' to order out of the country “ any    
aliens he shall judge dangerous to the peace and safety of the      
United States,” and, if they remained, to imprison them “ so        
long as, in the opinion of the President, the public safety may     
require.” The Sedition law provided fine and imprisonment           
for “ combining ” to oppose measures of the government, and         
for “any false, scandalous, or malicious writing against the        
government ” or against its high officials, " with intent to bring  
them into disrepute.’ This law' is in direct conflict with the      
First amendment to the Constitution.                                
President Adams took no part in securing these laws; ami he         
made no use of the Alien act. But Federalist judges showed a        
sinister disposition to stifle criticism of their political party by
securing convictions under the Sedition law. Mathew Lyon, a         
Vermont editor, charged Adams with “ unbounded thirst for           
ridiculous pomp and for foolish adulation ” and with “ selfish      
avarice.” For these words, he was punished by imprisonment          
for four months and by a fine of Siooo. (Federalist officials       
made the imprisonment particularly brutal, even for that age;       
and the fine was ruinous for a country editor.) Nine other con-     
victions followed in the few months remaining of Federalist rule.   
The Republicans threatened to call upon the State govern-           
ments for protection. Throughout the South and West, mass           
meetings denounced the acts, and the legislatures of Virginia       
and Kentucky (in a rather vague way, to be sure) suggested          
Nullification as the proper remedy.                                 
in his presence while it was read to him. But from the first,                  
Jefferson held communication with Congress only in writing and                 
without unnecessary formality. (In 1913 Woodrow Wilson                         
restored the personal speech to Congress, but without any aris-                
tocratic or monarchic ceremony.) In matters of hospitality at                  
the White House, too, Jefferson discarded the elaborate and                    
courtly ceremonial of his predecessors in favor of what the                    
shocked European diplomats called a “ j»ell mell ” style.                     
Not much legal reform was necessary. The Alien and Sedi-                       
tion acts (enacted for two years only) had expired. The Repub-                 
licans did repeal the fourteen-year Naturalization law (page 250),             
all internal revenue taxes (the whisky tax, house tax, and stamp               
duties), and the partisan Judiciary Act that the Federalists had               
hurried through in 1801 after their defeat at the polls.                       
                                                                               
The Federalists charged that this last repeal was unconstitutional and         
that the Republicans had dragged die judiciary into politics! To prevent       
the Federalist Supreme Court from interfering with the repeal, another law     
idjnurned the sittings of that body for some months --- and the matter never   
came before a court for decision. There was a nice question. Congress is       
forbidden by the Constitution to decrease the salary of a judge or to dismiss  
him 'except by impeachment). Can it then take salary and office from a         
somber of judges by abolishing a court ?                                       
                                                                               
The debt had never l>een decreased by the Federalists, and                     
the war flurry of 1798 had raised it, through new loans, to                    
$83,000,000, with an interest charge each year of $3,500,000.                  
One of Jefferson's dearest hopes was to abolish the national debt.             
He and Gallatin (his brilliant Secretary’ of the Treasury *)                   
planned to get rid of half of it in eight years. The army was cut              
to ;ooo men; most of the war vessels were docked; and every                    
saving possible in any other department was rigidly enforced.                  
In 1803 the purchase of Louisiana added $15,000,000 to the                     
debt, and war with the Barbary’ Pirates compelled more military                
[expense. The giving up of internal taxes, too, had greatly                    
                                                                                        (1815 1840)     
                                                                                                        
                                        AU Ike Past we leave behind;                                    
                          H’r debouch upon a newer, mightier world, varied world;                       
                          Fresh and strong the world we seize --- world of labor and the march ---      
                          Pioneers! ‘O Pioneers! --- Walt Whitman.                                      
                                                                               CHAPTER XXVIII           
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                                        THE WESTWARD MARCH AFTER THE WAR                                
                                                                    I. FROM 1815 TO 1830                
                                                                                                        
                In 1800, we have seen, the West had a half-million people.                             
 Without new immigrants, that numlier might have increased                                             
 by 1820 to a million. But actually, by 1820, the population                                           
 of the West had become two and a half millions --- because a                                          
Jaidiion and a half of Easterners had moved west in those twenty                                       
1}tare --- most of them near the close of the period. The West                                         
■then had a full quarter of the total population --- instead of the                                    
■mere tenth it had had in i<8oo.*                                                                      
I From 1815 to 1821, more than ever before, the westward                                               
[stream was due to industrial depression in the seaboard dis-                                          
tricts. With the return of peace in Europe, New England                                                
■tipping lost permanently its monopoly of the world’s carrying                                         
B'Cf page 256 and maps facing pages 242, 255. Until 1840, this West-                                   
j® growth was due in only small degree to European immigration.                                        
the Revolution until after 1815, Europe sent us only four or five                                       
■rwhí immigrants a year (and most of these remained near the sca-                                       
Bud) In 1817 the number rose at a bound to 22,000; but the ten years                                    
■22-1830 brought only 200,000. The census of 1830 found only 10,000                                     
■k oi the Appalachians.                                                                                 
American flag in the City of Mexico would never be hauled                   
down. But Polk, wisely moderate, tpok (and paid for) only                   
what he had offered to buy before he began the war.                         
Almost at once, however, it was discovered that the best                    
route from Texas to California (the old Spanish Trail from                  
Santa Fe to San Diego) lay south of the American acquisitions.              
So in 1853 James Gadsden, representing the United States,                   
bought from Mexico for ten million dollars another small ces-               
sion south of the Gila.                                                     
This Gadsden Purchase was our last expansion before the                     
overthrow of slavery; but it was not the last attempt by                    
the Slave Power. Proslavery men had long looked cov-                        
etously at Cuba. Polk offered Sjtain a hundred million                      
dollars for the island, but the Spanish government de-                      
clared bluntly that it would rather see the island sunk in the              
sea. Then, Southern leaders began to advocate forcible                      
seizure.1 This piratical doctrine was set forth with par-                   
ticular emphasis in 1854 in the famous Ostend Manifesto,                    
a document published in Europe by a group of leading                        
American diplomats there. Among these was James Bu-                         
chanan, who became President in 1857 and at once re-                        
newed attempts to buy Cuba and also to secure slave                         
territory in Central America.                                               
11. FREEDOM OR SLAVERY FOR NEW TERRITORY                                    
Population increased in the decade t.840 -1850 from seven-                  
teen to twenty-three millions. Immigration from Europe had                  
now begun in earnest. Until 1845, no one year had brought                   
’In 1851 the Ljpcz "filibusters." five hundred strong, sailed from New      
Orleans to invade Cuba. This, and other like attempts upon Central Amer-    
ica, may well be presented in special reports. It is to be kept in mind that
«hatever the motives of the statesmen at Washington, the filibusters them-  
tclves and the Southern people back oí them were impelled largely by the    
indent land hunger and the spirit of conquest and adventure which had       
brought their ancestors to Virginia and had sent their brothels to Texas.   
100,000 immigrants (page 307). That year brought 114,000;                   
1847 (during the Irish famine*) brought 235,000; and 1849                   
(after the European “ year of revolution ” 2) brought almost                
300,000. This tremendous current, once started, continued                   
unabated to the Civil War. It still came almost wholly from                 
the northern European countries, and most of the immigrants                 
were sturdy laboring men. In the main they avoided the South                
with its slave labor; but Southern railroads were built largely             
by Irish immigrants, and some of these finally settled in South-            
ern cities.                                                                 
Florida became a State in 1845 ; but Slavery*» gain in the                  
Senate through the addition of that State and of Texas was                  
balanced by the admission of Iowa (1846) and Wisconsin (1848).              
In the lower House of Congress the fifteen free Stales now had              
nearly a half more members than the fifteen Slave States.                   
This situation gave especial importance to the question whether             
slavery or freedom should control the new territory acquired from           
Mexico. As soon as the war with Mexico began, the President                 
had asked Congress for a grant of two million dollars to enable             
him to negotiate to advantage. To this “ Two-Million-Dollar                 
Hill" in the House of Representatives, David Wilmot, a Penn-                
sylvania Democrat, secured an amendment providing that                      
slavery should never exist in any territory (outside Texas) to be so        
acquired. Northwestern Democrats voted almost solidly for                   
this Wilmot Proviso, partly from real reluctance to see slavery             
extended, partly to punish Polk and the Slave Power for “be-                
traying ” the Northwest in the Oregon matter. The session                   
expired (August, 1846) before a vote was reached in the Senate.             
In the next session the Proviso again passed the lower House,               
but was voted down in the Senate, where the Slave Power had                 
now rallied. Then (February, 1848) Calhoun presented a                      
neu> Southern program in a set of resolutions affirming that,               
since the territories were the common domain of all the States, * 5         
1 Modern Progress, 388. 1 reland sent us a million immigrants in four years.
5 lb., 405. The German fugitives, in particular, made a notable addition    
to the forces of liberty in America.                                        
 After the discovery of gold in California (and with the open-           
 ing of these prospects of Oriental trade) the question of trans-        
 portation across the Isthmus of Panama arose. Great Britain             
 and the United States each tried to secure routes for a canal           
 from ocean to ocean; but in 1850 the Clayton-Bulwer treaty              
 agreed that any canal across those narrow lands should be neu-          
 tral, and subject to common control by the two countries. In 1855       
 a railway was opened across the Isthmus, and regular steamship          
 lines were established to connect its ends with New York and            
 San Francisco; but the journey by that route remained long and          
 formidable. Steamship travel as yet was neither commodious              
 nor swift.                                                              
       The ambitious project of a transcontinental railway, too, was    
 agitated constantly after 1850. Still, for almost twenty years         
 more, nearly all real immigrants to the Pacific coast districts        
 had to continue to travel the two thousand miles from the Mis-         
 sissippi in trains of covered wagons along the Oregon-California       
 Trail (cuts facing page 501). In the later fifties, however, the       
 Wells-Fargo Company established relays of heavily armed                
 stage coaches over that route, so that government officials and        
 wealthy travelers could make the trip from St. Joseph in Mis-          
 souri to the coast in twenty-five days (instead of three months).      
 Important mail, at the rate of five dollars for a thin letter          
 sheet, was carried even more swiftly --- in ten days --- by the        
 daring riders of the “ Pony Express.” Then in 1861, encour-            
 aged by the prospect of a government subsidy, the Western              
I Union finally carried a telegraph line across the mountains to        
San Francisco.                                                          
I The Oregon and Mexican cessions of 1846-1848 had doubled               
I our territory once more, giving us a total area of more than three     
I million square miles. Between 1840 and 1860 our population,            
I too, had nearly doubled, rising from 16| million to 314 million ---    
I making a larger nation than any then found in Europe except            
■ Russia, This rapid increase was due, far more than at                  
■ any earlier time in the century, to European immigration               
(page 395). In i860 a sixth of all our people were foreign       
born, and in some Northern States nearly half were European      
immigrants.                                                      
Population continued to shift from country to city, ^specially   
in the Northeast. (Study the maps facing 242, 255, 309.) In      
i860 we had 158 cities of eight thousand people and up, or four  
times as many as in 1840 (page 321). The cities now con-         
tained one man in six of the population --- instead of one in    
twelve, as in 1840, or one in twenty, as in tSoo. Nine cities had
reached the 100,000 mark, and New York was approaching a         
million. In 1840, Chicago had only 5000 people (page 322),       
living in cheap wooden houses along unpaved streets; by i860     
it had 109,000.                                                  
The cities of i860 were still large towns gone to seed from      
rapid growth. They were unplanned, ugly, filthy, poorly          
policed; and the larger ones were run by corrupt “ rings ” of    
politicians, who maintained their power by unblushing fraud.     
Still there had appeared some improvements. Business streets     
were paved, and lighted with gas; the water supply was much      
belter than in the towns of thirty years before; and streetcar   
lines were installed (the cars drawn along rails by horses).     
Boston led in the introduction of public sewers, in 1823. New    
York’s “ Croton Water ” (brought in by a great engineering       
enterprise in 1842) was long a by-word for excellence. In 1852   
New York introduced a uniformed and disciplined “ Metropol-      
itan police,” as London had done earlier, and other places were  
following that example. The invention of the steam fire-engine   
in 1853 led promptly to the organizing of paid and trained fire  
companies, and promised better protection against devastating    
fires. In 1858 New York set aside a thousand acres for her       
“ Central Park.” Until then (except for two or three open        
spaces) the only city parks had been chance survivals of old     
village grazing grounds, as with the Boston Common.              
The westward movement of the population, too, continued          
without sign of abatement. The admission of a free California    
in 185a, followed by Minnesota in 1858 and Oregon in 1859        
                                IV. NEW AMERICANS                                 
I looked toward the United Stales with eager eyes kindled by the fire of ambition,
ui heart quickened with new-born hope. I approached its gales with great          
I afectaiion. --- "The Immigrant," speaking through Frederick Haskin.             
One great factor in our growth of population after 1865, and                      
in the swift settlement of the West, was the increase of immigra-                 
tion. That movement had been checked by the war ; but 1865                        
I brought us more than a quarter of a million European settlers                   
I (three fourths of them from the British Isles and Germany),                     
I and the next year brought 318,000. In 1883 this rising flood                    
I swept 700,000 new citizens to our shores, and in 1905, more                     
than a million! The census of 1910 showed one third of our       
White population foreign-bom or bom of foreign parents.          
While our resources still seemed inexhaustible, America wel-     
comed these newcomers warmly and indeed sought them              
eagerly. Many a State set up a “ Bureau of Immigration,” to      
secure its share of the enriching stream, and advertised its par-
ticular advantages by lavish distribution of pamphlets (not      
always modest) in European lands. Steamships and railways        
made it easier for immigrants to come than in older days, and    
our Homestead policy made it easy for them to get farms. Our     
best advertisers, too, were the immigrants themselves, who       
wrote back to their old homes about the splendid openings they   
found here --- so that sometimes whole villages migrated from    
the Old World to the New. The world had never seen such a        
tremendous movement of populations as that migration to this     
Western “ Land of Opportunity.” During the first thirty-five     
years after the Civil War (1865-1900) 13,260,000 Europeans       
sought homes in the United States, --- four times the population 
of the country of which George Washington was President          
In late years the immigrant has come to be a problem.            
Until 1890, immigration remained mainly like that before the     
Civil War--- with some increase from Scandinavian lands.         
But after that time, more and more, our immigrants came from     
the lands of Southern and Eastern Europe --- Italians, Russian   
Jews, Bohemians, Poles, Hungarians, Slovaks. (Until the          
World War, the Jews were being persecuted cruelly in Russia;     
and Poland, Bohemia, and other smaller Slav provinces were       
oppressed subject lands of Russia or Austria, whence the         
inhabitants looked with fine hope to this “ Land of Freedom.”)   
A large part of these immigrants from Southern Europe            
were unskilled workmen, illiterate (even in their own languages),
and accustomed to a standard of living lower than that of        
workers in America. Moreover, since 1890, the newcomer has       
had little chance at a “ free ” farm. Instead he has usually     
been forced to seek a home in some “ foreign quarter ” of one    
of our large cities or factory towns, or in the coal-mining dis- 
tríete, with little more contact with the wholesome sides of                 
American life than he had in his European home.                              
As early as 1882, Congress began to pass “ Exclusion Acts ”                  
to shut out especially undesirable immigrants --- anarchists,                
convicts, idiots, lunatics, paujjers, and finally (1917) illiterates.        
A long struggle, too, was waged over “ contract labor.” Mine                 
owners and large manufacturers had long been sending agents                  
to Europe to hire cheap workers, paying their passage to America             
after requiring them to sign contracts to work for low wages.                
American labor found that this practice was forcing down Us                  
wages also, --- to a point that threatened its chance to keep up             
decent homes; and in 1885 the labor unions persuaded Congress                
to forbid all importation of contract labor.                                 
Immigration fell off during the World War because European                   
countries kept their man-power at home. Then in 1919 war-                    
stricken Europe prepared to pour her millions upon us more                   
swiftly than ever before. The peace, however, found industry                 
demoralized even in America, where, in 1921, five million men                
were seeking work. Congress accordingly began to pass a new                  
kind of Exclusion Acts,' limiting the number of immigrants                   
who might enter this country in any one year and apportioning                
that number among the different European countries in the                    
proportion in which they have previously sent us citizens. The               
law of 1924 permits a total of only 150,000 a year.                          
Oriental labor has been wholly excluded. The Union Pacific (1865-            
iSóo liegan the importation of Chinese coolies to do the heavy work in       
building its line westward through the Rockies. These immigrants             
continued to be welcome in the early seventies for the like toil in build-   
ing other transcontinental railroads. But as White laborers became           
note numerous in the West they objected vehemently to this Oriental          
taimigration (especially during the long depression that followed the        
[Ptnic of 1873; page 554). A Chinaman lived and saved on wages on            
wbkh no Irish or German immigrant could possibly keep up a home in           
the fashion of his class by American or even by European standards.          
Besdes. the Chinaman almost always looked forward to returning to            
 bis Asiatic home with his savings, after a term of years.                  
1 Accordingly our first exclusion law (188a) shut out Chinese labor.         
I For many years a like result was reached as to Japanese labor by a         
“ gentleman's agreement" between the United States and Japan,                              
whereby Japan promised herself to keep her laborers from coming to our                     
shores. But when Congress enacted our immigration law of 1954,                             
it insisted on expressly forbidding all Oriental immigration --- against                   
earnest and repeated recommendations from President Coolidge. This                         
incident added regrettably to bad feeling in Japan toward the United                       
States.                                                                                    
                               V. A NEW AGE OF INVENTION                                   
                                                                                           
                  Men, my brothers, men Ike workers! Ever reaping something new!           
                  That whieh they have done but earnest of the things that they shall do.  
                                                                            --- Tennyson.  
                                                                                           
In 1876 the nation celebrated the hundredth anniversary of                                 
the Declaration of Independence by a huge Centennial Ex-                                   
                                position at Philadelphia.                                 
                                Three million Americans                                   
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                from all partsof thecountry                               
                                visited Philadelphia that                                 
                                summer, and their new ex-                                 
                                periences there contributed                               
                                mightily to a quickening of                               
                                our intellectual and esthetic                             
                                and industrial life. A large                              
                                number of recent epoch-                                   
                                making inventions were dis-                               
                                played at the Exposition                                  
                                --- such as the Bell tele-                                
                                phone, slill in its toy stage,                            
                                and the fourteen hundred                                  
                                horsepower Corliss engine,                                
                                outrunning all previous                                   
                                dreams of mechanical                                      
                                power.                                                    
During the next few years the Age of Steam gave way to                                     
an Age of Electricity. The young Edison, “ the most versatile                              
inventor in history,” * was already experimenting with the                                 
                                                                                           
 1 Edison took out 727 patents for new inventions between 1870 and 1900.                   
other “ irreconcilables ”) asserted that the Republican         
victory’ was a repudiation of the League. Harding’s suc-        
cessors, Calvin Coolidge and Herbert Hoover, were equally       
non-committal in regard to the League, although when            
Hoover was elected, friends of the League hoped that he         
would urge our entry. In 1934 his successor, Franklin           
D. Roosevelt, said definitely that we would not join the        
League, though continuing to cooperate with it.                 
                II. DOMESTIC AFFAIRS SINCE 1920                 
For twelve years after 1920 the Republicans remained in         
power. The last two years of Wilson's administration had been   
a period of reaction, and in spite of the country’s great need, 
little constructive legislation had been secured. The same was  
true of the Harding administration. The Republicans had         
overwhelming majorities in Congress; but they’ had won with-    
out promising any’ constructive program, merely by criticizing  
“ Wilson policies.” To be sure, emergency tariff and immigra-   
tion measures were hastily passed; a budget system was          
adopted for national finances; some aid was given the farmers   
(page 672); but on the whole the tremendous problems of         
sudden readjustment to a peace basis were left to solve them-   
selves.                                                         
The war-stimulated prosperity was now succeeded by wide-        
spread industrial depression. The Federal Reserve did help to   
prevent a true panic, although many hundreds of small banks     
closed their doors. Farmers who had had to use the highest      
priced machinery and farm labor that America had ever seen      
when they planted their crops in 1920, received next to nothing 
for their harvest. Their mortgaged farms were soon passing      
rapidly into the hands of banks and loan companies. Europe      
was no longer buying American wheat. Her demobilized armies     
were back on the land --- and besides she had no wealth left    
wherewith to purchase. Farmers, in consequence, were unable     
to replace outworn machinery, or to pay for other factory goods.
So the slump reached swiftly into other lines of industry. The  
