HISTORY of the United States In a series of four voyages he explored many islands of the West Indies and twice sighted the coast of the American mainland; but till his dying day he supposed that all these lands were outlying parts of Asia. His service, however, lies not in exploration of the Americas but in charting a route across the Atlantic at a time when Europe wanted such a route; and for that feat the name of Columbus is likely to be remembered as long as western civilization and the American continents endure. European interest in America. From what we know of the Indians it is plain that a fruitful land does not of itself compel people to live up to its opportunities. Its history will depend upon the desires and the character of the people who inhabit it. When America was discovered by the restless, energetic people of Europe, who were anxious to control nature and to get more and more out of what the world offered, men of many different characteristics were brought together. Many Europeans turned their eyes to America, for various reasons. They saw here chances for adventure, easy wealth, and later for freedom from economic and religious oppression. The race to assert political control over it began with its discovery. Exploration is a kind of scientific research, an attempt to find new facts and relate them to each other, but it is also a means of acquiring new national territory. Explorers usually claimed the places they found for the nations which sent them out, but this was after all, often merely a verbal or written assertion. What finally determined political control was the people, the men and women who came to the new lands to live, to become Americans. Therefore the history of colonization occupies a most important place in the quest for understanding of our national characteristics. Why come to our country?—Love of adventure.—The people of western Europe in 1600 knew about as much of America as most of us now know' of Central Asia. However, they were more interested in it, and they read in Hakluyt's Voyages and other tales of travel some things that were true and some that were not. The accounts they read stirred the imaginations of many. The long and dangerous voyage and the uncertainties of a wiki new country were challenges to the adventurous. Some people came because of the very uncertainty, enticed by the joy of exploration. The United States has always had a large element of adventurers, restless and looking for something new. Economic reasons.—Some came, as was the case in Virginia, in the hope of making a speedy fortune by discovering gold or some other valuable which could be secured with little effort. Most of them were disappointed; some returned home, but some stayed and gained such livelihood as t hey could. Some rich merchants and younger sons of noble families came in order lo establish great landed estates which would give them wealth and rank. Such men were the Dutch patroons, who secured land on the Hudson, some of it still held by their descendants. Such also were many of the planters of Virginia, Maryland, and South Carolina. Some men came, among them fishermen of Dorchester, England, who in 1623 made a settlement at Cape Ann, in Massachusetts. Today a codfish hangs in the Massachusetts State House, in memory of the importance of the fisheries of the early days Forced settlers.—In the earliest days the population would have grown hut slowly had only those who were attracted to America come over. Many were forced to come. The Virginia Company secured permission to bring children from the workhouses. These unfortunates were apprenticed for twenty-one years. They had a very poor start to life, and it is possible that from them have descended many of our unsuccessful fellow citizens. Many convicts also were sent over, bound to serve a term of years, and then to be free. This was not so bad a source of population as it might seem, for many things were contrary to the law in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries that are not so today. Many people were, in fact, imprisoned for political and religious offenses which really indicated coinage and independence of mind, and these were most desirable settlers. Again, Cromwell sent over to New England and Virginia some thousands of Scotch prisoners taken in battle, and they too were a solid and valuable contribution to our colonial population. The most numerous of those who were brought to our country by force were the Negro slaves. The first came in 1619, but it was nearly a century before their number was great. About 1725 a regular and profitable traffic developed, which continued to grow until the Revolution and was not entirely discontinued until 1808. During this period (1700-1808) probably half a million Negroes were brought to America. Most of them were sold in the colonies south of the Mason and Dixon line, as the southern boundary of Pennsylvania is called, but during the colonial period slavery was legal in all the colonies, and slaves were held in all. America as a refuge.—Desire to come to America, and force, were not the only reasons that caused people to cross the Atlantic. In more cases the reason was rather the necessity or desirability of leaving Europe. This is illustrated by the experience of one little group living, about 1600, in or near the village of Scrooby in the central part of England. The story of these Pilgrims' journeys to Holland and thence to Plymouth in search of a chance to live the kind of social and religious life which their consciences required is known to all Americans. The persecutions of the Quakers in England and the idealism of William Penn led to the founding of Philadelphia. Maryland became a haven of peace for people of various creeds besides the Roman Catholics, who first sought religious freedom there. Spanish Colonization. -As Spain was the first in exploration, so Spain led the way in colonization. Spanish culture was planted in nearly half of America's sixteen million square miles: the Spanish language, religion as the Sjianiards practiced it, Spanish lawT, the traditions of Spanish literature and art, habits and manners, fashions and ideals. Spaniards occupied most of South America (except Brazil), Central America, Mexico, and most of the West Indies, including Cuba, Puerto Rico, and Dominican Republic and pushed into the southern The Spanish fort at St. Augustine. Our Country a Land of Immigrants The stream of immigration to America.—The real history of the United States is to be found in the story of the people who settled here. During the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries and the early years of the twentieth century a steadily increasing stream of homeseekers came to America, impelled by high dreams, by religious, economic, and social conditions, by the distresses of war, and by the sufferings of famine. It is with this stream of settlers, and with the adjustments which the settlers and their descendants made in their lives in this new land, that American history deals. Religious sects, similar to that of the Pilgrims, all known by the general title of Puritan, found England uncomfortable between 1620 and 1640, and had much to do with the settlement of New England. Catholics, equally oppressed, began the settlement of Maryland in 1634. Between 1649 and 1660 the Puritans were in control in England, and members of the former ruling party, the Cavaliers, came to Virginia. In the last half of the seventeenth century it was particularly the Quakers who were abused, and they came in great numbers to Rhode Island, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. The revocation of the Edict of Nantes (nanIs) in 1685 sent French Protestants, the Huguenots, scattering over the world, and many of them came to America. Early in the eighteenth century wars devastated the Rhine country and thousands of "Palatine" Germans fled to Holland and England, from which they were assisted to cross to America. William Penn welcomed great numbers to his new colony of Pennsylvania. During the middle of the eighteenth century economic conditions were very bad in Ireland, both for the Irish and for the descendants of the Scotch immigrants established there a century before, called Scotch-Irish. By this time it had become a business to transport people across the Atlantic, and by the thousands the dissatisfied Irish and Scotch-Irish sold out their belongings and migrated to America. In the nineteenth century conditions of ocean travel were much improved and the stream of migration continued, though settlers came now to an independent United States instead of to a group of European colonies. In 1838 the first ship crossed the Atlantic under steam power. Soon regular lines were making quick trips to various ports of the United States from Great Britain, Germany, and France, and a little later from the Scandinavian countries and the countries around the Mediterranean Sea. The character of American life changed, too, and there came to be a demand for laborers by the hundred thousand to build railroads and to work in mines and factories. States owning land advertised for settlers; employers advertised for laborers, and steamship companies for passengers. In the 1850's the stream of immigration reached nearly half a million a year. In the early years of the twentieth century it often exceeded a million. Home lands of the Americans.—Immigration to the British colonies that are now part of the United States had been chiefly from England, the German states, the Netherlands, and France. As the stream of emigration grew larger it was fed from wider and wider territories. In the 1840's a famine in Ireland started a movement which has given the United Stales an Irish population much larger than that remaining in Ireland. In the middle of the nineteenth century great groups of Germans came. Norwegians, Swedes, and Danes began to arrive in great numbers at the close of the Civil War. In the 1880's Italians began to come. The impulse spread farther, and in the 1890's Hungarians and Russians came to work in the mines and in the cities. Hundreds of thousands of Jews from Russia, Rumania, and other countries began about the same time to seek the United States. Few streams once started ceased to flow, and by the end of the century the United States was drawing settlers from all of Europe and from western Asia. What our ancestors brought from Europe.—It is incorrect to speak of the life which these immigrants lived as a thoroughly new culture. The colonists brought with them much that was old. They brought with them the history of Europe, that is, the experience which the people of Europe had gained, the things they had invented, the ideas they had acquired. When the immigrants arrived they were rich in the inheritance of thousands of years of human development. The first colonists brought with them a system of law and political institutions which had been steadily worked out in England during five or six centuries before settlement began here. The system took root in the United States and has been developing here ever since. The Indians, won over by Captain John Smith, were at first friendly and helpful to the colonists. When they found, however, that the cultivated fields of their new neighbors drove away the game on which they lived and that they were being treated as inferiors, they determined to drive the white men out. In 1622 and 1644. under Powhatan's brother, they attempted to do so, but were overcome in war, and after 1O44 ceased to be a real power in Virginia. How Plantations Grew Up and Were Extended Tobacco. -The smoking of tobacco had been introduced to Europeans by Sir Walter Raleigh, and rapidly became popular. Tobacco was very difficult to get, however, and was very expensive. The Virginians, therefore, were delighted with Rolfe's discovery that they could grow tobacco with ease and sell it for a good price. Tobacco soon became their staple product. That is, instead of making everything they needed, they began to grow tobacco, to sell it in England, and to buy from England other things they needed. Of course tobacco was not the only thing they raised, but it was the chief crop they sold, and with the profits they bought most manufactured articles. Tobacco growing, therefore, became their chief interest. Labor. To grow tobacco required long hours of labor in the hot sun. White men coming over from England for this purpose often sickened and died, and others tired of it. If, however, a man had a little capital to start with, he could secure a few laborers to do the work, and have time to enjoy the large profits. The laborers were of several kinds. First, there were bound laborers who sold seven years of their fives in return for their passage to America, hoping after that to secure their freedom and make homes for themselves. 'Then there were young children, chiefly taken from the English poorhouses, whose services were sold for a long term of years. Many convicts, too, and prisoners of war were sold for varying numbers of years. All these three classes of laborers became free in time. Few remained with their masters after securing freedom, 'The abler became, in time, masters themselves. The weaker went into the pine barrens and eked out a miserable livelihood on the poor sandy land. A fourth class of laborers was the Negro. They were brought over from Africa as slaves and eventually became laborers forever, with no day. He was a scientist and discovered many important things about American wild life. When his father died in 1704, he found himself rich and important. He gave up his father's trade and devoted himself to politics and to his land. He owned a great deal of untilled land which he held for speculation, and a well-organized plantation at Westover on the James River. On this he built a beautiful brick house, which he furnished splendidly, like the country houses of England, with fine silver, portraits, and particularly a library of the best literature of the day. Here he entertained his friends with witty and wise conversation concerning the politics of Virginia and of the British Empire, and concerning art, literature, and philosophy. He wrote very charming accounts of American life. He died in 1744 and most of his property went to his eldest son, the third William Byrd. There were now several plantations belonging to the estate, but they were producing less, and this William was not so rich as his father. When he died the laws of primogeniture and entail had been repealed. Most of his property went to his widow, and when she died, in 1814, it was divided among his children. After this division none of them could afford to live in the old family mansion, which had to be sold. Some slaves or servants were blacksmiths, The Negro women spun yarn under the direction of the mistress. The children of the master's family were often educated by a tutor who lived with them, until the boys were old enough to go to college in England, or to William and Mary, at Williamsburg. Sometimes several near-by planters would join together in hiring a teacher or two for all their children. Governor Berkeley's famous statement that he thanked God there were no schools or printing presses in Virginia did not faithfully represent the facts. There were a number of privately endowed and semi-public schools, although not for many years could there be developed a public school system like that of New England. The House of Burgesses did provide as early as 1646, for the sake of the children sent over from England as indentured servants, that they should be brought up in "good breeding and in good and useful trades," and treated kindly. Not for many years was any real effort made to educate Negroes. Long-distance shopping.—Much of the land was left idle, but several great fields were laid out for tobacco. Here the slaves worked in gangs under the direction of an overseer. When the crop was ripe, it was harvested, cured, anti packed. From the plantation it was shipped direct to the master's agent in England. With it went a list of nearly everything the plantation would need from the outside world during I he following year, 'There are still in existence many of these long lists, ordering plows, table china, carriages, wine, books, and fine clothes for the family. Careful directions were given to tailors and dressmakers; but the clothes must often have fitted badly without the chance of trying them on. Even wigs were thus ordered, and George Washington in his old age secured his false teeth in the same way. As one never knew how much the tobacco would sell for, or how much the things ordered would cost, it was impossible to calculate closely; and as the planters were often careless about money, they were frequently in debt to their agents. Social life.—The slaves worked long hours, had none of these foreign luxuries, and were uneducated. They were, however, a merry race, for they had no responsibilities. They had a real gift for music and sang at their work, and after it, songs which they had heard or which they made for themselves. The planter's family lived a comfortable life, with plenty of servants, with many luxuries and beautiful things about them. Time hung a little heavy on their hands. The young men hunted, the girls rode, and their ciders read and talked and went into politics. Most of the books they read were written for adults and imported from England. Good company was always welcome, and house parties lasting for weeks were frequent. Associating thus pleasantly with their equals, the Virginians came to be noted for their charming manners. Surrounded at home by their inferiors, some became tyrannical, but the majority were considerate and thoughtful of those dependent on them. The parish.—On Sunday the family went to the parish church, the ladies in the family coach, the men on horseback. After service most of the congregation loitered to chat in the churchyard, but a few of the most important men stayed in the church to talk business. These were the parish vestry. The vestry consisted of eight or ten planters who, when one of their number died, elected his successor, generally his son. They attended not only to the affairs of the church, but of the district in which it lay; for the parish was the smallest unit of local government. There was, however, little for them to do, as there was no public education and the planters took care of the poor on their own plantations and even kept up most of the roads and bridges. The county court.—All the planters judged cases between their slaves and punished the guilty. Some were appointed as justices of the peace by the governor and judged small cases among the neighboring whites. For more important cases, a number of neighboring justices of the peace, especially appointed by the governor, sat together, as a county court. The county was made up of several parishes. The county courthouse was often a dignified though simple building. Near it there was generally a tavern for the accommodation of the justices and the lawyers who appeared in court. The county court was a very important body, for it not only acted as a court, but governed the county as well. The county court voted taxes, saw to it that the vestries did their duty, and in fact attended to most of the local government. Elections.—The meeting of the county court was often a gay social event, especially when there was to be an election for the House of Burgesses. Two wealthy planters would run against each other. They would entertain freely all those who had a right to vote, that is, those who owned fifty or more acres of land, and would make speeches to the assembled electors, for no one could vote unless personally present. When the election came, the supporters of the two candidates divided into two crowds, and were counted. The governor's council.—Some of the older and richer planters were appointed by the governor to he his council. This lady advised him in his work; but as he was appointed from England and they were native Virginians, they often differed with him as to policies. The council also sat as an upper house of the legislature (the lower house being the House of Burgesses), and out of it grew our idea of a senate. The Irish.—There had been Irish immigrants from the beginning, and into almost all the colonies. The Carrolls of Maryland were the most prominent Irish family. In the seventeenth century the severe English restrictions on Irish industry, together with the improvement in transportation across the Atlantic, brought a growing stream. Irish and Scotch in America.—Pennsylvania was the colony that seemed most attractive to both Presbyterian Scotch-Irish and Irish Catholics, and during the sixty years after 1715 they arrived at Philadelphia by the thousands. With them came other Scotch directly from Scotland, from both the lowlands and the highlands. They found the near-by land of the Delaware Valley taken up by Quakers and other earlier immigrants. The Susquehanna to the west was largely in the hands of the Pennsylvania Dutch. These new' immigrants, therefore, pushed still farther on into the mountains, where they came by 1760 to be the most important element of the population. With their long experience in hardship at home, the Irish and Scotch fitted easily into the life of the frontier. They took at once their place in the vanguard of the frontier advance. The Frontiersmen and Their Contribution to Democracy What the frontiersmen lost and kept.—By 1760 the mountain valleys from Pennsylvania to Georgia had become occupied. Their population was drawn from many stocks. Nowhere else in America had people dropped off so much of their European training; nowhere else were all living a life so simple, or with so few differences among individuals or families. It is quite wrong to suppose, however, that they had lost the effects of civilization because they did not have the material things, the frame houses, the schools, and roads, that civilization produces. Most of them regarded their kind of life as merely temporary. They submitted to privations in order that they might acquire a better place in life than they could hope for in older communities. Deeply ingrained in them were the fine fruits of civilized esperience. They lived not very differently from savages, but there were thousands of years of spiritual development between them and the real savages of the woods about them. They retained the power to look far ahead in time, to plan carefully and execute their plans diligently. Men with the fine and gentle traits of Lincoln were not uncommon. On the frontier some of the unnecessary frills of civilization were lost forever, but the essentials remained. On the frontier civilization was camping out until a new home was built. The frontier and the colonies.—The frontier mountain region was not a colony by itself. The charters of several of the colonies on the coast gave them all the territory westward between their north and south boundary lines. The northern portion of the Appalachian frontier was in Pennsylvania. Here the frontiersmen, who hated and feared the Indians, were always at odds with the Quakers, who did not wish to vote money or men for Indian wars. A small part of the frontier lay in Maryland and a much greater portion in Virginia. Virginia did more for frontier defense than did Pennsylvania, and there was better feeling between the two parts of the colony. In the first place, let us take up the facts that made union easy, in case people wanted it. And first, it was of the greatest importance that the great majority were alike in race. We have no very accurate information, but an approximate idea of the racial distribution is given by the census of 1790; for the racial projections of the whites did not change very much between 1760 and 1790. Judged by the names of the people in the census, about eighty-two per cent of the while population came from England and Wales. Seven per cent came from Scotland and Scotch Ireland, and in every colony except Pennsylvania and New York the Scotch were second in numbers. Five and a half per cent came from Germany; and the great majority of the Germans lived in Pennsylvania, where they were second in numbers. Two and a half per cent were Dutch, living mostly in New York, where they were second in numbers. The Irish were about two per cent, and the French less than one [>cr cent, and both were widely scattered through the colonies. There was, then, a very great deal of racial resemblance among the Americans in 1760, for the Germans and the Dutch were racially much like the English and Scotch. A substantial majority of the colonists, moreover, came from the British Isles, and had the same political habits, together with memories of the same history. Blending of races.—Since 1790 many other races have come to America and become part of our people. It does not require any particular kind of blood to make an American. It would, however, have been harder, and have taken a longer time, to create an American l>eople in the first place, had there been greater racial differences, and particularly had the different races settled in separate districts. This is shown, for instance, by the history of the French settlements. The Huguenots coming to English colonies and scattering up and down the coast, became at once American. But French Canada has never cared to join us and remains distinct from English-speaking Canada; and the small French community in Louisiana remained a long time separate in laws and social relations, even after it was annexed to the United States. Language. —Still more important, was the fact that nearly all Americans spoke the same language. The only communities that did 'not speak English were those of the Germans in Pennsylvania and the Dutch in New York, and in these districts the leading people spoke English as well as their own language. There are nations, parts of which speak different languages, such as Belgium and Switzerland, but generally national boundaries follow language lines even more closely than they do racial lines. It is possible that high-school students of today would find it difficult to understand many of the Americans of 1760. The number of educated persons was not very great, and even among them there were greater differences in speech according to locality than there are today. There was little slang, and what there was, was not our slang. The country people in most regions spoke dialects, using different words and pronunciations. Some kept words that had dropped out of use among the educated who followed English practice, and they added others taken from the Indians, the Negroes, the Scotch, Dutch, French, and even Spaniards. Language grows and changes like everything else, and no standard of spelling was vet established. Dr. Samuel Johnson, indeed, had brought out his great dictionary, but few Americans used it. It was only in the next generation that Noah Webster's Spelling Hook began to fix standards for Americans to follow. Outside New England hardly half the people could read. This did not mean that they were stupid, but only that they had not had an opportunity to learn. Beginnings of an educational system.—Public education in the United States arose from the Puritan idea that every person must work out his own religious views by reading the Bible. If all were to learn to read there was need of schools. Since all citizens of the colony were, in the beginning, church members, it seemed natural to let the colonial government look after the schools. When new religious groups moved in, this practice had become a custom and was not disturbed. In 1647 the General Court (that is, legislature) of Massachusetts Bay passed a law requiring towns of fifty families to have an elementary scbool and towns of a hundred families to have a Latin Grammar School, and thus began our present system of public schools. The Industrial Revolution and migration to America.—Many people who thus found their means of livelihood taken away in Europe, looked to America. In addition, there were many others who were dissatisfied with the political and the religious conditions about them, and looked to the United Stales as a land of liberty and promise. Particularly in 1830 and in 1848, there were great revolutions in Europe, which were generally unsuccessful, and many of the defeated liberals sought refuge and opportunity in the United Stales. As the means of transportation across the ocean improved, and particularly after the introduction of steamships, the population from Europe became greater year by year, the number was so great that the United States government began to count them. In that year there were about 20,000, in 1850 about 400,000. At first they came mostly from England and Scotland. At the end of the period the Germans had become most numerous, while French-Canadians, Scandinavians, Belgians, and in fact all the peoples of western Europe had sent forerunners. These newcomers were able to find jobs in the United States, and promoted our growth. The Erie Canal required many unskilled day laborers, and after that throughout the period from 1825 to i860 there was a great demand for similar labor in making other canals and railroads. Many native Americans who were displaced by our own Industrial Revolution in New England and Pennsylvania, preferred to go wrest rather than work in the new factories, so the manufacturers welcomed the foreign immigrants as day laborers in the factory villages. For immigrants who arrived with some money there was the same opportunity as for natives, to cross the mountains and secure farms of their own. The Uniter! States at this time welcomed the immigrants, and most of them were happy in their change. Changes in community life.—The changes above described began to affect the character of American life. In the country farming went on much as before, but the cheap wheat from western farms made it harder for the New Englanders to make a living out of their rocky soil; some farmers moved west and some sent their daughters to work in factories. In the villages the craftsmen, cobblers, furniture-makers, and others were less busy and fewer boys learned such trades. On the other hand, shopkeepers were doing more business selling factorymade goods. Landowning squires were less important than the owners of the new factories. In the cities the population grew rapidly and it came to be more divided in interest than it had been before. Foreign born immigrants.—In addition to the native Americans were, as we have seen, thousands of foreign immigrants. A large proportion of those who landed at New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, or New Orleans, planned to go to the Mississippi, of which they had read in books of travel or immigrant guides. In some cases a group had long planned to move and had sent an agent to report to them and to select the place of settlement. One interesting case of this kind was the settlement of Swiss at New Glarus in Wisconsin where their advance agents derided that they could continue their cheese-making activities. It very often happened that first-comers encouraged, and frequently assisted relatives to follow them. Thus many communities were created in America with ties of friendship which ran back hundreds of years. Those who came without plans were met in New York by agents of land companies, of railroads, and, as time went on, of the stale governments. Many were cheated, but at least they were feted on into the West. Great numbers had no money to be cheated out of, but kept the western goal in their minds. They got jobs, saved money, moved on, and in the course of two, three, or four years, reached the fringe of settlement, cheap land, and American opportunity. (See map on pages 32-33.) The mark of their influence, with its European roots, has influenced the Middle West in all the wars since their trek to new homes. The earlier immigrants who went west settled about the sites of larger cities, as Cincinnati, Louisville, and St. Louis, where they engaged in handicrafts, and in market gardening, in which few native Americans were expert. Thus at Cincinnati the Wurlitzers began to make musical instruments, and Nicholas Longworth developed grape culture with German laborers. Later they lwgan real frontiering, and sought regions just being opened up, northwestern Ohio, northern Indiana, central Illinois, where after 1850 the Illinois Central Railroad had lands to sell, and Wisconsin. By 1850 they were an important element not only in agricultural and industrial life, but also in politics. The Know-nothing party.—The election of 1852 seemed to many to usher in a new era of good feeling. Democratic policies had triumphed almost as completely by 1852 as had Jefferson's principles by 1815, and they meant that the national government should interfere as little as possible in the lives of the people. Sectional disputes were supposed to be abolished forever by the compromise. There seemed to be almost a vacuum in national politics. Into it a new issue was injected. Between 1848 and 1852 the number of foreign immigrants increased suddenly and greatly. The coming of so many foreigners alarmed many native Americans. The manners and customs of the newcomers differed from those to which Americans were accustomed. The influx of so many new workers reduced wages, and laborers feared that a permanent lowering of the American standard of living would result. Few immigrants went to the South, and for this very reason, the voting strength of the North increased. The practical disappearance of the Whig party left many leaders and voters anxious to find a new issue with which to fight the Democrats. Under these circumstances a new party came into existence. It called itself the American Republican party and later the Native-American party, but it was based on a secret society, and was popularly nicknamed the "Knownothing party," as its members replied, "I know nothing," to those who asked about it. In 185.5 and 1854 it won many political successes, and seemed likely to have a future. It never, however, secured important legislation, for the sectional issue once more arose and cut across its path. Increased immigration.—One effect of increasing ease of communication, combined with the tales that went abroad of America's wealth and the opportunities it offered, was to increase immigration. Immigration came in waves of several years' duration. By 1872 immigration, interrupted by the war, again reached the level of 1854, about 400,000. Five years later began a rise from 138,000, in 1878, to 789,000, in 1882. Although the number of newcomers fluctuated, in only two years between 1882 to 1893 did it fall below 400,000. After the low period of the depression years of the nineties came the period from 1905 to 1914 during which several times immigration totalled a million a year. Not only did their numbers increase, but the area from which immigrants came continually expanded. Before the war we had begun to receive immigrants from Germany and Scandinavia, as well as from Great Britain and Ireland. In the eighties the Italians began to come in large numbers, and later the Bohemians, Hungarians, Greeks, and other peoples about the Mediterranean. From eastern Europe came Poles, Finns, Russians, and Jews. Some of these newcomers scattered over the country and engaged at first in some special occupation, such as the Greeks vending fruit, or the Irish in building railroads. The greater number were drawn into the expanding industrial life of ihe great cities and factory districts. They furnished in large degree the man power used in rapidly expanding industries. In Pittsburgh the managers of the steel industry and their clerks were very largely Scotch, either descendants of the Scotch-Irish who came in the eighteenth century, or immigrants, such as Andrew Carnegie. Most of the laborers in his mills were Hungarians. Export and import trade.—Another factor that made our relations with other countries more important than they had been was our increasing production of manufactured goods. Before the Civil War to had imported more manufactured goods than we exported. The protective tariff was intended to help our own manufacturers apply what we needed. Now our factories were able to supply more than we needed of certain manufactured goods, such as heavy machinery. We also produced a surplus of partly finished machines such a castings and certain textiles. This created a new problem, for our manufacturers had to compete with foreign products in foreign business leaders realized that, unless some means of promoting order were found, misunderstanding and "cut-throat" competition would ruin the chances of all the competitors. Many native Americans, especially during the World War, were alarmed at such movements and sought to Americanize the immigrants more rapidly. It was soon discovered that national characteristics which have developed for centuries are not easily destroyed and should not necessarily be destroyed. Those who have become the best Americans have grown to be so gradually. It is not a good thing to throw off one set of habits before becoming thoroughly familiar with another. The most important thing proved to be to make the foreigners feel at home by establishing friendly intercourse with them. This was done by the efforts of individuals in social centers, such as Jane Addams's Hull House in Chicago, where they were made to feel at home and as if they were fellow citizens, instead of outsiders. It has been a great enrichment of the United States that we have had people come to us bringing the treasures of different civilizations. Of late years foreign immigrants have been encouraged to remember what they brought. National anti-racial clubs have been encouraged. Exhibits have been held in schools and public halls demonstrating the costumes, art , and home life of other countries. The folk songs and characteristic instrumental music of European nations have become very popular. These influences can be seen on every hand; for example, in the designs of women's clothing and of household incidentals and in the many books on European life and affairs which are published in America every year. It helps explain why Americans know so much more about Europe than most Europeans know about America. In other words, it might be said that the immigrants of this period brought with them to America new elements and kinds of culture as well as new hands to work and hopes to be realized. But immigrants, as a whole, came from the less educated classes and there were many things they could not bring to us. Political problems of immigration. Immigrants connected the United States with the outside world in other than cultural ways. Many of them sympathized with their home countries when the latter became involved in quarrels. In such cases there were always some from all the countries involved and so American public opinion was divided. Many of the immigrants sent money regularly to relatives at home. When immigrants became naturalized Americans it became the business of the United States to protect them wherever they travelled. Not all countries gave full recognition to American naturalization papers and so there came to be international disputes over citizenship. Before they became naturalized, immigrants claimed the protection of their home countries in case they got into difficulties in the United States. In the second Cleveland administration there was a troublesome case when some Italians were killed in Louisiana. Italy demanded compensation; the United Slates hail no power to compel Louisiana to do anything, and so finally our national government paid money damages. Later a similar problem arose with the Japanese, who were given certain privileges by treaty but were excluded from holding land or attending schools in California, which they claimed were included in their rights as set forth in the treaty. Here the United States could not do what it had promised to do, because it could not coerce a state. The Filipinos were finally defeated and peace established. Another of our ablest Americans, William Howard Taft, was sent out to study the situation and to plan a government. The United States has done much to educate the Filipinos and we have spent a great deal of money there, but there are many who believe that American trade benefits enough by the relationship to repay the cost. For many years some of the Filipinos have longed to be entirely independent. Congress considered the question many times, and in 1933 a law was passed providing for independence after a ten-year probationary period. The bill was submitted to the Filipino legislature for ratification but it was rejected by them. Their chief reason for doing so was that when they became an independent country their exports to the United States would naturally be subject to tariff regulations. They also objected to the clauses giving the United States the right to maintain military and naval bases in the Philippines. In 1934 a new bill was drafted removing the military' posts, and making the naval bases a matter for future arbitration. T his was passed by the Filipino legislature, so they will be independent in 1944 or 1945. With the discovery of gold in California and the building of the transcontinental railroads Asiatics, particularly Chinese and Japanese began to migrate to the United States in great numbers. Soon native Americans objected to competing for work with Asiatics whose standard of living enabled them to work for very small pay, and so a new kind of international difficulty arose. About the time we look the Philippines it seemed that Japan and the leading powers of Europe were about to divide China among themselves, and if this were brought about it would be necessary for us to come in and take our share of the spoils or to lose much of our trade and influence. The younger Chinese did not look with favor upon "foreign devils" who introduced strange habits and interfering forces into their country. In 1900 a movement to throw off foreign influences broke out in what is called the Boxer Rebellion. Many Europeans and Chinese were killed and, not long after, the partition movement ceased. All these contacts with Asia brought problems as to our relation with the native peoples of the various countries and as to our relations with other nations who were engaged in trading with them. Immigration was more troublesome. When, in 1898, we secured the Philippines we became interested in the political and military aspects of the situation. It was necessary for us to be in a position to defend the islands from attack. Just at this time it seemed likely that China was to be divided among the great powers of Europe, at least commercially. John Hay, Secretary of State under McKinley and Roosevelt, determined to preserve the integrity of China. To do so it was necessary to negotiate understandings with the other powers which were interested, as Japan, Great Britain, Russia, Germany, and France. Hay led them to agreement, to a "concert of powers," on two points: first, that China should be preserved as a nation, and second, that all nations should have equal trade rights in China. It was plain that in order to keep the door of trade open and to preserve Chinese integrity the United States was forced into intimate cooperation with the great powers. During the Boxer Rebellion in China we took part in a joint expedition with European nations to protect white lives and property and cooperated in arranging a peace treaty. But questions of Far Eastern policy could not be settled once for all. They demanded constant attention and activity. What was happening there became a part of the daily concern of our government. In 1905 President Roosevelt mediated to bring peace between Japan and Russia, then at war. In 1907 he came to an agreement, not a treaty, to prevent Japanese immigration to this country. In the hope of establishing bonds of understanding between the two countries, we used part of the indemnity paid us by China for the cost of the Boxer relief expedition to bring Chinese students to our universities. Immigration.—Of the many social and economic problems which we saw developing in Unit Five, one of the first to thrust itself forward for political solution was that of immigration. There had long been a feeling that our country was admitting too many immigrants. This feeling was particularly strong among laborers, who ever since about 1850 had feared that newcomers would reduce wages. As a result, Chinese had been excluded in 1880, and later the bringing over of laborers under contract was prohibited. The administration, too, had sought to discourage steamship advertising which attracted many who had no serious purpose in seeking America. The World War brought new support to the movement. A general feeling that it was dangerous to allow so many people unfamiliar with our history and customs to become citizens reminds one of the Know-nothing movement of the 1850's, although the results were very different. It seemed possible, also, that the distresses of Europe would send new' millions to our shores after 1919. If we were to act it should be done promptly. Therefore, in 1921 a law was passed restricting the arrival of immigrants from each country of the Old World to three per cent of the number of that nationality residing in the United States according to the census of 1910. Thus the protective system was extended from commodities to labor. This first law did not work satisfactorily, and in 1924 a new law was passed fixing quotas for each country on the basis of two per cent of the number of that nationality in the United States in 1890. This was replaced in 1929 by a new system, according to which the total number admitted should be 150,000, of which each nation should have the percentage which it had contributed to the total population in 1920. In both 1924 and 1929 the exclusion of Chinese was continued, and the Japanese, who had been kept out by an informal agreement between Theodore Roosevelt and the Japanese government, were now formally excluded. In the second law they were excluded on the ground that they are not eligible to citizenship. 