Williams and Anne Hutchinson, with their followers, 27 planted separately small colonies on Narragansett Bay, which became united in the colony of Rhode Island. The charter, Mural painting by Albert Herter, Connecticut State Capitol Frontier life taught colonial America to govern itself. Here are the founders of Connecticut writing the Fundamental Orders by which they governed themselves until given a charter. The fourth English colony to be established in what is now the United States was Maryland. Charles I granted the territory to Cecilius Calvert, better known by his title of Lord Baltimore. In the spring of 1634 Baltimore made a settlement on the western side of Chesapeake Bay, near the mouth of the Potomac River. Being a Catholic, Baltimore wished to make his colony a refuge for members of his church who emigrated from England for the sake of religion. As a matter of fact, however, there were always more Protestants than Catholics in Maryland. Baltimore declared and rigidly enforced from the beginning the policy of religious toleration. To avoid strife and contention. He warned the Catholics particularly to remain silent "upon all occasions of discourse concerning matters of religion." Maryland differed in origin, and to some extent in government, from the Virginia and Massachusetts settlements. It was the work of one man, the proprietor, while they were the work of companies, or corporations. Thus we have the two original forms of English colonies—proprietary and corporation. The Carolinas. In 1662 Charles II, with characteristic generosity, gave to eight of his friends all the southern half of the present United States. The boundaries as finally defined, extended from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific, and from Virginia to a point south of St. Augustine in Florida. Emigrants from Virginia had already begun to settle in the northern part of the territory, and in 1670 the proprietors planted a colony in the south at Charleston. This was the beginning of North Carolina and South Carolina. Spain claimed all the territory in the Carolina grant, and particularly resented the inclusion in the grant of St. Augustine and half of Florida, which it had held for a hundred years. As a result of these conflicting claims the Carolina colonists suffered a great deal of annoyance from the Spaniards and from the Indians who, through Spanish policy, were incited to attack them. New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware. In a war with Holland in 1664, England, as we shall see, took possession of the Dutch settlements in the territory that we know as New York, New Jersey, Delaware, and Pennsylvania. The King immediately gave all the territory, except Pennsylvania, to his brother, the Duke of York, who later became King James II. In 1681 he granted Pennsylvania to William Penn in payment of a debt. James held on to New York, governing it by officers and laws which he sent from England, but he disposed of New Jersey and Delaware. These colonies finally passed into the hands of proprietors, who opened them to the Quakers and to other colonists seeking toleration for their religion. In 1682 Penn leased Delaware "for ten thousand years," and its development then went on as a part of the growth of Pennsylvania. Philadelphia, founded at the junction of the Schuylkill and Delaware rivers, was advantageously located, and quickly developed into the most flourishing commercial city in America. Georgia. Georgia was the last colony to be formally established by authority of the English government in the territory that is now the United States. It owed its origin to the benevolent interests of General James Oglethorpe, who wished it to become a harbor of refuge for unfortunate but enterprising emigrants from England and the continent of Europe. The King's motive in granting the charter, which he did in 1732, was to create a buffer colony between the South Carolina settlements and the Spaniards in Florida. Thus by the middle of the eighteenth century, England held the strip of territory bordering the Atlantic from Maine to Georgia and extending inland to the Appalachian Mountains. It was a small area in comparison with that claimed by France and Spain. The English colonial system, however, had features which gave England a decided advantage in a contest for American territory. England's island colonies. Closely connected with England's colonies on the mainland were the island colonies—Barbados; Jamaica, captured from Spain; the Bahamas; and the Bermudas. These islands served, in a measure, as stepping stones between England and the American continent, for they enabled ships crossing the Atlantic to get fresh supplies. Then, too, they frequently sent settlers to the mainland colonies. Throughout the colonial period important commercial relations were maintained between the islands and New England. The English colonial system. In the contest for America, the nature of the English settlements gave England the advantage, particularly over France. The English settlements were made up almost wholly of people who came to America to stay. Men brought their families with them, or married and established homes after their arrival. The great majority of the men were farmers. They improved the land and, in comparison with the French colonists, cultivated it intensively, occupying only what they could hold and use. The result was that when the English were once established they could not be driven away. Sir Thomas Pownall, a keen student of American affairs, wrote in 1756: "Wherever our settlements have been wisely and completely made, the French, neither by themselves nor [by] their dogs of war, the Indians, have been able to remove us/' As the English clearings crept slowly into the interior and up the river valleys toward the Appalachian Mountains, the lines of communication with the coast were strengthened and kept intact by a steady stream of immigrants from the British Isles. By the middle of the eighteenth century, when France was attempting to hold onefourth of North America with 80,000 colonists, there were roughly 1,250,000 English inhabitants between the Atlantic and the Appalachian foothills. On one point, the English government agreed with the French and Spanish. It, too, believed in mercantilism and held that colonies ought to benefit the home country. It therefore encouraged the colonists to produce commodities which England would otherwise have to import from other countries, and forbade them to develop manufacturing, so that they would have to buy manufactured goods from England. The colonists, however, had the same rights as Englishmen who stayed at home to participate in all colonial commerce, and colonial ships had the same rights as English ships in all English ports. There were no monopolies for the benefit of the government. the great mass of Englishmen who stayed at home. True, most of the colonies had become royal colonies by the middle of the eighteenth century, and were subject directly to the King rather than to a proprietor, or a corporation. Although they had governors sent out from England, yet all had their own representative assemblies which had a great deal of freedom in passing colonial laws. In some of the New England colonies the right to share in the local government depended upon membership in the Congregational church, and in the southern colonies the Anglican Church was established by law. Yet, with a few temporary exceptions, the colonists tolerated all religions. The English government made no sustained effort to force the Church of England upon the colonists. It winked at the emigration of nonconformists who went to the colonies for religious freedom. 4. The Dutch-Swedish Field of Influence The Dutch and Swedish colonies. At the beginning of the seventeenth century Holland was made up of seven provinces bordering on the North Sea. Much of the country lies below sea level and the very existence of the people has always depended upon their successful struggle with the ocean. Being victorious in the Courtesy, Title Guarantee and Trust Company of New York Dutch commercial ambition led to the founding of New York. Peter Minuit. one of the directors of the Dutch West India Company, "bought the island Manhattes from the wild men for the value of sixty guilders ($24)" in 1626 and set up the fur-trading post of New Amsterdam. Like the other commercial peoples of Europe, the Dutch were interested in eastern trade, and their first step toward colonization in America was the result of that interest. In 1609 Henry Hudson, an English captain in the service of the Dutch East India Company, explored the Hudson River in search of a shorter passage to China. In 1621 the Dutch government chartered the Dutch West India Company to exploit the region explored by Hudson. Two years later this company planted colonies on the lower end of Manhattan Island, on Long Island, and on the Connecticut and Delaware rivers. There were already some Dutch trading posts in these regions. The first settlements were hardly more than fur-trading posts. To encourage agricultural development, the company, in 1629, established what is known as the "pahoon system/' Enormous areas were granted to proprietors, or "patroons," each of whom was to undertake to settle fifty farmers to improve the land. Under this arrangement most of the land along the Hudson, the Delaware, and Long Island Sound was soon granted to directors of the company, who became patroons. In 1638, Dutch claims on the Delaware were disputed by the establishment of a Swedish colony, called Christina, near the present city of Wilmington. Despite Dutch protests, Swedish immigrants, continued to push settlements up the Delaware until, in 1655, the valiant Governor Stuyvesant compelled their submission to the Dutch West India Company. Dutch dominion in America, however, was already doomed. In 1652 Holland had become involved in a series of wars with England. In 1664, during the second of these wars, the English took possession of New Netherland. Charles II gave the territory to his brother, the Duke of York, and in his honor the name was changed to New York. The Dutch colonial system. The Dutch colonial system was a commercial despotism. Its sole purpose was to make profit for the Dutch West India Company and for the government, which owned stock in the company. The settlers were forbidden to engage in the fur trade, which was a company monopoly, nor could they weave woolen, linen, or cotton cloth, although they were encouraged to raise the raw materials for these fabrics to supply the looms of Holland. Politically they were subject to the governor and to the regulations of the company, which he enforced. In local government they did not have the extensive privileges exercised by settlers in the English colonies north and south of them. They had little to lose, and possibly much to gain, from an English occupation of the territory. Realizing that fact, they refused to a man to help Governor Stuyvesant repel the English attack. By the conquest of New Netherland, England not only connected its northern and southern colonies, but reduced the number of its rivals in North America from three to two. Problems for Oral or Written Discussion 1. Who were the chief explorers and colonizers sent out by Spain to the New World? 2. How did the discovery of gold by the Spaniards stimulate the colonization of America? 3. In what ways did the missionaries aid in the work of exploring and civilizing the New World? 4. What part of the present territory of the United States was explored and colonized by Spain? 5. How did the maritime supremacy of Spain protect her territory from encroachment by other countries? 6. Why was the colonial policy of Spain weak? Major Problem II—How the French settled in Canada, the St. Lawrence and Mississippi valleys, and the French West Indies. Questions that you will need to answer to solve this problem: 1. What caused France to be so much later than Spain in establishing a permanent settlement in the New World? 2. Why did the French settlers follow the rivers and the Great Fakes so far into the interior of North America? 3. How did the French colonial system operate? 4. In what ways did the French treatment of the Indians help their colonial system? 5. What service did the missionaries give to the French cause? Major Problem III—How the English settlers established permanent homes and cleared farms on the narrow strip of land along the Atlantic coast. This problem involves the following questions: 1. Why did the English not expand their settlements rapidly into the interior of the country? 2. How did geographic conditions in this territory affect the choice of occupations made by the English settlers? 3. What gave the English settlers such a firm hold in America? 4. In what ways was the English colonial system similar to and in what ways did it differ from the colonial systems of Spain and France? 5. How did conditions in England stimulate emigration to America? Major Problem IV—How the Dutch and Swedish settlements were taken over by the English and gradually absorbed into the English colonial system. Questions that you will need to answer: 1. What was the Dutch "patroon system"? 2. Why were the people of New Netherland willing that the English should assume control and displace the Dutch government? Investigational Activities 1. Describe the life in a southwestern Spanish mission. There is an interesting account in the novel by W. Caliier, Death Comes for the Archbishop (Knopf). 2. Suppose you could have taken a trip from Spain to Mexico City in 1600. Write a letter back home to Spain describing the city that you visited. S. Chase and M. Tyler,Mexico (Macmillan). 3. Investigate and report on the advanced civilization of the Mayans and the Aztecs. Read: J. T. Adams, Epic of America (Little, Brown); 5. What is meant by social and economic planning? S. Chase, New Deal (Macmillan). Was the mercantile system of 1600 a system of economic planning? Why did it fail? 6. Why does any country today have a colony or imperial possession ? Select a possession of some great power and try to discover why this country retains control of its possession. Attracted by the remarkable economic, religious, and political freedom permitted in the English colonies, the tide of immigration swept steadily into the thin strip of settlement along the Atlantic coast. By 1750 the frontier had reached the Appalachians and was creeping across into the Ohio Valley. There it met French fur trappers and traders and missionaries, who did not relish the coming of the English. In 1754 French and English rivalry in the Upper Ohio valley started the French and Indian War which ended in 1763 with the withdrawal of France from North America, leaving its wide colonial empire to England and Spain. In order to raise revenue to pay for this war the British imperial government decided to administer its tariff laws more strictly and to collect additional taxes in the American colonies. In attempting to do so it discovered that New World conditions had produced a nation. Beginning with the representative council of the Fondon trading company which had settled Jamestown, the English colonies in America had developed representative legislatures. Fife on the frontier had made democracy and direct representation natural. When the imperial laws of the distant home government conflicted with their economic interests, the colonists had been accustomed to ignore them. Fighting against their common enemies, the French and the Indians, they had won a sense of unity and strength. England, busy with wars, had long allowed them a freedom greater than any in Europe. The Americans now objected to the enforcement of the old tax laws and to the laying of new ones, declaring that only their local legislatures had a right to tax them. The clash of Old and New World ideas led to the American Declaration of Independence, which stated the American views, and to the Revolution. Not only was England deprived of all her North American territory except Canada, but a new democracy was created. Growth of the English Colonies The significance of the English colonies. It was the English colonies along the Atlantic coast which grew into the United States. The roots of the American Revolution were planted deep in the soil of American life. The fundamental causes of the break with the mother country grew out of the character of the colonists and the divergence of their political ideas and economic interests from those of Englishmen. It is necessary, therefore, to study some of the conditions and influences which went into the making of Anglo-American colonial society. Climate and geography divided the English settlements into three groups—the New England colonies, the middle colonies, and the southern colonies. It is the purpose of this chapter to glance at these three sections about 1760, noting their social organization, their economic interests and activities, and their political ideas and institutions. 1. Social and Economic Conditions a. The People Racial elements. The population of the English colonies in 1760, after a hundred fifty years of growth, was somewhat over 1,500,000. The inhabitants were about equally divided north and south by Mason and Dixon's line, the boundary between Pennsylvania and Maryland. Included in this number were nearly 400,000 Negro slaves, three-fourths of whom were in the southern colonies. The white population of the middle and New England colonies combined was considerably greater, therefore, than that of the southern colonies. The great majority of the white inhabitants were English by birth or descent, but there was a considerable mixture of other blood in all the colonies. In New York, for example, were the descendants of the original Dutch settlers, to whom were added numerous German and Scotch-Irish immigrants. More than a third of the population of Pennsylvania was German in origin. In all the colonies there was a liberal sprinkling of Irish, Scotch, and Scotch-Irish. Social classes. The chief motives which carried emigrants to the colonies were, as we have already seen, the desire for better living conditions, the desire for greater religious freedom, and the desire to escape punishment and persecution following the successive political changes which kept England in a state of unrest during the seventeenth century. One or another of the chief motives back of emigration operated from time to time upon all classes of people in England. The result was that the social distinctions of the home country were reflected in the colonies. The well-to-do planters in the South, the wealthy merchants of the middle colonies, the merchants and ship owners of New England, and the professional men—preachers and lawyers—throughout the country were at the top of the social ladder. Below them were the small farmers, laborers, fishermen, and sailors. Below these were the indentured servants and bondmen who, after serving only a few years, were able to make their way into the higher classes. At the bottom were the Negro slaves. Pioneer democracy. Pioneer conditions tended in the beginning, however, to put all free colonists on the same social level. Class barriers were always more easily crossed in the colonies than in England. Land was everywhere the basis of well-being and independence, and land was easy to get. It was no uncommon thing for descendants of an indentured servant to rise in two or three generations to positions of respectability and power. The possibility of such advancement made the English colonies a land of hope and opportunity, a magnet attracting a ceaseless stream of immigrants. b. Geography Geographic factors. In the English colonies, as in all countries, geography exerted a powerful influence upon the lives and habits of the people. The character of the soil, the direction of the ocean currents, and the trend of the Appalachian mountain system were dominant geographical factors. Geographic influences in New England. In the north of the region known as New England the highlands almost meet the sea. The narrow strip of land between the hills and the seashore was naturally rocky, unfertile, and ill-adapted to profitable agriculture. By intensive and laborious cultivation it could be made to yield the New England colonists sufficient crops of corn, beans, barley, and rye to supply their own needs and leave a small surplus for export to the West Indies. But it was evident enough that they could not depend upon agriculture as a source of wealth and comfort. On the other hand, the hills were clothed with timber, and the short, swift streams were broken by numerous falls, which supplied power for sawmills, and later for other machinery. The coast line was broken by convenient harbors, and the cold ocean current flowing southward from Labrador hugged the New England shore and brought to the doors of the colonists inexhaustible quantities of codfish, herring, and mackerel. New Englanders turned inevitably, therefore, to lumbering, shipbuilding, fishing, and trade. Geographic influences in the middle colonies. Farther south the highlands lie at a greater distance from the coast, the soil is prevailingly fertile, and the area open to cultivation is large. These conditions are sufficient to explain why New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania were the "bread colonies'' of the eighteenth century. But the influence of geography upon the middle colonies did not end there. The river systems, penetrating far toward the north and west, turned the eyes of adventurous spirits to the profits of trapping and fur trading. The spacious harbors afforded by the mouths of the Hudson and the Delaware were a stimulus to ocean commerce. Geographic influences in the South. South of Pennsylvania the mountains lay farther from the coast. The climate was mild, partly because of the Gulf Stream. T he land suited to cultivation was rich and extensive. These advantages made the southern colonies agricultural and produced the plantation system. From Virginia to Georgia, surface features divided the colonies into three distinct regions the tidewater, the piedmont (foothills), and the mountain. The tidewater district, separated from the piedmont by the falls of the rivers, was the land of large plantations and slave labor. The close connection of this region with the mother country was possible because of easy and direct access to the Atlantic. The piedmont, rising gradually to the mountain ranges, was a region of smaller farms, a more selfsufficient and more democratic area than the tidewater. The mountain region, made up of the long ranges of the Appalachians, furnished an effective barrier to emigration westward, and the Great Valley, stretching southwestwardly through Maryland and Virginia, tied the western parts of those colonies to Pennsylvania. As a result of geographic conditions, western Virginia and the western parts of North and South Carolina were settled largely by Germans and Scotch-Irish from Pennsylvania rather than by farmers from the tidewater area. This situation led later to prolonged and bitter political conflicts within the seaboard states of the South. c. Occupations The predominance of agriculture. While conditions in America brought about a considerable variety of occupations, some form of agriculture was the leading industry in all the colonies. (a) New England agriculture. In New England the farms were uniformly small, usually twenty acres, and their products were mostly consumed at home. The export of grains and vegetables was negligible, but horses, and beef and pork — by-products of the farms—were important articles of commerce with the West Indies. The small holdings, the grudging yield of the land, and the compact village settlements prevented the establishment of Negro slavery on a large scale in New England. There, however, as in the other sections, indentured white servants were numerous. (b) Agriculture in the middle colonies. The middle colonies New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware — were called the "bread colonies;' because they produced such a large proportion of the wheat used by the English colonies. This fact suggests that farming was the chief occupation. The Indians. Wherever Europeans touched the shores of the North American continent or penetrated its interior they found Indians. Though their number probably did not exceed 500,000, the Indians were widely scattered. Anthropologists classify them into tribes, and then on the basis of similarity of language, physical features, and general habits, or civilization, group them into tribal families. It is not necessary for our purpose, however, to go into these classifications. We need only note here some of the ways in which the Indians affected the lives of our colonial ancestors. The role of the Indians was both helpful and harmful. As a rule, they received the first European explorers and colonists kindly. They provided food in emergencies, showed them how to cultivate the native fruits and vegetables, and gave them valuable lessons in adapting themselves to the country. They served as guides and scouts to explorers and military expeditions, and were a source of unfailing profit to fur traders. It was inevitable, however, that two peoples of such widely different stages of civilization should come into hostile conflict. Although the Indians cultivated small fields of corn, melons, and vegetables, they were essentially a hunting people and lived and clothed themselves chiefly from the wild game of the forest. When they realized that the white people had come to stay, that the area of settlement was moving steadily westward, destroying the game or driving it away, they tried in self-defense to keep their hunting grounds and protect the only means of livelihood that they knew. The frontier thus became a battle line where the contestants fought with equal stubbornness and savagery. Warfare retarded the expansion of the white settlements but could not stop it. The unchecked stream of immigrants from the Old World must find homes in the New World. In the end the great majority of the newcomers must find their homes on the frontier. European rivals. The ferocity of the Indians was intensified by the influence of the rival European contestants for America. In the north the French used the Algonquin tribes to block the advance of the English, and the English used the "five nations'' of the Iroquois to check encroachments of the French upon New York and New England. In the South and Southwest Spanish and French fur traders were active throughout all the first half of the eighteenth century in stirring up hostilities against South Carolina and Georgia. The English traders were equally active in counter efforts to turn the same Indians against the Spanish and French. It is unnecessary to go into the details of these international frontier rivalries. Those between the English and the Spanish produced no large results. Those between the English and the French, reinforced by contemporary struggles between the mother countries in Europe, led to a series of wars. The first three of these wars in America—1689-97, 1702-13, 1744-48— had no lasting results. The fourth, however, known as the French and Indian War, 1754-63, changed the course of American history, and calls for more attention. The French and Indian War. By the middle of the eighteenth century France, as we saw in Chapter II established its claim to the Great Lakes basin and the St. Lawrence and Mississippi valleys. It was part of the strategy of French leaders to push their frontier line southward and eastward and confine the English between the mountains and the sea. This plan required a strong line of forts along the Ohio River. The importance of the Ohio Valley was quite as evident to alert English leaders as it was to the French. In 1749 a group of wealthy Virginians formed the Ohio Company to place a colony west of the mountains. In 1753 this company began to build a fort at the junction of the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers, the site of modern Pittsburgh. The same year the French established Fort Le Boeuf on the headwaters of the Allegheny, 120 miles north of the English fort. During the winter of 1753 the governor of Virginia sent young George Washington with a message saying that the Ohio country belonged to the English, and requesting the French to withdraw. Naturally, the French commander at Fort Le Boeuf refused to leave. The next year Washington led a force of Virginia militia to expel the French and was himself defeated and compelled to surrender. The French then took possession of the fort that the English had begun, strengthened it, and named it Fort Duquesne. These conflicts in the Ohio Valley inaugurated a world war. In 1755 General Braddock lost his life and a force of English regulars trying to drive the French from Fort Duquesne. In 1756 England and France recognized a state of war in Europe, and the war spread. Spain, Austria, Russia, Sweden, and Saxony joined France; Prussia, under its great ruler and military genius, Frederick the Great, joined England. At first England put little vigor into the contest, but William Pitt (the elder) came to the head of the ministry in 1757 and by his energetic statesmanship aroused the English to enthusiastic exertions. In the end, the English were everywhere victorious. They regained Fort Duquesne in 1758 and named it Pittsburgh, in honor of William Pitt. In 1759. they captured Quebec, and the following year Montreal, a feat which was equivalent to the conquest of Canada. They all but drove the French from India, and took Cuba from Spain. By the Treaty of Paris, in 1763, France withdrew from the American continent. It gave Canada and all its territorial claims east of the Mississippi River—except the Island of Orleans—to England. It gave the Island of Orleans and all its claims west of the Mississippi to Spain. Spain ceded Florida to England in exchange for Cuba, which the English had taken. The French ambition to build a great empire in America was ended, for the time being, and the actual possessions of England, if not its claims, were enormously enlarged. In this cartoon of a Federalist-Republican fight in Congress. Lyon. editor Of The Scourge of Aristocracy and Repository of Important Political Truth, holds the tongs. He wassailed under the Sedition Law. ment greater power of control over foreigners in the United States; (2) they passed the Sedition Act, designed to punish those who criticised government officials and policies. One of the laws that was directed against foreigners increased the time required for naturalization from five years to fourteen years. Two other laws, called the Alien Laws, gave the President authority to imprison or deport without trial foreigners whom he thought dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States, and to license others to remain. The Sedition Act imposed a fine of not more than $2,000 and imprisonment for not more than two years upon any person convicted of defaming, by speech or by writing or publishing, the government, the President, or the Congress. The law was intended to muzzle the Republicans until after the next presidential election. It was to expire on March 3, 1801. President Adams took no action under the Alien Laws; but about a dozen Republican editors and writers were convicted of violating the Sedition Act. The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions. The Republicans replied to the Alien and Sedition laws in the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions. The Kentucky Resolutions were written by Jefferson, the Vice President, and were introduced in the Kentucky legislature by his friend John Breckinridge, a local Republican leader. The Virginia Resolutions were written by Madison, Jefferson's neighbor and party lieutenant. Both documents declared the Alien and Sedition laws unconstitutional. The President had no right, they said, to imprison or deport any person without judicial trial; nor had Congress the right to limit the freedom of speech and press as it sought to do in the Sedition Act. The importance of the resolutions, however, lay in the fact that they stated the Republican conception of the nature of the Union and the rights of the states. The Union, said Jefferson and Madison, was a union of the states. It had only the powers granted it by the states. The Tenth Amendment declared: "The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people/' Each state agreed to the Constitution and entered the Union, they said, as an independent power. Each, therefore, had the right to judge whether or not the government of the Union was exercising powers which the Constitution did not grant. The method by which a state might pass such a judgment was not clearly stated. The legislature, however, was to take the first step. The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions were submitted to all the other state legislatures with the request that they express their views concerning the constitutionality of the Alien and Sedition laws. About half of them replied that they did not accept the doctrine that a state had the right to judge the acts of the Federal government. Several went further and expressed the opinion that that was a duty to be exercised by the Federal courts. Answering these replies, the legislatures of both Kentucky and Virginia adopted a second set of resolutions restating the argument of the first resolutions. The second Kentucky Resolutions declared that a state had not only the right to judge the constitutionality of Federal acts but it had also the right to nullify, that is, the right to refuse to obey, "all unauthorized acts done under color of' the Constitution. Foreign immigration. Newcomers from Europe were a considerable factor in the rapid spread of population. Nearly 5,000,000 immigrants entered the ports of the United States between 1830 and 1860, and most of these settled sooner or later in the western states. For example: There were large colonies of Germans in Wisconsin, Illinois, Ohio. Missouri, and Texas, and large migrations of Scandinavians settled in Minnesota and northern Wisconsin. Irish immigrants settled in large numbers in the cities, but they, too, tended to drift into the West, where they furnished much of the labor employed in constructing railroads, canals, and other public works. In the East the Irish went into the factories, and were employed in large numbers in street improvements and in unskilled branches of the building trades. Because they were ready to work for lower wages than native American laborers would willingly accept, considerable hostility to foreigners developed in the East. As we shall presently see, this gave rise to a short-lived but significant political party (page 302). What was done in New York was repeated on a smaller scale in Boston, Philadelphia, and other centers of the industrial belt, a region extending from eastern Massachusetts, by way of New York and Philadelphia, to Pittsburgh. In the effort to safeguard the depositors and patrons of banks, Massachusetts, New York. Virginia, and South Carolina maintained systems of inspection and regulation that gave some semblance of public supervision, but in most of the states there was little or no successful attempt to regulate banking. The honesty and business ability of the bankers were the principal safeguard of the public. Population and social change: (a) Rural conditions. The farmers of all the eastern states found conditions of life very hard. During the early decades of the industrial development the mill towns offered employment, cottages, and other advantages to the surplus population of the region. But before 1850, hundreds of thousands of immigrants crowded into the towns and worked at wages with which native Americans could not compete. The result was an increasing migration of the farm population of the East to the richer lands of the Middle West. The small farmers of New England and the Middle Atlantic States ceased to increase in numbers, and abandoned farms became everywhere more common. (b) Urban conditions. But the streets and avenues of the cities took on a new appearance. Handsome three-story houses with grass plats in front and gardens in the rear adorned the long avenues of Boston. Cultured and well-to-do families, like the Lymans, the Eliots, the Lowells, and the Ticknors, increased in numbers, if not in influence. Half a score of men, like Amos Lawrence and John M. Forbes of Boston, counted their fortunes by the million. They set the example of living in two houses. In one, somewhere along the Massachusetts or Maine coast, the summer months could be spent. In the other, on Beacon Street or Commonwealth Avenue, their private libraries offered intellectual a drawing by A. Kollner. Courtesy, New York Historical Society By 1850, New York City had become the financial capital of the United States, and Wall Street the synonym for financial power. Compare this view of Wall Street with that on page 123. entertainment, and ancestral pictures stimulated family and class pride. A Massachusetts gentleman was not unlike a Carolina planter. What the Lawrences and the Cabots did in Boston was imitated by other New Englanders elsewhere. But another tradition prevailed on the Island of Manhattan. There the urge and drive of trade and finance forecast the furious pace of American business that was to come. John Jacob Astor, a poor immigrant from Baden, Germany, had tramped the forests of Canada and the Great Lakes country (luring the early decades of the century. He knew the value of fur on international markets. In a little while he was the leader among the fur merchants of the world, and when he died in 1848, had a fortune of $20,000,000. Of like character "(as "Commodore'' (Cornelius) Vanderbilt, the Hudson River ferryman of the 1830's who became the financier, ship owner, and transportation leader of 1860. Since the election of 1840, a few sturdy souls had refused to compromise their abolitionist principles by voting either the Whig or Democratic ticket. Although they knew that they could not win an election, they nominated their own candidates for the presidency and vice presidency. In the campaigns of 1840-48 they called themselves the Liberty party. From Ballon's Pictorial Drawing-Room Companion, 1856 Courtesy, Evanston, III., Historical society Millions of Irish and German immigrants came to America in the 40's and 50's to escape potato famines and revolutions in Europe. In the campaign of 1852 they were Free Soil Democrats. Only in the election of 1844 did they influence national politics (see page 230). The Native American, or Know-Nothing, party. We have already noticed (page 265) the rapid increase of immigrants after 1830. Organizations were formed in New York as early as 1844 to oppose immigration and the growth of foreign influence in politics. Now, in 1854, magazines and newspapers began to spread the popular slogan, "America for the Americans/' and the organization of a secret political party followed. When members were asked about the plans and purposes of the party, they replied, "I do not know"; and it was for this reason that it came to be called the Know-Nothing party. Many former leaders of the Whig party became the chiefs of the new organization which gave promise of lasting influence. A large number of Representatives of the Know-Nothing, or Native American, party appeared in Congress when it assembled in December, 1855. The Republican party. The excitement over the KansasNebraska Bill brought out violent protests in the Northwest, especially in Michigan and Wisconsin. There the resolutions of local meetings led to a new combination which speedily came to be called the Republican party, the name which Thomas Jefferson had given the organization with which he opposed the Alien and Sedition laws of 1798. Jefferson's name carried more weight in the West than in the East or South. There was little opposition in the Northwest to incoming foreigners, for these people bought land from the railroad companies, set up homes on the prairies, and thereby added to the strength of a region eagerly seeking a stronger position in Congress. Thus the Republicans welcomed the new German citizens. The Republicans also received a large number of deserters from the Know-Nothing ranks. Many of these had been northern Whigs, and some had been Democrats. Thus, from the point of view of national politics, the chief importance of the KnowNothing party was that it broke down old party lines and led to the rapid growth of the Republican party. The Republicans made such a vigorous campaign against Douglas and other members of Congress who had voted for the Kansas-Nebraska Bill, that a majority of all the members of the next House of Representatives elected from the northwestern states in 1856 were Republicans. Southern solidarity. Naturally the growth of a strong sectional party in the North threw the South more on the defensive, and caused a corresponding shifting of party lines there. The Whig and Know-Nothing organizations broke up, and most of their members joined the Democrats. Public opinion tended to make the South opposed to everything northern. The Rural Republic Becomes Our Modem Industrial Nation, 1865-1920 In the years from 1865 to 1920 the United States changed from a moral republic into the great modern industrial nation of today. The movements contributing most to that change were the Industrial Revolution, the disappearance of the frontier, and the development of world power. This striking transition so increased and intensified the problems of the nation that the insistent demands of the people gradually brought about a widespread program of liberal reforms. The major modem problems developing in the new industrial period rose from ownership of world-wide possessions, the growing demand for world peace, the regulation of big business, the rise of transcontinental systems of transportation and communication, the demands of labor, the limitation of immigration, the difficulties of the farmer, and the bewilderingly rapid growth of American society and culture. These problems are so complicated and so important that the greater part of the remainder of this book is devoted to their topical discussion (see Chapters XVII-XXIV). In the decade following 1865. both the North and the South paid the social and economic cost of war. Deprived of the leadership of Lincoln. Congress gave outlet to the bitter emotional heritage of the straggle by enforcing a harsh and expensive military reconstruction program in the South. Both North and South suffered from the dislocation of the money system by the issuing of unsecured paper money; from the inevitable upset of the national economic balance by the abnormal demands of war production, the military use of manpower, and the wanton destruction of resources; and from the usual war-aftermath of political corruption and financial speculation. The disgraceful political orgies during Grant's presidency and the Panic of 1873 were largely consequences of the war. The discoverer of America was the product of his times. Christopher Columbus was alive with the keen intellectual interests and eager commercial ambitions of the fifteenth century. Born in the noted Italian port of Genoa, he was eager to make himself rich and famous by discovering a shorter and cheaper route to the distant trading marts of the Orient. Trained with the famous geographers and sea captains of Portugal, he believed that the earth was a sphere. He promised fabulous wealth to any of the rising national states that would finance an expedition westward across the Atlantic. Spain, newly unified and hungry for trade with the East, backed his world-famous adventure in 1492. The discovery of America started a wave of European exploration and westward emigration that extended well into the nineteenth century. It was soon clear that Columbus had discovered a new continent of vast extent and resources. Rich commerce in silver and gold, sugar, tobacco, timber, and furs beckoned the European trading companies and merchant princes. The ambitious European nations encouraged trading companies and men of wealth to found colonies, and the pageant of American immigration from Europe began. During the sixteenth century Spanish. Portuguese. French, and English explored the New World. Spanish soldiers and missionaries pushed rapidly into the interior from their base in Mexico, spreading the civilization of Spain. By the end of the century Spain held two-thirds of South America, all of Central America and Mexico, and the southern fringe of what is now the United States. In the seventeenth century the European straggle for American resources centered in North America. France sent its explorers and fur traders up the St. Lawrence River into the Great Lakes region, and established a claim to the Mississippi valley. The English colonized the Atlantic Coast. In spite of these terrible human losses and oppressive debts, there was, nevertheless, an unprecedented prosperity in the North. During the struggle the European wheat crop had failed three years and the farmers of the Middle West had made fortunes. At the same time the great industries of the middle Atlantic states and of New England had accumulated wealth beyond anything previously known to history. The New York papers boasted long lists of millionaires. Men erected mansions in the fashionable quarters of cities, and built palatial summer homes on the banks of the Hudson or in the mountains of Pennsylvania, New York, and New England. Under the banking law of 1863 hundreds of great financial institutions had risen. With the advantage of governmental business, the railroads had reaped enormous gains, new roads being finished even in the months of severest struggle. The city of Chicago had doubled its population, Detroit had grown as never before, and Cleveland was taking on the character of a great coal and iron center. Pittsburgh was the center of the iron and the growing kerosene oil industries. Everywhere in the North there was amazing activity. Towns built new sewer systems, laid down horse car lines, and erected new public buildings. They issued bonds that sold on the feverish markets, and the plain people East and West subscribed to these and to the numerous issues of Federal securities. Despite danger of being drafted for service, the number of sturdy immigrants from Europe was greater than the number of men who had laid down their lives on southern battlefields. Notwithstanding, the reconstruction of the Union out of its broken parts was a bitter task. The restoration of the people to a healthy, peaceful life was a slow process. The South. The South was again a part of the Union, but its condition was such that its restoration to the Union might well have been considered a liability rather than an asset. The Confederate government had floated $2,000,000,000 in securities, and enormous amounts of paper money. All of this was a total loss. The states had likewise made extensive loans which they were required to repudiate. The business districts of Richmond, Columbia, and Atlanta were in ashes. The southern states had sacrificed nearly 500,000 men. The former slaves wandered about aimlessly and every day some died of starvation. Wealthy planters had been reduced to the point of helplessness, and some to the verge of starvation. Charity associations in Baltimore, Cincinnati, New York, and London raised funds or collected provisions for the unemployed and the distressed. 2. The Development of the West a. Shaping the Land System The early land system. As we have already seen (pages 111- 113), the administration of the public domain was a subject of conflicting sectional interests. The West for obvious reasons wanted the land granted to settlers on the freest possible terms, while the East for equally selfish reasons wished to maintain a price sufficiently high to discourage emigration. The act of 1820 lowering the minimum price of public land in government auctions to $1.25 an acre and permitting bidders to buy as little as eighty acres at a time, was a concession to the persistent western demand. But the provision that the purchase price must be paid in cash was a reservation in the interest of the East. The Preemption Law of 1841. Naturally, the West remained unsatisfied. Western leaders tried to induce Congress either to grant free homesteads to actual settlers, or to give the land to the states within whose respective limits it lay, expecting that the states would then donate it to settlers. But for twenty years their efforts bore no fruit. Benton's proposal to reduce the price gradually to 25 cents an acre and then give away the remnant not sold at that price failed repeatedly. In 1833, Clay, trying to satisfy both East and West, secured the passage of a bill providing for the division among the states of the receipts from land sales, only to see it killed by presidential veto. In the meantime, emigrants were bringing about a practical modification of the auction law. Without waiting for government surveys, advertisement, and sales, many of them "squatted" on land that pleased their fancy. Having made improvements, they claimed the right to buy the tracts that they occupied at the minimum price when the land was put on sale. Congress passed numerous special laws recognizing specific claims, but denying the principle of "squatter rights." Every special law was, however, an encouragement of the practice, and Congress finally yielded to the pressure. In 1841 it passed the general Preemption Law. Thereafter, when the government surveys reached his claim, a settler, upon proof of cultivation, could buy 160 acres at private sale for the minimum price of $1.25 an acre. The effect of the Preemption Law was to stimulate and hasten settlement of the Trans-Mississippi West, but the final step in opening the government lands had to wait another twenty years for the passage of the Homestead Act. The Homestead Act, 1862. During the ten years between 1850 and 1860 there was a shifting of sectional attitudes toward free land which brought a homestead law nearer realization. The West, of course, still wanted it. Influential leaders and newspapers in the North and East passed from hostility to indifference and finally to approval of the policy. The South passed from indifference to opposition. Two words—immigration and slavery—furnish the clues to the explanation of this double shift. European immigrants arriving in the United States from 1840 to 1850 numbered 1.713,000, and from 1850 to 1860 the number was 2,598,000. The great majority found homes in the industrial East and North, furnished cheap labor for the factories, and thereby removed the chief obstacle—as Benton had pointed out in 1829—to a liberal land policy in the West. That is to say, foreign immigration now furnished the labor that the factories needed, and the East no longer felt it necessary to check emigration to the West. The famous Homestead Act of 1862 resulted in a marvelously rapid break-up of the western prairies into farms. This picture of the pioneers "Breaking Raw Prairie" appeared in 1871. keep slavery out of the territories, actively stimulated the westward movement and sought to promote it by the readiest means. For the opposite reason, southern leaders now tried to prevent western settlement. The new sectional attitude brought about the passage of a homestead bill in 1860, but President Buchanan, out of consideration for his southern advisers, vetoed it. Two years later, however, after the southern states had seceded, a similar bill was approved by Lincoln, and became a law. This first Homestead Act gave settlers 160 acres of land upon proof of occupation and cultivation for five years. This law applied to land in all the states west of the Mississippi River except Texas, which retained its public domain when it entered the Union as a state, in 1845. Dhring the first twenty years after the passage of the law the population of Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, Kansas, and Nebraska increased nearly 4,000,000. How many of these people were represented by the homesteaders and their families, we do not know; certainly a great majority. Men could still obtain land, however, by preemption ("squatting''), by purchase from the government, and by purchase from the railroad companies which had obtained land subsidies, or grants. Many still preferred one or the other of these methods because it relieved them of the five-year residence requirement of the Homestead Act. Other western land laws. The Homestead Act was a great boon to many ambitious but needy families who 'settled in the states immediately west of the Mississippi River, but it was not adapted to the geographic conditions beyond the meridian of 100° west longitude. There it was hardly possible for a farmer to maintain his family on a quarter section of drought-bitten land. Nor did the law encourage the development of ranching, though it was evident that much of the land, if it was used at all, must be used for grazing. Eventually, various acts were passed to meet this situation, but none of them did meet it. In 1873 a law provided that a settler might obtain 160 acres if he would plant trees on 40 acres. This was the Timber Culture Act. Four years later the Desert Land Act permitted applicants to preempt, or file claims for, 640 acres in the Plains and Mountains area and buy it for $1.25 an acre. In effect it was an extension of the Preemption Law, designed to meet the necessity for larger homesteads in the plains region. By taking advantage of all these laws a man, with a little manipulation, could obtain enough land to establish a ranch. He could file his claim to a homestead, a timber-culture grant, and a desert-land section. Then he might induce his "cowboys" to file claims on adjoining land and transfer it to him, and the thing was done. In the beginning, however, the ranchman was not too scrupulous about confining his herds to his own land. They grazed at will upon the "free grass" of the open range. Big Business Transforms Our Nation The Industrial Revolution was well started in the United States in the early 1800's. By 1865 American business was taking on a modem aspect as a result of new inventions, the building of transcontinental railroad and telegraph systems, improvements in banking, and largescale financing through great stock-issuing corporations. In 1870 the Standard Oil Company created the first tmst. "Trust busting" began with the Sherman Anti-Trust Act of 1890 and reached its height under President Theodore Roosevelt. In Wilson's administration the Clayton Anti-Trust Act stressed regulation rather than prevention of big business combinations. The Federal Reserve Act established a similar control of banking. And in the National Industrial Recovery Act of 1933 the government undertook to regulate industry through the cooperation rather than the competition of industrial combinations. It was big business that financed the great national network of transportation and communication based on the application of steam power and electricity. At first an effort was made to prevent railroad corporations from combining. But the Esch- Cummins Transportation Act in 1920 turned from prevention of combinations to government regulation of transportation and communication. Electric railway companies, automobile bus lines, and airplane companies were allowed to provide transportation of unrivaled speed and cheapness, while telephone and radio systems furnished almost instantaneous communication the world over. Big business and modem transportation and communication, however, created serious labor and immigration problems. Huge corporations were less likely to consider their workers' welfare than were individual employers; and the railroad and telegraph hastened the end of free western lands, long the poor man's refuge. In the 1870's and 1880's a "new immigration" of unskilled foreign workers flooded the labor market. 1. Labor The historical use of the term "labor/' The term labor has come, in the course of time, to have a much narrower application than the word itself indicates. When we speak of labor now, we generally mean industrial labor, and this limited meaning has come to be accepted by usage. Yet we must remember that not until very recently has the number of laborers engaged in manufacturing and other industries equaled the number engaged in agriculture. Moreover, agriculture has a distinctive character and a continuity that no other industry can possess. We must remember, too, that the history of "labor" is not identical with the history of "organized labor"; the great mass of workers in the United States are and always have been unorganized. Land. The history of labor in the United States has been affected by a host of peculiar conditions and circumstances. The most striking of these conditions has been the existence of cheap, easily available, unoccupied land. Until the beginning of the twentieth century, it was always possible for Americans or newly arrived immigrants to become farmers. The presence of rich farming land beckoned invitingly to toilers in the mill or the mine, and served as a continual counterbalance to industry. It kept wages comparatively high, or made necessary, as an alternative to high wages, the importation of laborers from Europe. The open land of the West thus served as a disorganizing factor in industrial labor and operated, at the same time, as a safety valve for discontented workers. It is significant that the period of greatest industrial conflict coincides with the passing of good cheap farming lands. Immigration. Immigration is the second factor which has made the American labor problem unique. It was in the forties of the last century that industrialists began to replace high-priced native labor with cheap immigrant labor. This almost universal employment of women and children was due in part to the drain of men to the new lands of the West, in part to the influence of English practices, and in part to the comparative cheapness and ease of managing this form of labor. Though hours were long— generally from sunup to sundown—the work was not exacting, and the workers were not dissatisfied. Most of the operatives were girls drawn from the near-by farms, and they often returned to their homes after a few years of work; thus they did not constitute a permanent class of laborers. The Lowell and Waltham mills, in Massachusetts, were famous for their neatness and cleanness and for the general air of respectability and culture that they presented. The girls lived in their own boarding houses, under rules of conduct as strict as those to be found in boarding schools, attended lectures and maintained a literary magazine of some merit. As improved machinery was introduced and the pressure of competition increased, labor conditions became less pleasant. Gradually, in the late thirties and forties, the rosy-cheeked farm girls were replaced by Irish and French-Canadian immigrants, and the New England labor scene began that change which ended in practically repealing the section. Early labor organizations. Though women and children constituted the principal labor force in the textile, clothing, and shoe industries, the majority of industrial workers in the early Republic were men. Men were better able to protect themselves from too great injustice. Forming a permanent rather than a temporary labor force, they were in a position to bargain for better working conditions. As early as the 1790's we hear of local organizations of printers, shoemakers, and tailors, and of "turnouts/' or strikes, sometimes accompanied by violence. The real beginnings of organized labor, however, as we shall see, came in the 1820's. Legal difficulties. Labor organizations, in this early period, had to face not only a hostile public opinion, but legal difficulties as well. According to the common law of England, combinations of workers to secure higher wages were illegal, and this principle was early applied by American judges to American trade unions. Furthermore, the courts held that strikes were contrary to public policy and constituted an unlawful conspiracy. Throughout the early years of the nineteenth century strikers were indicted on charges of criminal conspiracy. This reactionary attitude gradually gave way to a more reasonable view, but it was not until 1842 that Chief Justice Shaw of the Massachusetts Supreme Court ruled that a trade union was a lawful organization and that a strike for the closed shop was legal. The objectives of labor organizations. The early labor movement was more concerned with working conditions than with wages. Labor agitation was directed primarily toward a shorter working day. With the establishment of the ten-hour day on all government work in 1840, a definite goal was fixed toward which organized labor might aim. In addition to a ten- hour day, leaders demanded an extension of the suffrage and of political rights for workingmen, the establishment of a system of free public schools, the abolition of imprisonment for debt and of convict labor, and more liberal land laws. New factors in American labor. The two decades from the panic of 1837 to the war between the North and the South form a distinct chapter in the history of American labor. In these years the influences of the Industrial Revolution and of immigration began to make themselves powerfully felt. These factors, combined with the prolonged effects of the panic of 1837, led to a general lowering of the position of the disappearance of the frontier around 1890, labor could no longer escape the problems of an industrialized order by flight to the West, but was forced to stand and face them and adjust itself to them. Immigration. The problem presented by the passing of the frontier was aggravated, as we shall see, by the torrent of immigration that flowed into the country in the years after 1880. and by the changing character of this immigration. Over 5,000.000 emigrants found their way to the "Promised Land" during the decade of the eighties, over 3,500,000 in the nineties, and almost 9,000,000 in the first ten years of the present century—a total of almost 18,000,000 new arrivals in the course of a single generation. Even subtracting the number of immigrants who returned to their Old World homes, and the women and children who did not enter industry, there remained several hundred thousand workers who had to be absorbed into the body of American labor annually. After 1890 the great majority of new arrivals came from the southern and eastern European countries such as Italy, AustriaHungary, and Russia rather than from the northern European countries. Most of the new immigrants chose to work in factory, shop, or mine rather than on a farm. And since the majority of these new recruits to the American labor force were unskilled, they formed a body of cheap laborers whose presence depressed labor standards. Organized labor always recognized in unrestricted immigration the most serious threat to its progress. The persistent demand for restriction of immigration came largely from labor, as did the demand for the prohibition of the importation of contract labor. The rise of organized labor. Early organizations. The War between the North and the South gave a powerful stimulus to labor and labor organization. On the one hand, the compelling demands of the war tremendously increased industry. On the other hand, the drain of well-nigh one million men to fill the ranks of the Union armies, the lure of free homesteads in the West, and the sharp decline in immigration decreased the available labor supply. It was under these favorable circumstances that the labor movement gained momentum. The most important of the new labor organizations appeared shortly after the war: the National Labor Union, founded in 1866, and the Knights of St. Crispin, established in Milwaukee the following year. Though the National Labor Union lasted only six years, it attained a maximum membership of 600,000, and was partly responsible for one important piece of legislation: a law prescribing an eight-hour day for employees on government works. The Knights of St. Crispin, a shoemakers union, attained a membership of some 50,000, scattered from Massachusetts to Wisconsin. It attempted to maintain the old apprentice system under the control of the guild, and opposed the introduction of machinery into the shoe industry—needless to say, without success. The Knights of Labor. Far more important than these short lived organizations was the Noble Order of the Knights of Labor, founded in 1869 by Uriah Stephens, a Philadelphia garmentcutter. The purpose of this order was "to secure to the toilers a proper share of the wealth that they create; more of the leisure that rightfully belongs to them; more societary advantages; in a word, all those rights and privileges necessary to make them capable of enjoying, appreciating, defending, and perpetuating the blessings of good government/' The organization hoped to secure these ends by cooperation, arbitration of industrial disputes, an eight-hour day, the abolition of child labor, and many other reforms that have since been achieved. Membership was open to all workers, men and women, skilled and unskilled, laborers and capitalists, merchants and farmers. Only liquor dealers, gamblers, lawyers, and bankers were excluded. Though the Order proposed to substitute arbitration for the strike, and though its Grand Master, Terence Powderly, was an avowed believer in peaceful progress, the Knights attained their remarkable successes in the eighties through strikes, and came to be associated in the public mind with violence. In 1884 and 1885 the Knights conducted a series of strikes on the over labor standards and conditions of a more far-reaching and fundamental character than was previously believed possible in our Federal system. Labor and the courts. Labor reforms in the United States have had to receive not only the assent of the political departments of our governments, but they have had to run the gauntlet of the state and Federal courts as well. The Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution provides that "no state shall deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law." Since most labor legislation had the effect either of limiting the liberty of contract of workers or of depriving some employer of property, the courts have tended from the beginning to hold a large part of labor legislation unconstitutional. Gradually, however, the courts have developed a more liberal attitude toward such labor legislation. Though two Federal laws looking to the prohibition of child labor were declared unconstitutional, the courts have generally accepted state regulation of child labor without question. In 1908 the Supreme Court upheld an Oregon law limiting the hours of labor of women to ten a day, and two years later it sustained a ten-hour law for all workers. On the other hand, the courts have repeatedly applied the prohibitions of the Sherman Anti-Trust Act to labor organizations. Thus, in the famous Pullman strike of 1894, the American Railway Union was regarded as a conspiracy in restraint of trade, and was enjoined from its activities. Later decisions held that a boycott constituted improper restraint of trade, and assessed against the offending labor union the cost of the damages sustained by the manufacturer of the boycotted article. The Clayton Anti-Trust Act of 1914 specifically exempted labor organizations from its provisions, except where necessary to prevent irreparable damage. Contrary to the expectations of labor leaders, this law did not prove to be a "new charter of freedom," and the courts continued to grant injunctions against strikes, boycotts, and picketing. Yet there can be little doubt that in recent years the attitude of the courts toward labor and labor legislation has been increasingly sympathetic and liberal. Characteristics of the immigration problem. We have noticed the intimate relationship of immigration to labor. Properly considered, immigration is a major theme of American history, because all of our history has been the adjustment of Europeans to the American environment. For three hundred years, men of all nations and all tongues and all faiths found their way to the out the greatest experiment in social adjustments that has ever been attempted. It is this fact which justifies the statement that America has been the "melting pot" of the races. The number of immigrants. There are no statistics on immigration prior to 1820. Estimates for the first thirty years after the formation of the national government are: for 17901800, 50,000; for 1800-1810, 70,000; and for 1810-1820, 115,000. Since 1820 we have accurate figures, and a glance at the graph gives an idea of the tremendous swarm of Europeans who have been absorbed into our nation in the past hundred years. Causes of immigration. The causes of these great folk movements are not hard to find. Fundamentally they were the same as those which drove colonists to America during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries—hard times at home, political disturbances, wars, religious discontent. On the other hand, there was the hope of economic, social, and political betterment in the Promised Land, where happily famine was unknown and want was rare. Immigration since the eighties. The decade of the eighties marked a distinct turning point in the history of immigration. In that decade there was a tremendous increase in the volume, and a profound change in the origins of immigrants. After a century and a half of active colonization and rapid natural growth, the population of the thirteen colonies at the beginning of the American Revolution was under 3,000.000. In the half century from 1880 to 1930 the number of new immigrants was considerably larger than the total population of the United States in 1850. No folk movement in history, ancient or modem, compares in volume or in scope to this one which has been continuously enacted in the America of our own time. The "new" immigration. More significant than the increase in the volume of immigration was the dramatic shift in its sources. Since the beginning of our history the overwhelming majority of immigrants had come from the British Isles and Germany, with smaller contributions from France and the Scandinavian countries. The racial elements that made up the American population in 1870 were not notably different either in character or in relative strength from those which made up the population one hundred years before. Yet in the seventies there began to appear new types among the thousands who thronged in at Ellis Island, New' York. In 1886, for the first time in our history, immigration from southern and eastern Europe exceeded that from northern and western Europe. Altogether, between 1880 and 1930, Italy sent us over 4.500,000 of her sons and daughters, Austria-Hungary and its tributary states over 4,000,000, Russia and Poland some 3,250.000—a total from these countries of over 12,000,000. Geographic distribution. While the earlier immigrants from the British Isles and Germany had distributed themselves widely through the North and West, the new immigrants quickly concentrated in the larger cities, particularly along the eastern seaboard. By 1900 two-thirds of the foreign-born were living in towns and cities, and by 1920 this proportion had increased to three-fourths. In New York City were hundreds of thousands of Italians, Germans, Poles, Russians, and Jews. Irish and Canadians were found in large numbers in sedate Boston; Russians in Quaker Philadelphia; Germans in Baltimore, Cincinnati, St. Louis, and Milwaukee; Scandinavians in St. Paul and Minneapolis; Poles, Russians, Italians, and Scandinavians in Chicago. Many of the smaller cities such as Hartford, Connecticut, Jersey City and Newark, New Jersey, Toledo, Ohio, Lowell and Lynn, Massachusetts, showed a high percentage of foreign-born inhabitants. From this over-rapid concentration of the foreign-born in the already crowded cities of the North arose many and perplexing problems of housing, sanitation, health, transportation, and politics. Soon every large city came to have its slums, and its teeming tenement houses, breeding places of disease, crime, and vice. In 1893, the Danish immigrant, Jacob Riis, described these tenements of New York City in his book How The Other Half Lives, and civic leaders were shocked into action against the evil. Economic distribution. The economic distribution of the new immigration was of even greater importance than its geographic distribution. In the period prior to 1860 the newcomers had entered farming and industry and the trades in about equal proportions. Of those who indicated their occupations in the forty-year period from 1820 to 1860, roughly one-third were farmers, one-third laborers, and one-third mechanics, merchants, and professional men. But the great majority of new immigrants from southern and eastern Europe were unskilled laborers. Over two-thirds of all the Italian and Polish workers, for example, were unskilled. In 1907, of the 23,000 laborers in the Carnegie Steel Works, less than one-fourth were native-born Americans. In 1909 over three-fourths of all the workers in the bituminous mines of Pennsylvania were foreign-born, the great majority of these being Slavs, Italians, Magyars, and Croats. What was true of the mines and the steel mills was almost equally true of the northern textile industry, the lumber industry, the stockyards, and the railroads. The story of the penetration of the foreign-born into these industries has been vividly told in such novels as Upton Sinclair's The Jungle and King Coal, and Abraham Cahan's Rise of David Levinsky. Canadian and Mexican immigration. Two other groups of immigrants came into the United States in increasing numbers during the first third of the twentieth century—Canadians and Mexicans. This influx from the north and the south was due largely to the fact that the immigration restriction laws of the early twenties did not apply to the countries in North and South America. Almost one-half of the Canadians who came to this country between 1900 and 1930 settled in New England, many of them entering the textile mills and lumber mills of those states. The Mexican immigration was a comparatively new movement, and, in many respects, one presenting serious problems. The census figures of 1930 revealed that not far from 1,500,000 Mexicans were living in the United States, the vast majority of them in the four southwestern states which border on Mexico—Texas, New Mexico, Arizona and California. The problem of Americanization. Even in the colonial period, many Americans were disturbed about the problem of assimilating the Irish and Germans who poured into the new country. But as long as the newcomers were of the same racial and linguistic stock as those already here, and as long as there was elbowroom for everyone in the open lands of the West, the problem was not a serious one. With the change from the "old" to the "new" immigration, in the eighties, and with the passing of the frontier and the rise of the city at the same time, the problem of assimilation and Americanization took on a new complexion. Would it be possible to absorb the millions of oliveskinned Italians and swarthy black-haired Slavs and dark-eyed Hebrews into the body of the American people? Would they adjust themselves to their New World environment and understand and contribute to American institutions? Could the process of Americanization be carried through without doing irreparable harm to the heritage of language and culture which the immigrant brought with him? Would the presence of millions of Roman Catholics and Jews among a people traditionally Protestant in their religious faiths raise the unhappy issue of religious toleration? Actually the process of Americanization has proved much less difficult than was feared. toleration has never been seriously threatened. Governmental regulation of immigration. It is a suggestive fact that though, in our constitutional system, the regulation of immigration is a function of the Federal government, yet with one notable exception, it was not exercised for one hundred years. The exception, of course, was the prohibition of the importation of Negro slaves, which took effect in 1808. Aside from this single piece of legislation Congress maintained a completely passive attitude while millions of immigrants poured into the country. Oriental immigration. It was not, indeed, until 1882, that Congress undertook to regulate immigration, and it did so then because its hand was forced by a situation which was rapidly getting beyond control. This was the threat of the flooding of the Pacific coast with Chinese coolies. The discovery of gold in 1849 and the consequent demand for labor first brought the Chinese to California. By 1852 there were some 25,000 Orientals on the Pacific coast, and thereafter they came at the rate of some 4,000 a year. In the sixties, thousands of coolies were imported to work on the Central Pacific Railroad. By the end of the seventies there were over 100,000 in California. Their low standards of living, long hours of labor, and willingness to do as they were told were thought to constitute a serious menace to native labor. At the same time they aroused racial prejudice by their obstinate adherence to Chinese ways of life and religion, and by their obvious desire to get as rich as possible and return to China with their savings. As a result of these factors an anti-Chinese movement developed in the late seventies. It was in response to this situation that Congress, in 1882, passed an act excluding Chinese laborers for a period of ten years—a prohibition that was extended in 1892, and again in 1902 until it became permanent. Japanese immigration did not become a problem until considerably later. There were less than 25,000 Japanese in the country at the beginning of the twentieth century, but when Japanese began to come over in increasing numbers California became alarmed and demanded that the policy of exclusion be extended to them. In 1907 President Theodore Roosevelt reached a "gentlemen's agreement'' with the Japanese government whereby it agreed not to issue passports to Japanese laborers who wanted to settle in the United States. Despite this agreement a small stream of Japanese continued to trickle in to the Pacific coast, and in 1913 the California legislature passed a series of laws designed to prevent Orientals from owning land in the state. Through the efforts of Bryan, Secretary of State under President Wilson, these laws were modified and an international crisis temporarily averted. Immigration policies. Once embarked upon a policy of regulation, Congress was faced with a number of alternatives. Should it adopt a policy of restriction, of selection, or of exclusion? If restriction were to be resorted to, how far should the government go in denying entry to prospective immigrants; if selection, upon what basis should it be made? From 1882 to 1917 Congress followed a policy of restriction, excluding from the country, by a series of enactments, contract laborers, paupers or those likely to become so, those with infectious diseases, polygamists, anarchists—indeed, almost every class of undesirables. The demand for selectivity. While this policy of restriction afforded protection against some unwelcome additions to the population, it scarcely affected the total number of immigrants. There arose, therefore, an insistent demand that some plan be formulated whereby the number of newcomers might he reduced and only the best admitted. The criterion of selection was to be literacy. Three times a literacy test for immigrants passed both houses of Congress, only to receive the presidential veto. Cleveland vetoed such a bill in 1897, Taft in 1913, and Wilson in 1915. 