Exploring American History The English Merchants Form Companies. Wealthy as the merchants were, however, no one of them had enough money to buy and stock ships to send to distant parts of the world. So merchants joined in companies. One of the oldest of these traded with the German towns along the Baltic Sea and with Flanders. Another was called the Levant Company, whose ships sailed through the Strait of Gibraltar and the length of the Mediterranean, trading with the cities of southern Europe, and with those ancient centers of trade, Damascus and Antioch, where ended the caravan routes across the desert from Asia. English merchants soon captured the trade which had once made Genoa and Venice rich. Other English merchants, joining to form the Muscovy Company, sent trading expeditions to the villages and cities of Russia and beyond Russia to Persia. Russia was known to Vikings and Irish before Leif Ericson discovered Vinland (see page 4). In 1600, ships of the East India Company followed the route of Da Gama about Africa and began trading at Calcutta in India and in the towns along the banks of the Ganges. These English merchants were taking the profits which had once made Portugal rich. They laid the foundation of England's power in India, which has continued to this day. Wealthy English Merchants Wanted to Invest Money in America. At the opening of the seventeenth century Englishmen were traveling over the known world to trade. Along London's busy streets hurried merchants. These men would gather in their shops or in the coffee houses to exchange news. One would tell of a ship in which he was interested that had been lost with a valuable cargo while coming about the southern tip of Africa. Another would describe a marvelous fair which he had attended in the heart of Russia. While there he had seen goods that had been brought in from hundreds of miles around to be sold, and there he had filled his money bags with fat profits. Still another might tell of a letter recently received from a friend who lived in Spain describing the gold and silver, the spices and valuable goods, that came pouring into that country from the New World. Perhaps these English merchants might fall to talking about the Newr World. Why should not Englishmen find gold there? Surely the Spaniards had proved that America was rich. Who feared the Spaniards now that Drake had defeated their proud Armada? Certainly no king of Spain would be strong enough to stop Englishmen from going to the New World to search for gold, to trade, or to build homes, But .America had more riches than merely gold. Had not the explorers who had sailed along its shores brought back news of endless forests? In these Englishmen could find tall, straight trees for masts, and tar, and turpentine. When the American colonies won their independence, most of the people dwelling in the United States were the children or grandchildren of persons from the northern countries of Europe, particularly the British Isles and Germany. The people from these nations intermarried and created the American stock. The United States was a melting-pot for different European peoples. After the close of the War of 1812 an increasing number of people left their farms in Ireland and journeyed to the land of promise west of the Atlantic. They were poor, and life was hard in Ireland. There were seasons when people went hungry. In the terrible year 1848 almost no potatoes were raised, and the folk of Ireland were face to face with a famine. Thousands came to America to escape starvation. After 1830 the Germans began coming again in considerable numbers. Many Germans did not like the kind of government under which they lived. They were unwilling to endure the tyranny of their rulers. In 1848 many Germans tried to change the government so that the people would have a voice, through elected representatives, in their government, as in Great Britain and America. The attempted reform failed, and many Germans fled to America to escape the wrath of their kings and princes. To the suffering people of Ireland and Germany, America offered an opportunity to start life again, exactly as in the seventeenth century it had held out such a prospect to Englishmen. Not until after the World War did America practically close its doors to the stranger who desired to make his home within its boundaries. Today, in the second quarter of the twentieth century, the United States is a land of great cities. While the population speaks English in the main, many other languages are also spoken. Among the people are to be found both the rich and the poor, the Educated and the ignorant. Society is vastly different from the society of the Indian village or even the society of America before the Civil War. The twentieth century has brought forth a new America. The problems of today are different from those before the World War and very different from those before the Civil War. Immigration Between the Civil War and the World War. The Irish who came to America before the Civil War tended to settle in the eastern cities. Many of them worked at building the canals and the new railroads. On the other hand, the many Germans who arrived after 1848 tended to live on the land. They established their homes on farms in Michigan, Iowa, Wisconsin, Missouri, Texas, and other States. Carl Schurz, who was secretary of the interior under President Hayes, was the greatest of the Germans who came in 1848. Three different influences in the latter part of the nineteenth century caused the flow of immigrants into the United States to increase to a flood. First, America in these years offered great opportunities, particularly in the swiftly developing industries. Second, the cost of transportation across the ocean was reduced by the new steamships to a very low figure. Before 1850 most immigrants came to the New World by slow-going sailing-ships. After the Civil War they came on the new steam-driven liners and during the trip were usually herded like cattle in the steerage of the ship. Third, life continued to be so hard in Europe and Asia that thousands of people sought America to escape poverty and tyranny. Until 1896 a majority of the immigrants came from the countries of northern and western Europe: The two Jugoslavian women on the station platform are saying good-by to friends who are emigrants to the United States. Hope for the future mingles with sorrow at parting. Great Britain, Germany, Norway, Sweden, and Denmark. After that date the people from southern and eastern Europe began to outnumber the Northerners greatly. Thousands of immigrants came from Poland, Russia, Austria- Hungary, Turkey, Italy, and the Balkan Peninsula. After the surrender of Lee almost every year saw a greater number of immigrants landed at Ellis Island in New York Harbor, where government officials carefully examined the newcomers, Many who for one reason or another could not comply with the rules were sent back at the expense of the steamship company which had brought them. More than a million a year came between 1900 and 1914, when the outbreak of the World War in Europe stopped the flow of immigrants. The Immigrant in the United States. Most of the immigrants after the Civil War went to the cities to live. At first the people from each country naturally tended to settle in a section by themselves. Steiner in the same book described "Little Hungary" in Cleveland, Ohio, as it was in 1906: " In Cleveland some twenty thousand Magyars live together round about those giant steel mills which send their black smoke . . . over that . . . city. Although street after street is occupied solely by them, 1 have not seen a house that shows neglect, and the battle with Cleveland dirt is waged fiercely here, judging by the clean doorsteps, window-panes, and white curtains which I saw at nearly every house. ... A weekly paper keeps the Hungarians in touch with one another and with the homeland. . . . They cling ... to the fatherland, in which they have a just pride, and whenever the opportunity' offers itself they show how much they love it." ! Steiner talked to a little group on shipboard who were going back to visit the home village." Immigrants Have a Hard Time. The industries of the United States, although they were growing swiftly, could not provide immediately for the hundreds of thousands of immigrants who came each year. Because there were too many laborers, wages were low. If a man had a job which paid only a little, he was wise to keep it as long as he could, for so many newcomers were seeking work that often there were not enough jobs to go around. In 1873 and 1893 Americans suffered from panics. The condition of newly-arrived immigrants who knew little about the country and could not speak English was often pitiful. Not only were men out of work during the hard times of 1873 and 1893, but these periods of depression made wages unusually low. The Rise of Labor Unions. In an effort to improve factory conditions and to secure increased wages and an eight-hour day, wage-earners banded themselves together in unions. Labor unions had appeared before the Civil War, but none of them had lasted for more than a few years. After this war, when industry was growing more rapidly, stronger unions appeared. Perhaps the oldest of the labor organizations still in existence is the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, founded in the 1860's. The Immigration Law of 1924. Perhaps no law of the United States or of any State has benefited American wage-earners so much as the Immigration Law of 1924. From 1914 until 1918 immigration into the United States was practically stopped by the World War. When peace came, a temporary measure was passed which kept out all but a small number of immigrants. In 1924 the new immigration policy of the United States was shaped. Following five years of temporary provisions this law went into full force on July 1, 1929. It provides that immigration into the United States shall be limited to 150,000 newcomers each year. No immigrants from China, Japan, and India and only a few from Africa are permitted. The yearly quota allowed to each country is fixed by the per cent, of the 150,000 which corresponds to its share of the population of 1920. The quota of the British Isles is the largest because a very large percentage of the American people are descended from persons who came originally from that region. The German quota is large for the same reason. The Greek quota is small, because the Greeks began coming to America late in the nineteenth century, and the number of persons in the United States descended from Greeks is small. No limit is put on the number of immigrants who may come to the United States from the Philippines, Canada, or Latin America. Practically no immigrants, however, may come from islands of the West Indies not possessed by the United States. Reasons for the Immigration Law of 1924. During the World War the people of the United States discovered that many of the immigrants who had come to the New World lived in communities by themselves where the customs of the homeland were continued. Some of these people naturally remained loyal to the nations from which they had come. The American people felt that the immigrants should give up their loyalties to their home countries and become Americanized. The War made Americans believe that immigrants were coming into the country faster than they could be Americanized. A demand arose that the immigrant flood be stopped, so that the immigrants already here could be absorbed into the life of the country. Another reason for the law was the demand of the laboring people. American wage-earners received high wages after the War because there were not too many of them for the positions industry offered. If a flood of laborers came to the United States from other countries, wages would be reduced. There was danger that America would have too many wage-earners, as in the latter part of the nineteenth century. This condition would mean a return to the poverty and suffering of those days. So the immigrant flood of more than 1,000,000 a year before 1914 was reduced to 150,000 a year. The United States and Japan. An American naval officer, Commodore Matthew C. Perry, in 1853-54 opened Japan to communication with the world. Up to that time the Japanese had truly lived by themselves. (See map, page 374.) They were eventually grateful to the United States for persuading them to open their doors. The Japanese at once began to study the ways of living of Europe and America and adopted everything they thought would be of benefit to them. As a result the twentieth century found Japan a new nation, strong, industrialized, and highly civilized. In 1904, when Japan went to war with Russia and defeated that nation in eastern Siberia, the American people were in sympathy with the Japanese. President Roosevelt helped bring the warring nations to an agreement, and the treaty of peace was signed at Portsmouth, New Hampshire. Then Japanese laborers began to come to America in large numbers. They were willing to work for lower wages and to live much more cheaply than Americans. The people of California, Oregon, and Washington began to fear that their States might be overrun by the Japanese. In 1907 the United States entered into a "Gentleman's Agreement" with Japan that the Mikado's government should not permit any more laborers to emigrate to America. So the difficulty was settled peacefully and without a treaty. During the World War, in which Japan fought against Germany, the Japanese government tried to get control of some rich regions in China. The United States, following the "Open Door" policy, protested. After the World War ended, some Americans began to fear that the Japanese wanted to get control of China and even the Philippines. In both countries talk of possible war began to be heard. America did not want war, nor did Japan. The American government believed that one of the chief causes of the trouble was the fact that both nations were rapidly building warships. The naval conference which met in Washington in the winter of 1921-22 (see page 750) brought peace to the Pacific area by means of treaties which were to run until 1936. 