The colonists defeat the Indians in the Pequot War. New England was thus rapidly expanding. It was able to do so in comparative safety as a result of the terrible Pequot War in 1637. This was the story of white aggression and racial hatred which was, unhappily, to be repeated on almost all of our frontiers for two and a half centuries. The chief incident of this first New England war was the surprise attack by the Puritans, under the lead of Captain John Mason, on the main village of the savages. In the dark, with a strong wind blowing, the two entrances to the stockade were guarded to prevent any escape, and then a torch was applied. Five hundred Indian men, women, and children were burned to death. The colonists form a confederation for protection. The fear of a general Indian uprising led to the formation of a league in 1643 among the four colonies of Massachusetts, Plymouth, New Haven, and Connecticut. Under the name of the New England Confederation this league functioned feebly for forty years, and was of slight importance. Its chief significance is in showing how easily these colonies, which were beginning to plant themselves without charters or thought of King or Parliament, were slipping toward a belief in entire political independence in managing all their own affairs. A step toward intellectual independence also was taken by Massachusetts in 1636 when Harvard College was established to train up a godly ministry. The Puritans pass severe laws against the Quakers. In 1656, two Quaker women, from England by way of Barbados, arrived in Boston. At once persecution began, and as others came it was increased n severity. The penalities included, besides the selling of Quaker children into slavery in the West Indies, the imprisonment, beating, and torturing of their elders, and even the hanging of three men and one woman. At the request of Massachusetts all the other New England colonies, with the exception of Rhode Island, passed severe laws against the Quakers, though none tortured or killed them. To the request of Massachusetts Williams replied that the Rhode Islanders had no laws against any one declaring his religious beliefs, whatever they might be. He also said that he believed the doctrines of the Quakers tended to the subversion of civil government. But he added that if they were allowed to preach in peace and were not persecuted, they would gain fewer adherents by their sayings than they would by suffering and martyrdom. The General Assembly of Rhode Island added that the colony prized freedom of conscience "as the greatest happiness that men can possess in this world." New England makes rapid progress. In the forty years since the passengers on the Mayflower had landed on the shores of Massachusetts, New England must have seemed to its old inhabitants to have made astounding progress. Literature had begun. Bradford and Winthrop had written valuable histories, Williams in Rhode Island and Hooker in Connecticut had wrought out the ideals of the rule of the people, and of intellectual toleration. The ordinary citizen, living on his farm owned outright, untroubled by any relics of feudalism, untaxed save by himself, saying his say to all the world in town-meeting, had gained a new self-reliance. Wrestling with his soul and plough on week days, and the innumerable points of the minister's sermon on Sundays and meeting days, he was coming to be a hard nut for any imperial system to crack. All were not farmers, though most were, and a merchant class of larger or smaller traders was springing up in the seaports and in villages along navigable rivers. These traders carried on a commerce with the mother country, the Wine Islands, Africa, for slaves, the West Indies, and their fellow colonists to the south. Maryland is founded as a refuge for persecuted Catholics. In 1632 the foundations for yet another colony were laid next to Virginia. Lord Baltimore, a Catholic peer, received a charter from King Charles which permitted him to found a settlement where Catholics would he tolerated, named in honor of the queen, Maryland. Baltimore could make laws only "with the advice, assent, and approbation of the freemen or the greater part of them or their representatives." The Dutch colonize New Netherlands. From 1610, the year following Hudson's discovery of the river named for him, Dutch traders had frequented its mouth to traffic with the Indians. In 1614 they founded a fort and a small trading post on the site of what is now Albany. In 1623 the Dutch West India Company, a trading company like the others that have been mentioned, planted a small settlement on Courtesy of Hughes and Company Leonard Calvert, Brother of Lord Baltimore and First Governor of Maryland, Bargaining with the Indians for Land Manhattan Island, where a few huts had been built some years before. The Dutch claim to New Netherland, with its principal town of New Amsterdam, was not clearly defined but included New York and Long Island, New Jersey, and Delaware. Of course it was not recognized by the English. The Dutch capture the Swedish settlements but are in turn conquered by the English. The Dutch were, in fact, rather late claimants, though their brief history in America was picturesque enough. Many prominent New York families like to trace their ancestry back to them. Their stay was a troubled one, for they were in in Connecticut and eastern Long Island, and the Virginians in Delaware, but also with colonies of Swedes which had settled at Wilmingon and surrounding points. The latter were finally conquered by the Dutch in 1655, but nine years later an English fleet arrived at the mouth of the Hudson and forced the Dutch governor, the redoubtable Peter Stuyvesant, to surrender. The Dutch had not believed in self- government by their colonists and the history of New Amsterdam had been turbulent. The small town early acquired its modern cosmopolitan character, and it is said that eighteen languages were spoken on its streets in the Dutch period. Except for a few words adopted into our language, some local social customs and many romantic legends, the Dutch influence, however, has not been great in the development of our institutions and culture. English promoters found New Jersey. In honor of the Duke of York, the King's brother, to whom the territory had been granted, the colony and town were renamed New York, and the Dutch sway within the present United States came to an end. The two favorites to whom the Duke of York granted the land between New York and Delaware Bay founded East and West Jersey—now New Jersey. The two colonies soon came largely under the control of the Quakers. The Carolinas are founded. Charles II, who had returned to the English throne in 1660, after the death of Cromwell, was only too willing to use the vast lands of America as grants to noblemen. Just as lie granted the Dutch territories to his brother, so also he granted to a group of eight nobles the lands south of Virginia now included in North and South Carolina. Colonization was rather slow, but Charleston was settled in 1670, and grew rather rapidly. French Huguenots found refuge there from the persecutions of Louis XIV. Rice growing, introduced in 1693, resulted in a great increase in slavery, rapid fortunes, and much wealth and leisure. T This diversity was greatly to increase in the future, but at its beginning the United States became both a hope and a refuge for people of many races. There was also the marked variety in religion. Although all the colonies were under English rule, Catholics, Congregationalists, Lutherans, Church of England adherents, Quakers, and others could all find rapidly growing and prosperous communities in which they could make their homes, and be unmolested. The intolerance of individual colonies should not obscure the remarkable religious freedom that had come to exist within a group of colonies of a single European power. It could have been found at that time under neither French nor Spanish rule. New England develops small farms and the compact type of settlement. For reasons chiefly of soil, topography, and climate, there had also come rapid and clearly marked differences in the social and economic life of the various colonies. In New England the physical factors in agriculture tended to make small farms which could most profitably be tilled by the head of a family with the help of sons or a hired man. The system of small holdings tended in turn to continue the compact type of settlement which had naturally developed from the New England form of migration, groups of families closely knit together by common membership in a church. The small farm, the church, and the town meeting all worked against a loosely scattered mode of settlement in New England. New York is dominantly commercial. New York had started purely as a trading post. For more than a century, the huge land grants of the Dutch patroon system, the fur trade for the only colony which had easy access to the interior of the continent, and the magnificent harbor, all were to determine its character as mainly commercial, although there were many farms along the Hudson, while the other colonies were dominated by agriculture. The Southern colonies develop the plantation system. Passing southward to Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas, we find agriculture again holding sway. In them the staple crop of tobacco demanded larger landholdings than in New England. Tobacco culture brought about a more scattered way of living, as well as a demand for that black slave labor which was economically unprofitable on the broken and stony surface of New England. These effects were not all felt in the South during its earlier period, but were to be of great importance after 1700. England grants much political liberty to her colonies. Another characteristic of the English colonies, as contrasted with those of any other nation at that time, was the extraordinary amount of liberty granted to the individual colonist. Neither France, Spain, nor even liberty-loving little Holland dreamed of giving her colonists when they left the mother country anything like the freedom which England granted to hers. Tecumseh organizes the Indians against the whites. The Indians by treaty were in possession of much of the Old Northwest. Across the international boundary were scattered English serving as a reminder that there was a very real barrier to advance beyond the lakes. In the dozen years preceding 1809, the Indians had "sold" 48.000,000 acres, but this did not satisfy the whites' eternal demand for land. Finally two leaders arose among the red men, Tecumseh and his brother who was called the Prophet, sons of a Shawnee. These two men, the finest, perhaps, that the Indians developed in their history, conceived the statesmanlike plan of reforming the Indians, keeping them from drink, stopping the alienation of their lands, and uniting all the tribes into one great confederation which should hold itself aloof from contact with the whites and defend the natives' own mode of life. Harrison defeats the Indians at Tippecanoe. For a short while they were successful and even induced their followers to give up rum. A large settlement of Indians under the leadership of the two brothers was established at the junction of Tippecanoe Creek and the Wabash River, and it seemed as if they might he able to make a final stand against the whites. William Henry Harrison, Governor of Indiana Territory, got together some of the Indians and made a treaty with them which transferred Tecumseh's hunting grounds to the whites, a treaty which Tecumseh regarded as void. The Indian leader's power grew, and more tribes joined him. Harrison moved swiftly with about a thousand troops to Tecumseh's settlement at Tippecanoe. The presence of the troops was a provocation, and the Indians fell upon them in the night. Harrison routed the attackers, forced them to flee, and then destroyed their entire village. The "War Hawks" organize Congress for war with England. Advantage was taken of the belief through the West that the British in Canada were egging on the Indians against us. The truth of this is still open to question, though the Indians had secured arms from the British. But the country was made to believe not only that we had been right in fighting Tecumseh but that our northwestern settlements were unsafe from Indian attack so long as the British remained in Canada. Three days before the battle of Tippecanoe, Congress met in Washington. A little over a fortnight later, Monroe became Secretary of State. He hoped to avert war. But there was a group of young new members in the Congress who were yet more insistent upon war. The War Hawks," as the aggressive newcomers were to be called, formed an important group, though all were so young. Slavery, quite as much as Northern factories and mills and bank accounts, was protected by the Constitution. Some day, the conservatives argued, the problem might be capable of solution, without force or injustice. Changed economic conditions had fastened slavery on the South, and another shift some time might make it possible for the South to get rid of it. England had done so in the Empire by spreading emancipation over a number of years and compensating the slave owners. In America the abolitionists aroused passion and focused attention in such a way as to make the question of slavery a burning one. The country was under the black shadow of dangerous sectional feeling, even when the people so light-heartedly marched and sang their way through a contest between a party without a platform and one without a vice-presidential candidate. A spirit of lawlessness seems to pervade our land. Meanwhile the ferment in America continued. We presented in the last topic something of the swirling currents in the mental life of the period. We have to note now that much of the passion and prejudice developed by new ideas and conditions found vent in mob action and a general reign of violence. Nor was this by any means confined to the dispute over slavery and abolition. The mobbing mania which attended that problem was merely a symptom of a far wider unsettlement in a society changing so rapidly that the forces of law and order were outrun by those making for new adjustments. The great increase in the number of foreigners arriving as immigrants was raising religious, economic, political, and social questions which were often treated in the spirit of the mob. Although the Germans suffered in places, the Irish were the special target for violence. There were anti-Catholic riots in numerous villages and cities. In many states Catholic churches were burned and priests maltreated. Almost invariably sufferers could get neither redress nor protection. Popular unrest arises in Rhode Island. In 1842 the effort to settle a question by means of violence almost precipitated civil war in Rhode Island, which had been backward in abolishing the freehold qualifications for the franchise. In this particular eddy of the national life, economic conditions, democracy, the negro, and the foreigner all played a part. Both the franchise and representation of the towns were antiquated in that state, which was yet being governed under its old colonial charter. In the early days the freehold qualifications had not been questioned when almost every one was a farmer and could own a few acres. The economic change from agriculture to shipping, and especially to manufacturing, had produced a considerable class of citizens who were no longer freeholders, but they considered that they had the right to vote. The conservatives in control were stubbornly opposed to enlarging the electorate, but the malcontents found a leader in Thomas W. Dorr, the son of a wealthy manufacturer and a graduate of Phillips Exeter Academy and of Harvard College. The Dorr War achieves its purpose. When the new People's party, as it was called, was rebuffed by the legislature, which declined to consider its grievances, a convention was assembled. A new constitution for the state was drawn up by the convention and submitted to the people. Nearly 14,000 votes were cast in favor of it, a majority of the qualified voters of the state. Technically neither the convention nor the new constitution had any legal status, but an election was held and Dorr was elected governor. Meanwhile, the legislature had been stung into action, and had prepared a new constitution, which, however, was defeated at the polls. There were now two governments in the state, and both appealed to President Tyler for aid. This he declined to give to either. The Landholders had sought to make political capital by claiming that the Dorrites were trying to give the vote to numbers of undesirable persons. By the passage of laws of extreme severity against the rebels and by the condemnation of Dorr to life imprisonment, the Landholders lost almost all popular support. Before the end of 1842 they were forced to submit a new constitution to the people. It gave the franchise to all male citizens over twenty-one without regard to color, provided they paid a tax of not less than one dollar a year. Three years later Dorr was liberated from prison. The Dorr War was thus successful, though the armed revolt itself had been suppressed. John Quincy Adams opposes the "gag rule" in Congress. Meanwhile, the slavery agitation was continuing as an ominous undertone in the national life. Almost every question before Congress became the compromise, men gave themselves up to making money rather than to splitting hairs over the slavery problem. England and the United States become interested in Central America. An important bit of European diplomacy was concerned with the respective rights, or perhaps it would be truer to say ambitions, of England and the United States in Central America. For two hundred years England had claimed a protectorate over the Mosquito Indians in Nicaragua. In January, 1848, British warships seized Greytown on the San Juan River. In April, Polk announced his strong insistence upon maintaining the Monroe Doctrine, "a policy which no European power should cherish the disposition to resist." Apart from our general reasons for having proclaimed that doctrine which warned all European nations not to establish new colonies in America, we had a peculiar interest in the isthmus of Central America. Since our acquisition of California, it was the shortest route between our East and our far West. We make the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty with England. For a long time there had been talk of the possibility of a canal being dug across Central America, which would permit a continuous water passage between our two coasts. In any case a railroad there was a simple matter as contrasted with our yet unbuilt transcontinental lines. England also had a stake in whatever might mean a new trade route for the world at large. When, in 1849, we secured by treaties with Honduras and Nicaragua the right of transit across their territories, England was concerned about her own rights. At the end of that year a special envoy, Sir Henry Lytton Bulwer, arrived from England with the offer to negotiate a treaty that would define the rights of each nation. The negotiations were in the hands of John M. Clayton, then Secretary of State. A treaty, known from the two chief negotiators as the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty, was signed on April 19, 1850. England agreed not to try to extend her territory in Central America. The United States agreed not to seek new possessions there. The treaty provided that both nations would guarantee the neutrality of any canal built. It said that neither would fortify it or ever insist upon exclusive control over it. And it was further stated that it was to be built for the benefit of the world and to be operated on "equal terms for all." No canal was built during the century, but the treatv undoubtedly cleared the international atmosphere. Much anti-English feeling still remains in our country. It was well that it should be so cleared, for by the mid-century a new factor had entered American politics. As we had previously noted, the Irish had been coming in great numbers. By 1850 there were nearly a million of them, settled for the most part in the industrial centers of the East. The relations of Ireland to England had always been extremely difficult. The Irish who reached America as immigrants came for the most part with intense hatred of England. Although they were at first not popular among ourselves, partly due to economic causes, they developed a marked aptitude for politics. Locating in large masses in important centers like Boston, New York, and Philadelphia, they became an important and even at times a determining factor in elections. Politicians were quick to see the need of catering to the Irish vote and the simplest way was to play upon hatred of England. There was still enough feeling left from the Revolution and the War of 1812 to make a strong anti-British policy almost as welcome to Americans as to the Irish. Our history in 1850 was still brief. History as written in those days was largely a record of politics and wars. Until the Mexican struggle, our only two wars as an independent nation had been those against England. Our whole history appeared one long struggle against that power. "Twisting the lion's tail" thus came to be one of the surest means of winning votes in the absence of important domestic issues. The Democrats approve the Compromise of 1850. For a moment, in 1852, it seemed as though the chief domestic issue, slavery, had been settled. The election proved that the people as a whole wished to forget. In the platform drawn up by the Democrats at their convention in Baltimore in June, 1852, the compromise as passed by Congress in 1850 was unqualifiedly approved. A further plank pledged the party to "resist all attempts at renewing, in Congress or out of it, the agitation of the slavery question, under whatever shape or color the attempt may be made." Certainly nothing could have been more explicit than that, and whoever voted the Democratic ticket knew what he was voting for. The two wings of the party into which it had split in the previous election were willing to unite, and the only difficulty was a candidate. To satisfy the North and South and the two united Democratic factions, it was necessary to choose as colorless and recordless a candidate as could be found. But it was not until the forty-ninth ballot that he was found by a stampede to Franklin Pierce of New Hampshire. He had probably been agreed upon from the first by the party leaders, who did not, however, bring out his name until the thirty-fifth ballot. As the ordinary man became more and more anxious to make money, he cared less and less about the affairs of the world at large. Foreigners were to sell us raw materials, buy our mass-produced goods, and send us gold in payment, while we reserved our entire domestic market for our own manufactures. Harding opposes our entrance into the League of Nations. Although Harding, when a candidate for the presidency, had made contradictory statements as to his attitude towards the League of Nations, he became opposed to it after his inauguration. In 1921, the Senate passed the Knox resolution which ratified the treaty with Germany and which declared the war at an end. It inserted a clause in the resolution prohibiting the President from appointing any representative of the United States to serve on any body, commission, or agency set up by the Versailles Treaty without the consent of Congress. For many years after, in the absence of that consent, we have had to be represented on many European commissions by an "unofficial observer" only. We make a beginning toward limitation of armaments. In 1921, although eager to take part in the movement for disarmament which had always been an American ideal, we felt unable to do so in connection with the League. President Harding invited nine powers, including Great Britain, France, Italy, and Japan, to meet in Washington to discuss reduction of naval power, and on November 12, the meeting was opened by Secretary Hughes. A beginning toward reducing naval expense was made by the agreement on the 5-5-3 ratio. This allotted equal strength of capital ships to the United States and Great Britain, and gave to Japan three-fifths of the strength of each of the others. Italy and France agreed to smaller percentages. Although sixty-eight capital ships were scrapped by the treaty, no progress could be made when other forms of more modern and effective naval weapons were discussed. France, particularly, objected to limitation of her submarines. The use of submarines, however, was forbidden as commerce destroyers. We come to an understanding with other powers. Perhaps more important than the naval treaty were the two which were made at the same conference regarding affairs in the Far East. In place of a renewal of the British-Japanese alliance, the nine nations represented at the conference, including China, Holland, Belgium, and Portugal, as well as those named above, made a new treaty. It is called the "ninepower treaty" and mutually guarantees the integrity of Chinese sovereignty and the policy of the "open door" for trade. In a "four-power treaty," Great Britain, France, Japan, and the United States agreed to respect each other's possessions in the East, and to submit to a joint conference any question likely to cause trouble. Various minor matters were also adjusted in other treaties. The conference was the one outstanding feature of Harding's term, and brought great credit to Secretary of State Hughes. Congress passes measures limiting immigration. For twenty- years before the war, restriction of immigration had been discussed, and several measures had been passed by Congress for the purpose, all of which had been vetoed. The unusual condition brought about by the war, however, gave added strength to the movement, and in 1917 a measure, based chiefly on a literacy test, was passed over Wilson's veto. The extreme nationalism aroused during the War and the danger after its close, that vast numbers of Europeans might rush to America to escape post-war poverty and unemployment in their native lands, led Congress to pass an act in 1921. It limited immigrants to three per cent of the number of their respective nationalities in the United States according to the census of 1910. A stricter law was passed in 1924. It was provided that after 1927 the total immigration should not be more than 150,000 persons a year, and that each nation might send to us only as many in proportion to that figure as the total number of its nationals in the United States in 1920 bore to our total population. This "national origin" system did not go into operation, owing to various difficulties, until 1929, but is now the basis of our immigration policy. Under it only 146 Japanese could enter the country each year as immigrants, but Congress specifically excluded all Japanese. Congress passes bonus bill but President's veto is sustained. The principal financial measures undertaken during Harding's administration were the effort to give a bonus to the ex-soldiers, the lowering of taxes with the beginning of cutting down the national debt, and the first funding of the European war debts. Our early immigrants come to find homes. There has been a mixture of races in America from the beginning. The chief of the colonizing groups was English, followed at a distance by the Dutch, Swedes, French in Louisiana, and others. In New York of the earliest days it was said that twenty languages were spoken, and within two years of its founding Philadelphia contained, besides the English, Dutch, Germans, Finns, Swedes, Danes, French, Scotch, and Irish. In the early eighteenth century' foreign immigration set in on a heavy scale. By mid-century perhaps 20,000 Swiss, 60,000 Germans and an equal number of Scotch-Irish, besides Irish, Jews, and others, had settled here. These early' immigrants, however, like the Scandinavian, German, and some other races in the next century, came, not to find jobs, but homes. Our later immigrants come to find work. In the course of the nineteenth century' the situation radically changed. Immigration took on enormous proportions. By 1880 a half million foreigners a year were pouring in, rising a couple of decades later to 1,000,000. After that date also the racial character altered. Instead of Irish, Germans, and Scandinavians, there came in tidal sweeps Italians, Poles, Czechs, Slovaks, Greeks, Levantines, Russians, Rumanians, and others from eastern and southeastern Europe, who had little or no racial affinity with the English stock on which they were to be grafted. As Professor Beard has pointed out, never since the Roman Empire had a people imported such a deluge of strange races to serve them. For to a considerable extent from the 1830's and especially from the 1880's these newcomers did come to serve the older Americans. The bulk of the more alien races came here seeking jobs. Whether they sought jobs themselves or took those they had been imported to fill, they naturally got those which native Americans least desired. They did the manual labor of laying railroads, and other sorts; they worked in coal mines and iron and steel furnaces. Several consequences flowed from this flood of newcomers and the work they did, even when they took up land in the West and became farmers. In Europe the population of each nation is largely of one race. In Spain, Italy, France, Germany, and others, all the work of every sort, the lowest as well as the highest, which contributes to the social result is done by people allied by blood. Every nation is provincial. It looks upon foreigners as somehow inferior. Multitudes of those who came to us were dreadfully poor. They were foreign, and strange to us. Many seemed uncouth. They did not know our language or our ways. They took the jobs to a great extent which Americans had rather looked down on anyway. Thus we came to look upon these new-comers rather as servile races and to regard the work they did as beneath what an American should do. We came in the North to look upon work done by them much as the Southerner had regarded work done by the slave, as something he himself could not stoop to. The foreigners interfere with the bargaining power of labor. Another bad effect was the extraordinary speed with which the country was settled and its industries grew. To those who were making money by the progress in real estate, coal, timber, oil, railroads, manufacturing, and many other material things, this seemed wholly desirable. The growth of population at a rate Europe never knew was regarded as indicating the success of the American experiment. We realize now that many of the evils from which we suffer—the corruption in politics, the mismanagement of our great cities, the general low morality of business, the waste of our resources, the emphasis placed on wealth and material success—stem from the feverish speed with which we grew and the haste with which colossal fortunes could be piled up in consequence. For labor itself, whether native American or imported, the effect was bad. The development of labor unions and the bargaining power of labor were greatly retarded because of the difficulty of incorporating in the movement these large bodies of foreigners who did not speak English and with whom the American worker would not join in combination. To the satisfaction of the capitalists these foreigners not only undersold labor but prevented labor from forming effective combinations. The foreigners come in such numbers as to prevent proper Americanization. Moreover, coming in such enormous numbers, they formed racial groups so that the normal process of absorbing individuals into American life was almost impossible. An individual alien might have quickly learned our language and adapted himself to our ways while at the same time he might have retained qualities which would have enriched our civilization. Many of these foreign strains have had much to contribute to us, such, frequently, as the love for music, an age-long appreciation of beauty, an ardent belief in the American Dream, a belief that life is something more than getting and spending, a willingness to consider no kind of useful work as unworthy, and many others. Of course, multitudes of them also have not had these qualities. Faced by solid masses of aliens in racial blocks, the Americans have too often felt that the necessary Americanization of these blocks has meant only destroying every alien trait and taste. Our foreigners have made many contributions to our civilization. On the other hand, in spite of every handicap, many of the later groups, like the earlier, have contributed much to our common civilization. The Scotch, Scotch-Irish, Irish, Dutch, French, and Germans who joined the English in the early settlement of the colonies made ours a mixed people from the start. Among the later groups the Scandinavians of the Northwest are second to none in maintaining the principles of the older America. Many of the Jews, ever since the colonial period, have contributed much to our cultural life. We find Italian, Polish, and Czech names in the list of citizens eminent for distinguished service. If we eliminated all the contributions of post-colonial immigrants and their descendants—works of art, literature, drama, music, the scientific contributions, the glorious deeds in army and navy, the support of hospitals, libraries, opera—the resultant scene would be a strangely shrunken America. America may now develop a new composite race. In the past fifty years, however, immigrants have been coming in far too rapidly for their own good or ours. Many voices were raised from time to time to warn of the dangers. The insistent pressure on Congress, however, by the employers, who wanted not only cheap labor but labor which would foil the efforts of the labor unions, was too much to allow proper legislation to be passed. It was the prospect of the impoverished millions and millions, who wished to come to America in one final and completely overwhelming flood at the end of the World War, which caused barriers to be put up. The "melting pot" is no longer being filled faster than it can melt, and we can now develop a new and composite race. There is to-day no such thing as a "pure race." Every race, including the English, is a mixture of many ancestral strains. What we now call pure is merely a race which has been free from too large mixtures for enough centuries to have established a character and quality of its own. That, in time, America may now achieve. 