The Scotch-Insh settlers were not of mixed blood, as their name might suggest. They were people of Scotch descent whose ancestors had lived in northern Ireland, and before that had lived for centuries in the Lowlands of Scotland. During the reign of James I, many of the Scotch Lowlanders were induced to leave the poor soil of Scotland and settle in the northeastern part of Ireland. But the Irish soil was little better than that which they had left behind, and these staunch Presbyterians soon found themselves involved in religious disputes with the Irish Catholics. America, therefore, easily attracted great numbers of them to her shores. There were also many Irish settlers who came to the Catholic colony of Maryland for religious reasons, while still others had hoped to improve their economic condition on the fertile soil of the New World. The Scotch-Irish and the Irish settlers found most of the land in the Tidewater, and much of that in the Piedmont, already occupied, and consequently many of them pushed farther to the west into the Appalachians. Accustomed to hardships at home, these settlers made ideal frontiersmen. America was fortunate in having such hardy, thrifty, and courageous men and women to lead in the conquest of the wilderness. The Settlement of the Old West; Treaty of Fort Stanwix. To prevent friction between the Indians and the English colonists in the West, the British government had attempted by the Proclamation of 1763 to prevent the settlement of the territory between the mountains and the Mississippi River. The vast district west of the Appalachians and lying between the Great Lakes and Florida was reserved for the Indians. The Proclamation Line, west of which white settlements were forbidden, was the -watershed separating land draining directly to the Atlantic Ocean from that draining to the St. Lawrence River or to the Gulf of Mexico (map p. 118). In 1768, however, Sir William Johnson negotiated with the Iroquois Indians were rounded up, branded, and then driven slowly, grazing along the way, to the Northern markets. Six hundred thousand cattle took the "Long Trail" in 1871. With the advent of the railroads into the West the "Long Trail" was considerably shortened. Dodge City in Kansas, Ogallala in Nebraska, and Miles City in Montana became famous as centers of the cattle industry. The great ranching frontier soon gave way to farming. The railroads brought into the West many farmers who took up the land and enclosed it with barbed-wire fences, greatly impeding the long drives. The Homesteader. The last wave of settlers into the West were the farmers, and with their coming the frontier passed into history. The settlement of the prairie land began in Kansas after the passage of the KansasNebraska Act (p. 366). Slaveholders and free-state forces contended for the control of the territory. After the rush into Kansas.had subsided settlers began to stake out claims in Nebraska. Remnants of many a train of covered wagons, tiring of the long journey to Oregon or California and attracted by the fertility of the soil, stopped to make their homes on the prairie. Likewise when many gold-seekers had been disappointed in their get-rich-quick schemes they returned to Kansas and Nebraska and exchanged the pick for the plow. The Homestead Act of 1S62 attracted many immigrants through the lure of free land. The demand for food supplies during the War between the North and the South, with its resulting increase in prices, was a further incentive to the settlement of the Western plains. In the period between 1862 and 1S80 nearly 470,000 settlers filed applications for homesteads and about one third of that number received land. Waving fields of wheat and corn displaced the pastures, and the recently constructed railroads transported millions of dollars worth of foodstuffs to the Eastern markets. In 1SS6 an unusual land boom caused a second migration into Kansas. European immigrants poured into the country. Removal of the Indians. The Indians were the unfortunate victims of the westward movement. Acting upon the principle that there were "no good Indians but dead Indians," the frontiersmen forced them from their hunting grounds and homes with little regard for property rights and often with great cruelty. During the presidency of Andrew Jackson many of the Indians east of the Mississippi were removed to new homes in the West, which the government promised should belong to them permanently. With the discovery of gold and the resulting migration into the West many of the Indians who resented the incursions of the whites removed to reservations. Even then it was difficult to protect the property of the Indians against the greed of the white men, especially if the land on the reservation was very fertile or if it contained valuable minerals. The first two decades following the War between the North and the South were marked by almost constant warfare with the Indians on the Western frontier. Frequently the battles resulted disastrously for the whites, but by 1885 most of the Indians had been restricted to reservations or had been driven into Canada or Mexico. Change in the Indian Policy. The publication of Helen Hunt Jackson's A Century of Dishonor aroused the sympathy of the Easterners for the Indians and led to a strong humanitarian protest against the treatment of the Indians by the frontiersmen and the government. President Cleveland, deeply affected by Mrs. Jackson's portrayal of the mistreatment of the Indians, recommended legislation to Congress which resulted in the passage of the Dawes Severalty Act of 1887. The purpose of the act was to break up the tribal government and the community life of the Indians. The reservations, which had been held in common by the tribes, were divided into farms which were distributed among the individual members of the tribes. The Indian could not mortgage or dispose of his farm for twenty-five years, but after the expiration of that period of time he was free to do with his land as he pleased. As a result of the Dawes Act the Indians made considerable progress toward civilization. It soon became apparent, however, that in some respects the act was unwise, and in 1906 it was amended by the Burke Act. By this law the 25-year period was abolished and individual Indians were to be given full management of their property as soon as they were able to secure a certificate of competence testifying to their ability to manage their own affairs. Those who were considered incompetent were held in an indefinite period of dependence. On June 2, 1924, Congress passed an act which conferred citizenship upon all Indians born within the boundaries of the United States. The passage of the Wheeler-Howard Act by Congress on June 15, 1934, was believed by the Commissioner of the Office of Indian Affairs, John Collier, to be "the most important piece of Indian legislation since the eighties." It authorized Indian organizations along tribal lines for the purpose of buying lands, preventing their sale, and carrying on general business. Indian Health. The government has done much to promote health and education among the Indians. Hospitals have been erected and instruction has been given in sanitation and in the prevention and treatment of disease. Since 1911 annual appropriations have been made for this purpose. Friction with the Japanese. A series of events early in the twentieth century tended to cool the friendship of the Japanese for the United States. At the close of the Russo-Japanese War in 1905, the Japanese were disappointed because the terms of the treaty of peace were not as favorable as they had expected. They blamed this diplomatic defeat upon President Roosevelt, upon whose invitation the peace conference was held. The Japanese irritation which resulted from this affair was increased the next year when the school authorities of San Francisco excluded Japanese subjects from the schools attended by Americans and Europeans. The Japanese were insulted by this racial discrimination, and although the matter was adjusted by President Roosevelt, the affair served to intensify the bitterness of the Japanese toward America. The most serious of the problems that involved the two nations was that of immigration. Since 1882, Chinese immigrants had been excluded from the United States, and there was a strong sentiment in this country for the extension of this policy to include all Oriental laborers. In 1907 Japan entered into an agreement with the United States not to grant passports to laborers who wished to come to this country. This "gentlemen's agreement" was observed for nearly two decades; but when the Immigration Act of 1924 was passed, instead of assigning a quota to Japan, as was done to most other nations, the act excluded all members of the yellow or Mongolian race, including the Japanese as well as the Chinese. The proud Japanese people were incensed by what they regarded as a deliberate insult, and an open break between the two powers was narrowly averted. (Later American-Japanese relations are discussed on pages 640-642.) The period since 1900 is interesting because of the rapid expansion of metropolitan areas, the continued growth of population, and the restrictions placed on immigration. The first attempts to regulate the influx of foreigners were through laws which did not greatly limit the numbers; but laws passed after 1920 set definite limits on the number of immigrants from each nation of the Old World, based on the percentage of each nationality already a part of our population. The American People—Their Growth in Population. In 1790 there were about 4,000,000 people in the United States, but by 1860 the population had grown to about 31,500,000, of whom about 4,500,000 were negroes. This increase was due largely to natural causes (increase of births over deaths), though immigration added about 5,500,000. During this period the area of the United States increased from 892,000 square miles to more than 3,000,000 square miles. Immigration to America, which was going on at a rapid rate from 1720 to 1763 (see p. 88), declined during the period from 1763 to 1815. This was due to the French and Indian War, the War for Independence, the Napoleonic Wars in Europe, the War of 1812, and European restrictions. However, after 1815 foreigners again came in large numbers. Accurate statistics on immigration before 1S20 are not available; but according to reliable estimates about a quarter of a million immigrants came to the United States in the three decades prior to 1820. During the period from 1820 to i860 more than 5,000,000 came (see graph, p. 684). Immigrants came to America in the hope of improving their living conditions. Political revolutions, religious oppression, wars, and hard times in Europe brought many to the United States, which they considered a land of opportunity. Settlement of the West. In the West population increased rapidly after the War of 1812. Soldiers returning from the war, men unemployed because of the closing of factories, and plantation owners whose soil had been exhausted, turned westward. The successful Indian fighting of Jackson in the Southwest and of Harrison in the Northwest lessened the danger from Indians, and stimulated immigration to those sections of the country. Many of the European immigrants, especially those from Germany, were interested in agriculture and settled where good farming lands were plentiful. Due to this settlement of the West, the center of population, which in 1790 was 23 miles east of Baltimore, Maryland, had moved by 1860 to a point 20 miles south of Chillicothe, Ohio (see map, p. 32S). By 1860 nearly half of the people of the United States lived west of the Appalachian Mountains. Growth of Population. The population of the United States increased from 31,500,000 in 1860 to about 76,000,000 in 1900. Many foreigners continued to come to America during this period and were welcomed by the government and by industry. In 1864 the Federal government set up the Immigration Bureau in Washington for the purpose of assisting those coming from other countries to America. Some of the Western states also maintained immigration bureaus and sent agents to foreign countries for the purpose of stimulating immigration. Due largely to this encouragement, about 14,000,000 foreigners came to America during the last forty years of the nineteenth century. In the latter part of this period most of them went to the cities, whereas a majority of the earlier immigrants had become farmers. Changed Character of Immigration. During the 8o's a fundamental change took place in the character of the immigration. Before that time three fourths of the immigrants had come from northern and western Europe, while from that decade on they were mainly from southeastern Europe and the Near East. While the earlier immigrants sought farms, the newer arrivals supplied labor for factories and mines during a period when America was rapidly becoming industrialized. It was during the 8o's that the movement to restrict immigration began. Many citizens felt that since this "new" immigration was of racial stock different from the native American, it would be more difficult to assimilate, and impossible to Americanize. The immigrants often settled in foreign quarters of the cities, where they retained their own languages and their native customs. Because thousands of these immigrants were laborers who were able to exist at a comparatively low standard of living, they accepted lower wages than the American workmen. Soon considerable opposition to immigration began to develop on the part of organized labor. The disappearance of the frontier also brought problems of labor and of immigration into prominence. As long as Western lands remained, the dissatisfied people in the East were able to seek, homes in the West, where the Frontier aided the Americanization process, but by 1890 this had become almost impossible. As the frontier gradually disappeared, labor unrest became more widespread and labor organizations became more hostile to the increasing number of foreigners. As early as 1852 Chinese laborers were excluded by an act of Congress. In 1855 a law was passed prohibiting laborers under contract from coming into the United States, and in 1891 Congress passed a law which prohibited the advertising for immigrants by American factory owners. In 1951 the office of Superintendent of Immigration -was created, and a tax of fifty cents was levied on each immigrant. Before the end of the century there was agitation for a literacy' test. A bill was introduced in Congress in 1896, providing for the exclusion of all immigrants between the ages of fourteen and sixty who could not read English or some other language. It did not become a law because of the President's veto. In the twentieth century' more rigid immigration laws were enacted and enforced, as we shall see in tire following chapter. Social Organization and Customs. By the end of the War between the North and the South, great social, political, and economic changes were appearing in the United States. The intermingling of all classes and groups on the battlefield had broken down many of the old social barriers, and with the development of industry' a new aristocracy based on wealth was arising. Among all classes society was more showy' and artificial than cultured. Nevertheless, women continued to be treated chivalrously and to live sheltered lives until, with the advent of the typewriter, many began to enter occupations outside the home. The modesty of the period before 1900 is amazing to the generation of today. All styles of dresses included very long skirts (see pp. 396, 656), and the sight of a woman's ankle was shocking, while women who ventured to swim did so clothed in dresses reaching below tile knees, and wearing hose. Immigration Restriction. During the period from 1900 to 1910 the number of immigrants to the United States was 8,795,000; from 1911 to 1915 there were 4,460,000; but from 1916 to 1920, during the period of the war the number dropped to 1,276.000. In 1921 the United States decided upon a radical change in its immigration policy, looking toward a more rigid restriction. It was felt that the disturbed conditions in Europe as a result of the World War, and the high taxes resulting therefrom, would cause too many poverty-stricken Europeans to come to this country. In the five years from 1921 to 1925, 2,639,000 were admitted, and from 1926 to 1930 the total was 1,468,000. This decrease was due largely to the several laws discussed in the following paragraph. In 1921 the Emergency Quota Act was passed and remained in effect for one year. It provided that the number of immigrants of a particular nationality' should not exceed three per cent of the number of persons of that nationality living in the United States in 1910. In 1922 the Emergency Quota Law was extended tor two years more. However, it was considered unsatisfactory, and in May, 1924. a new Quota Law was enacted which admitted annually, from July 1. 1924, to June 30, 1927 two per cent of the number of a given nationality resident in the United States in 1890. After July 1927, the quota was to be that proportion of 750.000 which the number of persons of a given national origin residing in the United States in 1920 bears to the country's total population in 1920.In 1929 a new immigration law likewise limited the number of quota immigrants to 150.000 annually. Native people from Canada, Mexico, and Central and South America, however, may be admitted to the United States without regard to any quota. 