Representatives of Four Classes Appear in the Colonies. The emigrants to America in colonial times came from different social classes in the Old World, and found their way to the New World by various methods. Broadly speaking they fell into four general classes. The first included farmers, merchants, and well-to-do people who had money enough to pay their passage, and often enough besides to establish themselves in agriculture, industry, or business. How many there were in this fortunate position we do not know, but they were among the leaders in planting and developing settlements. The second group embraced emigrants who were too poor to pay their passage and hence depended upon others for their transportation. It was customary for shipowners or other capitalists to supply passage money to emigrants in return for their promise, or bond, to work a number of years to repay the sum advanced. This system was called bond, or indentured, servitude. On their arrival bond servants were sold to employers and had to work for their masters for a term ranging from five to seven years. At the end of their indenture they were free. A third class of emigrants was made up of whites who were compelled to come to America against their will. Thousands of men, women, and children were kidnaped in the towns of Great Britain, taken forcibly on board ships, carried to the colonies, and bound out to employers. Akin to the kidnapped in their sad plight were many convicts transported to the colonies. Among them were debtors, Pity offenders against the harsh laws of England, and "rebels" who had taken part in agitations against the British government. Homeseekers Search for New Farms. With government established and routes opened, the way was prepared for immigrants. And they came with a rush, under company leadership and on their own initiative. Young New Englanders, weary of tilling the stony soil of their native states, poured through New York and Pennsylvania, some settling on the northern bank of the Ohio and others in the Lake region. Sons and daughters of German farmers in Pennsylvania and many "bound servants" who had worked out their time with their masters pressed on into Ohio, Kentucky, Tennessee, or beyond. From the worn fields and the clay hills of Southern states came pioneers of English and Scotch-Irish descent, the latter in great numbers. Industry Outstrips Agriculture. As planters bought land in the Southwest and gathered slaves around them to till it businessmen built factories and collected industrial workers from the farms and from foreign lands and paid them wages for their labor. Thus the growth of the slave labor system was accompanied by the rise of a free labor system. In seven-league boots this new industrial giant strode ahead of the agricultural giant. Between 1850 and i860 the value of domestic manufactures, including the output of mines and fisheries, rose from $1,019,106,616 to $1,900,000,000—an increase of 86 per cent in ten years. Meanwhile the total production of naval stores, rice, sugar, tobacco, and cotton, the staples of the South, moved only from $165,000,000, in round figures, to $204,000,000. At the halfway point of the century, the capital invested in industry, commerce, and city property in general far exceeded the value of all the farm land between the Atlantic and the Pacific. Each year the captains of industry turned out goods worth nearly twenty times all the bales of cotton picked on Southern plantations. More and More of the People Become Wage Earners. Such a revolution in industry, transportation, and finance, overturning the agricultural civilization inherited from the past, could not fail to bring in its train amazing consequences. Some were sudden and obvious. Others we are just beginning to understand. One of the clear and striking changes was the growth of an industrial population, detached from the land, concentrated in cities, and, to use Jefferson's phrase, dependent upon "the! caprices and casualties of trade" for a livelihood. This result, the thoughtful Virginian had prophesied, was sure to come, especially if public and private efforts to stimulate industry in preference to agriculture were pushed so hard. Immigrants Swell the Labor Supply. How was it possible to obtain so quickly such a huge number of workers for factories, mines, railways, and stores? In the early days of machine industry thousands of American boys and girls left the farms and sought employment and adventure in the cities. Farming families were usually large and there were children to spare. Other thousands of workers came from the Old World where poverty and distress reduced their chances of making a living at home. Indeed it so happened near the middle of the nineteenth century that misery in Ireland and Germany drove multitudes over the sea to America. About 1845 the migration from Ireland to America suddenly became a torrent. For centuries the Irish had chafed at the bonds imposed on them by the English government under which they had to live. Catholic in religion, they had been compelled to pay taxes to support the Protestant Episcopal Church in Ireland. Tillers of the soil, they were forced to pay enormous rents to absentee landlords who resided in England. Their woes as British subjects a potato famine in 1846 added physical distress beyond description. In cottages and fields and on the highways victims of starvation lay dead by the score, while thousands of survivors suffered the agonies of hunger. At hour of misery America offered a haven to those who had the money to pay their passage over the sea, and between 1850 and 1860 at least 750,000 Irish immigrants entered the United States. To political discontent and economic misfortune may likewise be traced the origins of a great Germanic migration which began about the same time. The potato blight that fell upon Ireland also visited the Rhine Valley and southern Germany, with results as pitiable if less extensive. This calamity inflicted by nature was made worse a little later by another inflicted by despotic German kings and princes. In 1848 a popular uprising in favor of republican and democratic government swept through Europe. For a time it rode on a full tide of success. Monarchs were overthrown or compelled to promise better government and tyrannical ministers fled from their palaces. Then came reaction. Champions of democracy were punished or harried into exile. Men of great ability, whose sole offense was opposition to kings and princes, now fled to America, bringing with them to the land of their adoption the spirit of liberty. In 1847 over fifty thousand Germans came, the forerunners of political refugees and a general migration that increased, almost steadily, for many years. The census of i860 showed that in the previous twenty years nearly a million and a half Germans had found homes in the United States. Far and wide they scattered, from the mills and shops of the seacoast towns to the frontiers of Wisconsin and Minnesota. Women and Children Flock to Industries. In the lighter machine industries, such as spinning and weaving, women and children could be employed in large numbers. From the earliest times, of course, they had worked hard in household industries, in small shops, and often in field and forest. Indeed it was the dexterous wives, spinsters, and boys and girls who had started the textile industry in America in their homes. They had spun, woven, and dyed wool, flax, and cotton, and made cloth, rugs, sheets, and table linen long before steam-driven machines were invented. When spinning and weaving were taken from the homes to factories, women and children followed, for they had to keep on working for a living. Many were the wives, daughters, j and sons of American farmers and mechanics, of carpenters, masons, and blacksmiths, for example. "The cotton manufacture alone employs six thousand persons in Lowell, wrote french visitor in 1836; "of this number nearly five thousand are young women from seventeen to twenty-four years of age, the daughters of farmers from the different New England states." Later, as immigrants poured in from the Old World, women and children of foreign origin furnished a still greater supply of workers for mills and factories. Industrial Workers Organize. Spreading mill towns of New England, New York, and Pennsylvania naturally brought about changes in the life of the people. Hours of work in industries were long and wages were often low. From time to time there were business panics which turned employees by the thousands out into the streets with no money to buy food. In these circumstances renewed efforts were made to bring industrial workers together in trade unions, so that they could have the strength of united forces in bargaining with their employers over hours, wages, and steady employment. From interest in trade unionism came interest in politics—in the making of laws favorable to labor. Even before the coming of steam and machinery, in the "good old days" of handicrafts, workers in many trades—printers, shoemakers, and carpenters, for example—had begun to draw together in societies to demand higher wages, shorter hours, and reforms of one kind or another. With the rise of the factory system local labor unions multiplied rapidly in manufacturing centers, and federations of several crafts appeared in the chief cities. By i860 the plumbers, printers, spinners, iron molders, and stonecutters had formed national trade unions. Women likewise began to organize, make demands, and strike for shorter hours and higher wages. All over the North labor leaders pressed to the front—forceful characters who forged links binding individual workers into a number of brotherhoods. Indeed they advanced so fast that they made an attempt in 1834 to federate all the crafts into one national organization; but their project failed because it was ahead of its time. Supremacy of the Union Is Established. First and foremost, the war settled for all time the question whether states could law' fully withdraw from the Union. The doctrine of complete state sovereignty was laid to rest. Men might still speak of the rights of states, but those rights were no longer to include nullification and secession. The nation was supreme in fact and in theory The Slave Power Is Destroyed. Besides upholding the Union the war shattered the planting aristocracy of the South, which had furnished so many distinguished public men and had tried so hard to check the industrial and commercial ambitions of the North. The first effective blow at the planters was struck by the abolition of slavery. The second came with the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868 and the third with the Fifteenth in 1870— two measures designed to give the ballot to freedmen and exclude from public office the confederate leaders. As if to complete their ruin, the Fourteenth Amendment forbade the United States or any state to pay any debts incurred in aid of the Confederacy or in the emancipation of the slaves. So Southern planters found themselves stripped of their property in slaves, shut out of the government, and ruled by white farmers and freedmen directed by Republican chiefs. Their labor system was wrecked and their money and bonds were as worthless as wastepaper. Industry Triumphs. While the planting system was being driven downward, Northern industry was making a rapid upswing- The war itself pushed business enterprise forward; the demands of the Federal Government for manufactured goods at high prices more than replaced the lost markets of the South. Between i860 and 1870 the number of manufacturing establishments increased 79.6 per cent as against 14.2 for the previous decade; while the number of persons employed in them almost doubled. There was no doubt about the supremacy of industry in the United States. The Protective Tariff Is Raised. Manufacturing was henceforth to be well protected by high tariffs on imported goods. For many years before the war, advocates of protection had been losing ground. The Tariff Act of 1857 imposed duties so low as to give few favors to American business enterprise. Secession changed all that. In securing money to pay its current war bills, the Federal Government raised the duties on foreign goods again and again—so high that the surviving followers of Clay or Webster must have gasped with astonishment. When the war was over, a big debt was left, with interest and principal to be paid. Hence pleas for protective tariffs based on old arguments were now supported by the plain necessity of the Government for revenue, which admitted no dispute. Congress Encourages the Immigration of Laborers. Linked with the growth of industry was the labor supply. The problem of manning the new and growing business undertakings became a pressing matter with which Republican leaders had to grapple. As their guide they had the platform adopted by their Union party in 1864. One plank declared "that foreign immigration, which in the past has added so much to the wealth, the development of resources, and the increase of power to this nation— the asylum of the oppressed of all nations—should be fostered encouraged by a liberal and just policy." That very year Congress created a Bureau of Immigration and made it lawful for immigrants to pledge their wages in advance for the payment of their passage to the United States. Thus manufacturers could bring laborers from foreign countries under contract to work out the cost of their passage. Though this law was soon repealed, the practice of importing laborers under bond was long continued. The cheapness of steamship travel shortened the term which the immigrant had to serve, but while it lasted he was bound by his contract. Homesteads Are Given to Farmers. To some extent the immigration law was an offset to the Homestead Act of two years before, giving away federal lands to settlers. For a long time free homesteads had been stoutly opposed by both manufacturers and planters. Together these two classes were strong enough to defeat homestead bills for a generation, in spite of the growing demand on the part of farmers and mechanics. However in 1862, with nearly all the Southern statesmen out of Congress and with manufacturers mollified by various favors, Congress passed the Homestead Act. This Act arranged for giving away a part of the federal domain in 160-acre lots to men and women eager to build homesteads all the way to the Rockies and beyond. Congress Grants Land to Railway Companies. Though they divided on the matter of free homesteads, farmers and manufacturers readily agreed that the Government should aid in making internal improvements. The Western tiller of the soil was impatient for some quick way of sending his produce to market. The manufacturer himself was eager for the same means of transporting his goods to the consumer on the farm. Confederate leaders put into their constitution of 1861 a clause forbidding their government to spend any money for internal improvements; but Congress, under Republican direction, made vast grants of public lands to railways—a new kind of "internal improvement. Even while war was raging, it voted land and money for a railway to the Pacific Ocean. National Banking Is Re-established. Equally useful to economic enterprise was the creation of a stable and uniform monetary system. From Hamilton's day to Lincoln's, businessmen in the East had demanded a sound national currency, though did not always get their way. The Constitution, it is true, forbade states to emit bills of credit—issue paper money—but the age of Jacksonian Democracy politicians got around this vision. Under their direction many states enacted laws chartering banking companies and authorizing them to issue r notes. Soon banks in Western and Southern states were printing huge quantities of paper money to help borrowers pay their debts. Many banks failed and the currency of other banks often became almost worthless. Western Railways Promote Settlement. Everywhere in this region promoters went to work at the task of bringing immigrants to occupy the great open spaces. Empire builders bought railway lands in huge tracts; they acquired more from the Government; they planned new cities. With towns on maps and railway and steamboat connections established with the rest of the world, they sent out missionaries to tell the people "back East" about the wonderful farming land and business opportunities in the West. Their converts they carried west bag and baggage in long trains. The spirit of this enterprise speaks through the following advertisement of the time, telling about a proposed railway cut through a new region: "This extension will run 42 miles from York, northeast through the Island Lake country, and will have five good North Dakota towns. The stations on the line will be well equipped with elevators and will be constructed and ready for operation at the commencement of the grain season. Prospective merchants have been active in securing desirable locations at the different towns on line. There are still opportunities for hotels, general merchandise, hardware, furniture, and drug stores, etc." James J. Hill Forges to the Front as a Promoter of Migration. Among the railway promoters and builders of the West, James J Hill, of the Great Northern and allied lines, was one of the most forceful figures. He knew that tracks and trains were useless without passengers and freight; without a population of farmer? and town dwellers to furnish business for them. He therefore advertised the advantages of the new West widely in the Virginias, Iowa, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Wisconsin, and Nebraska especially. To prospective settlers his agents said: "You see your children come out of school with no chance to get farms of their own because the cost of land in your older part of the country' is so high that you can't afford to buy land to start your sons out in life around you. They have to go to the cities to make a living or become laborers in the mills or hire out as farm hands. There is no future for them there. . . . You farmers talk of free trade and protection and what this or that political party will do for youWhy don't you vote a homestead for yourself? That is the only thing Uncle Sam will ever give you. Jim Hill hasn't an acre of land to sell you. We are not in the real estate business. Immigration from Southern and Eastern Europe Swells into a Flood. To build railways, dig in the mines, and operate industries, a large number of workers was needed— a number far larger than could be recruited from the farming population. So the gates of the country were thrown open to "the oppressed of all lands," and an ever-swelling flood of immigrants poured into the United States from year to year. By 1880 the annual immigration amounted to half a million people; it was three quarters of a million three years later; and it passed the million mark at the opening of the new century. Of course immigration was as old as America, but its character was now materially altered. Immigration from Northern Europe- Great Britain, Ireland, Germany, and Scandinavia—diminished. Meanwhile immigration from Italy, Russia, and Austria-Hungary increased; in ten years more than three fourths of the immigrants were from these three lands. Italians, Poles, Magyars, Czechs, Slovaks, Croats, Russians, and Jews outnumbered the English, Irish, and Germans coming into the United States. In the second place, these newcomers could not be received so well as earlier immigrants had been. There was no more free land to provide them with homesteads. Besides, captains of industry had encouraged them to come to America to work in the mills and mines; so they pressed into labor camps or the great industrial centers. They were crowded—yes, overcrowded —into racial colonies. There they preserved their languages, their newspapers, and their Old World customs, views, and loyalties, living apart from American civilization. So eager were businessmen to get a cheap and abundant labor supply that they asked few questions about the effect of this alien invasion on the people already in America or the newcomers themselves. They promoted it by importing armies of foreigners under contract to work in their industries. There seemed to be no limit to the factories, forges, refineries, and railways that could be built; to the multitudes that could be employed in conquering a continent; to the money that could be made; to the problems democracy could solve. Local Trade Unions Increase and Federate. As the number of workers in industries multiplied and immigrants surged in, often taking jobs away from the natives, industrial workers drew more closely together, especially in the cities. Long before, in the age when the American republic was launched, unions had been formed, in some places, among skilled workmen such as printers, shoemakers, tailors, and carpenters (p. 409). By the eve of the war in 1861 local unions had appeared in all important industrial towns. Organized Labor Seeks Favorable Laws Objections Are Advanced against Free Immigration. In every part of its work the Federation of Labor ran into the problem of immigration. When it tried to bring together all the workers in a given craft, it often had to deal with Germans, Italians, Croats, Czechs, and other foreign-language groups. Carrying on meetings in five or six tongues was not easy. If it succeeded by hard toil in organizing the workers in a certain craft and raising their wages, its efforts might be quickly undone by a fresh influx of foreigners willing to accept lower rates. When strikes were called to enforce demands for higher wages, foreigners might be imported to take the places of the strikers. So labor leaders came to the conclusion that cutting down immigration was necessary to their plans for organizing workers and upholding high standards of wages and hours. Outside the labor movement, citizens at large also began to question the wisdom of keeping the nation's doors wide open to aliens. They saw whole sections of great cities occupied by people speaking foreign tongues, reading only foreign newspapers, and tied fast to the Old World by loyalty and customThey witnessed an expanding army of total illiterates, men and women who could read and write no language at all; while among those aliens who could read, few there were who knew anything of American history, democracy, and ideals. Official reports revealed that over 20 per cent of the men of the draft army during the World War could not read a newspaper or write a letter home. Perhaps most alarming of all was that thousands of aliens were in the United States only on a temporary visit, solely to make money and take it back to Europe or Asia with them. These men were willing to work for almost any wage and to live in places unfit for human beings; they had no stake in this country and did not care what became of it. They could not share in the progress of the labor movement or feel any interest in American citizenship. Their supreme desire was to return to their native land as soon as they were "rich enough." A Beginning Is Made in Cutting Down Immigration. Yet in all this there was no cause for surprise. Since the foundation of the republic the policy of the Government had been to favor immigration. For nearly one hundred years no restraining act was passed by Congress, while two important laws actually promoted it; namely, the Homestead Act of 1862 and the contract immigration law of 1864. Not until American workingmen came into collision with Chinese labor on the Pacific coast did the Federal Government adopt its first measure of limitation. With the discovery of gold and particularly after the opening of the railway construction era, a horde of laborers from China had descended upon California. Long used to starvation earnings and to poverty-stricken conditions of living, they threatened to cut American standards of wages to the point of bare subsistence. In time the protest of American labor against this invasion was strong enough to compel both Republicans and Democrats to heed it. Accordingly in 1882 Congress forbade the admission of Chinese laborers to the United States for a term of ten years—a rule later changed into permanent exclusion. In a little while the demand arose for a bar against the Japanese, but in this case no exclusion law was passed at first. Instead President Theodore Roosevelt reached an understanding with Japan, in known as the "Gentlemen's Agreement." Under this arrangement Japan promised not to issue passports to laborers permitting them to sail for the United States, and President Roosevelt made a pledge that the Government would not adopt a Japanese exclusion act. Having begun the policy of restriction in 1882, Congress readily extended it. In that same year it forbade the admission of paupers, criminals, convicts, and the insane. Mainly owing to thpressure of the Knights of Labor, it forbade, in 1885, any person, company, or association to import aliens under contract for any specific employer. By an act of 1887 the contract-labor restriction was made even more severe. In 1903 anarchists were excluded and the Bureau of Immigration was transferred from the Treasury Department to the Department of Commerce and Labor in order to provide for a more rigid execution of the law. In 1907 the classes of persons denied admission were extended to embrace those suffering from physical and mental defects and otherwise unfit for citizenship. When the Department of Labor was established in 1913, the enforcement of the law was placed in the hands of the Secretary of Labor—usually chosen by the President from among labor leaders or persons in sympathy with trade-union ideals. Severe Limits Are Placed on Immigration. Not yet appeased, organized labor demanded further protection against the competition of immigrants. In 1917 it won another advance in its thirty-year battle; Congress then passed a bill excluding "all aliens over sixteen years of age, physically capable of reading, who cannot read the English language or some other language or dialect, including Hebrew or Yiddish." By this time a lively opposition to the restriction of immigration developed in many quarters. Naturally, certain races already in the United States objected to every barrier that shut out their own kinsmen; while some Americans of the old stock still held to the belief that the United States should continue to be an asylum for "the oppressed of the earth." And many employers, desiring an increase in the number of wage earners bidding for jobs, protested against further restraints. But Congress leaned toward more, rather than less, restriction. Indeed in 1921 it adopted a principle which made the deepest cut of all in immigration. It absolutely limited the number of aliens to be admitted from many countries to a small percentage of their citizens already in the United States in 1910. Japan known as the "Gentlemen's Agreement," and put the Japanese on the same basis as the Chinese, that is, totally ex eluded them. Labor Wins a Federal Law on the Rights of Labor. Besides trying to cut down the competition of alien workers, the Federation of Labor sought laws upholding the right to strike. In the early part of the nineteenth century some state judges had ruled that a trade union was unlawful in itself—a conspiracy in restraint of trade; but that theory was gradually dropped. By 1850 it was generally agreed that a trade union was not unlawful and that employees had a right to quit work in a body, that is, to strike for the purpose of enforcing their demands. The right to strike, however, did not mean the right to create disorder or to do anything one might wish in an effort to win. In fact the federal courts applied the Sherman Anti-trust law (p. 634) to trade unions and fined some of their officers for trying to monopolize trade and restrain interstate commerce. On application from employers the federal courts also issued orders from time to time forbidding labor unions to do certain things in pursuing their aims. Such a court order was called an injunction. For example, a court might order a trade union to stop interfering with non-union employees or to continue at work handling goods made by non-union labor. If a labor leader refused to obey an injunction, he could be brought before the judge who issued it and fined or imprisoned or both. 