Still greater during this period was the stream of Scotch-Irish from Ulster. These hardy Scotch Presbyterians, who had occupied northern Ireland for two or three generations, were being curbed in their industries for the protection of English industries and annoyed by petty religious persecution. They came to America in great numbers — so great as to form more than half the population of Pennsylvania, and many thousands of their numbers passed on to the southern colonies, settling along the coast and in the wilderness of Kentucky and Tennessee. In Pennsylvania they settled chiefly on the plains and mountain slopes west and south of the Susquehanna. The Scotch-Irish, as well as the Germans and others, were attracted to Pennsylvania because of the liberal, humane government inaugurated by William Penn. Slavery was never popular in Pennsylvania, and the number of slaves was kept down by strict laws against their importation. Before the Revolution many of them had been set free by their masters. Of Redemptioners, mostly Germans and Irish, there were probably more in Pennsylvania during the eighteenth century than in any other colony. The majority of them, after their period of servitude, became useful citizens. During the long period of its colonial youth, we find in Pennsylvania the same kind of quarreling between the people and the governors, the same vagaries in issuing paper money, the same unbridled spirit of freedom, the same monotonous history, as we find in most of the other colonies. Among her governors we find in the early period no really great men, but in 1723 there arrived in Philadelphia a young man from Boston who soon rose to be the leading figure in the colony, and so he continued for more than half a century. This was Benjamin Franklin, who, it may be said, was the greatest character of colonial America. The character of society in New York was unlike that of any other colony, owing to the patroon system, which continued all through colonial days and far into the national period. The patroon had a luxurious, well-built house of brick or stone, a retinue of servants, large barns, orchards and gardens, and broad pasture lands dotted with flocks and herds. His tenants were scattered for miles about him, and among them he lived much like a feudal lord of the Middle Ages. The majority of the people, especially in the country, were Dutch, and they clung tenaciously to the customs and habits of their nation. They were a plodding, industrious, religious people, who dwelt in small wooden or brick houses with sanded floors, and high, steep roofs, and, in the villages, with the gable ends, "notched like steps," turned toward the street. The window panes were very small; the doors, each with its knocker of brass or iron, were divided into an upper and a lower section. Country houses were placed as near together as the extent of each farm would allow, often forming a little village street. A great fireplace in each house was usually built of tiles brought from Holland, and on these were stamped various Scripture scenes, one of which was Lazarus leaving the tomb and waving the flag of the Netherlands.3 One of the features of the Dutch village and farmhouse was the stoop, on which, in summer evenings, the family would sit and chat for hours with their neighbors, the men smoking long Dutch pipes, the women busy with their knitting or sewing. The Dutch were more liberal in games and amusements than were the Puritans of New England. No people in America presented a more attractive picture of quiet, pastoral contentment, of unruffled satisfaction in life, of thrift and plenty, than the Dutch rural population of New York. Thus these people continued their rustic life, maintaining their customs and language for nearly two centuries; but after the Revolution they were forced to yield to the ever increasing tide of the English race, until they gradually lost their identity and their language. In New Jersey the mode of life was somewhat similar to that of New England, from which many of the people had emigrated. This was especially true of East Jersey, while in West New Jersey Jersey, where the Quakers predominated, the mode of life resembled that of Pennsylvania. The soil, with the exception of the sand regions in some portions of the colony, was fertile, and farming was practically the sole industry. There were few large estates, the great majority of the settlers being small farmers, each with his clearing in the forest; and this, with the fact there were few slaves or indented servants, brought about a social equality unknown in most of the colonies. There was little culture or education except in the villages that dotted the great highway between New York and Philadelphia. The people were thrifty and honest; houses were left unlocked, and there was little crime. The laws and punishments were modeled after those of New England. The moment we cross the Delaware into Pennsylvania we find a notable change in colonial society. It is true there were many English Quakers, as in West Jersey, but they were outnumbered by others. There were Germans, Irish, Scotch-Irish, Welsh, and Swedes. The tolerant spirit of the Quaker government had attracted men of every nationality and every creed. First in numbers came the Lutherans and Presbyterians, and after these the Dunkards, Moravians, Baptists, Anabaptists, Pietists, and Mennonites, with a sprinkling of Methodists, Episcopalians, and Roman Catholics. Yet with all the mixture of sect and nationality there was no colony in America more peaceful, contented, and democratic than Pennsylvania. It is true that the Germans and the Scotch-Irish could not get along well together, and they kept apart by settling in separate communities or in parallel bands across the colony, while the English predominated in Philadelphia and vicinity. There was also frequent political strife between the Scotch-Irish and the Quakers, and the latter often combined with the Germans to retain their prestige in the legislature. The chief industry was farming; the soil was rich and productive, and the river valleys were laden with waving fields of grain every year, while the broad meadows and mountain slopes were dotted with grazing herds. The great majority of the negroes became employees of their white neighbors, but many thousands of them purchased little farms as the years passed and became independent. The mineral wealth of the South was disclosed within a decade after the war. Coal was mined in all except three or four of the Southern states and in 1880 the coal output was worth more than twelve per cent of the entire coal production of the country. Alabama alone produced 400,000 tons of coal in 1880. The same state, also Tennessee and a few others, were found to be very rich in iron deposits, and since then a considerable portion of the iron production of the country comes from the South. Nothing perhaps is more significant in the transforming of the South into an industrial as well as an agricultural country than the building of cotton mills. Hitherto the cotton Cotton mills factories had been built chiefly in the British Isles and in New England. But the South discovered that it could manufacture cotton yams and fabrics more cheaply than it could be done anywhere else, owing to the nearness of cotton fields, its access to cheap labor, and to its boundless water supply from the mountain streams. The result was that cotton factories began to spring up in many parts of the South and by 1880 more than 700,000 spindles were turning and were consuming annually more than a hundred million pounds of cotton. From that time to the present the cotton manufacturing industry in that section has been constantly increasing. In 1881 a great cotton exposition was held at Atlanta, Georgia. The exhibits, numbering 1800 in all, included the various stages in cotton growing and the latest and best machinery used in its manufacture. Here also it was shown that cotton seed, formerly thrown away, was of much value for its oil and for cattle food and fertilizer. The exposition did much to inspire the South to greater achievement. Railroad building in the South has gone steadily forward since the close of the war and has been a great factor in the developing of the social, economic, and industrial interests of the country. The people of the South lost the Civil War, but they found themselves. In ancient times it often happened that whole nations migrated from one country to another, as when the Israelites entered Palestine from Egypt, or when Helvetians attempted to occupy Gaul. Such movement of population do not take place in our time. The habitable lands of the earth are preempted and, moreover, even small nations number millions of people and they would find it impossible to migrate as a whole. A few centuries ago portions of the populations of various countries swarmed out of the parent hive, driven perhaps by religious or political persecution, and settled in new lands for the purpose of making permanent homes. But they retained their connections with the home land. Of such classes were our thirteen colonies built up. It was left for the nineteenth century to register a great movement of population for economic reasons, not as groups or colonies, but as individuals or in families, giving up their citizenship and adopting that of the land to which they went. Many of these went to Canada or South America or Australia, but the great majority came to the United States. Were it not for our immigrants of the nineteenth century one can readily imagine that our vast western country would still be a land of Indians and fur traders. Before 1820 no exact immigration records were kept. It is estimated that the yearly average between the close of the Revolution and 1820 was about 6700, or about 250,000 in all. After that date the number rose steadily and in 1842 it passed the hundred thousand mark. In the late forties two events in Europe, the Irish potato famine and a political upheaval in Germany, sent great numbers of emigrants to America. Among the Germans who came were two notable men — Carl Schurz and Franz Sigel. In 1854 our immigrants reached 427,833, a number not again reached before 1872. The Civil War checked the stream of immigration, but in the following years it rose to greater heights than ever, the Irish and Germans predominating. The banner year of the century was 1882, when 790,000 newcomers from Europe reached our shores. Soon after the war the Scandinavians began coming in increasing numbers. A sturdy, industrious, religious people they were, of a pure Teutonic stock. They settled by tens of thousands in the great agricultural regions about the sources of the Mississippi. Later began a stream of a different class — Italians, Greeks, Russians, and others from Southeastern Europe. These came in great numbers and by 1896 they made up more than a majority of the immigrants. Of this class the proportion of illiterates was far greater than of the earlier immigrants. After the turn of the century the volume of immigration continued to swell until it had far passed the million-a-year mark. History presents no parallel to this long continued movement of population on a large scale. The American people at first and for many years welcomed the newcomers with open arms; but at length public opinion began to protest against the increasing volume, especially as many of the immigrants were of an undesirable class. In 1882 Congress passed a law excluding criminals and persons likely to become public charges. But many years were yet to pass before drastic legislation was enacted greatly curtailing the privileges of foreigners in making their homes in America. The great majority of Irish immigrants settled in the large cities along the Atlantic seaboard. They became workers in factories, laborers, builders of railroads. The Germans were chiefly farmers. Many of them remained in the eastern cities, but the majority went west and took up farming lands in the valley of the Ohio and the Mississippi. They were frugal and industrious; they were stanch friends of education and stable government. The English and Welsh settled chiefly in Pennsylvania and other mining states. The comers from Russia and the Mediterranean lands settled mostly in the cities. They became laborers, fruit venders, small store keepers, and, especially those of Jewish blood, merchants, bankers, and financiers. It is estimated that at least half of the American people are of foreign birth or descent, that is, are descendants of immigrants as distinguished from the colonists of Revolutionary times; and as a matter of course they have had an immense influence on the social, intellectual, political, and industrial life of the nation. The great majority of the people are of Teutonic or Germanic, often called Nordic, stock — English, German, or Scandinavian. However, the proportion has been somewhat changed, as compared with a century ago, by the influx of Irish and of the Mediterranean and Alpine peoples. Herein lies the one serious question, amounting to a "race problem" with respect to immigration. Can the American people absorb, "assimilate," these non-Teutonic masses and still remain the America of the early days? or will these masses so modify our ethnical life as to leave permanent results on our national characteristics? It was this question that led to the profound changes in our immigration laws in the early nineteen twenties, as will be noted later. Among our immigrants are some criminals, labor agitators and all-around mischief-makers, but the vast majority of them are good people. They come for a good purpose—to make homes and to give their children a better chance than they would have had in the old country. They are of the better class of European peasantry. The shiftless never-do-wells have not the pluck to travel three thousand miles to set up new homes. Too often in the cities our foreigners colonize, retain their language and customs, and thus deny themselves the opportunity of speedily becoming Americanized. But, thanks to the public schools and their influence, their children by the second or third generation can scarcely be distinguished from the rest of us. On the whole, our nation has been immeasurably enriched by foreign immigration. To prevent an influx of laborers from Europe at a time when our soldiers, released from the army in great numbers, were adjusting themselves to industry, an immigration restricting law was passed. It provided that not more than three per cent of the number of aliens in this country from any European country (based on the census of 1910) should be permitted to land during the coming year. Before the law expired another, still more drastic, was enacted. This law placed the quota from each country at two per cent of its nationals in this country in 1890. One object of the law was to cut down the coming of the racial groups from southern and eastern Europe and this was the sole object in basing the quotas on the census of 1890 before those groups had begun to come in large numbers. This law was to operate until July 1, 1927. After that time the whole number of immigrants should be limited to 150,000 annually, to be apportioned to the several nations in proportion to the racial stock represented by each in our population in 1920. Each country, however, is allowed a minimum of 100 a year, and certain classes, such as relatives of recent immigrants, are admitted in excess of the quotas. These immigration laws were in some degree the result of the influence of the Ku Klux Klan. This organization, chartered in 1915 by Georgia, took the old name of the secret order of Reconstruction days. It claimed to stand for pure Americanism and excluded from its membership Jews, Catholics, negroes, and alien born. It has been severely criticized as narrow and intolerant, but according to its confessed principles it stands for the better enforcement of law, for the continued separation of church and state and for Protestant, gentile, native, white domination of American institutions. While the Klan lays no claim to being a separate political party, it has taken sides in many city and state elections. 