GROWTH OF THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
Middle and the Southern colonies the settlers were scattered       
over a wider area and there were comparatively few towns           
and villages. They lived on plantations and farms, often           
several miles distant from one another. Before 1763 probably       
more than ninety per cent of the people were engaged in agri-      
culture or in closely related occupations.                         
The causes of immigration, the types and problems of               
immigrants, and their influence on colonial life. A great          
change took place in the racial character of the population of     
the colonies from about 1689 to 1763. At the former date more      
than ninety per cent of the people were English; at the latter     
this ratio had fallen to about sixty per cent. This change was     
caused by the immigration of Germans, “Scotch-Irish.” Irish,       
and other non-English races, and by the importation of a large     
number of African Negroes.                                         
Immigration was caused partly by conditions in the Old             
World. Lack of economic opportunity induced most immi-             
grants to set out for America, the land of promise, where they     
believed there was a chance to acquire wealth quickly. ‘‘Land      
hunger’’ induced all classes of Europeans to sail westward         
across the Atlantic. Even very poor people, who had never          
owned a foot of land, hoped to satisfy their desire to own a       
home. Some persons wished to escape arbitrary government,          
religious persecution, and the sufferings caused by wars. Most     
of the colonies, on the other hand, offered to deserving immigrants
practically free land and religious toleration, except in New Eng- 
land.                                                              
Most immigrants came in small overcrowded ships. The               
voyage across the Atlantic Ocean took from two to four months.     
Food was scarce and poor ; in fact, occasionally the passengers    
had to eat rats. The lack of medical aid was a problem. In         
some cases half of the immigrants on a single ship died during     
the voyage, especially when contagious diseases broke out.         
Many of the immigrants came as indentured servants [p. 86].        
Free settlers were obliged to make a hard and dangerous jour-      
ney to the frontier and at first lived in rough log cabins.        
Immigrants sometimes remained as aliens for a long time,           
from choice or because of harsh naturalization laws. Cath-       
olics were usually denied the privilege of citizenship.          
Important Immigrant Groups : The Germans. Conditions             
in Germany were intolerable in the late seventeenth and early    
eighteenth centuries, because of bad political, economic, and    
religious conditions which followed numerous and devastating     
wars. A large portion of the fertile regions of southern Ger-    
many, in the Palatinate, had been laid waste in the Thirty       
Years’ War (1618-1648). Thousands lost their homes, crops,       
and cattle. These conditions, together with religious persecu-   
tion. caused a large emigration from Germany to the colonies,    
particularly to Pennsylvania. By 1750 about 70,000 Ger-          
mans, later called the “Pennsylvania Dutch” lived in Pennsyl-    
vania. After 1730 many Germans moved from Pennsylvania           
to the western portions of the Southern colonies, attracted there
by better and cheaper lands. By 1763 perhaps 125,000 Ger-        
mans were living in all the colonies. They were a religious-     
minded group; a tolerant, peaceful, thrifty, homeloving, and     
industrious people with unusual skill in agriculture. Among      
their leaders were Francis Daniel Pastorius, a highly-educated   
man. a leader of the Germantown settlement; Christopher          
Sauer, who established the first German newspaper in Phila-      
delphia; Jacob Leisler, who courageously led the rebellion       
which gave New York a permanent popular assembly ; and           
John Peter Zenger of New York, the hero of the fight for         
liberty of speech and press.                                     
Scotch and Irish. In northern Ireland there lived a sturdy       
people of Scotch origin, whose ancestors came there about 1610   
upon the invitation of James 1 of England. The Scotch were       
given, unjustly, lands taken from the Irish, because King        
James I thought that they would be more loyal to England.        
The “Scotch-Irish” were not a mixture of Scotch and Irish,       
in spite of the name. On the contrary, they remained Scotch      
and retained Scotch habits, customs, religion, and ideals. Be-   
cause England hampered their political, economic, and religious  
life, many emigrated to America, particularly to western Penn-   
sylvania. Later, like the Germans, a large number moved          
from this colony to western Maryland, Virginia, North and       
South Carolina, and Georgia. By 1763 perhaps 150,000 were       
living in the colonies. They fought bravely in the colonial     
wars and helped to resist the attacks of the French and the     
Indians. In the words of Theodore Roosevelt, “Thev were as      
tough as the handles on their hickory axes.” They loved         
religious and political liberty and produced numerous fighting  
political leaders during the revolution. Patrick Henry was      
one of these.                                                   
The Irish migrated to the colonies from central and southern    
Ireland, particularly to Pennsylvania and to Boston. The        
number of immigrants was greater than was formerly believed,    
because many have been erroneously classified as ‘‘Scotch-      
Irish.” The Irish disliked the English because of political,    
economic, and religious persecution. Most of the Irish who      
fought in the War for Independence joined the patriot side      
[p. 67].                                                        
French Huguenots, Jews, and other racial groups.                
Many French Huguenots emigrated to the colonies, particularly   
after Louis XIV revoked the Edict of Nantes (1685), which       
deprived this sect of the religious toleration they had enjoyed.
They settled in New York, Virginia, South Carolina, and         
Massachusetts. Though comparatively few in number, the          
Huguenots were influential in colonial life. They formed in     
each settlement a group which was noted for its religious       
fervor and good citizenship. Paul Revere and Peter Faneuil      
of Massachusetts and Henry Laurens of South Carolina were       
of Huguenot extraction. The Jews settled in the larger towns    
and engaged in trade and commerce : in New York City, where     
they organized a synagogue, the first in America (1682) ; in    
Charleston, South Carolina ; and in Newport, Rhode Island.      
The commercial importance of this town was, in part, due to     
the business ability of the Jews. Still other smaller racial    
groups lived in various colonies, such as the Scotch, the Welsh,
and the Swiss in Pennsylvania, and a few representatives of     
nearly every racial stock of Europe.                            
Negroes. Negro slaves were introduced into Virginia in          
1619, but it was not until after 1700 that they were brought    
into the Southern Colonies in large numbers. All children of   
slaves were by law slaves. There were about 400,000 Negro      
slaves in the American colonies by 1763. Next to the English,  
the largest racial group was the African Negroes. They per-    
formed most of the labor in the South and made interesting     
cultural contributions, such as their folklore and music.      
America had a mixed population by 1763. If we count the        
Xegro slaves, at least forty per cent were non-English. Even   
the so-called English stock was not pure, because there had    
been intermarriage of the English with other races. Impor-     
tant unifying influences existed, such as the common use of    
the English language, laws, literature, forms of government,   
and political and social ideals.                               
           The Westward Movement, Frontier Society,            
                  Democracy, and Sectionalism                  
Some causes of the first westward movement, geographic .       
influences, routes to the “Old West” and the conditions        
of settlement. About 1720 began the settlement of the back-    
country and frontier regions, the westward movement of the     
population. The colonial assemblies wished: (1) to protect     
the people on the seaboard from the attacks of the French and  
the Indians; (2) to develop the natural resources (land and    
forests) of this region. A large population would help to ac-  
complish both of these purposes. The assemblies also wished    
to give wealthy men the opportunity to speculate in western    
lands. William Byrd and George Washington of Virginia          
benefited by this policy. Several classes of people moved to   
the West. Indentured servants, after the completion of their   
service, were granted fifty acres of free land, a part of their
‘•freedom dues,” located usually in the frontier region. Since 
the tidewater lands decreased rapidly in fertility, because    
of lack of fertilization, good land became scarce and high in  
price. Poor people and immigrants were therefore forced to     
settle on the frontier where land was plentiful and cheap.     
Some people from the tidewater area moved to the frontier      
region because of a desire for more political and religious    
freedom.                                                       
 Squatters (those who settle on land without paying for it)       
 were many in western Pennsylvania and in the back country        
 of the Southern colonies. They were in continual trouble with    
 the Indians, the great proprietors, like William Penn and Lord   
                      Baltimore, the king, and                   
                      others who held title to                   
                                                                 
                      land. Governor James                       
                      Logan of Pennsylvania                      
                      referred to such settlers                  
                      as “bold and indigent                      
                      strangers who possess                      
                      themselves of land in                      
                      an audacious manner.’’                     
                      In 1727 he complained                      
                      that many thousands of                     
                      foreigners were already                    
                      in the country; that                       
                      1500, from different                       
                      parts of Europe, came                      
                      that summer ; that they                    
                      settled “on any spot of                    
                      vacant land they can                       
                      find without asking                        
                      questions.” Such set-                      
                      tlers often thought of                     
                      land as a “natural                         
                      right” [p. 121]. Many                      
                      Germans and Scotch-                        
                      Irish, who migrated                        
from Pennsylvania to the Shenandoah Valley, held no legal         
title to the land they occupied. Between 1732 and 1740 out        
of 670,000 acres, about 400,000 w’ere illegally settled. It has   
been estimated (1760) that 100,000 settlers had squatted in       
Pennsylvania.                                                     
Where frontier settlements were located and why the               
frontier was the home of democratic ideals. Frontier settle-      
ments were located mainly in the western and northern parts       
of New England, in the upper Hudson and Mohawk valleys            
                                                                 t
                                                                   
men who tried to bribe the Americans and referred to them as      
“Messieurs X. Y. Z.” Consequently many Americans now              
cooled in their sympathy for France and Adams became more         
popular. Congress prepared for, but did not actually declare,     
war. It decided that the French Treaty of 1778 was null and       
void, permitted naval and merchant vessels to capture French      
ships on the high seas, and enlarged the army. In the “Naval      
War of 1798'’ the American navy captured nearly a hundred         
 French ships. Neither Adams                                      
 nor Talleyrand actually desired                                  
 war. fhe latter wished to                                        
 “bluff" the United States and                                    
 was himself financially interested                               
 in privateering, which nourished                                 
 during this little war. jClore-                                  
 over, he knew that war with                                      
 the United States w^ould mean                                    
 a new ally for England. He                                       
 therefore explained that the Di-                                 
 rectory had nothing to do with                                   
 the attempted bribe of America’s                                 
 representatives and even ordered                                 
 French commanders and priva-                                     
teers to respect the rights of American shippers. President       
Adams now decided to send a special commission to France          
and the Senate dared not, in the face of Republican opposition,   
refuse to ratify the appointments. The commission was re-         
ceived by Napoleon who had made himself First Consul of           
France. A treaty was agreed to but the question of damages        
due Americans on account of destruction of American com-          
merce was not settled.                                            
Why the Federalists passed the Alien and Sedition Acts            
and were soon sorry for their mistake. Soon after the             
French Revolution and the outbreak of the European War,           
thousands of revolutionary-minded Frenchmen came to Amer-         
ica, most of whom joined Jefferson’s party. A few became          
editors of Republican newspapers and bitterly criticized the      
Federalists. Hoping to silence their enemies and prevent the      
increase of Republican voters, the Federalists forced several     
acts through Congress (1798). The Naturalization Act com-         
pelled an alien to wait fourteen years, instead of five years,    
before becoming an American citizen. The Alien Act, limited       
two years, permitted the president to order the deportation       
of aliens, considered dangerous to the peace and safety of the    
United States. The Alien Enemies Act allowed the president,       
in time of War, to deport subjects of any country with which      
the United States was at war.                                     
The Sedition Act provided for a penalty not exceeding two         
years in prison and a fine not exceeding $2000, on any one,       
for writing, printing, uttering, or publishing “false, scandalous,
and malicious” writing or writings “against the government        
of the United States, or either house of the Congress of the      
United States, or the President of the United States, with        
intent to bring them --- into contempt or disrepute.” A score     
of persons were arrested for violating the Sedition law           
and ten were convicted, mainly Republican newspaper editors.      
One man, who declared that Adams had an “unbounded thirst         
for ridiculous pomp,” was jailed for four months and fined a      
thousand dollars. However, a comparison of the working of         
these laws and their wording with the Sedition and Espionage      
| laws of 1917-1918 will show that the Federalists passed com-    
1 paratively mild laws of this nature.                            
Why Thomas Jefferson and James Madison wrote the                  
Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions. The Republicans im-            
mediately declared that the Alien and Sedition Acts were          
^constitutional ; that the Constitution was a compact. The        
Kentucky Resolutions were written by Jefferson and adopted        
I November 16, 1798. They were similar to the Virginia Reso-      
I tans, written by Madison which appeared December 24,            
I 1798, and read : “That this assembly doth explicitly . . . de-  
I dare, that it views the powers of the Federal Government as     
I resulting from the compact to which the States are parties, as  
I failed by the plain sense and intention of the instrument con-  
I stating that compact.” They further declared : “That the        
I General Assembly doth particularly protest against the palpable 
I aid alarming infractions of the Constitution, in the two late   
cases of the ‘Alien and Sedition Acts’ passed at the last session   
of Congress.” Madison said that the States had a right to inter-    
pose for arresting the progress of the evil (seizure of their powers
by the central government) and for “maintaining unimpaired ...      
the authorities, rights, and liberties, reserved to the State re-   
spectively, or to the people/' He called attention to the first     
amendment to the Constitution which forbade Congress to make        
any law interfering with “liberty of conscience and of the press.”  
In the second Kentucky Resolutions of November 22, 1799,            
Jefferson declared : “That the several states who formed that       
instrument [the Constitution], being sovereign and independ-        
ent, have the unquestionable right to judge of the infraction:      
and, That a Nullification, by those sovereignties, of all unauthor- 
ized acts done under color of that instrument is the rightful rem-  
edy ” Other Southern States refused to support these resolutions.   
States like Massachusetts and Illinois, as well as Vir-             
ginia, appealed to the States’ rights doctrine, when their inter-   
ests were endangered by Congress. Federalist State legisla-         
tures claimed that the Supreme Court, not the State legislatures,   
should decide on the constitutionality of acts of Congress.         
Why opposition to Federalist policies increased. Jef-               
ferson’s party gained strength among the common people be-          
cause it championed States’ rights, opposed the increase in         
the power of the national government and control by the “well-      
born.” Several events hastened the “revolution of 1800” when        
the Republicans defeated the Federalists. The X. Y. Z. Affair,      
and the preparation for war with France caused heavy taxes          
for military and naval expenditures and reduced revenues from       
imports, so that Congress was forced to borrow $3,000,000 at        
eight per cent interest. Business was poor and large losses         
were caused by the war. Because of the Alien and Sedition           
laws the Federalists became very unpopular.                         
The personality of President John Adams was also a factor.          
A member of his cabinet spoke of him as one “who whether            
sportful, playful, witty, drunk, sober, angry, easy, stiff, jealous,
careless, cautious, confident, close, or open, is almost always in  
the wrong place.” John Adams, however, was a man of great           
ability, of independent judgment, patriotic and generally accu-     
•te in his judgments. The death of Washington was a great           
tes to the Federalists because he was universally loved by          
nearly all Americans regardless of political views. His influ-      
ence could no longer be a source of strength to the Federalists.    
 How Thomas Jefferson was elected third President of                
 the United States: the “revolution of 1800.“ The election          
 of 1800 brought before the people two opposing theories of         
 wnmental control----rule by the “well-born and rule by             
 the people. The conservative Federalists believed that men         
 of ability, education, and wealth, whose chief purpose was to      
 protect property rights, should control the government. They       
 abhorred violence and the pas-                                    
 sions of the mob. The Federal-                                    
 ist Party had served the country                                  
 well by helping to frame, launch,                                 
 organize, and strengthen the new                                  
 government. But now impor-                                        
 tant problems faced the country                                   
 -the settlement of the great                                      
 West, for instance. The ideals                                    
 oi the Federalists were not in                                    
 harmony with the democratic en-                                   
 vironment of America.                                              
In the election of 1800 Thomas                                     
Jefferson and Aaron Burr were                                      
the Republican candidates and                                      
John Adams and Charles C.                                          
Pinckney were the standard-bearers of the Federalists. When         
the vote was taken in the Electoral College Jefferson and Burr      
lied for first place, each having 73 electoral votes, while John    
I Adams received 65 and Pinckney 64. Under the Constitution         
the election was thrown into the House of Representatives,          
where each State had one vote and must elect either Burr or         
I Jefferson as President. Both men were enemies of Hamilton         
but. choosing the lesser of the two evils, he induced three         
Federalist electors to cast blank ballots. As a result Jefferson    
ns elected. In the Congressional elections the Republicans          
I <od a majority in both the Senate and the House of Repre-         
though the people as a whole were more enlightened in 1815        
than were they in 1763, many persons could neither read nor       
write, and ignorance and superstition were common.                
                                                                  
                                                                  
How the increase and distribution of population, par-             
ticularly west of the Alleghenies, influenced national and        
sectional problems. Population increased from 1,5^0.000 in        
1763 |p. 651 to 3,000,000 (of whom 500,000 were Negro             
slaves) in 1776. When Washington became President there           
were about 4,000.000, not so many people as now live in New       
York City alone, and in 1810, 7,239,881. Thus in about fifty      
years the population increased almost five times, mainly from     
 natural causes --- large                                        
 families of six to ten chil-                                    
                                                                 
                                                                 
 dren--- rather than from                                        
 immigration. An impor-                                          
 tant change occurred                                            
 in the distribution of                                          
 population. From 1763,                                          
 and for some time before,                                       
 many persons migrated                                           
 from Pennsylvania south                                         
 to the frontiers of Vir-                                        
 ginia, the Carolinas, and                                       
Georgia. Similarly, from eastern Massachusetts and southern       
Connecticut, and from eastern New York and Pennsylvania           
people moved west to the frontiers of these States and northward  
into Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont.                           
After the close of the War of Independence, people moved          
west across the Alleghenies into the Kentucky, the Tennessee,     
and the Ohio regions ; and in large numbers between 1790 and      
1815. The result of these movements was a shifting and redis-     
tribution of population. By 1815. more than half the people       
were living under frontier conditions in the regions called the   
“Old West” and the “New West.” In 1790, the center of popu-       
lation was near Baltimore, but moved west at the rate of about    
fifty miles every ten years. By 1810 the million people who       
lived west of the Alleghenies began to influence our political,     
economic, and social ideals. This new distribution of popula-       
tion spread the people over a larger area, shifted the population   
farther inland, in frontier regions containing only a few people    
to the square mile, where almost everybody was engaged              
in agricultural                                                      
rather than in                                                       
                                                                     
industrial pur-                                                      
suits.                                                               
[ ‘Some impor-                                                       
tant political,                                                      
economic, and                                                        
social changes                                                       
caused by some                                                       
shifts in the                                                        
population.                                                          
In the North-                                                        
east occurred                                                        
the growth of                                                        
towns and cities                                                     
and a variety of                                                     
indust r i e s ,                                                     
caused by the                                                        
scarcity of good                                                     
land and by the                                                      
industrial revo-                                                     
lution. Wealth                                                       
increased more                                                       
rapidly in this                                                      
section than in                                                      
the South and                                                        
the West.                                                            
 Wealth breeds political conservatism. Hence it was no accident      
 iat the Federalists were strong in this section. They were          
 mainly responsible for the conservative character of the Con-       
 stitution. Jeffersonian Republicans, on the other hand, occupied    
 the back country, the rural areas of the South and the West,        
 where the people were poor. The shift of population to the West     
hastened the negotiation of treaties with England and with   
Spain [pp. 205-207], the purchase of Louisiana and the       
formation of new western States, Kentucky, Tennessee, and    
Ohio. It explains the growth of the idea of western expansion
and the influence of the expansionists on the War of 1812 [p.
2J5], It hastened the beginnings of the sectional conflict ---     
East and West; particularly the dispute over the method oj         
selling the public lands. The conflict between the supporters of   
a national bank and those who favored State banks was also         
hastened by this new distribution of the population. It was        
also a cause of the great conflict between the agricultural and    
’.hf manufacturing interests for the control of the government.    
Some causes of decreased immigration ; the types and               
problems of immigrants and how they influenced Ameri-              
can life. Many immigrants came to America in the period            
1720-1763 [p. 66], but immigration was retarded by the             
revolution, the War for Independence, the European wars, the       
War of 1812 and Old World restrictions. During the wars,           
European nations wanted to keep every man eligible for milk        
larjr service. War also made emigration dangerous and ex-          
pensive. Unfavorable accounts were written by Englishmen           
for the purpose of discouraging emigration to the United States    
and inducing people to emigrate to Canada. Not more than           
150.000 immigrants came to America in this period.                 
During the Federalist era foreigners met opposition (Alien         
and Sedition Acts) and some of the Federalist leaders feared that  
many aliens could not be Americanized. In the early national       
I period some immigrants of non-English stock made notable         
contributions to American life. Thus the two great Secretaries     
of the Treasury were not native Americans : Alexander Hamil-       
ton was born in the West Indies, half-Scotch and half-French,      
while Gallatin was a Swiss by birth. Reduced immigration,          
intermarriage between racial stocks, the influence of environ-     
I ment. education, language, and the nationalizing influence of    
I ieAmerican revolution, the Constitution, and the War of 1812     
I -all these factors tended to unify the American people in        
I blood and in ideals in 1815 as they had not been unified in 1763.
The Westward Movement, Frontier Society,                           
Democracy, and Sectionalism                                        
Some causes of the second westward movement ; geo-                 
I graphic influences, routes to the "New West/’ numbers            
I and the.conditions of settlement. The chief causes of the        
second westward movement were the rapid increase of popula-      
tion. the growing scarcity of good land and its high prices,     
and the abundance of low-priced lands in Kentucky, Tennessee,    
and Ohio. Many poor people emigrated to the West because         
as squatters they could occupy land without cost. Rich men       
also moved West, because of the opportunity to increase their    
wealth by speculating in western lands. The national govern-     
ment sold to the Ohio Company (1787), and to other com-          
panies, millions of acres of land at a very low price. Virginia  
and North Carolina made extensive land grants in their western   
possessions ; the areas which later became the States of Ken-    
tucky (1792) and Tennessee (1796). Then, too, an act of          
Congress (1804) made it possible to purchase as small a tract    
as 160 acres and the government did not strictly enforce its     
laws against squatting. Many soldiers of the Revolutionary       
War were paid for their services in land bounties in the West.   
The admission of Kentuckv, Tennessee, and Ohio as States         
(1792-1802) gave the western settlers self-government similar    
to that in the older States.                                     
Several routes led to the West. The early pioneers walked        
over the mountains or rode horseback along Boone's trail ---     
only an Indian trail --- to Kentucky and Tennessee. Another      
route was across Pennsylvania over the Forbes wagon road to      
Pittsburgh and then by flatboat down the Ohio to the Missis-     
sippi ; thence up the rivers flowing into the Mississippi and the
Ohio. Some settlers followed the old Braddock road, that used    
by Washington and Braddock in 1754-1755. Another route           
was by way of New’ Orleans and up the Mississippi, a very’ slow  
and laborious journey until the introduction of the steamboat    
on the western rivers (1812). Emigrants from northern New        
York and New England moved west by way of Albany and             
the Mohawk Valley, thence over the Genesee road and on to        
Lake Erie and Ohio. Roads were so extremely poor that it         
was likely to take twenty-four hours to travel a few miles.      
Wagons w’ere sometimes “mired" in mud up to the hubs.            
There were few’ bridges and it was often dangerous to ford       
rivers, particularly in the spring. Emigrants after 1815 could   
the urbanization (“city-izing”) of this first home of the in-     
dustrial revolution. The East and the West had opposing           
economic interests. The leaders disagreed on such questions       
as the tariff, public lands, and banking. The North and the       
South were also in conflict on the questions of territorial expan-
sion (Texas) and extension of slavery into the territories. Thus  
the increase and the distribution of population sharpened sec-    
tional antagonism. North and South, and East and West. New        
problems arose between classes : agricultural and manufactur-     
ing, capital and labor, groups.                                   
The causes of immigration, classes and problems of the            
immigrants. We have noted some of the early causes and            
effects of immigration fpp. 66, 251]. In this period the out-     
standing fact is the coming of an enormous number of immi-        
grants, over 5,000,000. Some of the causes were: (1) the          
close of the Napoleonic Wars and the War of 1812; (2) the         
European revolutions of 1830 and 1848, particularly in Ger-       
many ; (3) the potato famine in Ireland, 1845-1846. In            
America, there was a demand for laborers for work on roads,       
canals, and railroads, and for factory labor. After 1820 the      
low price of Western land, $1.25 per acre, induced many poor      
people to leave their old homes in order to better their economic 
condition ; to escape the high rents and unfair demands oi        
landlords, so common in the Old World. From Great Britain         
came about one-half and from Germany about one-third of our       
immigrants. The latter country sent 2,300,000 (1840 to i860)      
and Ireland over 1,000,000. Most of the German immigrants         
became farmers, half of them settling in the West. Eighty per     
cent of the Irish located in the East, largely in the cities.     
How the immigrant influenced American life. The im-               
migrant influenced political, economic, and social conditions     
He was usually a Democrat, particularly the Irishman, patriotic   
and nationalistic. Because of the European revolutions of         
1848, some political “radicals’’ came to America ; a German,      
who later became a noted political leader, was Carl Schurz        
Antagonism between native Americans and foreigners arose, for     
both economic and religious reasons. Many immigrants were         
willing to work for low wages. Employers, with an eye to the      
largest profits possible, welcomed such laborers. But cheap      
labor forced Americans to adopt a lower standard of living       
Many very poor immigrants from England and Ireland were          
aided to emigrate, or were deported, in order to lessen the co>t 
of their support. Some of them became a burden in America.       
One investigation showed that the almshouses of New York.        
Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Boston sheltered 4700 native        
Americans and 5300 foreigners. Congress was requested to         
prevent the “dumping on our shores’’ of “paupers.” Religious     
antagonism arose between natives and some foreigners. This       
stimulated some anti-foreign sentiment, “nativism,” and caused   
the formation of the American or Know Nothing party [p.          
391]. The platform of this party demanded that only native       
citizens should vote or hold office, and that no foreigner should
become a citizen unless he had resided in America for twenty-    
one years.                                                       
The Census of i860 showed about 4,000,000 foreign-born in        
the country. Besides the Irish and the Germans there were        
Scandinavians (mainly Norwegians and Swedes), French-            
Canadians, Dutch, Swiss, Austrians, Poles, Italians, and other   
races. The percentage of native whites, however, was high.       
72.7 ; that of the Negro was next, 14.4. and the foreign-born    
whites, 12.9. The latter varied in the different sections; the   
North and Northwest having about 17 per cent while the South     
and the Southwest had only 5 per cent. Since nearly all immi-    
grants were opposed to slavery, many were favorable to the       
abolition movement.                                              
            The Westward Movement, Frontier Society,             
                   Democracy, and Sectionalism                   
Some causes of the third westward movement; geo-                 
graphical influences. The westward movement began in the         
colonial period and was marked by the filling up of the bad-     
country regions of the original thirteen colonies. Immigrants    
freed servants, and poor people, often squatters, moved West     
because of the scarcity or the high price of good land |p. 6oj.  
After the revolution, pressure of population and the desire for  
rich, cheap land caused a second westward movement to the        
keel-boat he would place his wife, his children, and such strangers     
as had been waiting at Fort Pitt for a chance to travel in company.     
In the flat-boat or the ark, would be the cattle and the store'.        
The keel-boat was hastily and clumsily made. The hold was shal-         
low, the cabin was low. Over the stern projected a huge oar which       
mounted on a swivel, was called a sweep, and performed all the          
duties of a rudder. The ark was of rough plank intended to be used      
for building at some settlement where saw-mills were scarce. . . In     
these crafts, if the water were high and swift, if they did not become  
entangled in the branches of overhanging trees, if the current did      
not drive them on an island or dash them against the bank, in a         
bend, if the sawyers and planters were skilfully avoided, and if no     
fog compelled the boatmen to lie to and make fast to a tree, it was     
possible to drift from Pittsburgh to Wheeling in twelve hours.*         
Routes and conditions of settlement. The “National                      
Pike” or Cumberland Road was another way of reaching the                
West [p. 4461. An early account of travel over this road                
through Pennsylvania reads as follows :                                 
We are seldom out of sight, as we travel on this grand trad             
towards Ohio, of family groups, behind and before us. . . A small       
* From McMaster’s History of the United States, Vol. IT, p. 144. By per-
mission of D. Appleton-Century Company.                                 
in Congress. The gold rush of 1897 fastened the attention of    
Congress upon this rich possession. From 1896 to 1903 the       
territory received favorable legislation on homesteads, trans-  
portation. and a code of law (criminal and civil).              
Chinese immigration restricted. President Hayes vetoed          
a bill restricting Chinese immigration because he said it con-  
flicted with the Burlingame Treaty. President Arthur, in        
1882, vetoed another bill which proposed to keep out for a      
period of twenty years such immigrants (mostly laborers).       
Finally, in this same year a law was passed which restricted    
the immigration of Chinese laborers for a period of ten years,  
but permitted those already in the country the right to re-enter
after leaving.                                                  
In this period the foreign policy of the United States indi-    
cated a willingness to annex territory beyond its continental   
area. On the other hand, it gave support to the plan of arbi-   
tration in the settlement of international disputes.            
income tax; the money of the country to be kept as much as                 
possible in the hands of the people ;                                      
and hence we demand that all State and national revenues shall be          
limited to the necessary expenses of the government, economically          
and honestly administered. We demand that postal savings-banks be          
established by the government for the safe deposit of the earnings of      
the people and to facilitate exchange. Transportation being a means        
of exchange and a public necessity, the government should own and          
operate the railroads in the interest of the fieople. The telegraph and    
the telephone, like the post-office system being a necessity for the trans-
mission of news, should be owned and operated by the government in         
the interest of the people. The land, including all natural sources d      
wealth, is the heritage of the people, and should not be monopolized       
for speculative purposes, and alien ownership of land should be pro-       
hibited. All land now held by railroads and other corporations in          
excess of their actual needs, and all lands now owned by aliens, should    
be reclaimed by the government and held for actval settlers only.          
The Populists hoped to strengthen the power of the people                  
by introducing into the States the Australian ballot, the initia-          
tive and the referendum, and the direct election of the United             
States senators. Some of these suggestions have been car-                  
ried out by amendments to the Constitution and by laws passed              
by Congress and by State legislatures.                                     
Attitude of Big Business towards cheap immigrant                           
labor. The general attitude of Big Business toward immi-                   
gration [pp. 709-713] was that of obtaining 3 large supply                 
of labor at low wages. This policy however would tend to                   
lower the standard of living of Americans. Still, following                
the Civil War, the working class did not make serious cor                  
plaints against immigration. Now however it became the                     
practice of manufacturers, steamship, mining, and railroad                 
companies to employ agents in Europe who advertised for                    
laborers. After their arrival many were employed under a                   
contract usually at low wages. Congress had passed an act                  
(1864) to encourage immigration. It had allowed the engage-                
ment, under contract, of immigrant laborers. That is, their                
passage was paid for in advance by pledging their wages, for a             
term not exceeding twelve months.                                          
Big Business, almost every large employer of labor, was      
ack of this bid. The American Emigrant Company was           
firmed. Its business was the importation of laborers, upon   
ders from employers. The latter paid the company a com-      
mission and advanced money to pay for the expenses of the    
sassage of immigrants. As labor organizations became         
wronger they endeavored especially to prevent the importa-   
nt of contract laborers.                                     
Congress finally passed an act (1885) which made it un-      
Iwrtul for anyone to prepay the transportation or in any way 
bassist or encourage the importation of foreigners under any 
■d of contract, except skilled workmen in a new industry     
bed they could not otherwise be obtained. The act was        
bended two years later empowering the Secretary of the       
fceasufy to deport contract laborers, and again to compel the
bp owner to bear the expense of the return of a contract im- 
krant.                                                       
1 Chinese cheap labor. Similar to the problem of contract    
■tor was that of Chinese cheap labor. The Chinese came       
■America in large numbers at the time of the discovery of    
■Idin California (1848) where they were welcomed. Chi-       
le coolies were imported by the Pacific railway companies    
Ido the rough construction work. About 1877 anti-Chinese     
fetation increased on the ground that the Chinese were de-   
living the American workingman of employment. The            
fcifornia constitution, submitted to the people in 1879, con-
feed provisions forbidding corporations from employing       
fenese, debarring the latter from suffrage, forbidding their 
feloyment on public works and annulling all contracts for    
jj die labor. In Pennsylvania Chinese were imported to break 
■nkes. The Burlingame treaty with China (1868) had al-       
|bed Chinese subjects to travel in the United States but     
■i denied them the right of naturalization fp. 556]. Con-    
fer. however, abrogated this treaty. These illustrations     
fe the conflict of interests between Big Business and its    
fere for cheap labor and the American workingman who         
feed to protect his job and raise his standard of liv-       
depression, a migration of about 2,000,000 people from the        
cities to the rural areas has occurred. Then, too, the practice   
of locating factories in the country has grown in order to avoid  
high taxes and wages. W ith the modern conveniences of            
country life, such as good roads, automobiles, radios, and        
amusements, people were more willing to live in the country       
than formerly. The redistribution of population has tended        
i:olessen the problem of overcrowding in the cities.              
| The rate of the growth of population has decreased. Al-         
though it doubled from 1871 to 1900, it gained only 60 per cent   
irom 1901 to 1930. This lower rate of population growth may       
Ibe traced to the scarcity of good, free land ; a lower birth rate
[accompanying the higher cost and standard of living ; the        
■World War ; limitation of immigration ; the lessened demand      
[for labor, due to loss of foreign markets and displacement of    
laborers by machines. Then, too, in the last ten years many       
Immigrants returned to the Old World. Compared with Euro-         
Lan states, however, the United States is still very thinly       
populated, especially in the West. To put it in another way,      
|: we had as many people as Germany, per square mile, our         
population would now be more than one billion. The rapid          
|tarease in the rate of the growth of population has tended       
la slow up agricultural and industrial expansion. It has          
kited individual opportunity for “success.-' It has changed       
I ^condition which has been considered as essential to American   
Lgress; viz., a rapidly expanding population.                     
How immigration and the classes and problems of im-               
migrants influenced American life. Immigration has always         
petted our political, economic, and social development [pp.       
L 248, 413]. From 1861 to 1933, 33,000,000 immigrants             
fane to the United States --- the largest migration known in      
ftistory. Up to about 1880, 75 per cent came from northern        
M western Europe ; principally from the Celtic and Teutonic       
Les--- Irish, Germans, and Scandinavians. After this date         
new immigration” took place ; that largely from eastern and       
ftuthern Europe; from Russia, Poland, Austria-Hungary,            
|taly, and the Balkan states. For example, in the period 1911-    
K15, only 17 per cent of our immigrants came from northern        
The causes of immigration, as formerly, were bad economic       
conditions in the Old World, better opportunities to obtain land
in the United States (Homestead Act of 1862), and higher        
wages. The greater need for raw materials, the expansion of     
manufactures and large railroad and other construction caused   
an enormous demand for cheap immigrant laborers. Bitter         
opposition came from native American laborers because they      
saw their jobs taken by “aliens” who were often willing to      
accept a low standard of living and wages. Others believed      
that such a large number of immigrants could not be             
“Americanized.”                                                 
The opposition to immigration finally caused an important       
change of policy. The movement for restriction began in         
1882, with the Chinese Exclusion Act. “Contract” laborers,      
those under contract to work for a low wage, were excluded      
in 1885. Between 1893 and 1921 other laws stopped the           
incoming of paupers, diseased persons, criminals, and an-       
archists. Japanese laborers were excluded in 1907 by Roose-     
velt’s “Gentlemen’s Agreement" with Japan |see p. 633]. An      
educational test (1917 ) kept out those above sixteen years of  
age who could not read. In 1921 the “quota law" provided        
that each foreign country could send only 3 per cent annually   
of their nationals resident in the United States, according to  
the Census of 1910. In 1924 this was changed to 2 per cent of   
those resident in 1890. Finally, in 1929, the “National Origins 
Law” became effective, with quotas based on the Census of       
1920 and other data. It limited the total number of immi-       
grants in any one year to about 165,000. None of these acts     
applied to Canada, Mexico, Central or South America. The        
effect of these laws was to change the racial nature of immi-   
grants from the Latin and the Slavic to the Nordic type ; viz., 
to make about 80 per cent of our immigrants come from north-    
ern and western Europe. Another reason for restriction was      
the fear that alien radicals, such as anarchists, might try to  
overthrow the American form of government.                      
The general conditions of life in America have changed in       
the last generation. Formerly we welcomed an unlimited num-     
ber of immigrants because of our abundance of good cheap        
land and the need of a large supply of low-priced labor. With   
the passing of free land and the increased use of machines in   
industry, it seemed unwise for the United States to admit so    
many foreigners as formerly. It was hoped that in the course    
of time restriction of immigration would produce greater po-    
litical unity and racial purity. Thus the problem of Ameri-     
kanization would become less pressing. More people left         
America in 1931 than came in ; 89.000 aliens departed, while    
lonly about 43,000 entered. In spite of the large immigration   
since 1900 the percentage of foreign-born in our population     
|was (in 1930) only about 14 per cent of the total. If the pres-
et restrictive laws are continued, this percentage will probably
^decline in the next generation.                                
The immigrants helped to make possible our extraordinary        
^industrial development. They also made important contribu-     
tions to our cultural life. Some noted immigrants were the      
Koilowing : Jacob Riis, the Danish reformer, author of How      
w Other Half Lives and Making of An American ; Michael          
Shipin, inventor, author of From Immigrant to Inventor;         
Itharles P. Steinmetz, the electrical wizard ; and the Nor-     
wegian, Rblvaag, the author of Giants in the Earth.             
            The Westward Movement, Frontier Society,            
                  Democracy, and Sectionalism                   
I Some causes of the westward movement, geographical            
fluences, routes and conditions of settlement. The earlier      
stward movements had, by i860, almost filled up the West        
the 95th degree of longitude [p. 419]. The edge of Western      
element, the frontier line, was in eastern Minnesota, Ne-       
aska, and Kansas, western Arkansas, and eastern Texas,          
eyond was a vast region almost wholly occupied by Indians,      
iich extended from this frontier line (edge of Western settle-  
sot) to the Rocky Mountains ; roughly 1000 miles from east      
west, reaching from the northern boundary of the United         
htes to Mexico. The most important new influence affect-        
in the westward movement was the famous Homestead Act           
381862, signed by Lincoln. For a hundred years or more          
tilers had demanded free land in the West. The squatters        
