Probably two-thirds of the colonists of America in 1775 had been born here, and most of them had never seen another country. Naturally their point of view was different from that of their parents or perhaps of their great-great-grandparents whose early years had been spent in England or on the Continent. Nevertheless, the customs and traditions of the various stocks from which they had sprung were still powerful. The English basis. The majority of the first settlers were English, and English blood and English traditions remained dominant. Two early non-English settlements, the Swedes on the Delaware and the Dutch along the Hudson, were small; nearly all the other colonists were English until after 1680. This early population was reinforced by a relatively small but constant stream of newcomers from England. The French Huguenots. Toward the end of the seventeenth century several other nationalities came in significant numbers. When the revocation of the Edict of Nantes (1685) drove the French Protestants into exile, many of them came to America. They settled in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New York, Virginia, and especially in South Carolina. These Huguenots were an able group, made up of many highly skilled artisans, merchants, and physicians. French migration, however, did not continue in large numbers. The German settlers. A group of Germans attracted by Penn's tolerant attitude concerning religion were among the first settlers in Pennsylvania. Something like 40,000 Germans landed in the first half of the eighteenth century. They made settlements in most of the colonies, but the greatest number came to Pennsylvania, where at times they considerably outnumbered the English. Since most of them were frugal farmers, they tended to move toward the frontiers, here land was more fertile and less expensive than along the coast, 'j'hey brought with them more advanced ideas on agriculture than the English- and they formed an industrious and stable element in the life of the colony. The Scotch-Irish. Large numbers of Scotch-Irish came during the eighteenth century. They were the descendants of the Scots who had settled in northern Ireland in the seventeenth century. There were 6,000 Scotch-Irish in Pennsylvania alone by 1729, and 6,000 more came in that year. Whole towns in Ireland were deserted, and many new towns established in this country. The Scotch-Irish, like the Germans, went to the frontier where land was cheap and plentiful, but unlike the Germans, they were restless and politically ambitious. They frequently came into conflict with the Indians and also with the colonial authorities. As one colonial governor sadly wrote, "[they] frequently sit down on any spot of land they can find without asking questions." On their own behalf they said, "It is against the law of God and nature that so much land should be idle while so many Christians want it to labor on and raise bread." This was the typical frontier point of view. Besides the Scotch-Irish, immigrants came directly from Scotland, and Scots who were prisoners were shipped here by the government. During Cromwell's time some Irish prisoners had been shipped to this country, but the number of Irish was not great during the colonial period. Why they came. Nearly all of these newcomers were in one sense or another refugees; many of them fled from far worse conditions than the English had suffered. The French Protestants, many of the Germans, and the Scotch-Irish Presbyterians had endured at least as severe religious persecution. The great wave of German immigration was occasioned by the devastation of their homeland in Wars with the French. Economic conditions in rural Germany at that time were so difficult that with the utmost industry a man could scarcely keep alive, and it was practically impossible for him to rise above the position in which he was born. Several distressing years of flood, drought, or severe frost had made people desperate. The Scotch-Irish had been prosperous until the woolen industry, which was their chief occupation, was forbidden by act of Parliament (1699) The years following brought troubles of bad weather and difficulties over land titles as well as official interference with their religion They came to America with a lively hatred of Great Britain and an intense dislike of government in general. English attitude toward settlement. Unlike France or Spain, England left the settlement of her colonies almost wholly to private initiative, permitting anyone to settle in them. She encouraged settlers from other nationalities by giving foreigners who had lived four years in an English colony the same rights as native-born Englishmen. This was an unusual provision in those days. Scarcity of free labor. So long as every man in the colonies could own land, it was difficult to hire workers. All the early groups of colonists brought servants with them, but the menservants soon found it possible to make a living for themselves, and the women were speedily sought in marriage. Innumerable letters to England advised prospective settlers to bring servants with them, but warned them that the latter would not remain long in service. In New England where the small farm was typical, the farmer and his family did most of the work. In other sections where large estates or plantations were the rule, the intense demand for labor was met at first by indentured white servants, who were gradually supplanted in the southern sections by Negro slaves. Everywhere apprentices were common. This scarcity of free labor throughout the colonial period lasted until the end of the nineteenth century, when the frontier disappeared. It had a profound effect upon the development of America. Apprentices. The English system of apprenticeship was established early in the development of the colonies. Under this system the master was responsible for the teaching, support, and moral training of the apprentice for a specified number of years. Most apprentices were children whom their parents bound out to receive training in a special line of work. Usually at least one son followed his father's trade; but, if there were several sons, it was advantageous to apprentice some of them to skillful persons, whose sons probably were too old or too young to follow in their fathers' footsteps. Girls were also sometimes apprenticed to learn the mysteries of weaving and dyeing, or the making of butter, cheese, and candles. In the days when trade education and vocational training were unknown, and most work was done in the home, the system had much to recommend it. On the whole it worked well. Indentured servants. The indenture, by which a man bound himself to work a specified number of years for his transportation, was the bridge between poor people in Europe, eager to come to this country, and well-to-do farmers and others here who needed their help. An able-bodied adult was usually bound for from four to seven years, with the assurance of a little equipment and often some land at the end of his time of indenture. The lot of the indentured servant depended largely on the kind of master he happened to get. Frequently he went into the home of a fellow countryman, even an acquaintance, where he was treated well and given a substantial start when his time was ended. In other cases he fared worse than a slave. The master took no interest in him beyond the period of his indenture, and if he tried to run away or otherwise behaved badly, his time would be extended. The system was unsatisfactory in many ways. Indentured servants lacked the incentive to work possessed by free men. Some had poor backgrounds and their position was difficult. In most communities a large proportion of the crimes were committed by people of this class. Nevertheless a great many, probably the majority, acquitted themselves reasonably well and prospered after they became free. Immigration agents. Unfortunately the coming of indentured servants was not wholly the result of supply and demand. It was also profitable, and in the eighteenth century it became a recognized business. Agents known as newlanders traveled about in Europe painting glowing pictures of the New World. They described as a country of high wages, free land, and perfect climate, where the farmer lived like a lord. Many of those who responded to these inducements had money enough, as they thought, to pay for their passage. Since it was more profitable to bring indentured servants than ordinary passengers, the agents and the ship captains sometimes conspired to cause delay and to make the journey more expensive for the passengers than they had anticipated. In this way many an unfortunate person who had expected to land in America with enough money to keep his family together and to buy a farm, found his family scattered and sold into bondage for a term of years. Kidnaping. An even more reprehensible method of obtaining servants for the colonies was by kidnaping or "spiriting," as it was called. This was most common in the latter part of the seventeenth century. It is reported that in a single year ten thousand persons were kidnaped and sent to America (1670). Efforts were made to stop this outrageous practice, and toward the close of the century it disappeared. Transported prisoners. About 40,000 prisoners were sent to the colonies (1717-1775), mostly to Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, and the West Indies. The English authorities sent them as bond servants, usually for longer terms than the ordinary indentured servants. Large numbers of them had committed only trifling offenses; others were political prisoners, and still others were poor starving wretches who had deliberately committed a petty crime in order to be deported. Yet some were hardened criminals, and the colonies cannot be blamed for objecting strenuously to receiving them. Slavery. Negro slaves were first brought into Virginia in 1619. Their numbers increased slowly toward the end of the century, but for some years longer they were less numerous than indentured servants. Even though there was much opposition to the importation of slaves, Colonel William Byrd stated that there were at least ten thousand in Virginia (1736). The Negroes, however, met an economic need. The supply of white servants was never sufficient and was always changing. Consequently, slavery increased in spite of the fears of Byrd and others. It existed in all the colonies until the Revolution, and slaves made up one-fifth of the entire population of the colonies by 1770. There were few slaves in the North, where small farms were the rule and fairly skilled labor was essential. A person traveling south would have observed different conditions. Negroes formed one-fourth of the population of Maryland, and one-third of that of Virginia. In South Carolina the development of rice and indigo culture in hot swampy fields made Negro labor apparently a necessity, and by the middle of the eighteenth century slaves greatly out-numbered the whites. The slave trade. The slave trade was carried on with unthinkable cruelty. The captured Negroes were crowded on the slave ships without room to stand erect. They were barely enough food and water to keep them alive. Thousands died on the voyage. There seems to have been no general feeling in any country that slavery was wrong. Northern ship-owners made enormous profits in supplying slaves for the southern market. During the eighteenth century, however, sentiment against slavery began to spread in various nations. Gradually the slave trade also came to be considered disreputable in America, and, particularly in the North, slave-owning was opposed on moral grounds. The changing attitude toward slavery and the slave trade is a striking example of the development of moral ideas. Social classes in America. All the early colonies began with the background of social distinctions to which the settlers had been accustomed in their home countries. As time passed, these changed considerably, but they were never lost sight of in the older sections of the colonies. In fact, they were carried out with a rigor which seems amusing today. Seats in church and places at the table and in processions were regulated with careful regard for social standing. College students were seated and listed in the catalog according to social rank. At the top of the scale were the royal governor and other English officials. In many colonies the governor maintained a sort of corut around which clustered the local aristocracy. This was composed of a few who were recognized as gentlefolk by birth and of others, more numerous, whose wealth or position gave them prestige, including large landowners, a growing number of merchants, and some professional people. In the New England colonies the clergy were particularly prominent and respected. Below this aristocracy came the substantial middle class—independent farmers, small shopkeepers, skilled artisans, and members of the professions who did not belong to the socially elect. A third group consisted of unskilled workmen and farm laborers. During their term of service indentured servants ranked still lower, but as soon as they had finished their period of service, they took their Place with the next higher class. At the bottom of the social scale were Negro slaves, who alone had no hope of bettering their position. Conditions began to change about 1850, when immigrants were pouring into the country in large numbers. Many of them went to work in factories for lower wages than native Americans would accept. Thus the native born were crowded out and began to regard factory work as beneath them. Conditions then became worse than they had been in the early days. Early labor unions. Soon after the beginning of the Industrial | Revolution, workers in a few city trades, particularly printers and shoemakers, formed unions for the purpose of safeguarding their interests, that is, to obtain higher wages, shorter hours, and better working conditions. For a time they were able to accomplish little. Men were sent to prison for attempting to strike, until 1825. 9 the early 1830's, however, the union movement made considerable progress. A number of local unions were formed, and the first trade union council met in New York (1833). The serious financial panic (1837) threw thousands out of work; wages were cut as in the depression after 1929 (see p. 722), and labor unions were crushed unable to regain their strength for many years. Labor was required to operate the factories, dig the canals, and build the railroads. The largest number of early immigrants came from England, Scotland, and Wales. These newcomers fitted readily into the life here and were scarcely regarded as foreigners. They belonged to all classes and were to be found in all parts of the country, but large numbers settled as farmers in the Northwest Territory. Another large group recruited from factory operatives in the old country entered the newly-opened factories in the East. These immigrants helped to keep the United States in touch with labor and reform movements in Great Britain. Historic Currents in Changing America The Irish. More striking was the influx of Irish. The annual number of these newcomers increased steadily, and in the late 1840s following the potato famine in Ireland, it leaped to unprecedented! figures. Conditions in Ireland even before the famine were desperately hard, and most of the immigrants landed without funds. Fortunately jobs were at hand. The opening of the West and the rapid growth of eastern cities made imperative a large supply of laborers who could handle a pick and shovel and who would go where they were needed. Thus the Irish were cordially welcomed by the contractors who were laying sewer and gas mains in eastern cities, or building roadbeds and canals farther afield. Irish strength played a large part in making possible the rapid development of the country during this period. As long as the Irish worked on construction gangs, no one objected to their presence. As soon as jobs such as the construction of canals were finished, the men who had been employed on them usually settled in near-by towns. They liked to live together in groups; they would accept work in the factories or elsewhere at wages below the customary rate. Genuine tolerance for differences 1 has never been a conspicuous American trait, and at this time Roman 1 Catholicism, the religion of most of the Irish, was often regarded as something European and hostile to democracy. When a Catholic church began to rise in a town, and the earlier residents found the Irish taking over their jobs, the combination of circumstances aroused deep resentment. Mob violence, to which the Irish were not slow to respond, often resulted. Rioting, especially at elections, became j a regular feature in some localities. The Irish and politics. The Irish in the United States early showed an aptitude for politics, particularly in municipal affaire. By the 1820's they were active in Tammany Hall in New York City and before long they controlled it. The Irish furnished most of the police in eastern cities, and a large proportion of other city offices and contractors. They became Democrats in the time of Jackson* and most of their offspring have remained Democrats. In natron** politics their cohesion and interest made them influential out "| proportion to their numbers. As the Irish were deeply hostile to Great Britain, their presence in this country did much to revive the bitterness resulting from the War of 1812. This showed itself particularly in the frequency which certain politicians "twisted the lion's tail." Many sea orations of the time were really not prompted by the personal resentment but by the thoughtful eye which he kept Irish in his audience. People of Irish blood have made an important contribution to American life. Many Irishmen fought on the Northern side in the War and they furnished a number of distinguished military naval officers. Other Irishmen have done notable work as actors, musicians, and teachers. Victor Herbert, the well-known composer, and Augustus St. Gaudens, America's foremost sculptor, were both of Irish birth. The Irish sense of humor, rightness of heart, and sympathetic understanding of the other person's point of view have woven a colorful thread into the fabric of American life. Migration from Germany. A steady stream of settlers had come from Germany to America during the colonial period, but it almost ceased at the time of the American Revolution. The failure of liberal uprisings (1830, 1848) gave impetus to a second migration. Among the newcomers were many men of superior education and ability and of liberal ideals. At the same time economic conditions in Germany were difficult; the peasant farmers who made up threequarters of the population saw little hope of improving their position, and many of them turned eagerly to the United States as a land of opportunity. With them came large numbers of skilled mechanics who had been displaced by the newly-built German factories and machinery. Some Germans with special skills or interests such as musicians, or importers stayed in the eastern cities; but the great majority pushed westward. Many went to the cities in the galley. Germans formed one-third of the voters in Cincinnati. Later, increasingly larger numbers sought the Great Lakes and settled in growing cities such as Milwaukee, St. Louis. Germans added strength to the movements for the abolition of slavery, prison reform education. They also brought to this country musical taste and skill of a high order little known here. Their interest in education seconded that of the New England pioneers and contributed to the development of the remarkable state educational systems in Middle West. Their opposition to slavery was an important factor in holding the West in the Union; and many of them fought in the Northern armies during the Civil War. Other national groups. People from other nations also came to the United States, but in less significant numbers. French Canadians began to move across the border to work. Standards in etiquette and in art in this period were borrowed from France rather than from Great Britain, and a small but influential group of Frenchmen served as teachers, dancing masters, and chefs. Colonies of Dutch, Belgians, and Swiss settled farming communities in the Northwest, and the handful of Scandinavians who came during this period were the advance guard of a movement which was to become important in later decades. The United States would have become a very different country had it been cut off from Europe. On the one side of the Atlantic was opportunity for work in the new factories and for farming in the new West; on the other were hosts of people in Europe eager to come to the New World. The work-of the immigrants in the factory or on the farm was important. It was even more important to have a rapidly growing population which could absorb the products of large-scale industry and agriculture and exploit the regions beyond the frontier. These newcomers, moreover, brought with them ideas and interests which modified those of the earlier stocks, helping to make American life a fabric woven of many-colored strands. Southern attitudes toward slavery. Once convinced that slavery was essential for prosperity, many Southerners stopped thinking of it as an evil. While abolitionist sentiment was growing in the North, a belief spread in the South that slavery was a positive benefit. It was pointed out that the Bible sanctioned slavery and laid down rules for the conduct of masters and slaves. At the same time Southerners circulated information on the evils connected with factory towns which had grown up in England and in the North. They argued that slavery was good from every point of view. The Negroes had been rescued from savagery; as slaves, they were sure of care in sickness and old age. The masters, relieved of all manual toil, could devote themselves to intellectual pursuits and to the direction of government; and society had no grave problems of industrial unrest and real poverty as it did in the industrial North. Some Southerners did not accept this view of slavery, but they were in the minority. Southern indignation was unbounded when Hinton R. Helper of North Carolina published his The Impending Crisis, depicting the injury slavery had done to the "poor whites,' > class from which he sprang. Southern officials burned all copies that fell into their hands. Slavery came within the jurisdiction of the states, and the right of a state to sanction slavery was implicit in the Constitution. The great majority of Northerners recognized this fact and took it for granted that slavery could not be interfered with where it already existed. The South, however, was not satisfied with this negative toleration. According to the slaveowners' point of view, their rights demanded federal protection at several points. Among these were the tariff, both foreign and interstate slave-trade, the return of fugitive slaves, and the extension of slavery in new territory. State rights versus federal supremacy. As early as 1789 the Democratic-Republican legislatures of Kentucky and Virginia had declared the Alien and Sedition Laws unconstitutional (p. 155). They set forth the theory that whenever in their opinion the federal court exceeded its constitutional powers, the individual states had the right to decide how to obtain redress. Immigration. At the same time immigration was increasing with the triple purpose of peopling the national domain, enabling manufacturers to replace native laborers who moved west or joined the army, and helping to replace soldiers killed in battle. We established an Immigration Bureau (1864), and passed a law permitting immigrants to pay for their passage by pledging their wages in advance. Although this law allowing a revival of indentured service was soon repealed, the practice, known as contract labor persisted illegally for several decades. Industry and labor. Northern industry was thus assured a plentiful labor supply and an expanding market in the growing West. In addition to these advantages manufacturers were benefited by the high protective tariff which made it possible for them to fill the government's vast war orders without undue foreign competition Before the war manufacturers had begun to combine many processes in one huge factory. This large-scale production was increased during the war by the government's method of taxing manufactured goods. Cloth made by a large company which did spinning, weaving, and dyeing was taxed only once, whereas cloth produced by several concerns, each handling only one process, would be taxed several times. A tax levied on a product each time it was sold naturally encouraged large-scale industries. Thus small manufacturers were forced out of business in competition with big companies, and capitalists rather than workingmen or society at large obtained the lion's share of the rewards. Before the Civil War the United States extended from the Atlantic to the Pacific, yet scarcely one-half of this area had actually been settled. One frontier lay some two or three hundred miles west of the Mississippi River and northwest of the Gulf of Mexico; another marked the eastern edge of settlement on the Pacific. Between these wavering fines stretched a vast region bisected by the mighty mass of the Rocky Mountain plateau and the high plains west of the one hundredth meridian. This tract was divided into territories and crossed by regular trails, even by one "pony express. Yet, except for the Mormon colony in Utah, the area had few white inhabitants. (See maps, pp. 271 and 401.) Indians still roamed over it at will. To Americans at that time it seemed to offer an inexhaustible supply of land, enough to give farms to all creation. Yet by^H opening of the twentieth century the frontiers had been obliterated. The skillful leader had no difficulty in creating an effective political "machine." The large number of recent immigrants in most of the industrial cities were easily controlled. Many of them could not read English, and most were quite inexperienced in democratic politics. The political leader, or his assistant who spoke their language, was often the only person to take any sort of interest in them. He found jobs for them, aided them in taking out naturalization papers, and helped them if they were sick or in trouble. Voting the way he advised was a natural return for his kindness. No one group should receive all the blame for the corruption of the time. Native as well as foreign-born persons accepted favors and sold votes. Too often the corporations stood ready to buy the kind of laws they wanted, and unfortunately, there were individual legislators not only willing to be bribed, but ready actually to black-mail the interests into buying them. They sometimes introduced measures which would harm the corporations for the express purpose of being bought off. Existing laws did not fit the new conditions created by the growth of big business, and new ones had not yet been made. By the middle of the nineteenth century the Industrial Revolution was entering a new stage. Factories housing the ever-improving power machinery were growing larger and entering a stage of expansion where one man's money or one family's money was no longer sufficient to provide the necessary capital. Personal relationships between the owners and the workers were becoming less close. Corporations were soon to be formed. Steamships were unloading thousands upon thousands of immigrants with their racial differences and their peculiar customs. Many of them became factory workers and hastened the growth and congestion of the industrial cities and mill towns. Others sought farms where the new agricultural machinery—the cotton gin, the reaper, the gangplow, and the threshing machine—were transforming the countryside and making it possible for the city population to be fed. When immigration to the US was curtailed following the World War, steamship companies remodeled their immigrant quarters and opened them as "tourist third class." The popularity of the service has increased rapidly. Ocean travel of all kinds has grown to a striking degree. The well-to-do travel on luxurious cruises to the West Indies, the Mediterranean, or around the world. People of all ages with all kinds of interests flock to Europe by the thousands every summer. Americans are rapidly on the way to becoming a well-traveled people. The conquest of the air. Man's first attempts to fly were made in lighter-than-air machines, that is, in balloons. As early as 1851 a balloon made a flight driven by power furnished by a steam engine. By the turn of the century Samuel Langley and the Wright brothers were experimenting with heavier-than-air machines. The Wright brothers succeeded in developing an airplane which was practical for short distances (1905). Planes had become reliable enough to be used for military purposes before the World War. Japanese-American relations. The relations between Japan and the United States had been almost uniformly cordial. During the Russo-Japanese War, American sympathy had been strongly with the Japanese, but the extent of the Japanese victory resulted in a reaction in America. A fear that Japan might become too powerful began to grow. Several factors also cooled the warmth of Japanese feeling toward the United States. The Japanese people, not realizing as the government did, that it was impossible to continue the war much longer, were bitterly disappointed that the peace terms were not more favorable to Japan. Quite unjustly, they blamed Roosevelt, and in thousands of Japanese homes his picture was turned to the wall. Japanese immigration. A far more serious factor in the situation grew out of Japanese immigration to the United States. Japanese laborers had been coming to California in considerable numbers. They were excellent workers, but as their living standards were lower than those of the American workmen they threatened to reduce the scale of wages. Consequently, an intense anti-Japanese feeling spread along the Pacific coast. Unable to legislate directly regarding immigration, the state of California began to pass restrictive laws, in particular, Japanese were forbidden to own land, and Japanese children were excluded from schools attended by white children. These acts aroused intense resentment in Japan. The federal government cannot exert much direct influence on Japanese government. This was not an official document, and it was not made public at the time. It was a promise on the part of Japan that she would not issue passports to laborers except to those who had been here previously or whose families were here. This agreement was faithfully observed, and it reduced Japanese immigration to a low figure. Yet the anti-Japanese groups were not satisfied until the federal immigration law of 1924 (p. 684), although placing other nationalities on a quota, excluded Asiatics. This law made little change in the number of newcomers, for the Japanese quota would have been only about 150 annually, but it gravely offended Japan. Tension between the two nations has not been relieved; on the contrary, it has increased as a result of commercial rivalry and Japanese activity in northern and central China since 1931. Immigration before the war. The position of labor might have been even more unsatisfactory had not a policy of restricted immigration been in force. The number of newcomers was tremendous during the first decade of the century. An increasing proportion came from southern and eastern Europe. Many were brought over by American or foreign labor agents, acting in the interest of steamship companies and American employers; others were sent by philanthropists. Americans began to feel that the "melting pot" could not possibly take care of so many newcomers at a time. Their presence was resented by American workingmen, who saw their jobs taken and their rates of pay often undercut by these new and unorganized laborers whose living standards were necessarily lower. Several restrictive measures were attempted. In 1917 a law, passed over President Wilson's veto, required that every adult immigrant be able to read in some language. It also raised the head tax to eight dollars, excluded all Asiatics, and extended the provisions for deportation. Immigration since the war. During the World War immigration almost stopped. When the Armistice was signed, it seemed likely that it would be resumed in great numbers. To forestall this, a new act was passed (1921), introducing the so-called "quota" system. It limited the annual admission of each nationality to not more than 3 per cent of the number who were living in the United States in 1910. Three years later the quota was lowered to 2 per cent, the basis of the 1890 census, and the total number of quota immigrants to be admitted from non-American countries was not to 150,000 in any one year. The law provided also that arrangements should be made, wherever possible, to have the examination for conducted in Europe. Thus procedure, it was thought, to save immigrant the hardship of crossing the Atlantic only to be rejected upon his arrival on this side of the ocean. It was provided further that after 1929 the quotas should be distributed proportionally, according to the national origin of inhabitants of the United States. Under the act of 1921 only the number of English or German birth counted in fixing the number admitted from England and Germany. Under the later provision all the native Americans of English or German ancestry helped to swell these quotas. These changes were intended to favor the admission of immigrants from northern and western Europe. With the coming of the depression (1929), emigration to the United States declined. More foreign born persons left the country than entered it (1931). At the same time restrictions were applied more stringently; the prohibition on admitting persons who might become public charges was rigidly enforced. Renewed activity in deporting aliens was instituted by Secretary of Labor in President Hoover's administration. None of the immigration acts applied to the countries of this hemisphere. With immigration from Europe sharply reduced, the unskilled immigrant labor was largely recruited from among FrenchCanadians and Mexicans. After 1924 about half of the newcomers were non-quota immigrants, with the proportion from Mexico on the increase. Diminishing growth of population. The reduction of immigration helps to explain why the population of the United States is not growing as rapidly now as it did during the nineteenth century. 