Benjamin Franklin Signing the Declaration of Independence
THE
MAKING
OF
AMERICAN
CIVILIZATION.
by CHARLES A. BEARD and
MARY R. BEARD
COLOR ILLUSTRATIONS BY
STANLEY M. ARTHURS
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
■	
NEW YORK	1939
Copyright, 1037,1939,
By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
All rights reserved—no part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission in
writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer who wishes to quote brief passages in connection with a
review written for inclusion in magazine or newspaper.
Setup and electrotyped. Published April, 1937. Reprinted September, 1937; June, 1938. Reissue
with additional material, March, 1939*
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
TO TEACHERS
The growing demand for social studies that will give boys and
girls in the schools a "realistic knowledge” of the society in which
they live and are to take part as citizens seems to us an encouraging
sign of the times. But we cling to the belief that this realistic
knowledge can best be acquired by what is called "the historical
approach.”
In the first place, many features of contemporary society are as
old as the American nation, or older, even though they may present
novel aspects today or be called by different names. This is as true of
the arts, sciences, and literature as it is of political and economic
institutions and practices. How can anyone hope to comprehend the
trends in "the new art” without studying the trends in "the old art”?
Or comprehend the issues of currency, banking, tariff, foreign trade,
agriculture, the use of natural resources, and the interpretation of the
Constitution, without knowledge of how- they arose? The American
people have been coping with them for more than a century. To
discuss these matters merely in the light of today, or of the past few
years, is to discuss them superficially and to encourage the formation
of frivolous judgments.
In the second place, the very statement of contemporary
problems raises controversial issues and a rational treatment calls for
knowledge of relevant facts, skill in research, and the judicial temper.
If anyone is to state the problems clearly and convincingly, he must
know how to get at the facts involved. If he is to treat them rationally,
he must know how to take an all-round view of them with all the
opinions involved. Such skill and such spirit, we believe, can be
better acquired by beginning with the problems of long ago than by
starting with questions that are "hot in the day's news.” Nearly all the
issues now up for consideration are issues that have long been before
the American people, and one may more firmly grasp their nature
iii
COLOR ILLUSTRATIONS
Benjamin Franklin Signing the Declaration of Independence
Frontispiece
FACING PAGE
The Covered Wagon.......................................307
Midstream Passenger........................................415
Chilkoot Pass...........................................651
MAPS
Voyages of Exploration and Discovery.....................10
The Original Grants (in color)..................facing	27
Settlements of German and Scotch-Irishlmmigrants ...	46
Distribution of Population, 1790.........................52
English, French, and Spanish Possessions in America,
1750 (in color)....................................facing	81
The Colonies of North America at the Tune of the Declaration of
Independence (in color).........................facing!A\
North America according to the Treaty of 1783 (in color) facing 151
The United States in 1805 (in color)............facing 225
Distribution of Population, 1830........................292
Roads and Trails into the Western Territory (in color) . facing 295
The Cumberland Road.....................................298
Texas and the Territory in Dispute......................356
The Oregon Country and the Disputed Boundary ....	359
The Overland Trails.....................................362
The Missouri Compromise.................................445
Distribution of Slaves in the Southern States...........450
Slave and Free Soil in 1861.............................453
The United States in 1861 (in color)............facing 469
The Theater of Warfare, 1861-1865 (in color). between 492-493
Railroads of the United States..........................522
The United States in 1870 (in color)............facing	527
The Forty-eight States (in color)...............facing	539
American Possessions in the Pacific (in color). .	. facing	681
The Caribbean Region (in color).................facing	111
Western Battle Lines of the Various Years of the World
War.........................................................799
Europe according to the Peace of Paris (in color) between 804-805
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
iii
CHAPTER
To Teachers
PART I. A NEW NATION IS BUILT IN NORTH AMERICA............j
I. America Is Discovered and Possessed by Europeans ......3
European Traders, Missionaries, Explorers, and Rulers Grow
More Interested in the Far East— Explorers Find New Routes and
Discover Distant Lands—Spain Founds an Empire in America—
France and England Enter the Race for Trade and Empire
II.	Emigrants prom the Old World Start Colonies
in THE New World.........................................20
The English Lead in Colonization—The London Company
Breaks the Path in Virginia—Congregations and Corporations Found
Colonies in New England—Five Colonies Are Started by Proprietors
—New York, New Jersey, and Georgia Have Special Origins
III.	The Colonies Grow in Population, Industry, and
Enlightenment............................................45
People of Many Nationalities and Classes Occupy the
Settlements—Wealth Is Accumulated by Industry on Land and Sea—
The Number of Churches Makes for Religious Freedom—Schools
and Colleges Are Founded for the Promotion of Learning—
The Colonial Press Widens Interest in Human Affairs—
Literature, Science, and Art Are Cultivated
IV. The Colonies Are Welded by Common Experiences in Peace and
War 75
Against Royal Officers and Proprietors the Colonial Assemblies
Contend for the Rights of Self-Government—Actions by the British
Crown and Parliament Tend to Bring All the Colonies into One
System of Government and Trade—Foreign Wars Help to Unify the
Colonists—Warfare Brings Training in Government
vii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER	PACE
V. Great Britain Tightens the Grip of Empire on the Colonies and
Arouses American Resistance 97 The British Government
Displays an Aristocratic Spirit—George Ill's Government Places
New Restraints on the Colonies—Colonial Resistance Brings
Repeal of the Stamp Act—Great Britain Adopts New Measures
of Taxation and Restraint— Americans Renew Their
Resistance—The British Government Retaliates—Americans
Turn from Argument to Insistence upon Their Rights
VI. Americans Win Independence by Revolution .	.118
The Conflict of Argument Reaches a Clash of Anns —The Struggle
for American Liberties Is Carried through a Revolutionary
War—Civilians Support the Revolution by Industry, Finance,
Diplomacy, and Government—Independence Is Declared—
Republican Government Is Established—The British
Government Bows to the Inevitable and Acknowledges the
Independence of the American Republic
PART II. THE AMERICAN REPUBLIC STRENGTHENS ITS
FOUNDATIONS.	..155
VII............................................
Stronger Union Is Achieved.....................157
Severe Trials Overtake the Republic—Planners Bring About a
Constitutional Convention—Clashes of Opinions and Interests
Lead to Compromises—
The Plan of the New Government Is Drafted—
The Constitution Is Ratified
VIII. The New Government Is Steered through
Troubled Years (1789-1801)........................... 188
Federal Authorities Are Chosen and Installed—
The Solution of Basic Problems Is Undertaken—
The Young Republic Runs into Hard Foreign Problems—Political
Factions Form in the United States—The Parties Wage a Hard
Battle (1796- 1800)
DC. Planters and Farmers Take the Helm (1801-1829)217
Republicans Reverse Federalist Policies—More Land Is
Acquired for Agriculture: The Louisiana Purchase—War Breaks
in upon the Republican Regime—Republicans Strengthen
Nationalism—
The Supreme Court Sustains the National View of the Constitution
TABLE OF CONTENTS
IX
CHAPTER	PAGE
X. The Republic Develops a Civilization of Its Own 250 Social
Foundations Are Altered—The Doctrine of the Rights of Man Is
Applied to Religion—The Right to Free Speech and a Free Press
Is Upheld—
Plans for Education Display Republican Zest— Literature and
the Arts Take Account of Events— Science and Invention Make
Strides
PART III. THE REPUBLIC EXPANDS AND
BECOMES DEMOCRATIC..........................285
XI. Rural Democracy Rises in the Near West	. .287
The Way Is Cleared for Western Settlement— People Rush to
the Near West—The Government Establishes Communications—
Agricultural Democracy Reigns in the Near West—New States Are
Added to the Union
XII. Urban Democracy Rises in the East .	.	. .3x1
The Old Political "Aristocracy” Is Overthrown— Democracy
Brings Changes in Political Practices
XIII. Jacksonian Democracy Triumphs in the Struggle
for National Power........................................324
Democratic Doctrines Are Applied in the Federal Politics—The
Country Splits over the Tariff and States' Rights—A New Party
Battle Opens
XIV.	The Nahon Pushes Westward to the Pacific
Ocean................................................344
The Middle Border Advances—The Tide Sweeps over Texas and
on to the Pacific—Oregon is Occupied—California Is Brought into
the Union— Mormons Make a Desert Flourish
XV.	American Life Becomes Increasingly Democratic 368 Efforts
Are Made to Apply the Theory of Democracy to All Social
Relations—The People Are Drawn into the Intellectual Life of
the Republic— Democracy Sweeps into Literature—Science
Flourishes in the Age of Liberty—The Arts Bear the Stamp of
the Age
PART IV. SOCIAL CONFLICT SHAKES THE
REPUBLIC.............................................399
XVI.	Industrialism Becomes a System in the North . 401
Machines Take the Place of Handicrafts—Industry and Railways
Break into the West—Statesmen Work Out Plans for "The American
System”
X
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER
PAGE
421
437
466
5°°
5i9
52i
XVII.	Cotton Becomes “ King ” in the South .	...
The Chief Features of the Cotton-Planting System—The Cotton
Kingdom Grows Stronger— Planters Voice Theories and Make
Plans
XVIII.	The House Is Divided against Itself .	. . .
Slavery Becomes an Issue in a Sectional Struggle— Efforts Are
Made to Settle the Conflict by Compromise—The Old Conflict
Reopens—A Third Party Wins in the Struggle for Power
XIX.	The Political Debate Passes into the Violence
of War................................................
Southern States Seek Independence—The Federal Union Suppresses
the Confederacy—The Triumph of Republican Policies Is
Assured—The Confederate States Are " Reconstructed ”
XX.	The South Seeks to Reorder Its Affairs .
War Leaves a Heritage of Political Upheaval and Economic Woe—
White Supremacy Is Restored— Southern People Continue
Agriculture with Changed Methods
PART V. THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION COVERS THE
CONTINENT................................................
XXL	Government, Farming, and Business Carry
Enterprise into the Far West..........................
The Federal Government Takes Leadership—The Land Is Occupied
and Exploited—Business Enterprise Promotes Industry and
Commerce—New States Are Admitted to the Union—The
Development of the Far West Makes Deep Changes in National
Life and Problems
XXII.	Machine Industries Spread Widely and Are
549
575
United under Corporahons..............................
Business Enterprise Leaps Forward—Great Industries Pierce the
South—Business Enterprises Are United under Corporations—
Social Changes Accompany Industrial Development
XXIII.	Great Wealth Alters the Course of Democracy
Riches Are Spent with Abandon—Wealth Furnishes a New
Setting for Religion—Wealth Furnishes More Money for
Education—Writers Survey All Phases of American
Civilization—The Theater Shows the Imprint of Prosperity—
Artists Gain
TABLE OF CONTENTS
xi
CHAPTER
PAGE
618
647
649
More Opportunities—Scientists and Inventors Respond to Richer
Opportunities
XXIV.	Political Parties Wrestle with National Questions
(1865-1900)...........................................
Parties Strive for Supremacy—Political Parties Discuss National
Issues—Laws Are Enacted to Meet Political Issues—Republicans
Are Victorious in a Great Contest over Issues in 1896
PART VI. AMERICAN INTEREST IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS
BECOMES WORLD-WIDE .
XXV.	America Is Involved in the Competihon of World
Powers over Trade and Territory .
The United States Upholds Pan-American Independence against
European Governments—Territories Are Added to the United
States—The Demand Grows for More Trade and a Larger Navy—A
War with Spain Opens the Way for Expansionists—American
Citizens Divide over Expansion
670
691
693,
717
XXVI.	World Policies Are Worked Out for the United
States ...................................................
Controversy Continues over Imperial Questions— Government
Is Set Up in the New Possessions— American Power Is Extended in
the Caribbean and Latin America—The United States Carries on
Negotiations with Other Powers
PART VII. DEMOCRACY ENGAGES IN SOCIAL REFORM..............
XXVII.	Labor Seeks a Larger Share of the Nahonal
Income ...................................................
Industrial Workers Face New Conditions—Industrial Workers
Seek to Meet the New Conditions of American Life and Industry—
Organized Labor Seeks Favorable Laws—Employers Develop Their
Ideas on Labor Relations
XXVIII.	The Spirit of Reform Extends to Wide Circles .
Changes in American Life Bring Wider Views of Democracy—
Domestic Discontent Takes Many Forms—Political Reforms Are
Adopted—Economic Reforms Are Adopted
XU
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER	PAGE
XXIX. Progressive Democracy Splits the Political
Parties..................................................747
Theodore Roosevelt States His Reform Policies— Roosevelt
Supports New Measures of Government—President Taft Tries to
Balance Factions in the Republican Party—Progressives Upset
the Two-Party System in 1912
XXX. The Democrats Sponsor a Reform Program
under President Wilson................................. 765
The New Freedom Takes Definite Form—The New Freedom Is Put
into Operation at Home—
The New Freedom Is Tried in Foreign Affairs
PART VIII. WORLD WAR BURSTS IN UPON
REFORMING DEMOCRACY.............................781
Again a European War Throws Its Shadow across America—The
United States Is Carried into the
XXXI.The United States Enters the World War .	.783
World War—A Settlement Is Made
XXXII. Republican Administrations Direct Foreign
Policies......................................811
Problems Left by the War Are Taken Up—Foreign Trade and Naval
Limitations Are Sought
PART IX. DEMOCRACY RESUMES ITS QUEST FOR THE
IDEAL..............................................829
XXXIII. Industries Prosper under Government Favors 831
The Government Promotes Economic Enterprise— Business
Booms—Dark Clouds Hover on the Horizon of "Universal
Prosperity”
XXXIV.	Ameri
can Civilization Encounters a Crisis .	.853
A Business Depression Grips the Nation—Efforts Are Made by
President Hoover to Stem the Tide— Religious Leaders Continue
Their Role as Makers of Opinion—Educators Press for the
Protection of Youth—Writers Wrestle with Problems of the
Hour—Playwrights Dramatize Emotions and Opinions—Artists
Join in the Expression of Opinions— Science and Technology
Widen Their Outlook—
The Crisis Is Made the Campaign Issue
XXXV. Democracy Considers Social Security .	...	889
Americans Examine Their Civilization as a Whole—
The Government Deals with Banking, Currency,
and Credit—Security Is Sought for Agriculture— Codes Are Framed
for Business Enterprise and Labor—New Laws Are Made for
Utilities and the Use of Natural Resources—The Nation Acts to
Reduce Unemployment and	Poverty—The
xiii
PAGE
CHAPTER
i
xix
Supreme Court Declares Most of the New Deal Unconstitutional—
President Roosevelt Announces a "Good Neighbor” Policy in
External Affairs—The Nation Debates Great Issues
Appendix.............................................
Index................................................
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER II
EMIGRANTS FROM THE OLD WORLD START COLONIES IN
THE NEW WORLD
The English Lead in Colonizahon
England Has a Big Navy for the Defense of Colonies and Trade.
The territories in America claimed by the English lay across three
thousand miles of open sea. To found colonies there, hold them, and
trade with them, England needed a navy strong enough to defend its
distant lands and its merchant ships against its rivals—Spain, Holland,
and France. And toward the end of the sixteenth century, the English
governing class decided to "rule the waves.” Queen Elizabeth made
and endorsed plans with that goal in view, and gave her blessing to sea
captains who caused the English flag to be feared on the ocean. From
decade to decade the navy was enlarged. It overwhelmed the Spanish
Armada in 1588, and later struck down its Dutch and French rivals. By
commanding the sea, Britain made it possible for its colonists to go
forth to America, plant settlements, trade in security, and hold the
regions they occupied.
England Has Business Leaders. But the great navy did not start
colonies. Nor could emigrants just set out for the New World at will.
Every expedition across the sea had to be planned and directed. Money
had to be raised to buy ships, tools, seeds, and fann animals. Hence
leaders and capital were necessary. England had both. Long before the
opening of the seventeenth century her merchants had built up a large
trade among towns at home, with the Continent, with Russia, and in the
Mediterranean. This trade had been profitable. It furnished capital and
nourished the spirit of enterprise essential for founding colonies.
Sometimes these leaders formed "companies of adventurers” and
induced other men and women to invest money in colonial
undertakings. Each company included several members; and,
20
EMIGRANTS START COLONIES
21
as in a club, the members had a right to elect their own officers and
to make rules for their own government. It got a charter, or legal right
to do business, from the monarch, and also a grant of land in America.
It could sell land in large or small lots to individuals and carry on trade
besides. Four of the thirteen colonies in America were founded by
companies—Virginia, Massachusetts Bay, the Dutch New Netherland,
and Georgia.
Other leaders in colonization acted alone or in groups of two or
more. These were called "proprietors.” A proprietor was a person to
whom the king granted land in America. This land the proprietor could
hold for his own use or sell, all or in part, to settlers. He was always a
rich man who could furnish or borrow money, collect ships, supply
goods, and enroll people for migration. He could govern his colony
himself or allow his settlers the right to vote and take part in local
government. In some cases a single proprietor was given a vast tract of
land; in other cases, two or more proprietors were associated as
partners. To the proprietary system six colonies owe their main
origins—Maryland, Pennsylvania, Delaware, New Jersey, and the two
Carolinas.
English Fanners Are Ready to Till American Soil. Colonization in
America was an adventure in agriculture. It was therefore necessary to
find fanners who were willing to leave their birthplace to till the soil in
distant lands. At the opening of the seventeenth century England had
two types of fanners who were ready to work the land in America. The
first were the yeomen— owners of small fanns—noted for their steady
habits, their pride in their crops, and their independence. The second
were fann laborers—men and women who worked for landowners for
wages. By 1600 the English serfs had been released from their ancient
bondage and were "free” to leave their home country for the colonies.
Thousands of them were very glad to go away because they owned no
land, were unemployed, and were miserably poor. The colonies seemed
to offer agricultural laborers a chance to find work and perhaps acquire
fanns of their own.
Competent Women Are Inclined to Migrate. Homes—not
individuals merely—were necessary to successful colonization.
Photograph hy Ewing Galloway. X. Y.
EMIGRANTS START COLONIES
23
And homes could not be established without women. It took women
of strong character and varied talents to make the distant venture a
success. But England could meet this requirement too. Some of her
women had business experience of their own; others were skilled in
industrial arts, such as spinning and weaving; and others knew all the
branches of fanning. Well aware that women were necessary in colony
building, the English companies and proprietors that planted settlements
in the New World offered especially large grants of land to married men
and sold fanns to maidens as well as to bachelors. Life and work in the
colonies were hard and hazardous, but many women in England were
willing to take the risks.
Religious Disputes Promote Migration to America. Among the
various motives that inspired British emigration was the desire for
religious freedom. This was a strong urge in the seventeenth century.
Not long before that time all nations and peoples of western Europe had
been united under the Pope at Rome in the Catholic Church. No one had
been allowed to choose his own religious beliefs. But after die opening
of the sixteenth century a popular movement known as the Protestant
Revolt changed this state of affairs and awakened a desire for greater
freedom. In England this movement ended in a complete break with the
Pope and in the establishment of the Church of England. To this church,
called the Anglican Church, every subject of the king was forced to
belong. But not all his subjects liked the new order. The Catiiolics, who
had never approved the Protestant Revolt, naturally wanted to restore
their religion and with it the headship of the Pope. On the other hand
many Protestants were dissatisfied with the Anglican Church because it
retained a large part of the Catholic faith and ceremony. Some of these
"dissenters” wanted to modify the established religion and others wanted
the right to form their own churches.
Among the moderate reformers were the Puritans, who wished
merely to "purify” the Church of England by removing some of its
Catholic features. More radical Protestants, calling themselves
Independents or Separatists, proposed to set up churches for
themselves—little self-governing congregations, or religious
24
A NEW NATION IS BUILT IN AMERICA
democracies. Before the Protestant Revolt had advanced very far,
there were Baptists, Quakers, Presbyterians, and other dissenting sects
each with its special form of worship.
Since the law of England forbade all religions except the one
established by the government, Dissenters and Catholics alike were
liable to punishment for disbelief—heresy—and in fact

t

-----^ , M
Courtesy of Harvard University Press
Harvard’s First Building: The Old College from the Yard
A conjectural restoration drawn by Harold R. Shurtleff. From The Founding
ofHarwird College
were sometimes cruelly punished. Hence it is not surprising that a
great many people in the British Isles were anxious to flee to the New
World where they could worship God according to their hearts' desire.
As the Dissenters were already organized in local churches bound
together by religious faith, they could migrate to the New World as
congregations. Thus it came about that religious congregations played
an important part in colonization.
Political Disputes Encourage Migration. While the religious
controversy was raging in England, a political quarrel arose between the
king and the Parliament, especially the lower branch,
EMIGRANTS START COLONIES
25
or House of Commons, which was composed of members elected by
merchants and the smaller landowners. This quarrel started when the
king insisted on forcing everybody to conform to the Anglican Church
and on ruling and taxing the country in his own way. Under James I
(1603-1625) the dispute became very bitter and under his son and
successor, Charles I, it broke out in a civil war. Since many of those who
resisted the king on account of taxation were Puritans in religion, the
whole conflict with Charles I was known as the "Puritan Revolution.”
Naturally England was not a merry country to live in during this period
of turmoil, and many men and women were eager to escape to America
to find political peace with religious freedom.
The London Company Breaks the Path in Virginia
Jamestown Is Founded. Late in 1606 three ships—the Sarah
Constant, the Goodspeed, and the Discovery—with one hundred and
forty-three emigrants on board dropped down the Thames River on their
way to the New' World. They were being sent over by the London
Company, just chartered by James I, and we're under the command of
Captain Christopher Newport, one of the six masters of the British navy.
In the following spring these pioneers reached a spot on a broad river in
Virginia which seemed attractive. There they built a fort and rude
dwellings, naming the place Jamestown in honor of their king. Thus the
first permanent English colony was begun.
Difficulties Are Encountered at First. After a hopeful beginning in
May, 1607, the colony was several times in the next few years on the
point of failure, for which several reasons were assigned: the hostility of
the Powhatan Indians, who lost no time in making a mass attack,
followed by repeated ambushes; the inexperience of the settlers, who, in
addition to setting out English grain and garden seeds, hopefully planted
pineapples and other tropical fruits; and the selection of a town site near
marshes which bred mosquitoes. These insects spread malaria, which
every summer season proved fatal to one half, or more, of those who
settled on low ground. Besides these ills, the colonists were under the
necessity of contributing to and drawing from a common store in
26
A NEW NATION IS BUILT IN AMERICA
a " comunitie ” plan, which, tried with equal lack of success at
Plymouth a few years later, encouraged the lazy and penalized the
industrious.
The Population Increases as Planting Flourishes. The
colony began to succeed only when more settlers had become
Painting by Stanley M. Arthurs
The Arrival op the First Women at Jamestown
An interesting account of the arrival of some of the first women in Jamestown can
be found in Maiw Johnston's historical novel, To Heme cmd to Hold.
seasoned to the " summer sickness,” as it was called; when every
freeman was given the right to have and hold property; and when a
profitable export crop was found in tobacco. Tobacco was in great
demand in England. The first settlers raised some, but much of it spoiled
when shipped overseas, until a young planter discovered a way to cure it
and thereby became the first inventor-industrialist of the English
colonies. Not only did John Rolfe provide a means to colonial
prosperity, but by marrying the favorite daughter of the great werowance
(chief) Powhatan, he paved the way for peace with the Indians until
the colony was strong enough to stand alone. This Indian bride was
Pocahontas, converted and baptized by one of those early English
EMIGRANTS START COLONIES
27
clergymen who, from the first, had administered to
EMIGRANTS START COLONIES
27
the spiritual needs of the colonists and at the same time labored to Christianize the
natives, for whom a school and college were projected as early as 1620.
The first group of settlers was composed of men, with whom were a few
adventurous boys. Women came over later, together with fresh supplies, brought across
the Atlantic by Newport, who became known as the " admiral of the Virginia Ocean ”
and without whose transatlantic voyages the colony must have perished. In 1619 the
London Company sent over a number of English women, willing to become wives of the
settlers who paid for their passage. Then as raising tobacco became more and more
profitable, the London Company sent over men who were indentured for a number of
years to work out the cost of their passage to America (see p. 47). In 1619 some twenty
Negroes were brought to Jamestown. From records recently discovered, it appears that
they eventually received their freedom; slavery, or servitude for life, was a later
development.
Local Government Is Established. As the population increased, the settlers and the
Company felt that self-government by a colonial parliament was desirable. At
Jamestown Captain Gabriel Archer had proposed one as early as 1609—for the
governors sent out had at times imposed severe regulations, partly military and partly
puritanical. Their jurisdiction extended from Spanish Florida to French Canada—
Lieutenant Governor Argali destroying a French settlement in the " northern parts of
Virginia,” shortly to be known as New England. Therefore, the London Company drew
up a charter of self-government for the colony, under which in 1619 the planters elected
two citizens from each settlement and borough to meet with the governor and his council
for the purpose of making decisions about Virginia affairs. This assembly, or " House of
Burgesses,” as it was called, was the first “ people's legislature ” on the American
continent.
Virginia Becomes a Royal Province. The creation of a colonial legislature did not
end the Company's troubles with Virginia. On the contrary, the king of England was
now grumbling because he thought the settlers were being given too much liberty. When
Roads and Trails into the Western Territory
RURAL DEMOCRACY RISES IN THE NEAR WEST 295
road]; and by having two or three camp kettles and stopping every evening when
the weather is fine upon the brink of some rivulet and by kindling a fire they may soon
dress their own food. . . . This manner of journeying is so far from being disagreeable
that in a fine season it is extremely pleasant.”
Immigrants Crowd All the Routes. There were no official stations on the frontier to
record the number of immigrants who entered the West during the years immediately
following the Northwest Ordinance. But travelers of the time reported that every road
was "crowded” with pioneers, wagons, and cattle; and that they were seldom out of
sound of the snapping whip of the teamster urging forward his horses or the crack of the
hunter's rifle as he brought down his evening meal. "During the latter half of 1787,”
says Katherine Coman, a careful student of the West, "more than nine hundred boats
floated down the Ohio carrying eighteen thousand men, women, and children, and
twelve thousand horses, sheep, and cattle, and six hundred and fifty wagons.” Other
lines of travel were also popular, and with the years the flooding tide of homeseekers
rose higher and higher.
Homeseekers Search for New Farms. With government established and routes
opened, the way was prepared for immigrants. And they came with a rush, under
company leadership and on their own initiative. Young New Englanders, weary of
tilling the stony soil of their native states, poured through New York and Pennsylvania,
some settling on the northern bank of the Ohio and others in the Lake region. Sons and
daughters of German fanners in Pennsylvania and many "bound servants” who had
worked out their time with their masters pressed on into Ohio, Kentucky, Tennessee, or
beyond. From the worn fields and the clay hills of Southern states came pioneers of
English and Scotch-Irish descent, the latter in great numbers. Indeed one historian goes
so far as to say "that the rapid expansion of the United States from a coast strip to a
continental area is largely a Scotch-Irish achievement.” While native Americans of
mixed stocks led the way into the West, it was not long before immigrants direct from
Great Britain and Europe, under the stimulus of company enterprise, began to filter into
the West.
406
SOCIAL CONFLICT SHAKES THE REPUBLIC
Industry Outstrips Agriculture. As planters bought land in the Southwest and
gathered slaves around them to till it, businessmen built factories and collected industrial
workers from the farms and from foreign lands and paid them wages for their labor.
Thus the growth of the slave labor system was accompanied by the rise of a free labor
system.
In seven-league boots this new industrial giant strode ahead of the agricultural giant.
Between 1850 and i860 the value of domestic manufactures, including the output of
mines and fisheries, rose from $1,019,106,616 to $1,900,000,000—an increase of 86 per
cent in ten years. Meanwhile the total production of naval stores, rice, sugar, tobacco,
and cotton, the staples of the South, moved only from $165,000,000, in round figures, to
$204,000,000. At the halfway point of the century, the capital invested in industry,
commerce, and city property in general far exceeded the value of all the farm land
between the Atlantic and the Pacific. Each year the captains of industry turned out goods
worth nearly twenty times all the bales of cotton picked on Southern plantations.
More and More of the People Become Wage Earners. Such a revolution in industry,
transportation, and finance, overturning the agricultural civilization inherited from the
past, could not fail to bring in its train amazing consequences. Some were sudden and
obvious. Others we are just beginning to understand. One of the clear and striking
changes was the growth of an industrial population, detached from the land, concentrated
in cities, and, to use Jefferson's phrase, dependent upon "the caprices and casualties of
trade” for a livelihood. This result, the thoughtful Virginian had prophesied, was sure to
come, especially if public and private efforts to stimulate industry in preference to
agriculture were pushed so hard.
It was estimated in i860, on the basis of the census figures, that mechanical
production gave employment to 1,100,000 men and 285,000 women. Taking children
into the reckoning, nearly 6,000,000 people—about one sixth of the entire population of
the country—were dependent on manufacturing. "This,” runs the official record, "was
exclusive of the number engaged in the
INDUSTRIALISM IN THE NORTH
407
production of many of the raw materials and of the food for manufacturers; in the
distribution of their products, such as merchants, clerks, draymen, mariners, the
employees of railroads, expresses, and steamboats; of capitalists; various artistic and
professional classes, as well as carpenters, bricklayers, painters, and the members of
other mechanical trades not classed as manufacturers. It is safe to assume then that one
third of the whole population is supported, directly, or indirectly, by manufacturing
industry.” The statistics of labor alone were an omen of the future: by i860 the workers
employed in industry and business in general already exceeded the number of slaves on
Southern fanns and plantations.
Immigrants Swell the Labor Supply. How was it possible to obtain so quickly such a
huge number of workers for factories, mines, railways, and stores? In the early days of
machine industry thousands of American boys and girls left the fanns and sought
employment and adventure in the cities. Fanning families were usually large and there
were children to spare. Other thousands of workers came from the Old World where
poverty and distress reduced their chances of making a living at home. Indeed it so
happened near the middle of the nineteenth century that misery in Ireland and Gennany
drove multitudes over the sea to America. About 1845 the migration from Ireland to
America suddenly became a torrent. For centuries the Irish had chafed at the bonds
imposed on them by the English government under which they had to live. Catholic in
religion, they had been compelled to pay taxes to support the Protestant Episcopal
Church in Ireland. Tillers of the soil, they were forced to pay enormous rents to absentee
landlords who resided in England. To their woes as British subjects a potato famine in
1846 added physical distress beyond description. In cottages and fields and along the
highways victims of starvation lay dead by the score, while thousands of survivors
suffered the agonies of hunger. At this hour of misery America offered a haven to those
who had the money to pay their passage over the sea, and between 1850 and i860 at least
750,000 Irish immigrants entered the United States.
408
SOCIAL CONFLICT SHAKES THE REPUBLIC
To political discontent and economic misfortune may likewise be traced the origins
of a great Germanic migration which began about the same time. The potato blight that
fell upon Ireland also visited the Rhine Valley and southern Germany, with results as
pitiable if less extensive. This calamity inflicted by nature was made worse a little later
by another inflicted by despotic German kings and princes. In 1848 a popular uprising in
favor of republican and democratic government swept through Europe. For a time it rode
on a full tide of success. Monarchs were overthrown or compelled to promise better
government, and tyrannical ministers fled from their palaces. Then came reaction.
Champions of democracy were punished or harried into exile. Men of great ability,
whose sole offense was opposition to kings and princes, now fled to America, bringing
with them to the land of their adoption the spirit of liberty. In 1847 over fifty thousand
Germans came, the forerunners of political refugees and a general migration that
increased, almost steadily, for many years. The census of i860 showed that in the
previous twenty years nearly a million and a half Germans had found homes in the
United States. Far and wide they scattered, from the mills and shops of the seacoast
towns to the frontiers of Wisconsin and Minnesota.
Women and Children Flock to Industries. In the lighter machine industries, such as
spinning and weaving, women and children could be employed in large numbers. From
the earliest times, of course, they had worked hard in household industries, in small
shops, and often in field and forest. Indeed it was the dexterous wives, spinsters, and
boys and girls who had started the textile industry in America in their homes. They had
spun, woven, and dyed wool, flax, and cotton, and made cloth, rugs, sheets, and table
linen long before steam-driven machines were invented. When spinning and weaving
were taken from the homes to factories, women and children followed, for they had to
keep on working for a living. Many were the wives, daughters, and sons of American
fanners and mechanics, of carpenters, masons, and blacksmiths, for example. "The
cotton manufacture alone employs six thousand persons in Lowell,” wrote a
INDUSTRIALISM IN THE NORTH
409
French visitor in 1836; "of this number nearly five thousand are young women from
seventeen to twenty-four years of age, the daughters of fanners from the different New
England states.” Later, as immigrants poured in from the Old World, women and
children of foreign origin furnished a still greater supply of workers for mills and
factories.
Industrial Workers Organize. Spreading mill towns of New England, New York, and
Pennsylvania naturally brought about changes in the life of the people. Hours of work in
industries were long and wages were often low. From time to time there were business
panics which turned employees by the thousands out into the streets with no money to
buy food. In these circumstances renewed efforts were made to bring industrial workers
together in trade unions, so that they could have the strength of united forces in
bargaining with their employers over hours, wages, and steady employment. From
interest in trade unionism came interest in politics—in the making of laws favorable to
labor.
Even before the coming of steam and machinery, in the "good old days” of
handicrafts, workers in many trades—printers, shoemakers, and carpenters, for
example—had begun to draw together in societies to demand higher wages, shorter
hours, and reforms of one kind or another. With the rise of the factory system local labor
unions multiplied rapidly in manufacturing centers, and federations of several crafts
appeared in the chief cities. By i860 the plumbers, printers, spinners, iron molders, and
stonecutters had formed national trade unions. Women likewise began to organize, make
demands, and strike for shorter hours and higher wages. All over the North labor leaders
pressed to the front—forceful characters who forged links binding individual workers
into a number of brotherhoods. Indeed they advanced so fast that they made an attempt
in 1834 to federate all the crafts into one national organization; but their project soon
failed because it was ahead of its tune. Fifty years were to elapse before the American
Federation of Labor accomplished this task.
However, by the middle of the century the labor movement
488
SOCIAL CONFLICT SHAKES THE REPUBLIC
Supremacy of the Union Is Established. First and foremost, die war settled for all
time the question whether states could lawfully withdraw from the Union. The doctrine
of complete state sovereignty was laid to rest. Men might still speak of the rights of
states, but those rights were no longer to include nullification and secession. The nation
was supreme in fact and in theory.
The Planters' Power Is Weakened. Besides upholding the Union, the war shattered
the planting aristocracy of the South, which had furnished so many distinguished public
men and had tried so hard to check the industrial and commercial ambitions of
Painting by Stanley M. Arthurs
Thf. First Day of Peace
Grant and Lee meet between the lines the day following the surrender at Appomattox Court House.
the North. The first effective blow at the planters was struck by the abolition of slavery.
The second came with the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868 and the third with the
Fifteenth in 1870— two measures designed to give the ballot to freedmen and
exclude from public office the confederate leaders. As if to complete their ruin, the
Fourteenth Amendment forbade the United States or any state to pay any debts
incurred in aid of the Confederacy or in the emancipation of the slaves. So Southern
planters found themselves stripped of their property in slaves, shut out of the
government, and ruled by white fanners and freedmen directed by Republican
chiefs. Their labor system was wrecked and their money and bonds were as
worthless as wastepaper. The South
DEBATE PASSES INTO VIOLENCE
489
was at last subject to the North. A control which neither the Federalists nor the
Whigs had been able to wan by politics was gained by war.
Industry Triumphs. While the planting system was being driven downward,
Northern industry was making a rapid upswing. The war itself pushed business
enterprise forward; the demands of the Federal Government for manufactured goods at
high prices more than replaced the lost markets of the South. Between i860 and 1870 the
number of manufacturing establishments increased 79.6 per cent as against 14.2 for the
previous decade; while the number of persons employed in diem almost doubled. There
was no doubt about the supremacy of industry in the United States.
The Protective Tariff Is Raised. Manufacturing was henceforth to be well protected
by high tariffs on imported goods. For many years before the war, advocates of
protection had been losing ground. The Tariff Act of 1857 imposed duties so low as to
give few favors to American business enterprise. Secession changed all that. In securing
money to pay its current war bills, the Federal Government raised the duties on foreign
goods again and again—so high that the surviving followers of Clay or Webster must
have gasped with astonishment. When the war was over, a big debt was left, with interest
and principal to be paid. Hence pleas for protective tariffs based on old arguments were
now supported by the plain necessity of the Government for revenue, which admitted no
dispute.
Congress Encourages the Immigration of Laborers. Linked with the growth of
industry was the labor supply. The problem of manning the new and growing business
undertakings became a pressing matter with which Republican leaders had to grapple. As
their guide they had the platform adopted by their Union party in 1864. One plank
declared "that foreign immigration, which in the past has added so much to the wealth,
the development of resources, and the increase of power to this nation— the asylum of
the oppressed of all nations—should be fostered and encouraged by a liberal and just
policy.” That very year Congress created a Bureau of Immigration and made it lawful
490
SOCIAL CONFLICT SHAKES THE REPUBLIC
for immigrants to pledge their wages in advance for the payment of their passage to the
United States. Thus manufacturers could bring laborers from foreign countries under
contract to work out the cost of their passage. Though this law was soon repealed,
the practice of importing laborers under bond was long continued. The cheapness of
steamship travel shortened the term which the immigrant had to serve, but while it
lasted he was bound by his contract.
Homesteads Are Given to Fanners. To some extent the immigration law was an
offset to the Homestead Act of two years before, giving away federal lands to settlers.
For a long time free homesteads had been stoutly opposed by both manufacturers and
planters. Together these two classes were strong enough to defeat homestead bills for a
generation, in spite of the growing demand on the part of fanners and mechanics.
However in 1862, with nearly all the Southern statesmen out of Congress and with
manufacturers mollified by various favors, Congress passed the Homestead Act. This
Act arranged for giving away a part of the federal domain in 160-acre lots to men and
women eager to build homesteads all the way to the Rockies and beyond.
Congress Grants Land to Railway Companies. Though they divided on the matter of
free homesteads, fanners and manufacturers readily agreed that the Government should
aid in making internal improvements. The Western tiller of the soil was impatient for
some quick way of sending his produce to market. The manufacturer himself was eager
for the same means of transporting his goods to the consumer on the fann. Confederate
leaders put into their constitution of 1861 a clause forbidding their government to spend
any money for internal improvements; but Congress, under Republican direction, made
vast grants of public lands to railways—a new kind of "internal improvement.” Even
while war was raging, it voted land and money for a railway to the Pacific Ocean.
National Banking Is Re-established. Equally useful to economic enterprise was the
creation of a stable and uniform monetary system. From Hamilton's day to Lincoln's,
businessmen in the East had demanded a sound national currency, though
DEBATE PASSES INTO VIOLENCE
4qi
they did not always get their way. The Constitution, it is true, forbade states to emit
bills of credit—issue paper money—but in the age of Jacksonian Democracy politicians
got around this provision. Under their direction many states enacted laws chartering
banking companies and authorizing them to issue paper notes. Soon banks in Western
and Southern states were printing huge quantities of paper money to help borrowers pay
their debts. Many banks failed and the currency of other banks often became almost
worthless.
While dealing with war finance, the Republicans attacked this state paper money. By
an act passed in 1864 Congress provided for the creation of national banks under the
control of the Federal Government and gave them the right to issue currency based on
the federal bonds which they bought. The next year Congress laid a heavy tax on state
bank notes and drove them entirely out of circulation. In this way, by two measures,
Congress restored federal control over the monetary system without re-establishing a
United States Banking Corporation so hated by Jacksonian Democracy.
States' Rights Are Limited by the Fourteenth Amendment. These acts and others too
numerous to cite here gave strength to the Union at the expense of the states. They were
all very significant, but the crowning act of nationalism was the Fourteenth Amendment.
Among other things, it forbade states to "deprive any person of life, liberty, or property
without due process of law.” The reason given for this provision was the need for
protecting the rights of freedmen against hostile legislatures in the South. The chief
result of the Amendment, as was foretold in protests loud and long at the time, was to
bring all state, municipal, and county officials under the control of the Supreme Court at
Washington.
The expected happened. Few Negroes ever brought cases under the Fourteenth
Amendment to the attention of the courts; but hundreds of state laws, municipal
ordinances, and acts of local authorities were set aside as null and void under the
Amendment. Laws of states regulating railway rates, fixing hours of labor in bakeshops,
and taxing corporations were in due time
568 INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION COVERS THE CONTINENT
life and business operations provided employment for hundreds of thousands of
women as clerks, stenographers, secretaries, teachers, designers, and managers.
Although critics of change, as well as persons aware of losses amid changes, still
insisted
that "woman's place is in the home," women like men were being linked more
and more, day by day, to the fortunes of business enterprise. A few women became
captains of industry themselves.
Immigration from Southern and Eastern Europe Swells into a Flood. To build
railways, dig in the mines, and operate industries, a large number of workers was
needed— a number far larger than could be recruited from the fanning population.
So the gates of the country were thrown
swelling flood of immigrants poured into the United States from year to year. By
1880 the annual immigration amounted to half a million people; it was three
quarters of a million three years later; and it passed the million mark at the
opening of the new century.
MACHINE INDUSTRIES UNDER CORPORATIONS 569
Of course immigration was as old as America, but its character was now materially
altered. In the first place, there were marked
706
DEMOCRACY ENGAGES IN SOCIAL REFORM
changes in the nationality of the newcomers. Immigration from northern Europe—
Great Britain, Ireland, Germany, and Scandinavia- diminished. Meanwhile immigration
from Italy, Russia, and Austria-Hungary increased; in the ten years between 1900 and
1910 more than three fourths of the immigrants came from these three lands. Italians,
Poles, Magyars, Czechs, Slovaks, Croats, Russians, and Jews outnumbered the English,
Irish, and Germans coming into the United States.
In the second place, these newcomers could not be received so well as earlier
immigrants had been. There was no more free land to provide them with homesteads.
Besides, captains of industry had encouraged them to come to America to work in the
mills and mines; so they pressed into labor camps or the great industrial centers. They
were crowded—yes, overcrowded —into racial colonies. There they preserved their
languages, their newspapers, and their Old World customs, views, and loyalties, living
apart from American civilization.
So eager were businessmen to get a cheap and abundant labor supply that they
asked few questions about the effect of this alien invasion on the people already in
America or the newcomers themselves. They promoted it by importing armies of
foreigners under contract to work in their industries. There seemed to be no limit to the
factories, forges, refineries, and railways that could be built; to the multitudes that
could be employed in conquering a continent; to the money that could be made; to the
problems democracy could solve.
Local Trade Unions Increase and Federate. As the number of workers in industries
multiplied and immigrants surged in, often taking jobs away from the natives,
industrial workers drew more closely together, especially in the cities. Long before, in
the age when the American republic was launched, unions had been formed, in some
places, among skilled workmen such as printers, shoemakers, tailors, and carpenters (p.
409). By the eve of the war in 1861 local unions had appeared in all important
industrial towns. Moreover in every large manufacturing city a central labor body,
composed of delegates from the unions of the separate trades, had been organized to
advance general
MACHINE INDUSTRIES UNDER CORPORATIONS 569
The initial success of such legislation led certain students of industrial questions to
contend that unions and employers should be compelled to submit all their disputes to
official tribunals and to accept their decisions. Kansas actually passed a "compulsory
arbitration” law in 1920, but it was strongly opposed by both labor and capital. In the
course of time the Supreme Court of the United States declared the Kansas statute
unconstitutional and it seemed generally agreed that the scheme was not practical.
Organized Labor Seeks Favorable Laws
Objections Are Advanced against Free Immigration. In every part of its work the
Federation of Labor ran into the problem of immigration. When it tried to bring
together all the workers in a given craft, it often had to deal with Germans, Italians,
Croat- Czechs, and other foreign-language groups. Carrying on meetings in five or six
tongues was not easy. If it succeeded by hard toil in organizing the workers in a certain
craft and raising their wages, its efforts might be quickly undone by a fresh influx of
foreigners willing to accept lower rates. When strikes were called to enforce demands
for higher wages, foreigners might lx imported to take the places of the strikers. So
labor leaders came to the conclusion that cutting down immigration was necessary to
their plans for organizing workers and upholding high standards of wages and hours.
Outside the labor movement, citizens at large also began to question the wisdom of
keeping the nation's doors wide open to aliens. They saw whole sections of great cities
occupied by people speaking foreign tongues, reading only foreign newspapers, and
tied fast to the Old World by loyalty and custom. They witnessed an expanding anny of
total illiterates, men and women who could read and write no language at all; while
among those aliens who could read, few there were who knew anything of American
history, democracy, and ideals. Official reports revealed that over 20 per cent of the
men of the draft ann) during the World War could not read a newspaper or write a
letter home. Perhaps most alarming of all was the discovery
LABOR AND THE NATIONAL INCOME
707
that thousands of aliens were in the United States only on a
temporary visit, solely to make money and take it back to Europe or Asia
with them. These men were willing to work for almost any wage and to
live in places unfit for human beings; they had no stake in this country
and did not care what became of it. They could not share in die progress
of the labor movement or feel any interest in American citizenship. Their
supreme desire was to return to their native land as soon as tiiey were
"rich enough.”
A Beginning Is Made in Cutting Down Immigration. Yet in
all this there was no cause for surprise. Since the foundation of the
republic the policy of the Government had been to favor immigration.
For nearly one hundred years no restraining act was passed by Congress,
while two important laws actually promoted it; namely, the Homestead
Act of 1862 and the contract immigration law of 1864. Not until
American workingmen came into collision with Chinese labor on the
Pacific coast did the Federal Government adopt its first measure of
limitation.
With the discovery of gold and particularly after the opening of the
railway construction era, a horde of laborers from China had descended
upon California. Long used to starvation earnings and to poverty-stricken
conditions of living, they threatened to cut American standards of wages
to the point of bare subsistence. In time the protest of American labor
against this invasion was strong enough to compel both Republicans and
Democrats to heed it. Accordingly in 1882 Congress forbade the
admission of Chinese laborers to the United States for a term of ten
years—a rule later changed into pennanent exclusion. In a little while the
demand arose for a bar against the Japanese, but in this case no exclusion
law was passed at first. Instead President Theodore Roosevelt reached an
understanding with Japan, in 1907, known as the "Gentlemen's
Agreement.” Under this arrangement Japan promised not to issue
passports to laborers permitting them to sail for the United States, and
President Roosevelt made a pledge that the Government would not adopt
a Japanese exclusion act.
Having begun the policy of restriction in 1882, Congress readily
708
DEMOCRACY ENGAGES IN SOCIAL REFORM
extended it. In that same year it forbade the admission of paupers,
criminals, convicts, and the insane. Mainly owing to the pressure of the
Knights of Labor, it forbade, in 1885, any person, company, or
association to import aliens under contract to work for any specific
employer. By an act of 1887 the contract-labor restriction was made even
more severe. In 1903 anarchists were excluded and the Bureau of
Immigration was transferred from the Treasury Department to the
Department of Commerce and Labor in order to provide for a more rigid
execution of the law. In 1907 the classes of persons denied admission
were extended to embrace those suffering from physical and mental
defects and otherwise unfit for citizenship. When the Department of
Labor was established in 1913, the enforcement of the law was placed in
the hands of the Secretary of Labor—usually chosen by the President
from among labor leaders or persons in sympathy with trade-union
ideals.
Severe Limits Are Placed on Immigration. Not yet appeased,
organized labor demanded further protection against the competition of
immigrants. In 1917 it won another advance in its thirty-year battle;
Congress then passed a bill excluding "all aliens over sixteen years of
age, physically capable of reading, who cannot read the English language
or some other language or dialect, including Hebrew or Yiddish.”
By this time a lively opposition to the restriction of immigration
developed in many quarters. Naturally, certain races already in the
United States objected to every barrier that shut out their own kinsmen;
while some Americans of the old stock still held to the belief that the
United States should continue to be an asylum for "the oppressed of the
earth.” And many employers, desiring an increase in the number of wage
earners bidding for jobs, protested against further restraints.
But Congress leaned toward more, rather than less, restriction.
Indeed in 1921 it adopted a principle which made the deepest cut of all in
immigration. It absolutely limited the number of aliens to be admitted
from many countries to a small percentage of their citizens already in the
United States in 1910. In 1924 it made the rule more drastic, abolished the
arrangement with
7io
DEMOCRACY ENGAGES IN SOCIAL REFORM
Photographs from Lewis W. Uine
IMNTIGRANTS AT ELLIS ISLAND
Japan known as the “Gentlemen’s Agreement,” and put the Japanese on
the same basis as the Chinese, that is, totally excluded them.
Labor Wins a Federal Law on the Rights of Labor. Besides trying to
cut down the competition of alien workers, the Federation of Labor
sought laws upholding the right to strike. In the early part of the
nineteenth century some state judges had ruled that a trade union was
unlawful in itself—a conspiracy in restraint of trade; but that theory was
gradually dropped. By 1850 it was generally agreed that a trade union
was not unlawful and that employees had a right to quit work in a body,
that is, to strike for the purpose of enforcing their demands. The right to
strike, however, did not mean the right to create disorder or to do
anything one might wish in an effort to win. In fact the federal courts
applied the Sherman Anti-trust law (p. 634) to trade unions and fined
some of their officers for trying to monopolize trade and restrain
interstate commerce. On application from employers the federal courts
also issued orders from time to time forbidding labor unions to do certain
things in pursuing their aims. Such a court order was called an
injunction. For example, a court might order a trade union to stop
interfering with non-union employees or to continue at work handling
goods made by non-union labor. If a labor leader refused to obey an
injunction, he could be brought before the judge who issued it and fined
or imprisoned or both. The injunction was freely used during the great
railway strike of 1877 and it was employed against Eugene V. Debs,
director of the Pullman strike of 1894.
To improve the bargaining position of labor, the American
Federation urged Congress to pass a law guaranteeing three things: (1)
trade unions shall not be prosecuted as combinations in restraint of trade
under the Anti-trust law; (2) the right of federal judges to issue
injunctions shall be limited to certain matters; (3) and any labor leaders
arrested for violating an injunction shall be given a jury trial. The
Democratic party was. on the whole, rather favorable to these demands,
and in 1914 Congress enacted a law designed to meet them. Samuel
Gompers hailed this measure as the “Magna Carta of Labor,” but as a
7io
DEMOCRACY ENGAGES IN SOCIAL REFORM
LABOR AND THE NATIONAL INCOME	711
matter of fact it did not prevent the use of injunctions in labor disputes.
So the conflict over this question was renewed. At length in 1932
Congress enacted a law putting stricter limits on the right of federal
judges to issue injunctions.
Organized Labor Puts Forward a Large Program of Legislation.
Trade unions called upon state legislatures and Congress to pass many
specific laws in the interests of labor. They asked each state to establish a
labor bureau to study labor problems and collect facts and figures on the
subject; one by one the states did this. They asked Congress to establish
a Department of Labor and give the Secretary of the Department a seat in
the President's Cabinet; this was accomplished in 1913. Other measures
demanded by labor included: the prohibition of child labor,
compensation for workers injured in industries, an eight-hour day for
railway workers, better conditions for seamen on board American ships,
state laws allowing strikers to parade in front of their former places of
employment (to "picket”), and laws providing safeguards against
dangerous machinery. In short between the middle of the nineteenth and
the opening of the twentieth century organized labor in the United States
attained great strength in membership, worked out a broad program of
favorable laws, and won many concessions from governments, state and
federal. It kept agents in Washington and at state capitals to advocate its
measures and look after its interests.
Employers Develop Their Ideas on Labor Relations
Theories of Labor Relations Are Formulated. Brought face to face
with organized labor, employers took various views of the situation.
Many accepted trade unions, conferred with their agents, made bargains
with them on hours and wages, and agreed to employ only union
workers. A plant in which only union labor was employed was called a
"closed shop.” It was closed to non-union workers. Other employers
insisted on an "open shop,” that is, on their right to employ competent
workers whether they belonged to trade unions or not. A third group of
employers declared that they would have nothing whatever to do with
any trade union; that they would not allow any labor officer to