The Importance of Our Cultural Background. If we look at our country today, we see a great nation of about 130,000,000 people engaged in many industries in a land where only five hundred years ago the only people were Indians who roamed at will in their primitive state. The Indians here—numbering less than 1,000,000—were content to make their living mainly by hunting, fishing, and a little agriculture; they had no desire to cut down the forests and prepare the land for large-scale agriculture; they did not attempt to build industrial centers and carry on extensive trade. They learned little or nothing of the progress which other peoples of their own time were making. Such a contrast shows what great changes have taken place. We study the history of the United States to understand these changes. American civilization as we know it today is not merely the product of the efforts of our people during the few hundred years of our history. It is only a phase in the social development of the race—a development which began long before America was discovered, and to which many peoples throughout the centuries have made contributions. In order to appreciate fully the American habits, customs, institutions, and ideals as they now exist, we must know from whence they have come and something of the struggles through which they have passed. A knowledge of our Old World background will help us to understand the vexing problems of today, to be more appreciative of the debt we owe the past, to be less boastful of our own accomplishments, and to feel a responsibility for contributing to our social development. The Voyage to America. The important decision having been made by the Spanish monarchs, plans and preparations were then made for the voyage which Columbus was to direct. In these preparations Columbus received help and encouragement from Martin Pinzon, one of the most important men in the maritime affairs of Palos, Spain. Pinzon, as chief captain, together with his two brothers, accompanied Columbus on his western trip. Three small vessels, the Pinta, the Nina, and the Santa Maria, were prepared and set sail from Palos, on August 3, 1492, with crews consisting, all together, of about one hundred anxious sailors. Favorable winds and mild weather aided in starting the venture with high hopes for success. But long days of hope changed to weeks and weeks of disappointment. Many of the sailors lost their courage and felt that they were headed for certain destruction. Possessed by fear, they were ready to rise against their leader and threatened to throw him overboard. But at last He believed that he had reached part of the Indies, and called the copper-colored people found there Indians. A half year later, in September, 1493 Columbus set out on a second voyage. Because his first attempt was successful, it was now easier to obtain ships and sailors. On the second voyage he had a fleet of seventeen ships and a crew of fifteen hundred men. He took horses, cattle, hogs, and chickens, and established a Spanish colony on the island of Hispaniola. This was the first successful European settlement in the New World, as the garrison left there before had perished. Columbus made two other voyages to America, and in 1498 discovered the mainland of South America. The fourth and last voyage was made in 1502. He returned in 1504, still believing that the islands he had found were parts of Asia and the East Indies, but greatly disappointed in his failure to find the wealth of the East. His disappointment was especially great since the Portuguese, under the leadership of Vasco da Gama, had found another route to the Eastern wealth and reaped huge profits from its discovery. Columbus died in poverty and obscurity, even though he had really discovered a New World of untold wealth. Columbus did not find a shorter route to the Indies but he did discover new lands which he claimed for Spain. He was followed by Spanish explorers and settlers, and through them Spain built up a vast empire in the New World, an empire that was many times greater than the mother country itself. Through it Spanish institutions were brought to the West Indies, to the southeastern and southwestern parts of the United States, to Mexico, Central America, and a large part of South America, where the Spanish language and other elements of Spanish civilization and culture still prevail. The Demarcation Line. While Columbus was making discoveries for Spain, the Portuguese were actively engaged in search of new routes and new lands. Both of these nations laid claims to newly discovered lands, and in order to avoid conflict between the rival nations Pope Alexander VI issued an order, in 1493, by which he divided the unknown world between Portugal and Spain. An imaginary north-and-south line was drawn one hundred leagues west of the Cape Verde Islands. To Spain he gave all the land, not held by Christian people, west of this line, while Portugal received the land to the east of this line. King John of Portugal, however, was dissatisfied with this arrangement, for he felt that his country was not getting its fair share of the newly discovered lands; therefore, after a discussion between the two countries, a new agreement was reached. This agreement finally led to a treaty, concluded at Tordesillas, between Spain and Portugal, signed in 1494, by which the north-and-south demarcation line was drawn, instead, three hundred seventy leagues west of the Cape Verde Islands. How America Was Named. It was soon found that the lands discovered by Columbus were not the lands of the East so eagerly sought by the Europeans. It was hoped, however, that a passage could be found through these lands, which would lead to China or to the Indies. Many explorers came in search of the northwest passage. Many of the rivers flowing into the ocean were thought to lead through the mainland. No one knew the immense size of the newly discovered lands. One of the Portuguese explorers who came to South America in 1501 brought with him a Florentine named Amerigo Vespucci, or Americus Vespucius, who wrote interesting letters to his friends, describing the regions which he had explored. He later made another voyage, in which he further explored the coast of the mainland of South America, which he called a New World. These interesting accounts were translated into the language of the day and were read by the people before Columbus's description had appeared in the Latin language. In 1507 a German geographer named Waldseemtiller published one of Vespucius's letters in a book on geography and wrote of the New World as having been discovered by Americus Vespucius, and suggested that the new continent, therefore, be named America, in honor of its discoverer. This suggestion was quickly accepted, and the Florentine, rather than Columbus, received credit for the discovery. When it was found that North America, too, was a new continent, not part of Asia, the name America was given to it also. Thus an error was responsible for the naming of America, as another error was likewise responsible for giving the name Indians to the natives of the New World. The Norse Discoveries. Columbus was not the first European to reach the Western World. Probably the first explorers were the Norsemen who, during the Middle Ages, occupied the Scandinavian peninsula. These people were bold and warlike and were not satisfied with the settled portions of Europe, but sought adventure by sailing the distant seas, looking for unclaimed land. They made a settlement in Iceland near the end of the ninth century, and about a hundred years later they planted a colony in Greenland under the leadership of Eric the Red. The settlement at Greenland lasted about four hundred years, while the settlement of Iceland was permanent. From these settlements as a base, further explorations were made to the west, and from tradition we learn that Leif Ericson, the son of Eric the Red, started on a voyage to his father's settlement in Greenland for the purpose of spreading Christianity, but a contrary wind drove him from his course and he discovered a new country about the year until September 25. From here he saw the Pacific Ocean—the first white man to see it from the New World—and four days later reached its shore and formally took possession of it in the name of the king of Spain. Reconstruction of an ancient Aztec temple in Mexico city, in honor of the gods of Rain and of War where Montezuma ruled as " emperor." Even though Cortes received great quantities of gold and silver, he imprisoned Montezuma, and after desperate fighting, subdued the Aztecs and made Mexico a Spanish province. Francisco Pizarro Conquers Peru. The successful conquest of Mexico, with its rich reward, stirred other adventurers to similar undertakings.! Pizarro had accompanied Balboa across the isthmus to the Pacific Ocean! and had learned of the great wealth of the Indians to the south. After much delay and many disappointments, Pizarro in 1532 led an expedition southward along the west coast of South America. He traveled hundreds of miles through the Andes Mountains to the settlements of the Peruvian Indians called the Incas. The Inca, as the ruler of these Indians was known, was taken prisoner and cruelly murdered, even though he paid as ransom for his freedom a roomful of gold worth about $15,000,000; and Peru, like Mexico, became a part of the Spanish colonial empire. Spanish Exploration of Present United States. Ponce de Leon was the first of the Spanish to explore land in the present limits of the United States. He had come to America with Columbus on his second voyage. He had spent nearly twenty years in the West Indies and, while governor of Puerto Rico, had heard rumors of an island to the north that was rich in gold, and of a fountain whose water would give perpetual youth to all h0 drank from it. In the spring of 15x3, the year in which Balboa discovered the Pacific Ocean, Ponce de Leon set out with high hopes in search of the island. On Easter Sunday he sighted land, and named it "Florida" after Pascua Florida, the Easter season. He landed near the site of the present city of St. Augustine, explored the coast, rounded the peninsula, and explored also the western coast of Florida. Reports of the vast riches found by Cortes and Pizarro in Mexico and in Peru stimulated other Spaniards to action. Search began for wealth to the north of the Gulf of Mexico. Coronado had heard reports of "Seven Cities of Cibola" and expected to find fabulous wealth in the heart of North America. About 1540 he began explorations which brought him to what are now Arizona, New Mexico, and Kansas, but the seven cities turned out to be mere Indian villages with no great wealth. While Coronado explored in the West, Hernando De Soto penetrated the continent from the east. He was an experienced explorer and had acquired great wealth in Peru. He brought with him from Spain more than six hundred men, two hundred horses, and a large drove of hogs. His expedition landed at Tampa Bay and began to move north and west through what are now the states of Florida, Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi, finally reaching a river so broad that "if a man stood still on the other side, it could not be discerned whether he was a man or no." Having discovered the Mississippi River, he crossed it and continued his search in what is now Arkansas. He failed to find great wealth, and in 1542, his third year in what is now the United States, he died. In the darkness of night his men buried him in the waters of the mighty river he had discovered. Spanish Influence in America. The Spaniards made it possible for Columbus to undertake the voyages which discovered America. Spanish leaders explored a large part of the New World and built an empire for Spain, most of which she held until well into the nineteenth century. St. Augustine, Florida, founded in 1565, and Santa Fe, New Mexico, settled in 1609, are the only important cities established by the Spanish that are within the present limits of the United States. The Spanish civilization, however, was extended in the southern and southwestern parts of the United States and thence southward to the Strait of Magellan, and also in the Philippine Islands. In Mexico, Central America and South America, with the exception of Brazil, which belonged to the Portuguese, Spain ruled supreme. The mercantile system, accepted by all European countries, wall based on the idea that the entire profit from trade with the colonies should belong to the mother country. In accordance with this idea, Spanish fleet sailing from Porto Bello or Veracruz, in the New World, carried large quantities of gold, silver, and tropical products to Spain, adding great to her power and prestige on the continent of Europe. ■ The Catholic faith was taught to the Indian natives. The religion and language of Spain, as well as her literature, art, and ideals, were transplanted, and many of the elements of Spanish culture prevail to this day in Mexico, Central America, and South America. The nations occupying I these lands have long since become independent and self-governing but many elements of the Spanish civilization planted three centuries ago have left their impress on that part of the New World. The French Explorers. The French government for many years did not take an active part in promoting exploration in the New World. The first explorer to sail under the French flag for the New World was Verrazano a native of Florence. In 1524 he came to seek a new route to the Indies. He sailed along the coast of North America from what is now North Carolina to Nova Scotia and returned to France without having discovered the desired route. Ten years later Francis I, the king of France, sent out Jacques Cartier with two small ships and a crew of thirty-six men. Cartier sailed along the northern coast of Newfoundland and into the Gulf of St. Lawrence. At Gaspe Bay he planted a large cross bearing the arms of France, and returned home. In a second voyage, the following year, he went up the river as far as the site of Montreal. The winter climate there was found to be much colder than that in France. In 1562 Jean Ribaut came to explore the coast of Florida and to find a place of settlement for French Huguenots. Ribaut landed at the St. Johns River and then went north to Port Royal harbor (now Paris Island, S. C.), where he built Fort Charles for the protection of the thirty men left there. The men soon abandoned the place, and in a boat built by themselves returned to Europe. In 1564, Rene de Laudonniere brought over a larger group of Huguenot colonists, who built Fort Caroline, on the St. Johns River. The Spanish considered a French settlement in Florida dangerous for their security, and destroyed it. The French court demanded redress, but Spain's answer was that the French had invaded Spanish territory and would not be permitted to establish permanent settlements in that part of the New World. After the rebuff in Florida, France again turned her attention to Canada, which she called New France. Samuel de Champlain was the guiding spirit of the French exploring and colonizing movements there. In 1603 he was exploring in the St. Lawrence region. A colony that he planted (1604) in what is now Nova Scotia was abandoned in 1607, but in 1608 he succeeded in planting a settlement at Quebec. The French had increased their interest in New France. Champlain was determined that the French should possess the Great Lakes region, and worked faithfully toward that end. Territorial conquest, conversion of the Indians to Christianity, and the rich fur trade with the Indians spurred them on. It was an easy step from the basin of the Great Lakes to the basin of the Mississippi River, and the French pressed on to spread the faith and reap the profits of the fur trade. In 1673 Jacques Marquette, a Jesuit, and Louis Jolliet (or Joliet), a trader, ascended the Fox River from Green Bay, made the short portage to the Wisconsin River, and descended that river to the Mississippi. They paddled their canoes down the Mississippi until the mouth of the Arkansas was reached. They were anxious to reach the sea,! but fear that the Spanish might capture them and that their secret of the short portage might be lost, made them return to the Illinois River. They ascended that stream and after another portage reached the Chicago River, i which carried them back into Lake Michigan. Jolliet, with a keen eye for trade, more than two and a half centuries ago saw the value of a Lakes-1 to-Gulf ship waterway. Rene Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, was the pathfinder who finished the exploration begun by Marquette and Jolliet. He was the contemporary and co-worker of New France's greatest governor, Frontenac.] Coming to this country in 1666 to his grant of land on the St. Lawrence, he found exploring more to his taste and spent little time on his estate. By 1669 he was exploring the country south of Lake Ontario and Lake Erie. When a fort was needed at the outlet of Lake Ontario t© protect the fur trade, Frontenac sent him to France to use his influence to obtain it. He was successful and Fort Frontenac was established. As La Salle's plans for exploring and trading grew he needed more money and other forms of assistance. He went to France in 1677, and obtained a monopoly of the fur trade in the Mississippi Valley. He also acquired a lieutenant in Henri de Tonty, who became his loyal assistant. After many delays, La Salle, Tonty, and a party of more than fifty men went from Lake) Michigan by way of the Chicago-Illinois portage to the Mississippi River. They descended the river to its mouth, reaching the Gulf April 9, 1682. La Salle named the region Louisiana, in honor of his king, Louis XIV. While Tonty stayed to hold the forts at the portages, La Salle returned to France and secured four ships loaded with colonists and started for the mouth of the Mississippi. After an unfortunate journey, which ended with missing the destination and landing on the coast of Texas, many of the colonists returned to France. The others, with La Salle, built a fort, but their situation became desperate. La Salle set out overland to reach Tonty, or to go on to Montreal, but he was murdered by some of his companions. La Salle failed to accomplish his aims, but his fortitude, foresight, and his unselfish patriotism are worthy of praise. In 1699 two brothers, d'Iberville and Bienville, did succeed in planting a trading post on the Gulf coast at Biloxi. From the settlements in Canada, the French fur traders, missionaries and explorers pushed on through the Great Lakes and down the Mississippi River, building a chain of forts from the St. Lawrence through the Mississippi Valley to New Orleans, which was founded in 1718. By these activities the French laid a foundation for an empire in America, built on the fur trade. This vast area they held for about a century and a half, but in 1763 they were forced to yield most of it to the English. La Salle leaving the French settlement in Texas, 1687: painting by J. N. Marchand today the French language and other elements of French culture remain in and about New Orleans and in and around Quebec and Montreal. A century of wars between England and France had begun. The French energies in America were turned to protecting themselves and to inciting and taking part in raids on the English settlements. France had hastened to grasp the heart of the continent before Spain could get it, only to lose most of it to England—as we shall see in a later chapter (Chapter VI). The English "Sea Dogs." Following the voyages of John Cabot (page 31) the English interest in America temporarily declined, for King Henry VIII was more interested in building the English navy than in exploration. English sea power was of great concern to him because English merchants were engaged in trade with near-by coast regions. As the Spanish colonial empire grew, rivalry with England developed. Spain attempted to maintain a monopoly of her rich trade with her American empire. English traders, however, sold many goods in the colonies, and English "freebooters," also known as "sea dogs," plundered Spanish ships and settlements. The English seaman John Hawkins brought, in 1563, three hundred negroes to Hispaniola and sold them as slaves to the Spanish colonists. He was active in this and other trade until a Spanish fleet attacked his ships and killed hundreds of his men. Sir Francis Drake, who had been associated with Hawkins, was activities in plundering Spanish commerce. In 1577, with a fleet of five vessels and one hundred fifty men, he started on a voyage that took him around the world (map, p. 33). He attacked Spanish ships and settlements on the west coast of South America. Four of his ships were destroyed, but he continued in his flagship, the Golden Hind. This ship, in a period of two | years and ten months, was the second one to sail around the world. Meanwhile, in 1578, Sir Humphrey Gilbert sailed across the Atlantic] in search of the northwest passage. In 1583 he made a second attempt and reached Newfoundland, where he selected a site for a colony, and claimed the island for England. On the return voyage he was lost at sea. S Sir Walter Raleigh. Gilbert's work was continued by his half brother, Sir Walter Raleigh, who in 1584 received from Queen Elizabeth a charter] which gave him the right to discover, colonize, and govern new lands. The first colonists he sent out landed on Roanoke Island in what is now North Carolina (maps, pp. 51, 66); but difficulties beset them and they! returned to England. His second group of colonists, with John White as governor, arrived at Roanoke Island in 1587. Here was born Virginia! Dare, granddaughter of Governor White. She was the first child of English! parents born in what is now the United States. Thomas Harriot, famous English scientist and mathematician, accompanied this expedition to survey the land. Governor White went to England for provisions but was delayed for three years, and on his return found that the colonists had left the island. On a tree was carved CROAT AN, the name of an island inhabited by friendly Indians. All attempts to find the "Lost Colony" there or elsewhere failed. The Plymouth Company attempted a settlement at the mouth of the Kennebec River, in 1607, but after a winter of terrible suffering the attempt was abandoned and no further settlement was made by that company!,] The London Company, however, was more successful. It was composed of 659 persons, including peers, knights, gentlemen, merchants, and citizens. Its organization was similar to that of a corporation of our own day. It was organized for the purpose of making profit for the stockholders, but of course it was hoped that it would benefit England by supplying such products as she could not produce at home. It was further hoped that the settlers would carry Christianity to the Indians. There were two classes of stockholders: first, those known as adventurers, who invested their money but stayed at home in England; and second, thoi known as planters, who migrated to America. Virginia The Settlement of Virginia. In December, 1606, the London Company] sent out from London three small vessels, the Goods peed (or Godspcetfm the Discovery (or Discoverer), and the Sarah Constant (or Susan Constant)J These ships were commanded by Christopher Newport, who was an expel rienced seaman. The three vessels left England for Virginia with 120I prospective settlers, of whom sixteen died on the voyage. The ships were all the voyage was long, and there was neither sufficient and proper food nor enough good drinking water. After a long and tedious voyage cross the Atlantic they sailed up a river which they called the James, in honor of their king, and in the month of May landed on a peninsula and made a settlement which they called Jamestown. The settlers, consisting of boys and men, at once began to build a fort for protection. Then they built a storehouse, a church, and a number of log huts for homes. In this modest way the settlement of Virginia began. The Early Settlers Suffer Great Hardships. When the settlers landed, they were in high spirits, for they had come to a beautiful land, in the month of May. However, before long, many difficulties beset them. Their food supplies ran low and their native food crop had not been successful. Their surroundings turned out to be unhealthful. Fever and dysentery broke out, and many of the settlers died. With the approach of cooler weather, the others were able to survive, and during the winter they obtained food by trading with the Indians. In the second summer sickness and hardship came again. Thus in the early years the first English settlers suffered great privations. Many of the planters were known as "gentlemen," who were unaccustomed to manual labor. They also suffered attacks from hostile Indians. For some time the first English settlement hung on a very slender thread, but courage and determination finally prevailed. The leadership of Captain John Smith was of great importance. As president of the Council he secured harmony in the Council, obtained corn from the Indians, and demanded labor from the settlers. Thus the colony was saved from starvation. Great hardship was endured because Early view of Jamestown; from an old print became intensely interested in other members of the church who were being persecuted for their religious ideas, and hoped to find a place where they all could worship without interference. Admiral Penn was a close friend of King Charles II and the Stuart family. The king had become personally indebted to Admiral Penn for an amount of about $80,000. On the death of Admiral Penn, William, who was then thirty-six years of age, fell heir to this claim against the crowJ The king preferred to pay the obligation with a large grant of land in the New World. Such an arrangement was acceptable to William Penn, who was looking for a place to set up a government where he might try out his new ideas, and relieve his friends who were persecuted for their religious beliefs. Therefore, in March, 1681, Charles II gave Penn a charter by which he might rule over a large tract of land located west of the Delaware River. The royal charter which Penn received, however, was not as liberal as some charters which had been granted to other proprietors. It provided that the laws of the new province must be in harmony with those of England, and that they might be passed only with the consent of the majority of the freemen, or their representatives. The laws made in the colony were to be sent to England within five years for examination by the Privy Council, and all measures proposed could be vetoed by the home government. Boundary Disputes. In order to be sure of free access from the sea to Pennsylvania, Penn bought Delaware (in 1682) from the Duke of York, but the boundary between it and Maryland was not settled till many years later. Penn's grant of Pennsylvania gave him lands, some of which had already been given to New York and to Maryland. This condition soon! caused boundary disputes. The northern boundary was adjusted, however, by an agreement with New Yrork, which established the parallel of 420 north latitude as the dividing line. But the conflict with Maryland wras not so easily settled. The grant of Maryland to Lord Baltimore had been made earlier than Penn's, and the controversy between these two colonies continued until 1760, when an agreement was finally reached. A few years later two English surveyors, Charles Mason and Jercmufl Dixon, marked out the boundary thus agreed on. This line, the famous Mason and Dixon Line, the southern boundary of Pennsylvania, came to be considered the dividing line between the North and the South. Prosperity in Pennsylvania. The first colonists sent over by Penn; came in 1681. During that year about a thousand persons settled in Pennsylvania. However, Penn himself did not arrive until the next year, when he brought over a hundred additional settlers. Philadelphia, the capital of the province, was laid out by Penn's commissioners in 1682. This town was located at the junction of the Schuylkill and Delaware rivers, and was accessible to ocean vessels. The settlement grew rapidly as additional Quakers arrived, and prosperity followed because of the industry and thrift of the settlers. The climate was favorable, and the soil was fertile. There were many other natural advantages which contributed to the prosperity of the new colony. It was rich in natural resources, and Pennsylvania did not suffer many of the hardships which some of the other colonies were forced to endure. One of the important reasons why Pennsylvania prospered steadily was her friendly relations with the Indians. From the very beginning, Penn maintained that the natives should be treated fairly. He entered into agreements with them by which he purchased their land at prices satisfactory to the Indians. This fairness was largely responsible for the friendly relations which existed between the early settlers in Pennsylvania and the Indians. However, this policy of fair dealing with the Indians was not continued by the sons of Penn. The result was that later the Indians turned against the settlers in Pennsylvania, and during the French and Indian War we find them on the side of the French, vigorously fighting the English. The Southern Proprietary Colonies Maryland. Maryland (chartered, 1632) was the first of the proprietary colonies. King Charles I granted to George Calvert, Lord Baltimore, the area from the Potomac River to the parallel of 40° north latitude. However, because George Calvert died before the grant was completed, the charter was issued to his son, Cecil Calvert, the second Lord Baltimore. This large area was given to Lord Baltimore and his heirs to rule as they should see fit. However, restrictions similar to those placed on Penn's grant provided that the laws of Maryland must be in harmony with those of England, and that the proprietor, in the making of laws, must have the "advice, assent, and approbation of the freemen ... or their delegates or deputies." The settlement was made under the direction of the second Lord Baltimore, at a time when the Catholics in England were not permitted to worship as they pleased. They were fined for failing to attend services of the Church of England; the privilege of voting was denied them; and their priests were not allowed to remain in England. Lord Baltimore, a Catholic, was anxious to find a place where his people could worship without persecution. In New England the expansion of population was regulated by the colonial governments. One of the first inland settlements in New England was that of Concord. The General Court of Massachusetts authorized the settlement in September, 1635, and several families moved to the frontier site that autumn. Springfield was founded in 1636. Rhode Island and Connecticut, settled the same year, are typical of the normal westward drift of the Americans. Although the purpose of these two settlements was ostensibly to obtain greater religious freedom, the colonists also needed more pasturage for their cattle. By the close of the seventeenth century, there was an officially drawn frontier line for New England and the inhabitants were forbidden to desert the frontier towns on penalty of imprisonment or loss of their lands. After 1715, when the forced concentration in Massachusetts had ceased, expansion began to the west and north because of the increase of population and the rise in the price of old lands. In New York hostility of the Indian tribes, especially that of the Iroquois, prevented westward expansion. In 1698 more than two thirds of the inhabitants were still on Long Island and near the mouth of the Hudson. However, Albany and Schenectady were established as outposts. In the eighteenth century, German immigrants moved into the Mohawk Valley and made the farthest advance in that province before the Revolution. German settlers were also among the leaders in this westward movement in Pennsylvania. In the South, movement westward began almost as soon as settlement was made, since the Tidewater region afforded ample room for expansion, In August, 1650, Abraham Wood led an exploring expedition from Fort Henry at the falls of the Appomattox River southward as far as the falls of the Roanoke. The result of this expedition into the interior was put into a small pamphlet, The Discovery of New Brittaine, by Edward Bland, a member of the party. John Lederer, a German physician, led three expeditions, the first in 1669 and the other two the following year, across the Piedmont, and ascended the Blue Ridge. Lederer is the first white man whose ascent of the Blue Ridge is recorded. In 1671 a small party, among whom were Captain Thomas Batts, Thomas Wood, and Robert Fallan, set out for the country beyond the Blue Ridge and continued until they penetrated the watershed of the Ohio. Theirs was the first recorded journey of Englishmen into that section. In 1716 Governor Spotswood of Virginia led his famous company of men over the Blue Ridge into the valley of the Shenandoah. Such instances mark the beginning of the extension of the frontier which continually advanced westward until our country extended from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean. During the first hundred years nearly all of those who came, except the negro slaves, were English, but by 1763 about 40 per cent of the population was composed of other groups, among which were the Germans, Irish, Scotch, "Scotch-Irish," French Huguenots, and Jews. In addition to these were the African negroes, who by 1776 numbered about 500,000. The immigration movement, which began with the settling of America, has continued throughout our history, and by 1935 had brought more than 37,000,000 people to our shores. Many nationalities and racial groups have contributed to our cultural heritage and have greatly influenced the development of our civilization. Family Life. The first English settlement in America, at Jamestown, was composed almost entirely of men, but those interested in the colonization of America soon realized the importance of women in establishing a permanent settlement. They knew that it was necessary to build homes in order to make the colony a success. In 1619, ninety young women were sent to Virginia to become the wives of the settlers. Many lonesome men gathered at the shore as the ship arrived, chose their wives, and after paying one hundred twenty pounds of tobacco, each, for the cost of transportation, happily took their brides to their new homes. The next year, when the Mayflower brought the Pilgrims to New England thirty-two of the settlers brought their wives, while others sent for their waves as soon as rude homes could be built and land could be cleared to furnish a means of supporting their families. In New England and in the South women were at a premium. Their work consisted not only of cooking the meals and making the clothes, but also of assisting in many other activities; and, like the men, they were often exposed to physical danger. The rigors of frontier life took a heavy toll among the women, and it was not uncommon for some men to marry three or four times. Colonial widows were often remarried within a few weeks or months of the deaths of their husbands, and young girls rarely lacked numerous suitors. Although some freedom of choice was allowed young girls in the selection of their husbands, the important decision was often made by their parents. Courtship was carried on with difficulty, by the fireside, with all the family present, though in some localities the young couples made use of courting sticks—long reeds, through which they conversed in whispers. In some cases, in spite of the disapproval of Puritan ministers, young people courted as they strolled on the village green in the late afternoon. As population and wealth increased, the customs concerning courtship became less strict, and prospective husbands demanded dowries from their future fathers-in-law. In accordance with the rigid morality of the day, divorce was rare, and a divorced person was an object of pity or contempt. The scarcity of laborers and money made large families desirable, and children were regarded as " an heritage of the Lord." It was not uncommon to find families in which there were twelve or fifteen children, although in the absence of skilled medical attention, and with the hardships of frontier life, the death rate was high. /Strict obedience was exacted from the children, and corporal punishment was often inflicted; two precepts were generally held to be true: "Spare the rod and spoil the child," and "Children should be seen and not heard." In the struggle with Great Britain, the colonies also came to believe the powers of government should be limited. Thus when James Otis , his speech against the writs of assistance (see pp. 134-135), he said ht an act against the constitution was void. He maintained that there was an English or British constitution which (although not written) was really binding on the British government. The idea prevailed throughout America that government should be kept within certain limits, and that the limits should be set down in a written constitution. The Form of Government. The framers of the Constitution felt that some method should be provided whereby the central government should have more authority than it had under the Articles. A clause was therefore inserted in the Constitution, stating that "This Constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in pursuance thereof; and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land; and the judges in every State shall be bound thereby, anything in the Constitution or laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding." This statement, of course, does not say that the Federal government, established under the Constitution, shall be sovereign. The framers of the Constitution felt that in some respects the states should be sovereign, while in other respects the national government should be sovereign. Some believed that sovereignty was divided between the states and the nation, while others believed that all sovereignty remained in the states. The members of the convention decided that there should be a national government, consisting of legislative, executive, and judicial departments. The members of the convention were acquainted with the state constitutions which had been formed during the period of the Revolution, and which had provided for these three departments of government. Another important problem before the convention was to find a method for selecting the President of the United States. Some felt that the President should be chosen by Congress, but others argued that he should be independent of the legislative department. The convention therefore provided for the election of the President and of the Vice-President by the votes of electors, each state to choose as many presidential electors as it has members in Congress—counting both senators and representatives. Checks and Balances. The form of government provided that the executive department shall have a check on the legislative department in that laws passed by both houses of Congress may be vetoed by the Presient, but, if vetoed, may become law's after being passed by a two-thirds vote of both houses. Our representatives being unwilling to compromise in this manner, and submit to bribery, broke off negotiations and reported the affair to President Adams. The Federalists had been pro-English and more or less anti-French, while the opposition, the Republicans, had been pro-French. President Adams realized that here was an opportunity to weaken the opposition, so in March, 1798, he reported the negotiations to Congress. He did not call the French agents by name, but merely referred to them as Mr. X, Mr. Y, and Mr. Z. The negotiations therefore came to be known in history as the XYZ affair. The American people were outraged by this attempt on the part of the French to extract bribes from the United States. There was a decided reaction against French sympathizers in this country, and many former Republicans who had been pro-French, now, because of this incident, went over to the Federalist party. President Adams declared that he would not send another minister to France without first having assurance that our minister would be received, respected, and honored as the representative of a free, powerful, and independent nation. Feeling against the French government ran high, and it looked as if war might result. The Federalists began to make preparations for war, and declared the French Treaty of Alliance of 1778 at an end. Congress passed an act providing for the raising of additional men for the army, and the officers in the navy were instructed to capture French ships which were interfering with our commerce. The most objectionable of these acts was the fourth, known as the Sedition Act, which provided for severe punishment of any persons who "shall. . . unlawfully combine or conspire together, with intent to oppose any measure or measures of the government of the United States. ..." It further forbade any person to "... write, print, utter or publish . . . any false, scandalous, and malicious writing or writings against the government of the United States, or either house of the Congress of the United States or the President of the United States with intent to defame . . . ." The Alien Act was not enforced, but under the Sedition Act there were a number of convictions. The Peace Negotiations. Since the war was not decisively won by either party, the problems before the peace conference could not be settled without great difficulty. Peace discussions had begun almost as soon as war was declared. Russia, which had entered the European war on the side of Great Britain, offered mediation in September, 1812. The United States accepted this offer in the spring of 1813, and sent John Quincy Adams, Albert Gallatin, and James A. Bayard abroad to enter into negotiations for peace. Great Britain, however, refused at the time to negotiate, but the American representatives remained abroad. In 1814, Henry Clay and Jonathan Russell were added to the group of peace commissioners. They met the British commissioners and began their discussions at Ghent, in 1814. Great Britain's chief statesmen were not at this conference, since she was more concerned with the European affairs which were being discussed at the Congress of Vienna, following Napoleon's defeat. The British statesmen who negotiated with the Americans were not very capable diplomats, and they committed some blunders, of which the American delegates took advantage. Jackson further exercised his authority and vetoed the Maysville Road Bill because he thought that the project was not only unconstitutional, but inexpedient as well. The Maysville Road was intended to benefit Kentucky by creating an overland way to the East, and also connect it with highways to the North and the South. In the main, the Westerners were interested in internal improvements, but Jackson felt that the states rather than the Federal government should bear the expense. Congress attempted to pass other bills for internal improvements, and tried to have them become laws by attaching them as riders to the regular appropriation bill, but Jackson exercised his veto power and Congress could not pass the bills over his veto. In his first annual message, Jackson had referred to the bank and called attention to the fact that the charter would expire in 1836, and that the question of the rechartering of the bank would be brought before Congress. He called attention to the fact that the constitutionality of the bank and the expediency of the law creating it had been questioned, and added that the bank had failed in establishing a uniform and sound currency. The president of the bank, Nicholas Biddle, was disappointed by have its aristocratic element. Lord Fairfax, with his thousands of and William Beverly, with an estate of similar size, became the lords of the Virginia Piedmont. The Scotch-Irish settlers were not of mixed blood, as their name might suggest. They were people of Scotch descent whose ancestors had lived in northern Ireland, and before that had lived for centuries in the Lowlands of Scotland. During the reign of James I, many of the Scotch Lowlanders were induced to leave the poor soil of Scotland and settle in the northeastern part of Ireland. But the Irish soil was little better than that which they had left behind, and these staunch Presbyterians soon found themselves involved in religious disputes with the Irish Catholics. America, therefore, easily attracted great numbers of them to her shores. There were also many Irish settlers who came to the Catholic colony of Maryland for religious reasons, while still others had hoped to improve their economic condition on the fertile soil of the New World. The Scotch-Irish and the Irish settlers found most of the land in the Tidewater, and much of that in the Piedmont, already occupied, and consequently many of them pushed farther to the west into the Appalachians. Accustomed to hardships at home, these settlers made ideal frontiersmen. America was fortunate in having such hardy, thrifty, and courageous men and women to lead in the conquest of the wilderness. Early Settlements in the Old Northwest. Even before the Land Ordinance (p. 183) had been passed, settlers from Kentucky began to cross the Ohio and take up "tomahawk" claims along the Scioto and the Muskingum rivers. They were trespassers with no legal right to enter the territory. Hearing of the movement, Congress sent Colonel Josiah Harmar to make a survey of the land and put an end to the trespassing. He built Fort Harmar at the mouth of the Muskingum in 1785 and successfully completed the survey. Indian Troubles; Battle of Fallen Timbers. As the pioneers pushed farther to the west the Indians became more and more restless. By 1790 the Indian attacks upon the boats on the Ohio and the frontier settlements had become unbearable. General Harmar was sent against them, but his expedition was a failure. The next year General St. Clair led another raw and undisciplined force into the Indian country, only to be overwhelmingly defeated on the banks of the Wabash. General Anthony Wayne was then entrusted with the task of breaking the power of the Indians. A year was spent in drilling his "Legion," as he called his little army. In the autumn of 1793 he advanced to Fort Greenville in the Indian country and remained there almost another year while his men were getting accustomed to the Indian method of fighting. With the arrival of re-enforcements from Kentucky, Wayne took the offensive and attacked the Indians in a place which Little Turtle, their chieftain, had chosen as his vantage ground. A tornado had passed over the place leaving it covered with fallen trees. It was an ideal place for the Indians to make their stand. Wayne completely crushed them in the battle of Fallen Timbers and followed his signal victory with the destruction of many of the Indian villages. The Treaty of Fort Greenville was followed by more than a decade of peace. The advancing settlers refused to be checked by the boundary line created by the Treaty of Fort Greenville, and the Indians again went to war. Their great leader Tecumseh organized an Indian confederacy, but it was dissolved after the defeat of Tecumseh's brother, the Prophet, by William Henry Harrison in the battle of Tippecanoe, November 5, 1811. The Americans seemed to be a land-hungry people and the quest for more and better lands continued to draw them westward Louisiana and Missouri had been admitted into the Union before the first quarter of the nineteenth century was over and the idea prevailed that it was the "Manifest Destiny" of the American nation to inhabit and control the continent to the Pacific. The Texas Revolution. Soon the inevitable friction between the American settlers and the Mexican government arose. It was hastened by the known desire of the United States to acquire Texas. In 1827 the United States offered Mexico a million dollars for the country between the Sabine and the Rio Grande. In 1829 President Jackson offered five million dollars for the territory. But each offer was declined. The Mexicans, too, suspected Jackson of encouraging a revolutionary attitude of the American settlers. So in 1830 the Mexican government refused to admit any more immigrants from the United States, forbade slavery, and passed other acts equally' offensive to the Americans. Conditions grew steadily worse until m 1835 a revolution broke out. On March 2, 1836, Texas declared its independence. President Tyler regarded the Section as a referendum on the Texas question and immediately urged that Texas be offered admission into the Union by a joint resolution of Congress. The resolution was adopted (early in March, 1845) as one °f the closing acts of the Tyler administration. The Texans presently accepted the offer and cast their lot with their kinsmen in the United States. Difficulties with Mexico. When Texas was annexed by the United States the Mexican government promptly withdrew the Mexican minister from Washington and severed diplomatic relations. Mexican officials claimed that the treaty recognizing the independence of Texas was not binding since it had been signed by Santa Anna under duress and had not been ratified by the Mexican Senate. Texas was still claimed by Mexico in 1845 in spite of the fact that the republic of Texas had maintained its independence for nine years. Its annexation by the United States, therefore, was interpreted by Mexico as a direct violation of her territorial integrity. There were other questions under dispute. American citizens held claims against Mexico which that country had failed to satisfy, either because of inability or unwillingness to pay. More serious was the dispute over the boundary between Texas and Mexico, a controversy which the United States inherited with the annexation of Texas. The Mexicans claimed that the Nueces River was the boundary between the two nations, but the United States supported the Texas claim to all territory north of the Rio Grande, in spite of the fact that the Nueces River had been the southern boundary of Texas while it was a state in the Mexican republic, and that the United States had practically admitted the Mexican claim by offering to purchase the disputed land. The Mexican War. In the spring of 1846 President Polk ordered General Zachary Taylor to occupy the disputed territory between the Nueces and the Rio Grande and to resist any attempt by a Mexican military force to enter the territory. On April 25 a detachment of Mexican troops crossed the Rio Grande, and met in a skirmish a small force of American ca several Americans were killed. Soon after this incident Polk sent his^' message to Congress, in which he stated that the Mexicans had in a our territory and had "shed American blood upon American soil " exists," he added, "by the act of Mexico alone." After a series of military victories he occupied Monterey and then pushed more deedinto Mexican territory. At Buena Vista he gained a brilliant victory over an army several times as large as his own. Meanwhile, Colonel Stephen Kearney had been ordered to occupy New Mexico and California. This country was very sparsely settled, and its occupation by American troops had little influence in determining the final outcome of the war, but it added weight to our demand for the cession of this territory in the treaty of peace. New Mexico was quickly conquered, but before Kearney could reach California that state had been occupied by an American fleet under Commodore Stockton and a small force under John C. Fremont. American authorities decided that the quickest way to bring Mexico to terms would be by a direct attack upon Mexico City. General Winfield Scott was placed in command of the expedition, which captured Veracruz after a short siege and then advanced against the Mexican capital. After a series of sharp engagements Mexico City was captured and the Mexican government asked for peace. Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, 1848. When General Scott began his advance upon Mexico City he was accompanied by Nicholas Trist, the personal agent of the President to negotiate peace. Before the American army reached Mexico City the crafty Santa Anna asked for an armistice. The armistice was granted upon the advice of Trist, but it soon became apparent that the Mexicans were merely playing for time. Polk was so displeased by the failure of the armistice that he recalled Trist. Ignoring the President's orders, Trist remained in Mexico and negotiated the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. When Polk received a copy of the treaty he was enraged at the presumption of his discredited agent, but since the treaty contained most of the provisions he desired he sent it to the Senate for approval. The treaty provided for the recognition of the Rio Grande as the boundary' between Texas and Mexico. Mexico also ceded to the United States the vast block of territory, over 500,000 square miles, including California and land east of it, for which the United States paid Mexico and assumed liability for payment of claims of American citizens. The war with Mexico has been described by earlier historians as a war on the part of the United States for the purpose of acquiring Land for the extension of the institution of slavery. Moreover, the war that followed was not fought for the purpose of extending the institution of slavery While there were many Westerners who believed in the ideal of "manifest destiny," and hence favored expansion, it should be noted that such were found in the free states (that is, free-labor states) of the West as well as in the slaveholding states in the Southwest. The Discovery of Gold, 1848. Americans knew little about California at the time of its cession to the United States. It had a sparse population composed of Mexicans and a number of Spanish priests who in their zeal to convert the Indian inhabitants had established missions there. Some reports had come back to the East about its sunny climate and big trees, but there was a question in the minds of many as to whether it was worth the price we had paid for it. A few Americans had made their way to California while it was still Mexican territory. John Sutter, a Swiss immigrant, had received a concession from the Mexican government and had erected a fort. It was his intention to set up a sort of feudal domain. In January, 1848, two weeks before the conclusion of peace with Mexico, James Marshall, a New Jersey immigrant, while digging a race for a sawmill near Sutter's Fort, discovered gold. Fearing that the news of the discovery might cause the agricultural work on his estate to be disrupted, Sutter attempted to keep the discovery a secret, but it finally leaked out and the rush to California began. San Francisco lost three fourths of its population within four months, as men hurried to the gold fields. Sailors abandoned their ships and soldiers deserted the army in order to try their luck in the hunt for gold. Before the close of the year six thousand men were in the gold fields, and had sent out six million dollars worth of the precious metal. During the early months of 1849 eight thousand men sailed for California from Atlantic ports in 137 vessels, and one traveler said he counted 459 covered wagons in ten miles along one cross-country trail. During the year 35.000 "forty-niners," as gold seekers were called, arrived by sea and 42,000 more by land. The Homesteader. The last wave of settlers into the West were the farmers, and with their coming the frontier passed into history. The settlement of the prairie land began in Kansas after the passage of the Kan^ Nebraska Act (p. 366). Slaveholders and free-state forces contended for the control of the territory. After the rush into Kansas had subsided settlers began to stake out claims in Nebraska. Remnants of many a train of covered wagons, tiring of the long journey to Oregon or California and attracted by the fertility of the soil, stopped to make their homes on the prairie. Likewise when many gold-seekers had been disappointed in their schemes they returned to Kansas and Nebraska and exchanged the pick for the plow. The Homestead Act of 1862 attracted many immigrants through the lure of free land. The demand for food supplies during the War between the North and the South, with its resulting increase in prices, xvas a further incentive to the settlement of the Western plains. In the period between 1862 and 1880 nearly 470,000 settlers filed applications for homesteads and about one third of that number received land. Waving fields of wheat and corn displaced the pastures, and the recently constructed railroads transported millions of dollars of foodstuffs to the Eastern markets. In 1886 an unusual land boom caused a second migration into Kansas. European immigrants poured into the country. Removal of the Indians. The. Indians were the unfortunate victims of the westward movement. Acting upon the principle that there were "no good Indians but dead Indians," the frontiersmen forced them from their hunting grounds and homes with little regard for property rights and often with great cruelty. During the presidency of Andrew Jackson many of the Indians east of the Mississippi were removed to new homes in the West, which the government promised should belong to them permanently. With the discovery of gold and the resulting migration into the West many of the Indians who resented the incursions of the whites removed to reservations. Even then it was difficult to protect the property of the Indians expansion agreed of the men, especially if the land on the reservation against t ^ Qr contained valuable minerals. The Indian could not mortgage or dispose of his farm for twenty-five years, but after the expiration of that period of time he was free to do with his land as he pleased. As a result of the Dawes Act the Indians made considerable progress toward civilization. It soon became apparent, however, that in some respects the act was unwise, and in 1906 it was amended by the Burke Act. By this law the 25-year period was abolished and individual Indians were to be given full management of their property as soon as they were able to secure a certificate of competence testifying to their ability to manage their own affairs. Those who were considered incompetent were held in an indefinite period of dependence. On June 2, 1924, Congress passed an act which conferred citizenship upon all Indians born within the boundaries of the United States. The passage of the Wheeler-LIoward Act by Congress on June 15> I934> was believed by the Commissioner of the Office of Indian Affairs, John Collier, to be "the most important piece of Indian legislation since the eighties." It authorized Indian organizations along tribal lines for the purpose of buying lands, preventing their sale, and carrying on general business. Indian Health. The government has done much to promote health and education among the Indians. Hospitals have been erected and instruction has been given in sanitation and in the prevention and treatment of disease. Since 1911 annual appropriations have been made for this purpose. Nearly all the Indians live in twenty-two states, with 61 per cent of th total number within the four states of Oklahoma, Arizona, New Mexico and South Dakota. In Oklahoma there are more than 90,000 descendants of the Five Civilized Nations—Cherokees, Creeks, Choctaws, Chickasaws and Seminoles. Arizona ranks next to Oklahoma in the number of Indian inhabitants, most of whom are Apaches, Navajos, and Hopis on reservations. New Mexico has about 30,000 Indians on reservations In South Dakota the four Indian reservations of Cheyenne River, the Rosebud, Pine Ridge, and the Lower Brule, cover a large area. There are many reservations, large or small, in other states also; seven in New York, for example, with a total area of less than 140 square miles. Indian Education. Until the beginning of the nineteenth century the policy of the government toward education of the Indians was inherited from colonial times. In 1819 Congress provided an annual appropriation of $10,000 for this purpose and steady progress toward a more efficient educational program has been made. By 1848 there were reported in operation sixteen manual training schools and eighty- seven boarding schools. The establishment of strictly government schools was stressed after 1873. Three types of schools have been developed. The younger children go to reservation day schools. The reservation boarding schools provide home and community life as well as instruction; here are taught the elementary subjects and agricultural and industrial work. The Passing of the Frontier. The two main factors in the hastening of the destruction of the frontier were the Homestead Act already discussed and the extension of railroads into the section west of the Mississippi. With the completion of the Union Pacific Railroad in 1869 the continental frontier was doomed, and by 1884 it was possible to cross the continent along sue different, railroad lines. There was also a network of railroads extending in every direction, which made possible the colonization of all portions of the far West. The railroad builders were anxious not only to dispose of the large tracts of land granted them by the government, but to see the free government lands taken. The financial panic of 1873 caused many of the railroads to promote the development of the West on a large scale. Advertising campaigns were organized and the farmers of both the Eastern states and Europe were told of the wonderful opportunities in the new section. The steamship lines aided by distributing literature and by making immigration attractive. Excursions were arranged and trainloads of prospective settlers were taken to the lands. The passing of the frontier was marked by one of the most spectacular rushes in our history. The United States government bought from the Indians an unoccupied section of Indian Territory, known as Oklahoma, and announced that this tract, consisting of over a million acres, would be because of differences in climate, soil, and other natural resources sectionalism developed in the United States. The South became a distinctly agrarian region in which large plantations produced staple crops. It differed from the other sections in its economic organization, since the negro slave was well adapted to plantation labor. Negroes were brought to one of the American colonies and sold as early as 1619. Because of the need of labor, especially in the South where the plantation system predominated, and where such staples as tobacco, rice, indigo, sugar, and later cotton, were produced on a large scale, slave labor became profitable. On the other hand, it was not profitable on the small farms in the West nor in the factories and mills in the East. In time, rivalry developed between the sections. The institution of slavery was criticized and those who opposed it became active in organizing antislavery societies to urge its abolition. This agitation for abolition caused the Southern planters, under the leadership of Thomas R. Dew, John C. Calhoun, and others, to formulate a philosophy for the defense of their institution. The Beginnings of American Slavery. The settlers in the New World handicapped by an inadequate supply of laborers. The Spaniards, come to America principally for the purpose of exploitation, were not inclined to engage in hard manual labor, and almost immediately resorted to slavery as a solution of their labor problem. It was natural that they should do this, for the institution of slavery had existed in the Old World from remote antiquity, and, at the time when America was settled, was generally approved. The early Spanish colonists made extensive use of the Indians as slaves in their mines and on their sugar plantations in the West Indies, but the Indians were not accustomed to this kind of labor, and failed to make satisfactory slaves. They were unable to resist the white man's diseases, and died in great numbers. Las Casas, the famous "Apostle of the Indians," suggested bringing negroes to the New World in order to alleviate the lot of the Indians. In 1563 and later Sir John Hawkins, the famous English seaman, brought many African negroes to the West Indies and sold them to the planters. The negroes proved to be much better adapted to hard manual labor than the Indians, and soon were in demand not only in the West Indies, but on the American mainland as well. Negroes are Brought to Virginia. The English settlers at Jamestown at first depended upon white indentured servants for the solution of their labor problem, but the huge profits derived from the sale of slaves in the West Indies prompted a search for additional markets by those engaged in the trade. In 1619 a vessel came to Jamestown with twenty negroes, who were sold or indentured to Virginia planters. Negroes did not displace the white indentured servants; in fact, in 1650, thirty years after the first arrival of negroes, there were only three hundred of them in Virginia. It was tobacco, not cotton, that first made slavery profitable in the South. The tobacco crop, which required much hard labor in the broiling sun, during its growing season of about six months, offered a type0j I to which the African negro was well adapted. Slavery Declines during the Period of the Confederation. The blessings of independence were tempered with certain disadvantages. While the Navigation Laws were in operation, Great Britain had purchased nearly all of her tobacco and much of her indigo and rice from the Southern colonies, but after the Revolution the British merchants shifted their trade to other colonies which had remained loyal to the king. This led to a marked decline in the price of the three staple crops, the cultivation of which had made slavery profitable. Had it not been for the difficult prob1em of dealing with more than a half million negroes, most of them jfl little or no training in self-support, and the fear of race war and Africa, it is very probable that all of the states would have been wilpQ1^ emancipate their slaves. In the Northern states, where the number of negroes was not and where slavery on a large scale had never been profitable, emancipation made considerable progress. By 1787 Massachusetts had abolished slavery, and Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Connecticut had provided for gradual emancipation. New Hampshire, New York, and New Jersey soon followed the example of these states. The question of slavery in the factories belonging to the national government, which was destined to become the subject of many bitter sectional controversies. In that year, Congress, under the Articles of Confederation, adopted plan of government for the Northwest Territory, in which it declared that slavery should forever be excluded from that territory. The Constitution Recognizes Slavery. During the Constitutional Convention in 1787, the question of slavery was frequently discussed. The system was attacked upon both economic and moral grounds. South Carolina and Georgia stood almost alone in its defense. These states upheld slavery, not as a positive good, but rather as a necessary evil. So strong was their determination not to enter a union in which the slave trade would be prohibited, that other states which desired a cessation of the traffic agreed to a compromise which provided that the importation of slaves should not be prohibited for twenty years, and that no import duty exceeding ten dollars a head should be levied upon them. This compromise was faithfully observed, but on January 1, 1808, the earliest date permissible under the Constitution, the slave trade was prohibited. The Constitution also provided for the return of fugitive slaves to their masters. The Industrial Revolution Fastens Slavery upon the South. Few people in 1790, however, expected for slavery more than a brief existence in the United States. Not only was the system becoming unprofitable, but it was being widely attacked upon moral grounds. The antislavery movement in both sections was rapidly gaining momentum. Many Southerners condemned slavery as an evil. Washington provided in his will for the emancipation of his own slaves after the death of his wife, and Jefferson, in writing on the subject of slavery, said: "I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is just; that His justice cannot sleep forever." Slaves who worked in a cotton field getting food rations; from an old print file industry. The speed with which cotton and wool could be spun and woven into cloth was limited only by the supply of rawT materials. Because of the extremely laborious task of separating the fiber from the seed, cotton had never been grown on an extensive scale. Eli Whitney, a New England schoolteacher, became interested in the problem, and in 1793 invented the cotton "gin" (a contraction of the word "engine"), which separated the fiber from the seed three hundred times as rapidly as it could be done by hand. It now became profitable to grow cotton upon an extensive scale. The amount of cotton produced in the South increased from 2,000,000 pounds in 1791, to 40,000,000 pounds in 1801, to 80,000,000 pounds in 1811, and to 177,000,000 pounds in 1821. Since slave labor was well suited to the cotton field, slavery again was placed upon a profitable basis, and was definitely fastened upon that portion of the United States which was adapted to the cultivation of cotton. Cotton and the Westward Movement. So great was the demand for cotton that from 1793 to 1810 the price never fell below sixteen cents a pound, and in 1818 it rose to thirty-four cents. Naturally the Southern planters could not resist the temptation to specialize in the production of this money-making crop. But the increased production of cotton meant a corresponding increase in the demand for slaves, and the average price of negro slaves in our country in 1820 was somewhere between $700 and $1100. The methods of cultivation under the slave labor system were extremely primitive. It was the general practice to cultivate the same land until the cotton produced no longer paid for the cost of production. Few planters thought of attempting to restore the fertility of the soil, and when the yield from a portion of a plantation became unprofitable, the owner simply allowed that land to lie fallow for several years, and sought increased production in new and more fertile land. In this way, the plantations constantly grew larger, and the system pressed farther toward the southwest, where the land and climate seemed favorable to the production of cotton. The American Colonization Society. One of the greatest obstacles to emancipation of the slaves was the problem of disposing of the freed MTioes Had it not been for this problem, it is probable that emancipation . ^ south would have been carried out on a much more extensive scale. Jefferson, who opposed slavery (p. 344), proposed, in 1784, that the negroes be sent out of the country. In 1816 there was formed "The American Society for the Colonization of the Free People of Color of the United States"" Bushrod Washington and Henry Clay served as presidents of the society. Liberia, in Africa, was selected as the site for the colony. Although the society had the support of many influential men, and of Congress, which appropriated $100,000 to be used in the movement, the society was not a success; in the period from 1820 to 1830, only 1162 negroes were transported to Liberia by the Colonization Society. Antislavery Arguments. The chief arguments against slavery were that it was contrary to the principles of the Declaration of Independence, uneconomical, and unchristian. Liberty was one of the "inalienable" rights of man. Slavery, therefore, could not be justified unless the negro was looked upon as something else than man. To exclude men from the blessings of free government because they were inferior to other men seemed to strike at the very foundation of democracy. Perhaps the most telling argument against slavery was that it did not pay. Abundant evidence pointed to the fact that the South was lagging far behind the North in wealth, industry, roads, population, and intellectual growth. The antislavery people were sure that slavery was the only explanation for this. The Rise of the Abolitionists. Before 1830, the antislavery leaders had, on the whole, been moderate in their criticisms, and seemed to be content to seek the gradual elimination of an undesirable institution; but now a new and more violent group of agitators, known as abolitionists, became active. They urged immediate, unconditional, and universal emancipation, without any compensation to the slaveholder, whom they regarded as a sinner in the sight of God. One of the pioneers of the abolition movement Was Elihu Embree, who had been a slaveholder in Tennessee, and about the slavery controversy 1812, at the age of thirty, joined the Society of Friends. Later he specifies that his slaves should be "legally emancipated as soon as they can." He aligned himself with the Manumission Society of Tennessee, and published, at Jonesboro, Tennessee, the Manumission Intelligencer, a weekly newspaper soon to be succeeded by The Emancipator, a monthly publication appearing in April, 1820. In this paper he attacked slavery and announced that "one of the leading tenets of my creed is universal and equal liberty . . . and another tenet of my creed . . . Endeavor to know what is right, and do it, dreading no consequences." Embree died in December, 1820, and another pioneer, Benjamin Lundy, who had organized a number of antislavery societies, carried on the work. Lundy founded an abolitionist paper, The Genius of Universal Emancipation, and in his zeal to spread his message, traveled more than sixteen hundred miles on foot, preaching his doctrines. Another outstanding pioneer in the abolitionist movement was Theodore Weld. In 1834 he conducted an active antislavery campaign in Ohio, then carried the fight into Vermont, western Pennsylvania, and New York. He preached with great zeal, and, in the manner and spirit of an evangelist in a protracted revival meeting, moved his audiences to action with his remarkable eloquence. His opponents often resorted to violence; so bitter was the opposition that usually a bodyguard of young men was required to insure his safety. Often stones crashed through the windows of the churches where he spoke, but he continued in the face of violence and converted to the cause hundreds in his audiences. Many of his hearers became leaders in the movement and organized abolition societies. All of these were pitiless in their attitude toward the slaveholders. Sometimes the abolitionists went so far as to send papers, pamphlets, and other forms of incendiary literature into the South, calling upon the slaves to revolt against their masters. Nat Turner's Insurrection. The fear of a slave uprising had hovered like a specter over the South for many years. In 1831, the same year that The Liberator appeared, this specter became reality when Nat Turner, a negro religious fanatic, led an insurrection against the whites in SouthHampton County, Virginia. Sixty white people were killed. Excitement and lawlessness continued for many days. Many people of the South believed that the insurrection was the result of the abolition propaganda, and demanded that all abolitionist literature be suppressed. Fearing the influence of abolition agents, Southern state legislatures passed laws restricting the education and religious worship of the slaves, but these laws were not rigidly enforced. Northern Attitude toward Abolition. At the beginning of the movement, the abolitionists were almost as unpopular in the North as in the South. A mob in Boston destroyed the office of The Liberator and dragged Garrison through the streets. In 1835 a Purse of one hundred dollars was offered the individual who would first lay violent hands upon an abolition leader who, it was rumored, would address an antislavery society at Boston. Two years later, Elijah P. Lovejoy, an abolitionist editor, was killed by a mob at Alton, Illinois, and his press was destroyed. The French in Mexico. Fortunately, the Monroe Doctrine was not challenged until the United States had grown into a strong nation, thoroughly capable of looking after its own interests. The first violation was by France. Napoleon III, seeing his throne tottering because of the failure of his foreign policy in Europe, conceived the idea of regaining his lost prestige by building up a great empire. Mexico, in the throes of a revolt, offered an inviting field, and the time seemed especially opportune since the United States was involved in the War between the North and the South. Events played into his hands when the Mexican government gave him an excellent excuse for intervention by suspending the payment of debts owed to several of the European powers. Great Britain, Spam, and France sent a joint expedition into Mexico, and in a short time they had made a satisfactory settlement of the debt question. The British and Spanish troops were withdrawn, but the French forces remained to overthrow the government and set up Maximilian of Austria as a puppet emperor. The United States protested against this flagrant defiance of the Monroe Doctrine, but could take no definite action until after the close of the war. Our government then demanded' the immediate withdrawal of the French troops. Napoleon, having no desire to fight the powerful and veteran army of the United States, and because of the rising opposition to him in Europe, promptly ordered the return of the troops to France. Maximilian was soon captured and executed by the Mexicans. This episode added considerably to the prestige of the United States in world affairs. The Second Venezuelan Episode. The third application of the Monroe doctrine against the aggressions of European nations in the New World when Venezuela defaulted in the payment of debts owed Great Britain, Italy, and Germany. These nations sent a joint expedition to blockade the Venezuelan ports and to force a settlement of the debts President Theodore Roosevelt, fearing that this action might result • the political control of Venezuela by one or more of the European nations, urged that the nations submit to arbitration. Great Britain and Italy agreed, but Germany remained obdurate and threatened to send the german fleet to Venezuela. President Roosevelt then took a firm stand, and according to his own statement, ordered Admiral George Dewey to hold the entire United States fleet in readiness for action if it should become necessary. Germany then yielded and agreed to arbitrate. It was quite evident, however, that Venezuela was endeavoring to take refuge behind the Monroe Doctrine in order to evade the payment of her debts. Roosevelt had no sympathy for this kind of conduct and brought pressure to bear upon Venezuela to force her to pay her foreign obligations. Recent Interpretations of the Monroe Doctrine. Within recent years the scope of the Monroe Doctrine has been extended far beyond its original intention. We have learned that protection implies influence, supervision, and even partial control. Our experience with Venezuela in 1902, and later experiences with other Latin American republics, convinced the United States government of the necessity of playing the role of guardian over our neighboring republics in order that their mismanagement of finances might not be permitted to involve us in serious controversies with their European creditors. The "Roosevelt Corollary," which asserted the right of the United States to intervene and supervise the finances of the smaller republics in case of chronic wrongdoing or mismanagement, was entirely satisfactory to the European nations; they were pleased to use the United States as a collection agency; but it was extremely distasteful to the Latin Americans. Interventions in accordance with the policy stated in the "Roosevelt Corollary" will be discussed in Chapter XXXI. The settlement of the Maine boundary seemed especially difficult. The commission to which this task had been assigned in the Treaty of Ghent reported that it was unable to reach a decision. The question was then referred to the king of the Netherlands, but he was unable to make a settlement which was acceptable to both parties. For years the line remained unsettled, and the relations between the two nations became more and more strained until in 1842 it seemed that the militias of Maine and New Brunswick would come to blows in the fertile Aroostook Valley. The seriousness of the situation gave impetus to the diplomatic negotiations then in progress. The Webster-Ashburton Treaty, which was completed in 1842, gave to the United States seven thousand of the twelve thousand square miles in dispute, including the Aroostook Valley. The boundary line from Lake Huron to the Lake of the Woods also wTas settled in this treaty. The Acquisition of Mexican Territory. The withdrawal of our claim to Texas in 1819 (p. 312) did not prevent many American settlers from moving into that Mexican state to take advantage of the cheap land. In the course of time these settlers led a revolt against Mexico, won their independence, and applied for admission into the United States. After several years of sharp debate over the slavery question, Texas was annexed in 1845. The Mexican government had never recognized the independence of Texas, and consequently it regarded the annexation by the United States as an unfriendly act. This finally led to war with Mexico and acquisition of a large area of Mexican territory. Friction with the Japanese. A series of events early in the twentieth century tended to cool the friendship of the Japanese for the United States. At the dose of the Russo-Japanese War in 1905, the Japanese were disappointed because the terms of the treaty of peace were not as favorable as they had expected. They blamed this diplomatic defeat upon President Roosevelt, Upon whose invitation the peace conference was held. The Japanese irritation which resulted from this affair was increased the next year when the school authorities of San Francisco excluded Japanese subjects from the schools attended by Americans and Europeans. The Japanese were insulted by this racial discrimination, and although the matter was adjusted by President Roosevelt, the affair served to intensify the bitterness of the Japanese toward America. The most serious of the problems that involved the two nations as that of immigration. Since 1882, Chinese immigrants had been excluded from the United States, and there was a strong sentiment in this country for the extension of this policy to include all Oriental laborers. In 1846 the United States showed its interest in the isthmian canal by negotiating a treaty with Colombia (then called New Granada). According to the terms of this treaty, the United States was granted the right of way or free transit by any means of transportation, in return for the guarantee of the neutrality of the zone and Colombia's sovereignty over the property. Later attempts to modify this treaty in such a way as to give the United States greater concessions were unsuccessful. This treaty was in force at the time of the Panama revolution in 1903. American interest in the canal was greatly increased in 1848 by the discovery of gold in California (p. 317). Two years later, by the Clayton-Bulwcr Treaty, the United States and Great Britain agreed that any canal connecting the two oceans, and constructed by either, should be jointly controlled by the two powers, should not be fortified, and should be open to the use of all nations. Conflicting interpretations of this treaty, and the outbreak of the War between the North and the South, prevented the launching of the project at that time. In 1867, however, the United States showed that its interest had not waned, by negotiating with Nicaragua for a right of way across that country. The provisions of this treaty were very similar to those of the treaty of 1846 with Colombia. The Mexican Problem. Our relations with Mexico present a difficult problem than is found in our dealings with any other Latin American country. Because of its greater population and more highly developed national spirit, it is not feasible for us to follow the same plan of intervention and financial administration that we have used in the other countries near us on the south, and yet the proximity of Mexico to the United States and her failure to maintain a stable government, have made it necessary for us to be deeply concerned about her political affairs. Mexico's history has very largely been one of revolutions, except for the period from 1877 to 1911, when the country was under the dictatorship of Porfirio Diaz Maintaining his power by force, this strong ruler courted the favor of foreign nations by making valuable concessions to alien capitalists. By 1910 American investments in Mexico amounted to almost a billion dollars. Americans owned 80 per cent of the railroad and mining property, and 70 per cent of the oil property. Diaz, however, gave little thought to the welfare of the masses of his own subjects, 85 per cent of whom were reduced to the status of landless peons. The autocracy of Diaz, the unrest of the peons, and the fear of the growing foreign influence, led to a successful revolution under the leadership of Francisco Madero, in 1911. The United States was in sympathy with the revolutionists because during the last years of Diaz's dictatorship he had extended many favors to the British oil companies. But after a short administration of a year and a half, Madero was the victim of a revolution led by Victoriano de la Huerta. Wilson's Policy of "Watchful Waiting." Although the Huerta government was recognized by most of the nations of the world, President Wilson adopted the rather novel policy of refusing to extend recognition to a government which had come into power by force and assassination. He did not want to intervene in the domestic affairs of Mexico, and decided to wait for further developments. He called his policy "watchful waiting. Contrary to Wilson's desire, intervention soon became necessary. Villa attempted to force the intervention of the United States by making raids across the American border. Again Wilson's policy of "watchful waiting" had to be temporarily abandoned, and General Pershing was sent into Mexico on a punitive expedition against Villa. Through the skillful diplomacy of Ambassador Dwight W Morrow, the Mexican officials were brought to accept the American view with regard to the first point, and the Mexican Supreme Court rendered an opinion favorable to our views. President Calles agreed to confirm the rights of Americans to oil lands in Mexico if the concessions had been secured before 1917, and if the holders were actually developing the property. In 1938, however, the Mexican government seized many oil lands belonging to Americans or to other owners. Because of the longer hours for leisure, considerable interest was aroused in recreational activities. Athletic sports attracted large numbers of our people, both as active participants and as spectators. More atten tion was given to reading, and millions of books on art, poetry, literature history, and biography came off the press, while thousands of libraries were established throughout the country. Our government extended its recreational facilities through its national parks and forests. The coming of the automobile enabled people to travel more widely, and thus to enjoy more of the natural scenery of the North American continent. Population of the United States at the time of each census The American People—Their Growth in Population. In 1790 there "ere about 4,000,000 people in the United States, but by i860 the population had grown to about 31,500,000, of whom about 4,500,000 were ggroes. This increase was due largely to natural causes (increase of births over deaths), though immigration added about 5,500,000. During this period the area of the United States increased from 892,000 square miles to more than 3,000,000 square miles. Immigration to America, which was going on at a rapid rate from 1720 to 1763 (see p. 88), declined during the period from 1763 to 1815. This was due to the French and Indian War, the War for Independence, the Napoleonic Wars in Europe, the War of 1812, and European restrictions. However, after 1815 foreigners again came in large numbers. Accurate statistics on immigration before 1820 are not available; but a cording to reliable estimates about a quarter of a million immigrants came to the United States in the three decades prior to 1820. During the period from 1820 to i860 more than 5,000,000 came (see graph, p. 684). Immigrants came to America in the hope of improving their living conditions. Political revolutions, religious oppression, wars, and hard times in Europe brought many to the United States, which they considered a land of opportunity. The seemingly limitless opportunities for advancement in the West industry had broken down class barriers and created a spirit of hedonism and self-confidence which impressed Europeans unfavorably. American seemed always in a hurry. The quick business lunch dates from this period, and in the home food was eaten hastily and in silence. Culture seemed to be on the decline. Because the spirit of equality was strong in the West, the new states ve the right to vote to adult males without any restriction based on taxpaying or ownership of property; and the older states followed their example- By 1828 the suffrage had been so extended that Jackson was said to be the first President to be elected by the people. In the East, particularly among Southern planters and New England merchants, the aristocrat remained entrenched; and in the capital at Washington, society became highly organized. Elsewhere, however, social barriers were breaking, and advancement depended upon a man's own efforts. Growth of Population. The population of the United States increased from 31,500,000 in 1860 to about 76,000,000 in 1900. Many foreigners continued to come to America during this period and were welcomed by the government and by industry. In 1864 the Federal government set up the Immigration Bureau in Washington for the purpose of assisting those coming from other countries to America. Some of the Western states also maintained immigration bureaus and sent agents to foreign countries for the purpose of stimulating immigration. Due largely to this encouragement, about 14,000,000 foreigners came to America during the last forty years of the nineteenth century. In the latter part of this period most of them went to the cities, whereas a majority of the earlier immigrants had become farmers. Changed Character of Immigration. During the 80's a fundamental change took place in the character of the immigration. Before that time three fourths of the immigrants had come from northern and western Europe, while from that decade on they were mainly from southeastern Europe and the Near East. While the earlier immigrants sought farms, the newer arrivals supplied labor for factories and mines during a period when America was rapidly becoming industrialized. It was during the 8o!s that the movement to restrict immigration began. Many citizens felt that since this "new" immigration was of racial stock different from the native American, it would be more difficult to assimilate, and impossible to Americanize. The immigrants often settled in foreign quarters of the aties, where they retained their own languages and their native customs. Because thousands of these immigrants were laborers who were able to exist at a comparatively low standard of living, they accepted lower wages than the American workmen. Soon considerable opposition to immigration began to develop on the part of organized labor. The disappearance of the frontier also brought problems of labor and of immigration into prominence. As long as Western lands remained, the dissatisfied people in the East were able to seek homes in the West, where the frontier aided the Americanization process, but by 1890 this had become almost impossible. As the frontier gradually disappeared, labor unrest became more widespread and labor organizations became more hostile to the increasing number of foreigners. Concentration of Population. From 1900 to 1930 the population of the United States increased from about 76,000,000 to about 123,000,000. During this period there was a continued drift toward the city, so that by 1930 about 56 per cent of our population was classified as urban, that is, living in dries, towns, or villages of 2,500 or more, including one third of our total population living in cities of 100,000 or more. During this period metropolitan areas developed, for large cities usually were surrounded by a number of smaller cities. According to the United States Census Bureau there were in the United States in 1930 ninety-three metropolitan districts, each having an aggregate population of 100,000 or more, and containing one or more central cities of 50,000 or more inhabitants. The Chicago metropolitan district, an area of 1,119 square miles, had a population of 4.364.000, a density of 3,900 per square mile. The New York metropolitan district, an area of 2,514 square miles, had a population of more than 10.900.000, a density of about 4,340 per square mile. This recent development was made possible by rapid transportation, and has extended the influence of the city to larger areas. Immigration Restriction. During the period from 1900 to 1910 the number of immigrants to the United States was 8,795,000; from 1911 to 1915 there were 4,460,000; but from 1916 to 1920, during the period of the war, the number dropped to 1,276,000. In 1921 the United States decided upon a radical change in its immigration policy, looking toward a more rigid restriction. It was felt that the disturbed conditions in Europe as a result of the World War, and the high taxes resulting therefrom, would cause too many poverty-stricken Europeans to come to this country. In the five years from 1921 to 1925, 2,639,000 were admitted, and from Immigration: the number of immigrants arriving in one year, for the years shown here—one year in five 1926 to 1930 the total was 1,468,000. This decrease was due largely to the several laws discussed in the following paragraph. In 1921 the Emergency Quota Act was passed and remained in effect for one year. It provided that the number of immigrants of a particular nationality should not exceed three per cent of the number of persons of that nationality living in the United States in 1910. In 1922 the Emergency Quota Law was extended for two years more. However, it was considered unsatisfactory, and in May, 1924, a new Quota Law was enacted which admitted annually, from July 1, 1924, to June 30, 1927, two per cent of the number of a given nationality resident in the United States in 1890. After July 1, 1927, the quota was to be "that proportion of 150,000 which the number of persons of a given national origin residing in the United States in 1920 bears to the country's total population in 1920." In 1929 a new immigration law likewise limited the number of quota immigrants to 150,000 annually. Native people from Canada, Mexico, and Central j South America, however, may be admitted to the United States without regard to any quota. The Influence of the Machine Age. The invention of more and more labor-saving machinery destroyed the demand for immigrant labor. It made possible the production of more goods, and by increasing the efficiency in production, shortened working hours, thus affording more leisure to our working population. The Machine Age produced social changes which affected almost every phase of American life. While the coming of the automobile provided additional means of transportation, it also served to draw people away from their homes. In many cases homes were neglected in order that cars might be purchased. Manufacturers devoted millions of dollars to the employment of artists and engineers whose task was the production of a beautiful car within the means of the average person. While the automobile tended to take many people away from the home, the radio attracted them to it until the automobile manufacturers met the situation by putting radios in the automobile. Although the principle of the radio had been known, it was not until 1920 that the first broadcasting station was established in the United States. Immediately, the radio surpassed other forms of entertainment in popularity and friends boasted to friends about the stations they had "picked up" the night before. As the radio established itself as a permanent feature of American life, producing companies entered upon a competitive business which resulted in the clear transmission of sound and the production of ornamental radio cabinets. Meanwhile, the airplane was introducing a new element into transportation. The efforts of S. P. Langley and of Wilbur and Orville Wright had born' fruit in 1903 in producing a heavier-than-air craft. Though it was largely in an experimental stage until the close of the World War, the airplane has since become an important element in transportation. Through its mail and passenger service, the nation has been drawn closer together than had been possible before. In addition to the automobile, the radio, and the airplane, other inventions have altered American life. Electricity has revolutionized the home, has made cities by night fairylands of beauty, and has helped to solve the traffic problem by its automatic lights. Gas stoves have lessened the labors of the cook, and the tractor has displaced older methods of farm labor, while the dictaphone has simplified the duties of the business office. American Women. The changed order of society has had a greater influence upon women than upon men. The fact that there were few proessions open to women, except those of teaching and stenography. 