It was over half a century before England again took an interest in America. When she did, her effort was chiefly to break the trading monopoly of the Spanish and Portuguese and thus strike a blow at her rival Spain, rather than to settle the country. The interest revived with John Hawkins, who, instructing his crews "to serve God daily" and "to love one another," set out for Africa to secure a load of Negro slaves. Hawkins' slaving expeditions soon brought him into conflict with Spain, a private fight which developed into a long imperial conflict. His young kinsman, Francis Drake, not content with winning a fortune by selling Negroes, set out in 1577 with five vessels, and 150 men to wage private war on Spain. Plundering Spanish towns and capturing treasure ships, he finally sailed one of his vessels completely around the world. Instead of being punished at the request of the Spanish ambassador, the fearless pirate was knighted by Queen Elizabeth on his own quarterdeck. To put an end to this type of piracy as well as to conquer England for the Catholic faith, Philip II of Spain sent the Great Armada in 1588 to conquer the island kingdom. Thus Boston is an important city because of its harbor and the crescent of manufacturing cities which lie behind it, the latter originally made possible by the water power of the nearby streams. New York became our greatest city partly because it dominated the best route to the West (Hudson River —Erie Canal—Great Lakes). New Orleans became the greatest southern city because it caught the great commerce of the lower Mississippi, and San Francisco the first important city on the Pacific because it had the best harbor on the coast. Pittsburgh achieved greatness because of its location at the head of navigation on Ohio and its nearness to iron deposits; and Chicago, in part, because of its location on the Great Lakes. Fertile soil, mineral resources, and navigation facilities offer the chief explanations for the distribution of the population. Methods of Earning a Living. Geographic influences are also important in determining how a man may earn his living. The barren soil of New England turned the settlers' interests toward other means of livelihood than farming, and the near-by supply of fish made the colonial and nineteenth-century New Englander a follower of the sea. New England became the center of colonial shipping and retained that position in later days during the great era of the American merchant marine. With the passing of shipping as their leading industry, New Englanders turned to the abundant water power and found in manufacturing an outlet for their energies and a source of wealth. In the Central Atlantic states, where fertile farmlands were combined with good harbors, rivers, and water power, the activities of the people were more varied. In the colonial South, the discovery that tobacco was well adapted to the soil turned people into the production of this crop. Later they specialized in cotton, but as their wealth was drawn chiefly from these two commodities southern civilization remained predominantly agricultural and rural. The Economic and Political Background. In the colonization of America, religious, political, and economic motives were closely interwoven. Like the Spaniards, many Englishmen urged that the first object of the settlement was "to preach and baptize into Christian Religion, and by the propagation of the Gospel, to recover out of the arms of the Divell, a number of poor and miserable soules, wrapt up unto death, in almost invincible ignorance." As the years went on, one of the powerful motives which impelled Europeans to come to America was the persecution which the dominant churches inflicted upon dissenting minorities, persecution which sent not only Englishmen, but Irishmen, Germans, French, Jews, and others to our shores. The First Winter. About a month later the Pilgrims landed at Plymouth. Although bitter hardships were suffered that first winter, not one of the survivors returned to England the following spring. A firm but intelligent policy won for them the friendship of the Indians. Their rights to the land were approved by a new agreement, and at the end of seven years (by profits obtained chiefly from the fur trade), they purchased their release for £1806 from the merchants who had financed them. Massachusetts Bay. While the Separatists or Pilgrims were establishing themselves on the bleak New England coast, the times bore heavily upon the Puritans in England. Charles I (1625-49), more hostile than his father to the hopes of the Puritans, and more determined to establish an absolute I monarchy, blocked them at every turn. Like the Pilgrim Separatists a decade earlier, the Puritans turned in desperation to America. The Massachusetts Bay Company, organized for the business of fishing and fur trading, secured in 1628 the right to the region stretching from three miles south of the Charles to three miles north of the Merrimac and extending from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific. In the following year, the company was enlarged and came under the control of the Puritans who determined to use it as a means of founding a Puritan colony. The charter granted the company self-government with the power to make laws not contrary to those of England and directed that the freemen of the company meet four times a year to elect officers and transact business. As the charter failed to specify where these meetings should take place, the leaders took their charter with them and established the seat of the government in America. A preliminary migration under John Endicott established itself at Salem in 1628, but in 1630 the first large group of Puritans, with 17 vessels and 2000 colonists under John Winthrop, picked Boston as the site of their settlement. Although the Boston settlers suffered severely in the first winter and many returned to England, the very size of the expedition insured safety from the Indians and made it possible to secure a foothold. Upwards of 18,000 followed them and within a decade a firm foundation was laid for the New England colonies. The Opening of a New Era. It was more than a century after the discovery of America before the first English settlement was firmly planted on the seacoast of North America. In the meantime, the Spanish had established themselves throughout the regions of Central and South America, and their explorers had penetrated the southern portion of the present United States. French and English explorers had sailed along the seacoast of North America looking for a route to the Indies, and unsuccessful efforts had been made by these nations to plant colonies. Economic unrest, national ambition, the desire for profits, and religious persecution were turning the eyes of many in northern Europe toward the New Land. The defeat of the Armada had checked the power of Spain and opened the way for the rising naval power of England, France, and Holland. In a sense, the sixteenth century was an era of preparation. In the seventeenth, the strong powers of northern Europe were to reach out to grasp their share of trade and to plant colonies in North America.7 The colonization of this continent and the long conflict for empire will be told in succeeding chapters. Exercises and Activities 1. Prepare a timeline for the years 1000-1600. Using one color, place Old World events and movements on one side and on the other side with a differ7 The first half of the seventeenth century was one in which England showed a great expansive force. The British West Indies were also settled at this time, Bermuda in 1612 and Barbados in 1625. In 1630 there were probably as many Englishmen on these islands as on the mainland of North America. To a third of the population in 1700 was composed of indentured servants and slaves who provided the rough labor. In Virginia, as in all of the other colonies, the scarcity of labor was in part met by indentured white servants. These were composed of two classes—voluntary and involuntary. The former included poor people who sold themselves for a period of years to obtain their passage to America. The involuntary servants included children and adults kidnaped and spirited aboard ship by professional "spirits" or crimps, and vagrants, debtors, or petty criminals who were deported by the English courts rather than otherwise punished. Their term of service ran from three to seven years, during which period they were entitled to maintenance and medical care. At the end of their servitude, they were usually given an outfit and 50 acres of land. Composed of all types of people, good and bad, the indentured servant class made up a large proportion of the immigration of the colonial period. The indenture system was one which helped to solve two problems— the desire of poor people to get to America and the need for laborers in a new country. Although slavery existed in Virginia from 1619, slave labor was not important until the eighteenth century when slaves rapidly took the place of indentured servants on the southern plantations (Chapter 12). Social Aspects of Virginian Life. The great majority of free men in Virginia and in other southern colonies were not large plantation owners but small farmers. Like the small farm of the North, these small southern farms supplied most of the needs of the family, although there was in Virginia the tendency to devote as much land as possible to the cultivation of tobacco. It was not the small farmer, however, who gave the tone to Virginian life, but the handful of plantation owners who held large tracts of land along the numerous rivers. They controlled the labor of the thousands of white servants and Negro slaves and devoted their chief attention to raising tobacco for export. These well-to-do farmers led a life resembling that of the English country gentlemen, devoting part of their spare time to politics and government and the rest to outdoor sports and social contacts. The free white population of Virginia, like that of other colonies, had in it a sprinkling of the younger sons of the nobility and a considerable number of the prosperous middle class of Englishmen. The larger proportion, however, came from the lower middle and poorer classes who found conditions hard at home and who came to America even when the only way was to sell themselves as indentured servants. Fortunately, class divisions were not firmly fixed and the ambitious man could improve his economic and social position. An indentured servant was one who formally agreed to sell his labor for a certain period in return for passage money, maintenance, or other consideration. The agreement was called an indenture because the contract originally was written in duplicate on a large sheet, the halves of which were separated by a wavy or jagged line called an indent. Economic Life. As the years went by, Virginia developed slowly but steadily into a prosperous colony. This prosperity was based upon cheap land and production of tobacco, the same plant which today is the basis for the most important manufactured product of that state. Everyone who came to Virginia was entitled to 100 acres and received 50 more for every other person he might bring over. Under this regulation and other easy land laws, the tobacco growers found little difficulty in obtaining at little or no cost all of the lands they needed. The tobacco plantations were first laid out along the rivers, which were the highways of commerce, and then in the region behind. (See map, p. 40.) From 1612, when John Rolfe cured his first tobacco (p. 19), the culture of that plant grew rapidly. By 1662 close to 24,000,000 pounds was raised in Virginia and by the end of the colonial period 130,000,000. In many ways, tobacco dominated the economic history of that colony. It promoted large plantations, the introduction of servants and slaves, and the concentration upon one major crop. It discouraged industrial development and promoted a one-sided civilization. It likewise delayed the growth of towns and spread the population widely over the country. The commercial life was also controlled by this important product. From their own wharves, strung along the rivers, the plantation owners loaded their tobacco aboard ship and exported it to England where they had a monopoly on the market. Here they exchanged it for various commodities that could not be obtained at home. Population and Labor. The population of Virginia, which had numbered scarcely 1000 when the king took over the colony in 1624, had grown to around 60,000 by 1700. The make-up of this population was in no small degree determined by the demand for labor on the tobacco plantations. Maine and New Hampshire. Rhode Island maintained her independence against the strong Massachusetts Bay Colony, but the region to the north was not so fortunate. The land covered by the present states of Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine was granted to Captain John Mason and Sir Ferdinando Gorges and later divided, Gorges taking Maine, and Mason, New Hampshire. These men made unsuccessful efforts at colonization, and in the end the region was largely taken up by settlers moving north from New England, often persecuted religious dissenters from Massachusetts. Massachusetts absorbed both colonies, but in 1679 Charles II gave independence and a new charter to New Hampshire.5 Connecticut. Rumors of the fertile land along the Connecticut, combined with discontent over the political and religious situation in Massachusetts Bay, led the Reverend Thomas Hooker, pastor of the Newtown church, to set out in 1636 with a group of followers for the Connecticut River Valley where they founded the towns of Hartford, Windsor, and Wethersfield. The destruction of the Pequot Indians in the following year prepared the way for the rapid settlement of the most fertile land in New England. Here in 1639 the settlers drew up the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, believed to be the "first written Constitution known in history that created a government." In 1637 the Reverend John Davenport and Theophilus Eaton arrived in Boston with two shiploads of immigrants. Refusing all inducements to remain, they set out in the next spring for the shores of Long Island Sound, where they founded New Haven and other near-by towns. Living on the king's land, the Connecticut and New Haven settlers were finally given a charter in 1662. From Connecticut, New Englanders began to penetrate Long Island, New Jersey, and the Hudson Valley. Economic Life in New England. Unlike Virginia, where land was granted to any individual who had fulfilled certain conditions, the expansion of population in New England was carefully regulated by the colonial governments. Expansion was by townships rather than by individual grants. A group of men desiring to take up new land petitioned the government for a grant. If their purposes and piety were approved, they received a township grant of perhaps 36 square miles. Having determined the location of a town, the settlers laid out a common, fixed the site for the church, and assigned home lots around the common. After this was done, they distributed the rest of the land among the settlers, each receiving a share in the upland, meadow land, marsh land, and rights in the common. This system, in combination with the rigorous climate, poor soil, and land laws which allowed division among several heirs, discouraged the development of large estates. It made of New England a community of small self-sufficing farms and compact settlements. In New York great estates had been granted by both the Dutch and English authorities which the owners hoped to rent out to tenants. In this they had little success as long as good land in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Maryland could be obtained for little or nothing. With richer soil than New England, the Middle Colonies devoted themselves more exclusively to agriculture. Their chief product was wheat, and they have been called the "bread colonies." Like New England, they found a market in the West Indies. "We sell our superabundance of grain and cattle," said Pastorius in 1700, "in Barbados for brandy, syrup, sugar and salt, but we send the fine peltries over to England." Furs, in fact, were an important export item in the early years in all of the colonies. From the start the Middle Colonies had a larger number of non-English people than the other sections. The Dutch in New York, the Swedes on the Delaware, the Germans, the Irish, the Scotch-Irish scattered in all of the colonies, gave its civilization a more varied aspect which was evident in the style of architecture, methods of agriculture, and social life. The English. Although the American people even in colonial times were composed of many nationalities, the settlers from England were in the great majority. More important than mere numbers, however, was the fact that the English language and culture were destined to predominate in the colonies. From England came the forms of government as laid down in the charters, altered somewhat, to be sure, by American conditions. Colonial legislatures, in a sense, were little parliaments which occupied here somewhat the same position that the English parliaments did at one. Whatever civil rights Englishmen had at home were the heritage of Americans. The local government of county, borough, and township was introduced here as well as such officials as sheriff, constable, collector of taxes, and overseer of the poor. The English state church was the official form of religion in five of the colonies, although in New England Congregationalism as dominant. The colonists imported many of their manufactured goods tom England. They read English books, and the wealthy sent their sons to England to be educated, while those who could not afford it sent them to schools modeled after the English type of education. In many ways, then, England was the motherland of America. The Irish and Scotch-Irish. Outside of the English, the most important group coming to America from the British Isles were those from Ireland. These were of two types. The first consisted of the pure Irish stock from south and central Ireland who were Catholic in religion and were scattered widely throughout the colonies. The other type was known as "ScotchIrish" and came from northern Ireland. These people were of mixed Scotch, English, and Irish extraction and were Protestant in religion. Partly because there was no large distinct migration of south Irish, it has been difficult to estimate their number, but it was certainly much larger than has been generally supposed. On the other hand, it is easier to follow the fortunes of the north Irish Protestants from Ulster, who came in large groups during the first half of the eighteenth century. These men were descendants of settlers who had migrated to Ireland a century earlier to occupy the land which had been wrested from the Irish by the English king. Their religion was Presbyterian and their chief industry the making of woolens. When they were forced to pay tithes to the Church of England and forbidden to export their woolens to England, the Ulsterites turned to the New World. When they arrived in America they found the best lands near the coast occupied, and so were forced to move to the west. Trained by decades of border warfare in Ireland, brave, resolute, and aggressive, they quickly adapted themselves to the rigors of pioneer life and were superb Indian fighters. Their little hamlets became the pioneer outposts from Belfast, Maine, to the back country of Georgia. The center of their migration was the Pennsylvania frontier, and from here a steady stream flowed southwestward into the Cumberland and Shenandoah Valleys. Afterwards they went through the passes east into North Carolina or west some years later into Kentucky and Tennessee. The Germans. Next to the English and Irish, the largest national group coming to America in the colonial period was the Germans. The migration originated chiefly in the upper Rhine Valley or Palatinate. Hard times, political discontent, and religious persecution in that section impelled them to cast their lot in a foreign land. Penn sent agents to encourage them to migrate to Pennsylvania, and more than 100,000 settled there during the eighteenth century. Certainly a third of Pennsylvania's population at the opening of the Revolution were Germans from the Rhineland, the ancestors of the "Pennsylvania Dutch" of later times. A smaller number found their way to the Hudson and Mohawk Valleys. Skillful mechanics and thrifty farmers, these home-loving people occupied some of the most fertile lands in the east, and their descendants still hold it. Many of them, mingling with the Scotch-Irish, also pushed their way into the back country of Virginia and the Carolinas. The term "Scotch-Irish" is not wholly accurate. The non-Irish population who had settled in Ulster and other parts of north Ireland came from England as well as Scotland; and of those who came from Scotland, the great majority were lowland Scots whose blood may have been more English than Scotch. In America all who came from Ireland, whether from north or south, were commonly known as "Irish." This is one of the reasons why it is difficult to estimate the number and influence of those from the north and those from the south of Ireland. As against these advantages, the English colonies were far superior in economic strength and in number of population. The English colonists might be grouped under 13 separate governments which seldom acted effectively or in close co-operation, but in population they outnumbered the French about twelve to one. Their economic interests were more varied and their resources were far greater. Nor should there be forgotten the genius and enthusiasm of the great English statesman, William Pitt, who in the later stages of the conflict brought the full power of the British Empire to bear upon the American phase of the struggle. The Preliminary Conflicts—Border Warfare. In the great struggle between England and France for maritime and colonial supremacy which developened in 1689, the American colonies were immediately involved. In America the conflict generally took the form of raids by the French and their Indian allies upon the frontier settlements of New York and New England. Ia retaliation the English organized expeditions against the French fortresses in Acadia (Nova Scotia), along the St. Lawrence, and elsewhere. For America the outcome of the first war, King William's War (1689-97), was inconclusive. This struggle witnessed raids by the French and Indians upon the English frontier towns from Schenectady, New York, to Fori Loyal (now Portland), Maine. In return a New England fleet captured Port Royal (Annapolis), Acadia, but another expedition against Montreal failed. The Treaty of Ryswick (1697) settled nothing. Five years later Queen Anne's War (1702-13) broke out. The French raided the frontier towns, notably Deerfield, Massachusetts, and the Spaniards, allied with the French, attacked the English frontier of the Carolinas. Port Royal was taken by an expedition of British and colonials. In the Treaty of Utrecht (1713) Acadia, Newfoundland, and the Hudson Bay region were ceded to England. This treaty resulted obviously in great gains for England, but it did not settle the important question as to which nation was to dominate the continent or even the interior. A third conflict, King George's War (1744-48) was also indecisive. The Albany Plan of Union. As one war followed another, it became increasingly evident to many colonial leaders that some sort of colonial union would promote common action against the French and Indians Besides dealing more efficiently with other matters of common concern. The molasses was turned into rum for the fishing fleet and slave trade, and the currency exported to England for manufactured goods. When the planters in the Dutch and French West Indies began to sell their molasses and sugar cheaper than the planters of the British West Indies, England placed prohibitive duties on these commodities imported from foreign plantations into the British colonies in America. The enforcement of this act would have dealt extensive injury to colonial commerce, but fortunately it remained a dead letter until 1763. Economic Friction Reaches a Climax—England Ends the Policy of Salutary Neglect. Although the clash of economic interests was ever present, the mother country and her thirteen daughters managed to dwell for many years in the same house in reasonable friendship. When the mother country, however, began after 1763 to exert the parental authority, a break quickly came. What were the reasons which led England to turn her back on Walpole's policy of "salutary neglect" and undertake a more aggressive imperial policy? They appear to have arisen chiefly as a result of the long struggle for empire which reached its climax in the French and Indian War. During that struggle the weaknesses of the existing situation became evident. These weaknesses were: (1) the lack of unity on the part of the colonists in handling the Indian problem and questions of colonial defense, (2) the backwardness of some of the colonies in contributing their fair share to the general problem of defense, and (3) the willingness of some of the colonists to supply the enemy in Canada and the West Indies with foodstuffs during the war. France had been defeated, but the government of Great Britain knew that there would be no Indian peace until some strong authority could check the lawless activities of fur traders and backwoodsmen and the lawless purchasing of land by greedy land speculators. The French and Indian War had been immediately followed in 1763 by a general uprising of the Indians west of the Alleghenies under the Ottawa chieftain, Pontiac, an uprising incited by the French. Furthermore, the British public debt had doubled during the war and rested heavily upon the taxpayers. This debt had been incurred, the government said, in a large measure for the benefit of the American colonists, and the latter should pay a greater share. From the point of view of British imperialists there was no question that the empire should be more closely knit together, and their position was perfectly logical. The English ruling classes never questioned the justice or legality of the various acts which they passed to accomplish with the second highest vote, became Vice President. This strange s due to a division within the Federalist ranks. Hamilton, though office, still assumed Federalist leadership. Distrusting and disms, The Naturalization Act, extended the residence period of aliens citizenship from five to 14 years, thus striking at the Republican which foreigners tended to flock. The second, the Alien Act, gave the President "to order all such aliens as he shall judge dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States" to get out of the country". The Alien Enemies Act, empowered the President to deport aliens "try with which we were at war. The fourth, the Sedition Act, "that anyone who wrote, uttered, or published any "false, scandalous and malicious writing . . . against the government of the United or either house of the Congress . . . , or the President of the States, with intent to defame the said government," should be punished by a fine and imprisonment. These laws meant, if enforced, that opposition to the Federation was to be silenced. The Alien Act was not enforced in a single many Frenchmen left in fear of its application. Ten Republican printers were convicted and punished under the Sedition Act, with became martyrs to the Republican cause. According to them these ill-advised laws struck at the roots of personal liberty improperly enlarged the power of the central government. He emphasized as his chief principles of political faith: (i) economy; (2) restriction of governments, both state and federal federal especially; (3) the rights and powers of the people, industry, "equal and exact justice to all men," freedom of religion, press, person, complete acceptance of the decisions of the majority, and spread of public education; (4) the elevation of the farmer and not manufacturer through the "encouragement of agriculture, and of commerce as its handmaid"; and (5) peace with the world through "commerce, and honest friendship with all nations, entangling alliances w none." Such were the general principles of the Republicans; but what the "Republican revolution"? It consisted mainly of two ideas respect the limited range of government, which at best Jefferson believed to something of a necessary evil. First, let government regulate men's aft as little as possible. Let it be wise and economical, but "not take fi the mouth of labor the bread it has earned." In short, government sh exist for the people and be of the people. To those who distrusted the ability of the people, Jefferson once s"State a moral case to a plowman and a professor. The former will d it as well, and often better than the latter, because he has not been astray by artificial rules." Secondly, all governmental powers can be divided into domestic foreign affairs. The power of the central government should extend foreign affairs only. Domestic affairs belonged very largely to the governments. In other words, let the federal government's activities confined to the one thing the states individually could not very do. If this was the "revolution" in theory, how would it work practice? Origin of Slavery as an Institution. In 1619 about 20 Negroes ported into Virginia. Whether they were brought there as slay temporary bond servants is not clear. From that time until Amend in 1865 freed about 4,000,000 slaves, slavery was more or less a our history. Slave importations at first were few, but by 1700 the cheap labor, especially in the South, made slave trading profitable and American traders. By the eve of the Revolution there were 300,000 slaves in the country, and some estimates run over. In some Southern Colonies at this time the slaves equaled or ex number of whites, and in several of the Middle Colonies slaves one-fifth or one-sixth of the population. Even in New England feeling of the time. Many of the early presidents were opposed to slavery, and both Washington and Jefferson provided wills for the freeing of their slaves. Cotton Was King. This Mississippi plantation home of Jefferson Davis is the wealth of the slaveholding aristocracy—the Old South. In 1866, when this appeared in Harper's Weekly, the mansion was used as a school for the newly slaves. The slave quarters of the Davis plantation picture the other side of ie North and South Fundamentally Different. Influenced by geographic beyond man's control, the North and South developed fundamentally tent economic systems in the half-century closing in 1850. The North, have seen, became industrial. The South devoted itself to a plantation system of agriculture. Southern civilization at this time could be reduced to one word, it would be cotton. Cotton became the chief crop in the South, and it made very profitable as long as new lands were available for expansion. The and for cotton from overseas and from the North became so great that South made every effort to produce it on an ever larger scale. By 1850 felon output had increased thirtyfold and by i860 more than fiftyfold. But the war in the West was not over. After Grant's promotion to supreme command of the federal troops in 1864, General William T. Sherman was placed in command in the Sherman was to move southeast from Chattanooga through Georg' capture Atlanta, the railway and factory center of the South. By Sept 1864, Sherman had taken Atlanta where we shall leave him and t events in the eastern theater of war. About a month before Atlan Admiral Farragut in "one of the hardest earned victories" of his life Mobile on the Gulf to southern blockade-runners. The War in the East, 1862-63. By the line of the Appalachian nature had divided the theater of war into an eastern and western s While Grant was making his first attack in western Tennessee in popular clamor again compelled a move on Richmond. According April, 1862, the overcautious McClellan began the so-called "Pen: Campaign" in the region between the James and York Rivers in Vi Although the Confederates were greatly outnumbered, the superior s and tactics of Generals Lee and Stonewall Jackson stopped the Uni in the Seven Days' Battles (June 25-July 1, 1862) within four m Richmond. The federal failure cost McClellan his command. His successor, John Pope, soon met with disaster at the second battle 0 Run (August, 1862). Meanwhile, outside, Union soldiers began firing salutes in celeb but Grant quickly stopped this, saying, "The war is over; the re' our countrymen again." Returning to his loyal men, Lee, with tear-; eyes, said, "We have fought through the war together. I have donet I could for you. My heart is too full to say more." The next day h his army farewell and returned to Richmond, ever to remain one world's greatest figures despite defeat. Lee's surrender brought about the collapse of the Confederacy. By 26 Johnston surrendered to Sherman. After four years almost to the war was over. The Congressional Reconstruction Policy. Early in 1866 it was bee clear that Congress did not want the President's plan for reconstructs, as yet it had no plan of its own. The Congress, Republican by more two-thirds, responded to the whip hand of Stevens and Sumner an pointed the famous Committee of Fifteen to investigate conditions construction. While this investigation was being conducted, Congress passed a preliminary acts. The radical Republicans were annoyed by the "black c of the southern states. These laws had restricted the civil rights of the with reference especially to labor contracts, landholding, court rights, vagrancy. Consequently, Congress early in 1866 extended the life 0 Freedmen's Bureau and passed the Civil Rights Bill. Both the Civil Bill, which gave blacks equal civil rights with whites, and the Free Bureau Bill were passed over Johnson's veto, and the battle royal beg: Amendment XIV. In June, 1866, Congress presented Amendment to the states, thus assuring constitutional guarantee of civil rights to Ne: [100-04]. This long amendment provided first for citizenship and civil r for Negroes. In the second place, any state denying the right of suffrage to male Negroes was to have its representation in the House of Representatives reduced in proportion to the number of blacks it kept from voting.2 it disqualified for both federal and state offices all Southerners who, htaken an official oath to support the Constitution, later participated in rebellion. In other words, the former leaders of the South were barred definitely from sharing in political reconstruction, although Congress remove the disability by a two-thirds vote. Fourth, the war debt of the confederacy and all claims for freed slaves were declared void. With respect to the debt, this was a warning to all, foreigner or native, loans for the purpose of destroying the Union were exceedingly risk the summer of 1866, then, Congress was prepared to ride roughshod the President and the South. The South responded by promptly v against the amendment in every state except Tennessee. Tennessee act it and returned to the Union in July, 1866. The radicals were troubled over the increased representation the South would result of the elimination of the "three-fifths compromise" provision. Now the fr would count equally with the whites. They proposed, therefore, to offset this advantage by giving the Negro the power to vote the former slaveholder out of leal and, incidentally, the Republican party into continued power. southern whites known as "scalawags," speedily had assumed 1 over the newly enfranchised, ignorant, and inexperienced Negroes had the two important political rights of voting and holding offic Under these circumstances conventions were called and constituti drawn up, which guaranteed suffrage to the blacks and denied politics to the white leaders. At the same time state governments were es It is worth noting, however, that in only two of the ten state con did the Negroes make up one-half or more of the delegates. In total one-tenth of the delegates were Negroes. Taking the state conventions whole, Negro delegates were roughly one-quarter of all the delegates The governments that resulted were of course under the contr carpetbaggers, scalawags, and Negroes. How thoroughly government been removed from the hands of the former ruling class is illustrates fact that in seven of the states four governors, ten of the 14 Senators, and 20 of the 35 Representatives were politicians who south during or after the war. Scalawags and Negroes usually hell offices, although two Negroes rose to lieutenant-governorships, 1 were especially prominent in the legislatures, and in South Carolina! they outnumbered the whites 88 to 67. Taking the Negro membership in the early reconstruction legist7 a whole, perhaps two-thirds of them could not write. By the earl however, most of them had learned to read and write. In South usually cited as an especially bad example of reconstruction, Negro legislatures, according to recent research, "outnumbered, and in m, outshone, their carpetbag and scalawag contemporaries." In the s? there were said to be 200 judges who could not read. In several star practically ceased to exist as supreme court judges, mostly white, sell decisions. In many instances Negro legislators became tools in the hand1 self-seeking carpetbaggers. Upon a South laid low by war and def~ inefficient and frequently corrupt legislators saddled an additional in some states resulted in bankruptcy. Bribery, fraud, and plain steal officials after a brief residence. Not all the carpetbaggers were of this type, lr some Northerners went south out of a spirit of service. Scalawags, more the carpetbaggers, were southern whites who joined the northern Republican enforcement of reconstruction. That the Negroes were ignorant and largely unprepared for the citizenship is understandable. Under the plantation-slave system most Negroes '.v any kind of education. It has been estimated that nine-tenths of the 4,000,000 could neither read nor write. Of more than a million given the ballot under construction program perhaps between 100,000 and 200,000 could read and must be remembered that at the outbreak of the war there were about 500,000 fr in the country. Some of these were educated and some of them were in the were, of course, millions of whites in the South who were ignorant of political affairs. Causes for Immigration. The causes for this tremendous are to be found in the conditions existing in both Europe an Religious persecution, political unrest, and unfortunate conditions caused many to break the ties of their homeland in die finding a fuller life here. The rapid rise in the number of immf the 1840's, for example, was due in part to poor harvests on the to the potato famine of r845 and 1846 in Ireland, and to the wave of revolutions which swept Europe in 1848 and 1849. Quite as important were conditions in America. The greater opportunity here was the primary influence, particularly strong periods of prosperity and weaker during years of depression. Th decline of immigration corresponds closely to economic con' America. Much of the immigration since the War Between the been promoted by American employers in search of cheap labor, companies looking for passengers, and railroads seeking to sell 400). Professor Commons, a leading immigration expert, goes sot say that "the desire to get cheap labor, to take in passenger fares, and land, have probably brought more immigrants to America than conditions of Europe, Asia, and Africa have sent." Certainly the covered Europe with their propaganda. As the years went by and the nation's facilities improved, emigration became a less dangerous no longer limited to the strong and self-reliant. Furthermore, pr: fourth of the immigrants in recent decades have come over on fun by relatives and friends in this country'. Source of Immigration. Until the last decade of the nineteen century immigrants came principally from the British Isles, especially from Germany, and from the Scandinavian countries of Norway. In the 1890's the source rapidly changed until in 1896 the immigrants from southern and eastern Europe (Italy, Austria-Hungary, Russia furnished over half the number. By 1910 the "new immigration" as it was called, furnished over four-fifths of the total. A good proportion off immigration were Jews who fled from religious persecution and Pilgrim fathers had fled centuries earlier. Closing the Gates. Some agitation in favor of immigration had been in existence since the decade of the 1870's. It had first directed against the Chinese and had finally resulted in 1882 in the of Chinese labor.7 The early agitation came mainly from the organized labor who felt that a continuous flow of cheap labor k down and prevented a rise in the standard of living. Capital, on fl hand, advocated comparatively easy immigration laws, arguing for the continued supply of cheap labor was necessary to develop the resounding nation and to fill the jobs which the native American could not or w fill. A special phase of this long-continued agitation to restrict immigration the excitement over incoming Japanese on the western coast. And the San Francisco board of education in 1906 placing Chinese and children in separate schools led to a protest from Japan. As a real governments of the United States and Japan came to an understanding known as the "Gentlemen's Agreement," by which Japan agreed not to issue passports to laborers desiring to go to the United States. Thjs satisfy those opposed to Japanese immigration, and in 1924 then were excluded just as the Chinese had been 42 years earlier. Literacy Test. In an effort to devise new methods of exclusion To immigration, the literacy test was added by Congress, but bills providing were vetoed by Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson. Finally, in 1917, a law was passed over Wilson's veto. The Presidents were undoubtedly rioted they maintained that literacy was no fair test of the fitness of anyone to enter the army of American labor. It must be remembered, however the exponents of a literacy test were primarily interested in further restricting immigration and this seemed the easiest method at hand. Restrictions since the First World War. The First World War renewed strength to the demand for immigration restriction. Having large groups of foreign nationals here in time of war distilted America had long been a "melting pot" where the immigrants® nations were blended into one, but many were now asserting that the new immigration" did not blend as readily as the old and that they were m such numbers that they could not be "Americanized" rapidly. To the early believers in restriction, consejt now added many ardent patriots who saw in this situation American institutions. Many also feared after the war that, if the put up, America would be literally swamped by a wave of in the war-torn nations of Europe. Furthermore, employers opposed restriction, for there was little labor shortage, even in the prosperous years of the 1920's, to the strengthened agitation, immigration was radically reeffort was made to favor the "old immigration" at the expense Several laws were passed in the 1920's to bring this about 1929, a new "national origins" method was applied. Accordingly, government scientists were to attempt to find out what de up the American people in 1920. When this was determination was to be distributed among the nationalities in the in as found in 1920. That is, if 50 per cent of our people seem r to be descendants of immigrants from the British Isles, then I the immigration each year might come from Great Britain, ion, however, was limited to 150,000 a year.8 This "national id not apply to Canada or to the independent nations of Latin 11927 until 1933 inclusive immigration declined each year; -35 saw more aliens leave than were admitted. lion. While restrictive law's were being urged and passed to y the number of immigrants, a strong agitation developed to the newcomers. Speaking in very general terms, "Americanization" is the process of acquainting immigrants with American customs in the hope that they will soon become Americans like ourselves. There are obviously some difficulty here, for there is a wide difference of what America stands for and what the qualities of the ideal id be. There is, nevertheless, much in a fundamental way in helping the newcomer to conquer language difficulties, from the dishonest who would profit from his ignorance, possibilities of self-improvement, and in suggesting his rights our law's and constitutions. Much excellent work of this done by public and private organizations. It is high time; for f our history we have considered the immigrant rather as a b labor than as a human being and a potential citizen of the 1929, the annual quota of any nationality is determined as follows: number of 1920 inhabitants of that national origin whole number of inhabitants of quota origin in 1920 They see no harm in the public debt provided above all else that there i reasonable ratio between the total debt and the national income. Some believe that danger can be avoided if the debt is not more than twice the national income. Practically everyone agrees that the nation's economic being suffers if the national income is not maintained at a high el. It is worth remembering, whether or not one accepts the experts' salaries, that the federal government has always met its financial obligations. Electoral Reforms. The whole problem of government and reform in government is complicated by the indifference of the voter. Commonly in state and national elections not more than 60 per cent of the qualified least their ballots. (See graph, p. 790.) In the presidential election of 20 only one in two eligible voters went to the polls. The three out of ratio of 1900 was not surpassed until 1940 and 1944 when four out ve eligibles voted—elections in which the two-term tradition and a id crisis were at issue (pp. 773-76). The ratio dropped again to one in in 1948. Why is it that the 85 per cent record of 1876 has not been lied in the present century? Many explanations have been offered. Requirements such as the poll tax or educational tests bar Negroes the South as well as whites in the North. In many sections one party so dominates the situation that it seems useless for a member of the minority to vote.® Even in sections where such conditions do not exist, there is 'at indifference. Either the voter is absorbed in other problems or he lacks h that much can be done through political action, is only through continued vigilance and action that the electorate secure honest and efficient government, and only by holding the career politics in high esteem can the highest type of political leadership be ned. Many suggestions have been made as to how government might improved and the voter aroused to closer supervision of his elected representatives. The first two decades of the century' brought the initiation, the referendum, direct election of Senators, woman suffrage, and other radical innovations (Chapter 18), but they have not proved sufficient. Among the reforms more recently suggested are the short ballot, provisional representation, and fewer elections. If the voter is presented with 1 the 1940 election in the then eight so-called poll-tax states of the South only one-eighth total population voted, whereas three-eighths of the whole country's total population. Illinois, voting 53.4 per cent of its population, stood first; South Carolina, with only per cent of its population voting, ranked last. The denial of voting rights to Negroes poorer whites in certain southern states is being sharply challenged. Efforts of Congress, ;r, to pass an anti-poll tax bill have failed through filibusters in the Senate. In 1944 the e Court ruled that Negroes in Texas could not be legally denied suffrage. By 1949 it upheld their right to vote in Democratic primaries in Georgia, South Carolina, and As in the 1920's, there was again a widespread belief that crime was bo increase. Whether this is true, it is too early to know. Fortunately, there has ' a growing interest in the causes, cure and control of crime, and in of handling delinquents and criminals. Psychology, medicine, and sciences are making important contributions, as are workers in the field social welfare. Racial and National Frictions. Americans have always loved to their country as a place where all may have an equal opportunity and w tolerance is extended to everyone. In spite of this ideal, intolerance the racial and national groups who make up our varied population has I means ceased. The same opposition to "foreigners," as seen in earlier j in the Know-Nothing party, crops up now and again, although it has much less intensive in recent years than in earlier periods. The decline! be due in part to the radical restriction of immigration which has cut® minimum the flow of aliens to our shores. The immediate problem is the establishing a tolerant attitude among the national groups already here especially between the races, white and colored—which will tend t betterment of all. Friction and intolerance have existed between various branches of white race; for example, between Jews and Gentiles. This has been in no1 as intense as that between the white and colored races. The census 1940 records the population of the principal colored races of the United States approximately as follows: Negroes, 12,865,000; Indians, 334,100 Japanese, 127,000 and lesser numbers of Chinese, Filipinos, and groups. In addition there are about 1,000,000 Mexicans most of whom® Indian or part Indian. All of the colored races except the native Indians or were brought here almost entirely to supply the need for cheap labor. Causes of Friction. Racial prejudice, like that between nationalities® not new in American history. It was seen in the agitation for the restriction of Chinese and Japanese immigration, and again in the friction resulting from the efforts during the Reconstruction period to push Negro prematurely upon the South. Racial feeling seems to be based primarily on two factors, social fear and economic competition. By social fear is meant fear of the whites that, through a mingling of blood of a colored race, white civilization will give way to the colored. This fed is keen in certain sections of the South where the Negro race predominates. Economic competition is undoubtedly at the root of much racial prejudice just as it has been a major cause of friction between national groups. Such groups as the Japanese, coming here with their lower standard of living have been able to compete successfully in the economic world. Racial feeling is in no way confined to the South. It may be seen in the West in the attitude toward Orientals, and in the North in the feeling toward the Negro since the recent northward migration of that race. 