Colonization began in the efforts of commercial companies to make money by trading with the Indians, the settlers soon turned to agriculture and found in the products of the soil both the means of their own subsistence and a surplus that enabled them to carry on trade with Europe. As the population and wealth of the colonies increased, they became more selfsufficient and less dependent upon the trading companies and proprietors who had sponsored them. At the same time, however, they became more dependent upon the British government. As time wore on, most of the commercial companies and the proprietors lost their American grants. The colonies they had established were taken over by the king and were ruled as royal provinces. The increase in colonial population. Unlike the French colonies to the north and the Spanish to the south, the English settlements along the Atlantic seacoast of North America increased rapidly in population. Growth resulted from a high birth rate among the colonists and the continual stream of immigration from Europe. Although many persons migrated from Europe to America in order to find more religious and political freedom, far larger numbers came in the hope of bettering their economic condition. "Land free . . . labor scarce." The population of England in the seventeenth century was about five million. The country could scarcely be called overpopulated, though many contemporary writers seemed to think that it was, for they spoke of idle and mischievous crowds and of the unemployed that flocked to the cities, and they complained of taxes to take care of the poor. The real causes of distress among the masses seem to have been not overpopulation but an uneven distribution of wealth, and the economic disturbances which usually accompany such important changes as England was experiencing in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Whatever the causes, writers of pamphlets and books and those who drafted petitions to the king for charters repeatedly pointed out the advantage of the colonies as the place to take care of the "swarms of idle persons," rid England of its beggars, reduce the cost of maintaining prisons and jails, and lessen the poor tax. The same writers who told how advantageous colonization would be to England also described the richness and bounty of the New World. John Winthrop, who became one of the leaders of the migration to the New World, wrote: "All towns complain of the burthen of their poore . . . and yet suffer a whole continent ... to he waste without any improvement." A coin of 1647 bears this inscription: "In Virginia land free and labor scarce; in England land scarce and labor plenty." Thus the lure of free land and the hope of economic betterment were used to attract to the New World the landless, the poor, and the unfortunate. The colonization of America meant the spread into a savage land of European modes of living, languages, ideals of life. In the Spanish and Portuguese colonies it meant a mingling with the natives, forming sometimes, as in Mexico and Brazil, a settlement practically native in appearance. In the English colonies, however, this was not the case, for wherever the English settled, they crowded the red men back into the interior. As a result, English civilization, as it spread into the American wilderness, remained predominantly English. The English language, law, customs, institutions, and ideals, modified by a new environment and influenced by other European peoples, were the foundations upon which the life and culture of the people of the United States were based. America as a nation of immigrants. The United States has been called a "melting pot," a term used to describe the fact that the people of different nations and races have found a haven in the United States, and have become one in purpose and ideals with those who preceded them. This mingling of races began even in colonial times, for there were many non-English elements in the colonial population. The Scotch-Irish. The term "Scotch-Irish" refers to the descendants of those people who settled in the northern part of Ireland (Ulster) in the seventeenth century. Some of them were English but the larger number came from Scotland. Nearly all of them were of the Presbyterian faith. Discouraged by restrictive laws, the Scotch-Irish early in the eighteenth century began to migrate in large numbers to the English colonies in America. Coming after colonization had been going on for nearly a century', they were attracted to the frontier by cheap land. In Virginia and the Carolinas, Scotch-Irish pioneers were among the first to settle in the foothills of the eastern Appalachians. They soon became known for their democratic frontier spirit, which acted as a check upon the aristocratic spirit that was beginning to flourish in the coastal settlements. The Germans. The disastrous Thirty Years' War (1618-48), which brought ruin to the thrifty peasants of central Europe, was one of the chief reasons why so many Germans migrated to America during the colonial period. Lured by the attractive advertising of Penn's agents in Europe, the largest number settled in Pennsylvania. About one third of Pennsylvania's population at the time of the Revolution was German. Thousands of Germans also went to New York and to the frontier sections of Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas. The French, Swiss, Dutch, and others. When the French Huguenots (Protestants) lost out in their struggle to secure control of France, thousands of them became exiles in the New World. They settled chiefly in South Carolina and in the seacoast towns of the Northern colonies. From the German-speaking cantons of Switzerland many settlers came to Pennsylvania and to North Carolina. Welsh, Scotch Presbyterians, and Irish Catholics also came in large numbers, many of them seeking religious freedom in the Middle and Southern colonies. Jews were present in nearly ever)' seacoast city, although English law denied them the right of legal residence in any British possession. There were Swedes and Dutch who founded New Sweden and New Netherland. These non-English groups made up probably more than a third of the total population of the colonies. Although they were absorber! by the English, their presence is a factor in explaining the American Revolution, for it was much easier for them to revolt than it was for those of English descent. Social classes. The merchant, the banker, the sea captain, the lawyer, the landed proprietor, and the planter constituted a colonial aristocracy — of wealth, position, and influence. Closely identified with them in social position were the governing officials, both those elected by the colonists and those appointed by the king. Pastors of the various churches also held a position of influence, especially in New England. Scattered throughout the coastal settlements were numbers of small farmers, small tradesmen, and a few mechanics. These occupied an inferior position both socially and politically. Still lower in the social scale were the indentured servants, and, of course, the slaves. Roughly, then, there were three social classes: (a) the aristocracy — merchants, planters, clergymen, landed proprietors, government officials, lawyers, bankers; (b) the great middle class — small farmers, artisans; (c) a servile group — indentured servants and slaves. The effect of the frontier on class distinction. Back of the coastal regions was the great hinterland occupied by small farmers. This was too recently developed at the time of the Revolution for great social distinctions to have appeared. Here, as always in frontier communities, aims unhappy presidency. In the last two chapters we have noted some of the obstacles which John Adams encountered " after he became President in 1797. He was barely elected against a very strong opposition party, which continued to obstruct his policies. His foremost political adversary, Thomas Jefferson, held the office of Vice-President. lie was harassed by diplomatic troubles with France. In addition to all these handicaps, he lacked the united support of his own party. Hamilton exercised less influence over Adams than he had over Washington, for Adams was notably independent, even stubborn, at times. So Hamilton and Adams were frequently at odds, thus tending to split the Federalist party. The Alien and Sedition Laws, 1798. While the Federalists were thus divided and uncertain in their leadership, they were frightened by the criticism directed against them by the Republicans. In 1798, during the near-war with France, they passed a series of laws which helped prepare the way for their own downfall. These laws are commonly known as the Alien and Sedition Laws. They were reallv four in number: (1) a Naturalization Act, lengthening the term of residence required for citizenship from five to fourteen years. This law, it was hoped, would make it impossible for the Republicans to increase their voting power with the new immigrants, who for the most part were sympathetic with Republican ideals. (2) An Alien Act empowered the President to deport any foreigner whom he considered dangerous to the peace. (3) An Alien Enemies Act, which never went into effect because it was (o apply only to war conditions, empowered the President to deport subjects of any power with whom the United States might be at war. (4) The Sedition Act, the worst of the law's, was aimed directly at the critical Republicans. It provided for the punishment of "those who wrote, printed, or uttered any false, scandalous, and malicious statements against the government of the United States or either House of Congress of the United States, or the President of the United States." This law was a clear violation of the First Amendment to the Constitution, which guarantees freedom of speech and press. Merits would push forward the sale of the public lands and bring increased revenue to the government. The federal government agreed to set aside one twentieth of the income from the land sales within Ohio as a special fund for the construction of roads, and to connect the Ohio River with the eastern rivers which flowed toward the Atlantic seaboard. A committee of Congress recommended the construction of a road to extend from Cumberland on the Potomac to Wheeling on the Ohio. In 1S06 Congress appropriated $30,000, but the work of construction was not started until 1811. Ultimately this National Road (also called the Cumberland Road) was extended from Wheeling across Ohio and Indiana to Yandalia in Illinois (1838). In thus recommending and encouraging internal improvements, the Republicans were adopting the Federalist policy of loose construction. But these roads suited the economic needs of the agricultural classes whom the party was serving — another illustration of how economic interests have a way of making light of constitutional scruples. Westward migration. The admission of Ohio into the Union (1803) and the road projects of the federal government increased the great migration to the West. The population of the trans-Allegheny country grew by leaps and bounds. The population of Ohio in 1803 was not much more than .50,000, but by the next census, 1810, it had grown to 230,000. Kentucky, with 220,000 people in 1S00, had 406,000 in 1S10, and the population of Tennessee increased from 105,(MX) to 260,000 in the same ten-year period. Land companies spread pamphlets describing the value of their lands. So great was the rush of westward-bound settlers that the landowners of the East raised a protest against the "plots to drain the East of its best blood." The lure of the West overcame every effort to stop the migration. It did not stop even at the Mississippi River, but went on beyond the territorial limits of the United States into what was then Spanish territory. The importance of free navigation of the Mississippi to Western settlers. The treaty with Spain granting the free navigation of the Mississippi and the privilege of deposit at New Orleans opened Spanish Louisiana to American settlers. "The Mississippi is to them everything," said Madison. "It is the Hudson, the Delaware, the Potomac, and all the navigable rivers of the Atlantic formed into one stream." Two thirds of the commerce that passed through New Orleans was in American hands. Bv 18(H) Americans formed the majority of the inhabitants along the east side of the Mississippi above New Orleans. Thev formed the majority in the settlements beyond the Mississippi in upper Louisiana near the mouth of the Missouri River. twentieth century to foment a feeling of ill will and discrimination toward the Negro, the Jew, and the Catholic. The fact that the movement was ridiculed by the bulk of the people and was comparatively short-lived gives some hope that as time passes, much of the prejudice against the Negro and other racial groups will tend to disappear. However, there was a revival of Klan activities after World War 11. The yellow race. Other racial problems have become acute in the years of America's industrial transformation, because a liberal immigration policy encouraged large numbers of the yellow race to come to this country. This was tending to cause the same racial trouble in the Pacific coast states that the presence of the black race has caused in other sections. In order to avoid another racial problem the government took steps in 1882 to check Chinese immigration and in 1907 brought Japanese immigration nearly to an end. Factors fending to cause a decline in racial prejudice. Every now and then America suffers outbreaks of racial and religious intolerance, inch as the "Know-Nothing" movement of the 1850's, the American Protective Association movement of the l890's, the Ku Klux Klan movement of the 1920's and mid 1940's. These and other prejudice movements are directed against minority racial or religious groups. Part of the intolerance is caused by ignorance and stupid prejudices, and part of it is based upon the fear of economic competition. Unscrupulous leaders also see an opportunity to enrich themselves bv organizing these societies. Agitators and vote-seeking politicians sometimes play upon racial sympathies and prejudices to further their own ends. Not only have the Negroes suffered from these unreasoned prejudices, but other groups as well—Jews, Catholics, and the various "minority" racial groups that make up the American people. In the past these waves of intolerance and prejudice have not enjoyed a very long life. The intermingling of various racial groups in many sections of the country, particularly in our large cities, and the ever-widening influence of the public schools have tended to emphasize the American ideals of tolerance and equality. However, false notions of racial inequality, popularized by the unscrupulous, and the economic competition for jobs have caused manv to fear serious outbreaks of prejudice and discrimination. Undoubtedly racial and group intolerance is one of America's most pressing social problems. Much more has to be done before Americans may justly boast of their intelligence and their sense of justice. The present civilization of the Western Hemisphere is dominated by peoples of Old World origin. Ever since the days of Columbus, successive waves of immigration have poured into the New World. According to the first census (1790) the population of the country was a little less than four million. The census of 1940 gave the continental population of the United States as close to one hundred thirty-two million. Immigration contributed no small part to this stupendous growth. Causes of immigration. The causes of immigration have been many; but outstanding at all times has been the economic motive — the desire for land ownership. Even when religious, political, and racial persecutions played their part in causing people to seek another place to live, the desire for economic improvement was usually present also. Colonial immigration. In the colonial period a number of different peoples of Europe settled on the Atlantic seaboard. There were, for example, French, Dutch, Swedish, German, Irish, and Scotch, although most of the settlers in what is now the United States were English. Since the English predominated, they determined the language, laws, and forms of government that became the basis of American life. The periods of immigration. There are about five great periods in the history of immigration to the United States: the first, from the close of the Revolution to about 1823; the second, from 1825 to the War between the States; the third, from the close of the War between the States to about 1890; the fourth, from 1890 to World War I; and the fifth, from World War I to the present. Immigration before the War between the States. In the first period a total of about three hundred thousand people came to this country, chiefly from the nations of northern and western Europe. In the second period there arrived about five million immigrants from the same countries. This migration included large groups of German and Irish immigrants, especially in the period between 1845 and 1855. The Irish potato famine of 1S46 and 1847 and dissatisfaction with England's economic and political policies toward Ireland sent hundreds of thousands of Irish to our shores. Within a period of about seven years more than a million and a half Irish came to the United States. Political troubles in Germany in 1848 led hundreds of thousands of Germans to seek refuge in the United States. The beginnings of opposition to the immigrant. During this period the older settlers began to show signs of opposition toward the newer ones. Then in migrant has always been content — at least for a few years after his coming — to accept a lower standard of living than those already here. The immigrant^ who furnished the hulk of the unskilled labor of the country crowded the earlier inhabitants out of the lowly and poorly paid jobs, and were later crowded out themselves bv succeeding waves of immigrants. Labor began to oppose unrestricted immigration on the ground that immigrants tended to keep wages down and to lower the American standard of living. Prejudice toward the new immigrant also began to appear at this time. This prejudice was based on differences in religions and on differences in nationality. Very frequently, however, it was really caused by fear that the immigrant was taking jobs and economic opportunities away from the earlier immigrants. As early as the 1830's secret societies were formed to protest against the foreigner, and "native" Americans organized political movements to discriminate against him. One evidence of this feeling was the Know-Nothing movement of the 1850's; a more recent manifestation of it was the Ku Klux Klan movement of the 1920's; more frequently local groups have organized to propagandize their pet prejudices against particular foreign groups. Despite these "nativist" movements the general policy of the government toward the immigrant was one of welcome. Americans took pride in America as the land of opportunity, the haven for the oppressed. Immigration from 1860-90. The economic revolution after the War between the States required large numbers of workers. Manufacturers and the builders of railroads welcomed immigrants. The Western states also encouraged immigration. Larger numbers than ever before began to come to the land of opportunity. The chief source of immigrants during this period continued to be Germany and the British Isles; large numbers also came from the Scandinavian countries. The "new" immigration, 1890-1914. As the decades of the 1880's closed, it was noticeable that the origin of the immigrant stream shifted from northern and western to southern anti southeastern Europe. For example, in the early 1880's about three fourths of the immigrants were from northwestern Europe. Some twenty years later, nearly three fourths came from Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Italv. Taking the census year of 1890 as an arbitrary date, it has become customary to refer to the immigration before that year as the "old" immigration and that since 1890 as the "new" immigration. The new immigration came when the industrial revolution was in full swing and the frontier had disappeared. These new immigrants found an America very different from that found by their predecessors. There was no longer good land to be had for little or nothing. Two thirds of the new immigrants were men of working age, almost a fourth of whom came to America intending to return to their families in the Old World after they had accumulated a little fortune. Encouragement of immigration by business interests. The large corporations sent their agents to Europe to stories about great opportunities that awaited the immigrant in America. They lured many would-be immigrants to the new world by offering them jobs. Steamship lines promoted immigration by means of alluring advertisements and salesmen who told such tales of American wealth that many immigrants came to believe that American streets were paved with gold. The hard lot of the new immigrant. Many of the new immigrants were poor, unskilled, and illiterate. Leaving overcrowded, backward countries, they went directly to our industrial centers and accepted work at the bottom of the wage scale. They huddled together in hovels and tenements under living conditions often worse than they had left. New immigrants in the factory and mining towns. The story of Lawrence, Massachusetts, is that of many a mill town of the East. In 1848 the textile mills of Lawrence were doing a thriving business. The population was six thousand, and of this number two thirds were native Americans. The other third were Irish immigrants. In 1910 the population was eighty-five thousand. Of this number six sevenths were of foreign birth or of foreign parentage. Nearly one third of this group were new immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. The majority of the laborers in the textile mills were foreign-born. The same tendency was noticeable in other cities and other industries. In 1870 the coal miners of eastern Pennsylvania were either native Americans or immigrants from the British Isles and Germany; by 1910 most were Slavs or Italians. The development of a policy of selective immigration coincides with labor's opposition and the coming of the "newer" immigration. Differences between the old and new immigration. (1) The old immigration had come at a time when the country was growing and could absorb many new settlers. (2) The old immigration came in smaller numbers than the new. (3) Politicians more easily exploited the new immigrants to obtain their votes. (4) The old immigrants had come from nations with institutions, customs, and ideas similar to those of the settlers already here; the new immigrants had customs that were different from American ways. Thus it was claimed the "new" immigrant could not be so easily assimilated, that is, molded to .American ways of living. Culver Service These immigrants land on the wharf at Castle Garden, Battery Park, at the extreme tip of Manhattan in the late 1870's. By 1900, Mulberry Street was the heart of "Little Italy" in New York City. Many of the poorest Italian immigrants from southern Italy settled in this district The problem of Americanization. The new immigrants crowded together with others of their own kind. Most of our great cities soon had areas known, for instance, as "Little Italy," "Little Greece," "Little Bohemia." Bewildered by their inability to speak our language, the immigrants read foreign-language newspapers and went to foreign-language churches and theaters. The older people found it almost impossible to become Americanized. The public schools, however, did invaluable work, and the second generation of foreigners quickly adapted themselves to the ideals and conditions of American life. Various organizations attempted to carry the work of Americanization to the adult foreigners, but the task was extremely difficult. The necessity for Americanization was obvious when war broke out in 1914. The problem that resulted while America was a neutral was embarrassing enough; it became a serious matter when the United States entered the war. Although most of the "hyphenated" Americans, as they were called, supported the country of their adoption, some did so reluctantly and some were outspoken in their sympathy with America's enemies. This wartime experience was a factor which strengthened tire movement for Americanization and the demands of labor for the restriction of immigration. Selective immigration. With the "general immigration act of 1882 Congress began the practice of selective immigration. This law suspended Chinese immigration, the only definitely restrictive law that Congress passed until 1921. But between 1882 and 1921 Congress passed a series of laws which excluded certain classes of immigrants. In general these laws excluded: (1) criminals, (2) the mentally disabled, (3) those afflicted with certain diseases, (4) those likely to become public charges, (5) anarchists and other radicals who advocated the overthrow of government by force, (6) contract laborers, that is, those who were contracted for by steamship companies or industrial corporations, (7) polygamists, (8) aliens not eligible for citizenship (this referred chiefly to all Asiatics), and (9) those "who cannot read the English language or some other language or dialect." This literacy test was vetoed by Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson, but was finally passed over Wilson's veto in 1917. Restrictive immigration. After World War I there was a rush of immigrants to the New World. Fearing that the problem of Americanization would get beyond control, and that serious disturbances might attend the addition of large numbers to our labor supply during a period of adjustment. Congress passed an immigration bill. The law of 1921. This law —the first to restrict immigration by numbers, or quotas — specified that each nation would be allowed to send to the United States each year no more than 3 per cent of the number of persons of that nation in the United States as shown by the census of 1910. The number expected to enter was about three hundred fifty thousand; but the law permitted so many exceptions that in 1924 twice that number entered the country. 2. Discrimination in favor of the old immigration. In 1924 Congress reduced the number of immigrants allowed to enter. Two per cent of the foreign "nationals" in the country, according to the census of 1890, were permitted to enter. On this basis the annual quota was about one hundred sixty-seven thousand. The 1890 census was used as a basis for the determination of quotas in order to cut down the proportion of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. One of the chief reasons for discriminating in favor of the peoples of northern and western Europe was the popular, although false, notion, that the people of northern and western Europe are superior mentally and physically to the peoples of southern Europe. This theory of "Nordic supremacy," although no reputable scientist sustains it, flatters the "Nordic." Hitler and the Nazis gave some popularity to this idea. The National Origins Plan, July. 1929. The 2 per cent feature of the law of 1924 was temporary. The permanent feature of the law is known as the "national origins plan." Determination of quotas. The national origins plan of quota restriction, which finally went into effect July 1, 1929, provides that the total immigration from "quota" countries in one year shall be limited to 150,000. "The annual quota for any one nationality shall be the number which bears the same ratio to 150,000 as the number of inhabitants in continental United States in 1920 having that national origin bears to the number of inhabitants in continental United States in 1920 of European origin." The great difficulty in applying the principle was to determine the number of inhabitants in 1920 of the national origin of the group to be admitted. A special Quota Board was set up to determine this figure and the annual quota for each country. In filing its report, the Quota Board observed that "the information available raises grave doubts as to the value of these computations as the basis for the purpose intended." Other features of the Quota Law. There are three other features of the law which need mention. First, the law specified that every country should be allowed to send a minimum of one hundred immigrants per year, even though its quota figure fell below that amount. Secondly, the law definitely excluded Asiatic immigrants. In the third place, the Quota Law did not apply to the Western Hemisphere. Nonquota immigration from the Western Hemisphere. Since 1929 non-quota immigration to the United States from countries of the Western Hemisphere has been as heavy in some years as the quota immigration from Europe. Thousands of laborers from Mexico have crossed the border into our Southwest. There they are welcomed by beet-sugar growers and other employers of unskilled labor. Some have proposed that quotas be assigned to the countries of Latin America, but nothing has been done, partly because the depression acted as a bar to immigration and partly because employers objected to cutting off the supply of low-paid laborers. The immigration of Asiatics. The way in which our immigration policy may influence our international friendships is best illustrated by the story of the exclusion of Asiatics. 1. Opposition to the Chinese. After the settlement of California in the middle of the last century large numbers of Chinese migrated to the Pacific coast, where they worked as unskilled laborers. Many were imported to work on railroad construction. Gradually opposition to Chinese immigration developed, and in I860 China, by treaty, recognized the right of the United States to "regulate, limit or suspend" the immigration of Chinese laborers. In 1882 Congress suspended Chinese immigration for a ten-year period. This restriction was later renewed. In 1894, by another treaty, the entry of Chinese laborers was prohibited for ten years, and in 1904 Congress continued the exclusion of the Chinese without any time limit. During World War II (1943) this law was repealed and the Chinese placed under the provisions of the Quota Law. The "gentlemen's agreement" with Japan. Meanwhile, Japanese immigration began to grow in numbers. The Japanese, instead of engaging in manual tasks, obtained land and began to compete with American farmers. The presence of the Japanese became an issue in the politics of the Pacific states, particularly in California. Japanese children were for a short time excluded from the public schools. Japanese were not allowed to become landowners. The Pacific states even proposed to check immigration by state action. The Japanese government protested to the federal government, which could do nothing but inform the Japanese officials that it had no control over the school or land laws of states. The situation was tense. The whole problem was quietly solved by the famous "gentlemens agreement" of 1907, by which Japan promised to refuse passports to Japanese laborers seeking admittance to the United States. The United States was content to let Japan control the migration of her own people. Abrogation of the gentlemen's agreement. Although Japan lived up to her promise, congressmen from the Pacific coast, in the debate on the law of 1924, urged that the United States abrogate the gentlemen's agreement of 1907 and assume direct control over her own immigration policy. The protest of the Japanese ambassador and his statement that "grave consequences" might follow such an act stirred the nationalistic ardor of Congress, and the threat was answered by the insertion of a clause stating that "aliens ineligible to citizenship" could not be admitted. In approving the law of 1924 Coolidge expressed regret that Congress had seen fit to abrogate the gentlemen s agreement. This feature of the law of 1924 was a factor in weakening the friendly relations that Japan and the United States had maintained for some time. The problem of refugees. Conditions in central Europe after 1937 brought up the question of modifying our quota laws to admit a larger number of political and religious refugees. This question became particularly acute after the Nazi pogrom against the Jews in November, 1938. This pogrom, followed bv a series of discriminatory laws against Jews, shocked the conscience of Americans, making them aware that for some years discrimination toward minority groups had been developing in Germany, Russia, Poland, and elsewhere. Not only Jews but also Christians, Protestant as well as Catholic, sought escape from persecution. As of old, refugees looked to the United States. Many people urged that the quota laws be modified, temporarily at least, to permit the entrance of these refugees. The problem of smuggling and deporting. The enforcement of the quota laws has created the problem of preventing the smuggling of alien? across the Canadian and Mexican borders. There is a widespread "bootlegging'' of aliens. While there are no reliable statistics on the number of aliens who enter illegally each year, it has been estimated that the total volume of immigration has been almost as great as it was before the adoption of a restrictive policy. The Justice Department, which has charge of immigration, has been active at times in checking up on aliens and in ordering the deportation of those who entered illegally. However, it is difficult to determine whether a person is illegally within the country unless he happens to run afold of the law. The suggestion was made, therefore, that all inhabitants shoidd be registered and fingerprinted. This idea gained popularity with some because of the propaganda that aliens were the source of "radical" and un-American activities. Others, who were familiar with the increasing problem of crime, saw merit in the suggestion. However, the suggestion was opposed by those who thought that governmental interference with the liberty of the individual need not go to the extent of card-indexing his movements. The federal government took no action till 1940, when Congress provided for the registration of all aliens in die country. Words and Phrases Americanization, assimilation, contract labor, gentlemen's agreement, literacy test, national origins plan, "new" immigration, "'Nordic supremacy," "old" immigration, restrictive immigration, selective immigration Questions for Understanding the Text 1.What are the chief causes of the movement of peoples? 2.What economic interests opposed and supported unrestricted immigration? 3.What is meant by the theory' of "Nordic supremacy"? 4.What has been the attitude of the United States toward Asiatic immigration? Assuming that you had been a member of Congress in 1924, prepare a brief speech explaining your vote on the question of abrogating the government set up a one-and-a-hali billion dollar revolving fund. Additional money was set aside for the improvement of farms. "Socialized medicine.'' In messages to Congress in January and April, 1949, President Truman urged a nationwide program of health insurance. Bills were introduced into Congress, but not passed, which provided payments to students in the fields of medicine, dentistry, nursing, and hospital administration, and funds for national research institutes and prepaid personal health services. These proposed bills, implementing the President's broad suggestions, provoked a storm of criticism. The American Medical Association carried on an extensive campaign against "socialized medicine" (pages 619-620) and in favor of voluntary health insurance programs, such as the Blue Cross Hospitalization Plan. The association supported proposals to appropriate federal funds for research and the extension of public health facilities. Congress did authorize the expenditure of a hundred and fifty million dollars a year for five years for the construction of public and nonprofit hospitals. [The increasing cost of health service lends importance to the efforts of labor unions to insert health and hospitalization clauses in their contracts with employers (page 806).] Displaced persons. Congress delayed until 1948 the enactment of a law which would permit the entry into the United States of some of the hundreds of thousands of persons displaced by the war. The law of 1948 permitted the entry of 205,000 displaced persons over a twoyear period. Mr. Truman and many others, including both Democrats and Republicans, were dissatisfied because they felt that some of the restrictions in the law discriminated against Roman Catholics and Jews. These restrictions were lifted in 1950 and the number of displaced persons permitted entry was increased to 345,000. The Presidential Succession Act. 