Attracted by the religious freedom of the Pennsylvania colony, many settlers came from Europe. In Germany, the Protestants were being persecuted for their religion, and many of them fled to the New World and settled in Pennsylvania, where they became known as "the Pennsylvania Dutch." The Irish Protestants, too, left their country in large numbers and came to Penn's colony. Both the Germans and Irish were hardworking and thrifty, and the colony quickly grew and prospered. Benjamin Franklin, one of the greatest men in the English colonies, was a citizen of Pennsylvania. He was born in Boston, but as a young boy he journeyed to Philadelphia and found work as a printer. Through his industry and his cleverness, he at last obtained a printing shop of his own. Here he composed and printed two very fine publications. One was the Pennsylvania Gazette, the best and wittiest newspaper in the colonies. The other was Poor Richard's Almanack, a yearly booklet containing much valuable information and many wise sayings. "A penny saved is a penny earned"; "A rolling stone gathers no moss"; "Early to bed and early to rise makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise." These are three of the wise sayings which Franklin published in his Almanack. Soon a report of the affair was made to Congress. To avoid complications, the names of the three French representatives were removed from the report, and the letters X, Y, and Z were put in their places. For this reason, the conference in France became known as the "X Y Z Affair." Throughout America swept a wave of indignation, and the motto "Millions for defense! Not one cent for tribute!" was echoed in every corner of the land. American warships put out to sea, and captured two French frigates so easily that the French began to feel that a war with the United States might not be desirable after all. Accordingly, Napoleon Bonaparte, who had now come into power in France, made peace with the United States. The Alien and Sedition Laws. The situation now arose which led to the Federalists losing the Presidency. The editors of many newspapers throughout the United States favored either Great Britain or France in their struggle, and strong articles began to appear in the papers criticizing the government in no uncertain terms for the failure of the United States to enter into the war. The Federalist leaders were also irritated by the large number of foreign immigrants who were entering the country, becoming citizens, and giving their support to that great champion of the common people, Thomas Jefferson. To stop the criticism of their policies and to check Jefferson's growing army of followers, Congress, with the approval of President John Adams, passed in 1798 a series of laws known as the Alien and Sedition Laws. The first of these, the Alien Law, gave the President the power to send from the country any foreigner whose influence he felt was dangerous. It also increased the length of time which must pass before a foreign immigrant could become an American citizen and could vote. The Sedition Law provided heavy fines and prison sentences for those who published false or unfriendly criticisms of the government. "A house divided against itself cannot stand" said Abraham Lincoln, one of our greatest Presidents. And the United States, little by little, became such a house. A bitter quarrel flared between the North and South. Despite the ingenious work of the nation's great peacemakers, the rift between the rival sections grew wider and wider, and at last war threatened. The end of the Union seemed very near. States' Rights-Have the states the right to judge for themselves whether or not a law passed by Congress is constitutional? Can they refuse to obey a law they decide is unconstitutional? Or, has the central government the right to enforce obedience? These questions led to bitter quarrels in the early years of American history. Way back in the early days of the first Federalist Presidents, there were the broad constructionists who wanted the central government to become more powerful, and the strict constructionists who objected to taking power from the states. In 1798 the states of Virginia and Kentucky, in attempting to nullify the Alien and Sedition Laws within their borders, nearly brought. A hundred years ago the western part of our country was an uncivilized region, with inhabitants. It seemed unlikely that any large number of settlers would ever make their homes there, or that the western plains would ever be good for anything but grazing lands for buffalo. How did our government tempt settlers to make 1 their homes in so unpromising a region? What did the early pioneers find that laid the basis for much of our national wealth? The Louisiana Purchase, the Oregon Treaty, and the Mexican War gave to the United States a great area of land west of the Mississippi which was very thinly populated. Immigration into this land of prairies, mountains, and forests was slow, and the Pacific coast continued to be separated from the Eastern states by a wide and almost uninhabited belt. For the good of the country it was evident that this region should be occupied as soon as possible. Immigration-----One of the greatest effects of Western migration was the increase of immigration. Soon after the War Between the States, thousands of Irish and Germans and also large numbers of English, Welsh, Scotch, Swiss, and Scandinavians flowed into the United States. They were attracted by the Homestead Act and the great opportunity for wealth offered by the rich Western lands. Though some remained in the Eastern cities, most of these people moved on into the West and established prosperous communities. A large part of the Western population was made up of these nationalities. Then, too, across the Pacific came immigrants from China to California. For a time these were protected by the Burlingame Treaty of 18C8, which promised that the United States government would protect Chinese immigrants and would grant them the privileges given to immigrants of other countries. At first the Chinese were very useful in the building of railroads and other tasks. But they came in such numbers and were willing to work for such low wages that the white workmen of California were alarmed, fearing that the abundance of cheap Chinese labor would lead to lower wages for all workmen and would result in a lower standard of living. In 1882, therefore, Congress passed a law forbidding any more Chinese to settle in this country. Effects of Western Migration---What were the effects of the development of the West? It led to the growth of several important industries beyond the Mississippi— agriculture, cattle raising, mining, and lumbering. In the East, it led to the development of the great iron and steel industry, fed by the mines which had been discovered in the West. It improved agriculture in all sections of the country by stimulating the development of improved farming machinery. The development of the West also caused the extension of railroads throughout the wheat, lumber, and cattle districts to carry products to the Eastern markets. The Western products gave America many more commodities to trade with foreign nations, and led to a great international trade. Immigration, too, was stimulated and the population of the country increased enormously. Finally, the national government, which had in a large measure been responsible for the development of the West through the passing of the Homestead Act, was influenced by Western development. In the West, all men were equal, and titles and family names counted for little. All men were, therefore, granted the vote, and the influence of such "universal manhood suffrage" spread. The first companies to take advantage of the government's help were the Central Pacific and Union Pacific Railroad Companies. The Central Pacific undertook to build a line from Sacramento eastward across the Sierra Nevada Mountains. The Union Pacific was to build westward from Omaha, Nebraska, and meet the rails from the West. The task was enormous. Between the eastern aiffl western ends of the line stretched nearly 1900 miles of desert and mountain area inhabited only by wild animals and hostile Indians. Construction was started in 1864 by the Central Pacific. The following year, work was begun from the eastern end. This was undertaken by a company called the Credit Mobilier, controlled by the Union Pacific. West from Omaha the rails were laid by white workmen, mostly Irish and German immigrants. The road east from the Pacific was laid by Chinese immigrants under the direction of Leland Stanford, president of the Central Pacific. As week after week went by and the lines of rails crawled mile by mile farther out onto the prairies, a great rivalry sprang up in the two camps. The Chinese were determined that their line should extend east of Salt Lake City before they met the rails from the east, and the Irish and Germans were no less determined that the rails should join west of Salt Lake City. As a matter of fact, the two lines came together at Ogden, Utah, and the workers from the east had won by a very few miles. The ceremony of joining the rail ends by means of a golden spike was held in May, 1869, amidst the cheers of workmen and soldiers. As a railroad already ran from Omaha to the chief cities of the East, East and West were now connected. Faced by so many obstacles it is doubtful if this first Pacific railway line could ever have been completed had not the government helped out in many ways. Needed land was granted freely; money was loaned; government influence was used to get the necessary laborers. Had later generations not followed these early pioneers across the ocean, our country would not have become great, and prosperous. Hut immigration, which for a time nourished and strengthened the United States, at last began to threaten the very country it had created. Many citizens cried "America for Americans," and demanded that no more people from other lands be admitted. Others insisted that unrestricted immigration should continue. Do you know what our government has done to solve this problem? Slight Early Immigration-In the early years of its existence, the little nation of the United States did not offer a great appeal to Europeans. The uncut forests, the savage Indians, and the many other hardships of life in the New World served to keep down the number of foreign immigrants. Ocean travel, moreover, was dangerous, for the ships of that day were small and unseaworthy, and most people were unwilling to risk their lives and the lives of their families. After Waterloo, the great armies were no longer needed. Before 1815, the nations of that continent were almos constantly at war, and every able-bodied man could find employment in one of the rival armies. So the new little nation across the sea was allowed for many years to work out its destinies by itself, and most of the great men of the early years of American independence came from the original stock of the colonists. When the French armies of Napoleon Bonaparte were defeated at Waterloo in 1815, the long series of wars in Europe came to an end, and the great armies were no longer needed. Thousands of men were thrown out of work, and many of these now turned their eyes to the opportunities which were developing in America. Slowly at first, the tide of immigration began to flow across the Atlantic, growing year by year in the number of foreign-born people who came to our shores. The First Great Increase---Then, between 1840 and 1850, immigration from Europe suddenly increased. There were many reasons for this. Conditions in Great Britain had become bad, and thousands of workmen were without employment. These crossed the ocean in large numbers, just as their forefathers had during the preceding century. In 1846 many Irish came. The potato crop, upon which most of the inhabitants of Ireland depended for their food, failed, and a serious famine swept across the land. Faced with starvation, nearly a million of the inhabitants left their overcrowded little island and came to the beckoning shores of the United States. Many came from Germany, too. The people of that country had risen against their ruler and had attempted to establish a new government. The revolution, however, was broken up, and in 1848 hundreds of those who had taken part in it were imprisoned or executed. The common people were seized with terror, and thousands of them left their homes and came to America. It is interesting to notice that in the main the immigrants from each country chase a section of our country' and settled there. The British and the Irish stayed in the cities and towns along the northeastern coast, mainly in Boston and New York. The Germans traveled into the West and established themselves in Wisconsin, Michigan, and Illinois, where they soon built up prosperous farming regions. The Norwegians, Swedes, and Danes, who also began to come at this time, went even farther to the west and settled in the wheat belt in Minnesota and the Dakotas. When gold was discovered in California many people from each of these sections joined in the search for riches and traveled by sea or by land to the Pacific coast. Only the South received comparatively few of the great horde of immigrants. This was partly because field labor was considered unfit for white men in that section and there were few other jobs to be had, and partly because the Southern white men were opposed to the employment of foreign laborers, as they feared that it might make the slaves discontented and cause a Negro uprising. Immigration from Europe had a great effect on the outcome of the War Between the States. The sympathies of the majority of immigrants lay with the free North rather than with the slave-holding South, for many had crossed the ocean in search of freedom for themselves, and naturally favored any cause which promoted freedom. Immigrants also strengthened the North and added to its wealth by working in the factories and so helping to develop Northern industries. The flow of immigration to the North rather than to the South gave the Union a much greater man power than it gave the Confederacy. Then, too, such important leaders as Admiral Farragut and General Sheridan were products of immigration, for both of these leaders were sons of men who had been born in Europe. So one early advantage of immigration was the important part it played in the preserving of the Union. Employment of Immigrants------Unlike Europe, the United States did not find itself flooded with unemployed men when the great armies were disbanded at the close of the War Between the States. There was plenty of work for everyone. The thousands of square miles of prairie land in the West needed to be occupied and made productive. There were railroads and telegraph lines to be built. Hundreds of thousands of workmen were needed to work in the coal mines, the steel mills, the manufacturing plants, and the many other industries that were rapidly becoming important throughout the land. In the South, the rundown plantations had to be repaired and again put into operation, or else divided up into smaller farms. America was a real land of opportunity for any man. While the Irish, Germans, and Scandinavians were crossing the Atlantic to America, members of still another people were crossing the Pacific. These were the Chinese, who began to come in large numbers in the ten years preceding the war. At first they were received with open arms, for they were willing to do much of the heavy work for very small wages. As their numbers increased, however, they began to deprive the white workers of their positions, and at last a strong sentiment grew up to limit the number of Chinese admitted to our country. This feeling grew stronger and stronger, especially in California and the Far West. In 1882 the demand to keep out the Chinese was met by the United States government. In that year Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act, which forbade any more Chinese laborers to enter the country. This replaced the Burlingame Treaty of 1868, and at once the great tide of Chinese immigration decreased to almost nothing. Although a few Chinese have been smuggled into the country from time to time, no considerable number has come since 1882. At the same time that Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act, it also passed another important law regarding immigration. This provided that foreign criminals, anarchists, paupers, and people afflicted with contagious diseases should be excluded from the country. This important federal immigration act marked a distinct step forward in providing for a better and higher type of immigrant from Europe. In the building of the first transcontinental railroad to link the East with the West, immigrants played a large part. The laborers who built the western end of the line were mostly Chinese, and those working on the eastern end were mostly Irish and Germans. In this way did people from across the sea help open our continent, and link both the coasts together. Immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe. — Between 1880 and 1890 there occurred a great change in the type of immigrants who were coming to America. Before this time they had been mostly inhabitants of northern and western Europe, people who were much like the descendants of the original colonists and who quickly fitted into American life and accepted American laws and customs. After 1880, an ever-increasing number of immigrants came from the south and east of Europe, from Italy, Russia, Poland, and the Balkan States, between the Black and Adriatic Seas. These people found employment in the mines, in the steel mills of the East, and in the rapidly multiplying textile factories. For a while they filled a long-felt want, and their coming was encouraged. As the years went by, the percentage of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe became larger, and in 1890 it was discovered that they made up about 90% of all foreigners entering the country. In the ten years between 1880 and 1890 nearly twice as many immigrants entered the country as during any previous ten years. It was soon seen that this great increase in numbers had created many serious problems. These latest European immigrants were largely drawn from the lowest classes of laborers in their countries, and they were far less intelligent than the immigrants of the previous years had been. They had, moreover, lower standards of living and were willing to work at lower wages than American workmen. As in the case of the Chinese, this soon created a sentiment against them. The "Gentlemen's Agreement." — After the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905, large numbers of Japanese workmen began coming to our shores in search of work, which was no longer available at home. The people of the Pacific states objected violently and began an antiJapanese campaign which reached a climax in 1906 when the state of California barred Japanese children from the schools attended by American children. The Japanese government regarded this as an insult and as a violation of rights guaranteed to Japan by treaty with the United States. There was even some talk of war. President Theodore Roosevelt, however, managed to restore good feeling in 1907 by promoting what was known as the "Gentlemen's Agreement." By the terms of this arrangement, Japanese children in the United States would be admitted to the public schools on equal terms with other children, and Japanese workmen would not be excluded from our country, provided Japan would agree to permit none of them to come here. This odd sounding arrangement permitted the Japanese to "save face" in what would otherwise have been an embarrassing situation. It solved a knotty international problem. Dangers of Unregulated Immigration. — The tremendous increase in immigration in the closing years of the nineteenth century and the opening years of the twentieth century alarmed many Americans, who were quick to point out some of the dangers which might result from the unlimited and unregulated admission of foreigners into the United States. These opponents of immigration called attention to the fact that certain foreign groups have a tendency to live by themselves, speaking their own languages at home and keeping up their foreign customs. In time, this might easily lead to the building up of great foreign sections in our principal cities. In such foreign sections, the people would have only a limited opportunity to become familiar with American standards and ideals. These sections would also furnish good hunting grounds for unscrupulous politicians in search of votes which could easily be controlled. It was pointed out that many of our most notorious criminals were products of the foreign sections of our largest cities. Some people, adopting the motto "America for Americans," demanded that all immigration be discontinued. Others suggested that it be limited and regulated. Immigration Laws----In order to regulate immigration, our government has adopted a progressively strict series of immigration laws. In 1917 Congress added to the rather mild restrictions of the law of 1882 by passing a law excluding from the United States all persons who cannot read their own language. Although the President, Woodrow Wilson, vetoed this law, Congress passed it over his veto by obtaining the necessary two-thirds vote. In 1921 another law was passed to guard against a great tide of immigration, such as had followed the War Between the States. This law provided that no one country could send to the United States within one year more than 3% as many foreign-born people of that nationality as had been living here in 1910. In 1924 this law was amended, and placed an ever greater restriction by reducing the percentage to 2% of the number living here in 1890. This law also excluded from the United States Japanese workmen, whose admittance was opposed for the same reason that the Chinese had been. Japan protested this violation of the "Gentlemen's Agreement," but the bill was passed. The immigration amendment of 1924 further provided that after July 1, 1927, all nations should be allowed to send at least 100 immigrants apiece each year, the total from all nations not to exceed 150,000. Each nation was to be allowed a definite percentage of the 150,000 yearly total. It was 1929, however, before this went into effect. Though these restrictions have resulted in a great reduction in recorded immigration, they have led to the smuggling in of thousands of illegal immigrants. Recent Immigration---In 1933, when the German government under Adolf Hitler began to persecute Jews and people who did not believe in the government's activities, our country began to receive political refugees, fleeing from Germany. Among these were Albert Einstein, a famous scientist; Thomas Mann, a leading German writer; Heinrich Bruening, a well-known statesman and teacher; and many other desirable people. Later, during and following World War II, a problem was presented by the large numbers of "displaced persons," or "D.P.'s," who had been driven from their homes by changes in governments and boundaries,'and who dared not return. All of the democratic countries, including our own, gave refuge to many of these "D.P.'s." Many different opinions are held by Americans concerning immigration. Some approve of our present laws but feel that all unnaturalized immigrants who intend to make their homes here should become American citizens. Others believe that America should be saved for Americans and that no immigrants at all should be allowed to land. Some think that too many immigrants are incapable of understanding and adopting the American way of life, while others maintain that no people are better fitted to appreciate and use our freedom wisely than those who have experienced the loss of their own freedom. In normal times, most fair-minded Americans favor the admission of as many immigrants each year as American schools and American living conditions can educate and support. Enormous immigration had swelled the population with ignorant Europeans of the lowest social classes, and over such people Tweed and his men gained easy control. Wholesale bribes bought whole sections of the city's vote, which was easily directed due to the old method of voting on ballots, the form of which made it possible for every man's vote to be seen by those about him. A gang gained control of the city government. It is interesting to note the manner in which Tweed and his henchmen worked. Contracts for city work were let to companies who would pay those in power the biggest bribes. Claims against the city for various causes were doubled in amount, and half of each one kept by Tweed and his friends. Thus, for example, if a man brought a claim against the city for $10,000, the politicians would change the figures to make it $20,000 and would keep $10,000 for themselves. Decent and self-respecting citizens were disgusted, but for the time being they were helpless. The dawn of the twentieth century found the United States government faced with many perplexing problems. How could more agricultural land be secured? How could the country's natural resources be preserved? What could be done to settle the bitter disputes between labor and capital? How could the weaknesses in the nation's financial system be corrected? What should be done about the immigration question? The better we understand these great problems, the more intelligent citizens we shall be. The Occupation of the Western Lands. — All during the nineteenth century one of the great problems facing the United States was populating the broad Western lands. It was for this purpose that the Homestead Act was passed, tree claims were created, and immigration was encouraged. But, in spite of all legislation, it seemed for many years that the task was hopeless. Almost overnight, the situation changed. So great was the growth of population in the United States, and so constant was the flow of western migration, that in 1890 the government officially declared that the frontier had ceased to exist. Early in the twentieth century divided by the Newlands Act into the Department of Commerce and the Department of Labor. By this same Act, the Secretary of Labor was authorized "to act as mediator and to appoint commissioners of conciliation in labor disputes whenever in his judgment the interests of industrial peace may require it to be done." In addition to the settlement of labor problems and the promotion of arbitration between labor and capital, the Department of Labor has charge of immigration and naturalization. Roosevelt decided that the time had come for the government to take a hand. In 1935, during the administration of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, a federal law was passed which gave the advantage to the cause of labor rather than that of capital. This was the Wagner-Connery Labor Relations Act. The Wagner-Connery Act guaranteed American laborers the right to join labor organizations of their own choosing and to bargain as a group with their employers.- It forbade employers to dismiss workers because of union activities, to form company unions, to influence their employees by addressing them on union matters, to refuse to engage in collective bargaining with the elected union representatives of their workers, or to force their employees to sign contracts in which they promised that they would not join unions. The enforcement of the law and the supervision of working conditions were placed in the hands of a government body known as the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB). The Reduction of Immigration. — The twentieth century brought to a climax the great problem of immigration which had been assuming larger and larger proportions since the War Between the States. The flood of people from southern Europe which poured into the United States during the first seventeen years of the new century^had many unpleasant results. The foreign colonies in the big cities grew very large. Here little English was spoken, and here political bosses easily controlled a great and ignorant vote. Dirt, crime, and poor living conditions became prevalent. American wages were threatened by workmen whose low standard of living would allow them to work for much less pay. These evil results have led to increasingly strict limitation of immigration. The Immigration Laws of 1917, 1921, and 1924 greatly limited the number of foreigners allowed to enter the United States, and provided a standard which insured the elimination of criminals, mental defectives, and various other unwanted classes. It is felt that such a limitation will in time break down the foreign colonies and allow those who are legally admitted to become Americanized. Schools, factories, and city governments have united in a great campaign for the Americanization of our foreign immigrants. Political Reform----The political reform that began with President Hayes' attack on the Spoils System was continued increasingly in the twentieth century. Because selfish business interests or political bosses sometimes gained control of state legislatures, a system of initiative and referendum was established in many states. The initiative is a provision to take care of legislatures which will not pass measures wanted by the majority of the people. It allows a small group of voters to place before the citizens of the state for a popular vote any bill which they want passed. 