The history of the American nation begins with the settling of the thirteen original colonies. Many people came to these colonies. Some sought religious or political freedom; others were looking for a chance to earn a better living than they could earn in the old world. The new world was a land of opportunity, but only those with courageous hearts were willing to face its hardships. The settlers had to tame the wilderness and protect themselves from the Indians. They had to produce nearly everything they used. Men, women, and children worked hard. There was little time for play. The voters took a lively interest in their government. They expected the legislature to protect their rights and keep a watchful eye on the governors sent from England by the king. The colonial legislatures quarreled continually with the governors and often refused to pay them. As the colonies grew stronger they saw no need to depend on England for any kind of help. They wanted to make their own laws without interference from Parliament. They finally took up arms to resist British control. The struggle for independence was long and hard, but victory was finally won. A new nation —the United States of America — was born. The American Story confined in English prisons. However, not many debtors ever went there. The rapid peopling of the English colonies. Unlike the French colonies to the north and the Spanish colonies to the south, the English colonies along the Atlantic seaboard grew rapidly. Their growth was due partly to a high birth rate and partly to immigration. Why large families were usual. During the colonial period and for a long time afterward, American families were large. Families of eight, ten, or twelve children were rather common. Parents could support numerous children because land was cheap, and a family could build its own house from lumber cut on its own land, grow its own food, and make its own clothing and nearly everything else it required. Children helped in the hard work of the home and the farm, and the more numerous they were, the more likely the family was to get ahead. The custom of early marriage also favored large families. It is true that many children died in infancy, but even so, the average family had more children than does the average family today. Why immigrants came. Some people came from Europe to America seeking religious and political freedom. Among those coming to escape persecution for their religion were Pilgrims, Puritans, Quakers, Huguenots (French Protestants), Catholics, and Jews. Some individuals came as officials, ministers of the gospel, or missionaries to the Indians, and others came for love of adventure. Far larger numbers came in the hope of making a better living. The custom of giving the newcomer fifty or one hundred acres of land attracted the poor working people and peasants of Europe. Here they could become independent; there it was practically impossible to reach that goal. Obstacles to immigration. Immigration to America was held back by the cost and dangers of the journey. At best the trip from Europe to America required six to eight weeks; if storms drove the ship from its course, the voyage might last three months. There were no regular lines of ships, no regular dates of sailing, and no laws to regulate fares or protect the safety and health of the passengers. The traveler, after making a bargain with the sea captain for passage, had to wait in port, possibly for several weeks, until the ship was ready to sail and winds were favorable. Meanwhile he was using up his money and the store of food he had bought for the journey. Before 1700 nearly all the settlers in the English colonies came from England. After 1700 many came from other countries. In this period the largest group of immigrants, next to the English, were the Scotch-Irish. They were among the best frontiersmen and Indian fighters in America and did more than any other group to push the frontier westward over the Appalachians. In addition to the Scotch-Irish there came to America a large number of Germans, many Scotch, "Welsh, Irish, Dutch, and French Huguenots (Protestants), some Jews, and at least a few people from nearly every country in Europe. By the time of the Revolution these non-English settlers made up more than one third of the total population of the colonies. LEONARD CALVERT, brother of Lord Baltimore and first governor of Maryland. Maryland was founded in 1634. Both Catholics and Protestants were welcomed. In this painting, made by C. V. Turner in 02, Governor Calvert is buying land from the Indians. For several years the colonists had friendly relations with the Indians, but later the colony suffered severely from Indian wars. Contagious diseases frequently broke out. It was not unusual for half or more of those on board to die from small-pox, measles, or dysentery. Young children, weak mothers, and the sick were almost sure to perish under the hardships of a long voyage. Another obstacle to immigration was religious intolerance. Most of the colonies tried to shut out Roman Catholics, Jews, and Quakers. Only in Pennsylvania and Rhode Island were newcomers of every religious faith made welcome. Indentured servants. Many farmers and plantation owners were so eager for laborers that they were ready to pay the cost of the voyage for immigrants who would work for them a period of years. In exchange for passage to America adults had to serve from three to seven years; children, until they came of age. The contract between master and servant was known as an indenture; this gives us the phrase "indentured servant." The terms of the indenture were harsh, and the servant little better off than a slave. But when the time of servitude was up, he was free. WILLIAM PENN was the son of a wealthy English admiral. This portrait by an unknown painter shows him at the age of twenty-two, dressed as a knight. Soon after, he joined the Quakers and became a missionary and reformer. Six times he was thrown into prison for his beliefs. Later he founded a colony in America where Quakers and all others could enjoy religious and political freedom. The constitution he drew up for his colony was so liberal that Thomas Jefferson called him "the greatest lawgiver the world has produced." (Courtesy of Historical Society of Pennsylvania. Photo by Philip B. Wallace) He usually received a suit of clothes from his master. Sometimes he received a small grant of land and managed to become an independent farmer. More often he became a day laborer. Many indentured servants came here of their own free will, gladly binding themselves to service for a term of years in order to reach America. Entire families often came in this way, each one becoming an indentured servant. Other individuals, both adults and children, were carried here against their will and forced to become servants. The streets of London and other seaports in the British Isles were full of kidnapers. They made a business of hustling their victims into ships bound for America. Upon arrival here the captain delivered his unwilling passengers to whoever would pay him most. Debtors and criminals. The prisons of England also furnished immigrants to the New World. To avoid the expense of keeping offenders in prison, the authorities frequently sentenced them to be transported to America. Some were in prison because of their religious or to political ideas, many because of debts, others because of very minor offenses, a few because of serious crimes. Those sent to America had to serve masters in the colonies for a term of years, usually seven, and were then given their liberty7. Some fifty thousand of them were brought to the American colonies. Negro slaves. Probably one half of all immigrants to the English colonies in America were either indentured servants or Negro slaves. Although Negro slaves were first brought here in 1619, they were less numerous than white indentured servants until after 1700. The colonists from Maryland southward gradually came to depend upon slave labor, especially on the large farms or plantations, as they came to be called. Throughout the iyoo's the importation of slaves increased rapidly. Negro slavery existed in all of the colonies, but three fourths of the slaves were in Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia. Cheap Negro labor drove white labor from the plantations. As indentured servants gained their freedom, and as new immigrants arrived, they avoided the plantation regions. They settled in the northern colonies, or else pushed beyond the plantation area in the South, to make homes on the frontier. The expansion of the frontier. The coastal plain of eastern North America offered colonists wonderful natural riches. Here were fine harbors, navigable rivers, fertile valleys, abundant wild game, untouched forests, and unexcelled fisheries. By the time the American Revolution began, two and a quarter million people occupied the land cast of the Appalachian Mountains, where now some fifty-five million live. Most of the settlers still lived close to the great bays and navigable streams. In only a few places had settlers moved beyond the first highlands. Yet free land and plentiful wild game beckoned the adventurous westward. They were pushing the frontier back. The westward movement from the Atlantic coast, across the Alleghenies, the Mississippi Valley, the Great Plains, the Rockies, to the Pacific, is the central theme of American history — "the most American thing in all America." Between the first census in 1790 and that of 1830 the population of the United States grew from about four million to nearly thirteen million. In 1790 less than two hundred thousand American settlers lived west of the Appalachians, but by 1830 about one third of the entire population lived there. By ■ 8 jo half the population lived west of these mountains. Where the settlers came from. Nearly all of the early settlers in the West were native-born Americans. Some had been poor wage earners and day laborers back East, but most of them were farmers who went west in search of richer land. A great many were from Virginia and the Carolinas. After 1840 the stream of settlers included numerous immigrants from Europe, particularly from Germany. Why the factory system developed in the North. The factory system grew much faster in the North than in the other sections. Perhaps the most important reason was that Northerners had money to invest in factories — money they had made in commerce and banking. Other advantages of the North were abundant water power, a population with much mechanical and business ability, and a labor supply of farm girls and of immigrants from Europe. The first center of the factory system was New England, especially Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. From this section the system spread to eastern New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. Later it developed in Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. The growth of immigration. The early factory owners found their labor supply on near-by farms. The farmers' daughters were glad of a chance to earn money, and they were used to long hours and hard work. As more factories opened, the supply of American-born Nationalism and Sectionalism. At this period all shoe manufacturing was carried on by hand in little shops like this one. (Courtesy of Essex Institute, Salem) women and children was not enough. Factory owners then began to encourage immigration from Europe. From 1790 to 1825 the number of immigrants was only about eight thousand a year. These easily found work. By 1830 the number of immigrants reached fifty thousand a year, and by 1840, one hundred thousand. Then famine in Ireland and a revolution in Germany sent a flood of newcomers to our shores. By 1850 three hundred thousand foreigners were coming each year. Most of them entered Northern ports and stayed in the North. They were usually uneducated and very poor. They had spent everything they had to get here, and they had to take any job they could find, regardless of poor wages and working conditions. New social problems due to industrialization. The factory system brought a number of new social problems. 1.The workman's loss of independence. As factories gradually took the place of small shops, the life of the workman was changed in many ways. The skills he had learned through years of experience Were not needed in the factory; even a child could soon learn to run most machines. The workman could no longer look forward to being his own boss; he could not start a factory of his own, for machinery. The earliest textile mills in the United States were built in New England. The industry soon spread to near-by states. He was dependent for a living on the man or the company owning the factory. The native-born American hated the thought of working for somebody else. He would prefer to go to the frontier and farm. Many did go west rather than work in a factory. Those who took factory jobs did not expect to stay in the factory long. But many factory workers were unable in a whole lifetime to save enough money to go West with their families and start a farm. 2.Long hours. The hours of work in factories and shops followed the custom of the farm, where everyone labored from sunrise to sunset. The usual workday in a New England mill began at five o'clock in the morning if light permitted. A half hour was allowed for breakfast at eight and for lunch at noon. The day ended when it became too dark to see. Such hours taxed the strength of women and children to the limit. 4.Child labor. Since a man could not support a family on his wages, his wife and children went to work too. Women and children had always worked, and the public did not realize that tending a machine all day in a factory was more tiring and unhealthful than working in the house and on the farm. In one Rhode Island mill in 1801 an observer tells us that he found a hundred girls from six to twelve years of age. They earned from 12 to 25 cents a day and had a "pale, dejected look." At that time most factory workers were children. Nothing much was done about the child-labor problem until late in the century. j. Industrial accidents. The factory, or industrial, system, as it came to be called, brought new dangers to the worker. Machines then did not have "foolproof" safety devices; in fact they were built without much thought of safety. Artificial lighting was hardly ever used in factories and when used was very poor. Accidents were frequent, particularly to children, who are naturally careless. Some employers gave money to their injured workers, but others did not. Under the common law (see page 49) the employer did not have to pay an injured worker if the worker or any of his fellows was in any way to blame for the accident. 6. Unhealthy living and working conditions. The factory system led to an increase in sickness. Sanitary arrangements were crude, and large numbers of workers in one building favored the spread of infections. Besides, the manufacturing process often created dust, steam, or fumes, causing a high rate of tuberculosis among factory workers. Other health hazards were due to the rapid growth of the factory towns. Few of them had water or sewer systems. Most factory workers crowded into cheap, unhealthy tenements. Poor housing, poor food, and long hours of work under unsatisfactory conditions resulted in a high sickness and death rate, and at this period the city was much less healthful than the country. IMMIGRANTS arriving in the United States from Europe. American factory owners and mineowners were eager for additional workers; so the immigrants usually had no difficulty in finding jobs. 7. The labor movement develops. Until 1825 it was a crime in England for workers to organize and strike for higher wages. American judges followed the English practice and put many workers in jail for attempting to strike. There were a few workmen's societies in America, but they were powerless. After 1825 the labor movement finally got a start. Many trade unions were organized. In 1828 the trade unions of Philadelphia combined in a federation. Similar federations were soon formed in other cities. By 1834 a national federation of trade unions was established. Then, as now, labor unions struggled to improve wages, hours, and working conditions. In these matters they at first had little success. Strikes usually failed, for there were many immigrants who could fill the strikers' jobs. Besides, public opinion did not approve of strikes and in most cases took the side of the employer. Since strikes rarely succeeded, the labor organizations of this period put most of their efforts into getting better laws. Workingmen win the right to vote. Most of the new Western states permitted all white men to vote. The older states limited the vote to property owners. This caused such discontent among wage earners that in the 1820's and 1830's all the states except Rhode Island decided to let any white man vote, whether or not he owned property. From now on political parties had to pay more attention to the needs of the working class. The winning of the right of all men to vote was a big forward step for American labor. Labor organizations now worked to elect men friendly to labor. In 1828, for example, they joined with the farmers to elect Andrew Jackson President. They also asked for laws to improve the position of working men and women and to give them greater opportunity. They called for free public schools, equal rights for women, free homesteads for Western settlers, abolition of imprisonment for debt, abolition of slavery, laws establishing a ten-hour day, and other reforms. Labor wins some of its demands. The labor movement won some solid gains. The effort to obtain free public schools was successful.So was the effort to end compulsory militia service. In 1832 the officers of the Bank asked Congress to renew the chapter. It was the year of the presidential election, and they thought th' i President would not veto a bank bill for fear of angering the North eastern commercial states, whose votes he needed for re-election. They did not understand Jackson. A bill to recharter the Bank passed both houses of Congress. The President vetoed it in a ringing message declaring that the Bank was meddling in politics. The election of 1832. The presidential campaign was fought on the question of chartering the Bank. Henry Clay, nominated by the National Republicans, supported the Bank. Jackson, renominated by the Democrats, thundered against the Bank and the "money power." Jackson won a sweeping victory. Jackson removes deposits from the Bank. The Bank had fought Jackson's re-election, and he took revenge. Although its charter would not run out until 1836, he ordered the gradual removal of government money. The Bank was crippled. Jackson's victory over it seemed to most people another proof that "Old Hickory" was on the side of the common man and against wealth and privilege. A period of speculation. The early and middle 1830's were years of unusual prosperity. Many people were moving west. Immigrants by the hundreds of thousands came here from Europe. The factory system grew rapidly. In the East railroad building went forward. Roads and canals were being built in all parts of the country. Sales of government land increased by leaps and bounds, and by 1836 a large surplus was in the treasury. time the South was producing one fifth of the nation's pig iron. The South also had the largest tobacco factory in the world at Durham North Carolina. In the 1890's hundreds of new textile and knitting mills were built. Most Southerners still lived by farming, but the South was becoming an important manufacturing region. Industrial expansion in the North. Instead of ruin the War between North and South brought prosperity to the North. Manufacturing, transportation, and commerce expanded as never before. The use of machinery increased greatly. Almost overnight little businesses grew into big ones. Before the war ended, our modern industrial system had taken shape. Perhaps the greatest effects of the war were seen in the field of transportation. The movement of hundreds of thousands of troops and the supplies they needed forced rapid improvements in railroading. Small lines were joined to large ones. Connecting links, double tracks, and bridges were built. War needs led Congress in 1862 to vote federal aid for building a transcontinental railroad; however, construction had barely begun when the war ended. The closing of the Mississippi at the start of the war meant that the products of Western farms had to go east instead of south and had to move by railroad instead of by river boat. Chicago suddenly became the great Western shipping center. The supplying of a great army forced many industries to expand. To make cloth for uniforms, scores of new woolen mills were built. The manufacture of ready-to-wear clothing grew into a huge business during the war — a growth made possible by the sewing machine, invented in 1846. Army orders for millions of shoes caused the shoe business to leave the one-man shop for the factory. Great packing houses were built to fill army orders for meat, with the result that after the war thousands of local slaughterhouses had to close. In spite of fewer men on the farms, farm production increased, for the farmers turned to the use of the reaper and the mowing machine. 1 l'e farm machinery industry grew enormously but could not keep up with the demand. The need for iron and steel to make machinery, cannon, rails, locomotives, and steamships led to the opening of scores of iron and steel mills. The steel manufacturing district around Pittsburgh got its start during the war. Expansion continues after the 'war. For several years after the war, industry continued its rapid growth. Thousands of businessmen who had made fortunes from army contracts invested their wealth in new factories. Hundreds of thousands of immigrants poured into the country each year, supplying plenty of workers, who also became customers for manufactured products. The West was filling up, creating a demand for farm machinery, manufactures of all kinds, and more railroads. The five years after Appomattox saw more rails laid, more lumber sawed, more houses built, more coal, iron, silver, and copper mined, more flour milled, and more cotton cloth woven than any previous five years in the nation's history. Questions for Understanding the Text 1. What remarkable changes took place in the United States in the period 1850 to 1890? 2. (a) Where did the money come from which made possible the rapid growth of industry after the War between North and South? (b) Where did the laborers come from? 3. How did the large population of the United States and the absence of tariff barriers between the states help the growth of our industries? 4. Name several inventions which assisted the growth of nationwide businesses. 5. Name an invention which brought great changes in the food industry. Name some of these changes. 6. What invention made possible the wide use of electricity? 7. (a) What did Vanderbilt do to improve railroading in the Northeast? (b) What was his attitude toward the public? Toward government officials? 8. Name ways in which our government has encouraged private business. 9. (a) What is a franchise? (b) Why is it valuable? (c) What kinds of companies need franchises? 10. (a) What is meant by consolidation of business? (b) When did it begin? (c) What are the reasons for consolidation of business? 11. State the chief differences between a partnership and a corporation. 12. Tell the story of the oil trust. 13. How did secret rebates given to Rockefeller force his competitors to sell out to him? 14. Tell the story of how Andrew Carnegie became one of the leaders in the steel industry. 15. (a) How did Carnegie in 1900 frighten his competitors into buying him out? (b) What large company was then formed? (c) What was remarkable about it' 16. What is meant by absentee ownership? Is it better or worse for a community than local ownership of business? 17. (a) Name the good effects resulting from the consolidation of business. (b) Name the evil effects which sometimes follow. 18. (a) What groups protested the growth of the trusts? (b) Why did the Sherman Antitrust Act fail to prevent the growth of great combinations? The cities also attracted millions of immigrants from Europe. Between i860 and 1900 over fourteen million foreigners came to the United States, most of them settling in factory and mining towns in the Northeast. Until about 1880 the great bulk of the immigrants came from northwestern Europe, mainly from the British Isles and Germany. These immigrants were much like the people already living here and quickly fitted into our ways. After 1880 we began to receive many immigrants from eastern and southern Europe, especially from Italy, Hungary, and Russia. These people took much longer to learn our language and our customs. By 1890 three fourths of the immigrants entering the United States were from eastern and southern Europe. Soon our big seaport cities had whole sections known by Sl>ch names as "Little Italy," "Little Hungary," or "Little Bohemia," where the newcomers settled to be near their own countrymen. improvements help cities grow The modern city was made possible by new methods of communication, transportation, sanitation, lighting, and fire protection. Improvements in communication. CHINESE WORKERS in a California cigar factory. In the 1860's and 1870't thousands of Chinese immigrants were brought to this country by corporations seeking cheap labor. In some occupations on the Pacific coast white workers were entirely replaced by Chinese. The labor unions demanded that the Chinese be kept out of the United States. By 1900 twelve states limited the number of hours per day or per week that women might be employed. Four states prohibited the employment of women at night. Twenty states prohibited the employment of young children at night, although some of the laws now seem very timid. For instance, one state went no further than forbidding the employment at night of girls under twelve years of age. The real evil of child labor had scarcely been touched, for in 1900 one in every five children between the ages of ten and fifteen was 3 wage earner. Labor demands curbs on immigration. By 1880 nearly a third of million immigrants came here every year. Within a few years the figure rose to nearly a million. The United States, it was thought, had room for all who wished to come. Steamship companies sent agent* all over Europe to persuade people to come to America. Western t**' road companies, with land to sell, did the same thing. Labor leaders saw that their efforts to raise wages and improve working conditions would not get far so long as the country was flooded with poor immigrants eager to take any job. The labor unions demanded that the Chinese be shut out, and in 1882 Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act.* Next labor unions called on Congress to stop the practice of bringing in laborers under contract. Congress did so in 1885. Still the flood of immigrants increased. Labor then asked that immigrants unable to read and write be shut out. Many employers were against any such restriction. Some liberals opposed it because they wanted America to continue to be a refuge for the ill-treated. Labor did not have its way until 1917, when Congress passed a law requiring immigrants to be able to read or write in some language. Labor conditions in 1900. At the turn of the century wages and hours were little better than in 1865. According to the census of 1900 two thirds of the male workers received less than $ 12.50 a week. Only the most highly skilled workers earned as much as $ 18.00 a week. Of course prices were much lower than they are now. Beef sold for 17 cents a pound, pork for 14 cents, eggs for 21 cents a dozen. A good pair of shoes cost $2.00, and a good suit cost $20.00. Low as these prices seem, most American workers found that their wages would barely support even a small family. In 1921 Congress limited the number of immigrants to be admitted annually from any one country. The Immigration Act of 1924 carried this policy further by reducing the total number of immigrants to be admitted to 164,667. In 1927 this number was set at 150,000. After 1930 the Immigration Service let in very few immigrants And many were thought to be dangerous radicals. Progressives and pacifists were looked on with suspicion and sometimes had difficulty in securing a public hall for their meetings. Most of the states passed laws intended to force people to be loyal to the American political and economic system. In some states teachers were required to take an oath to uphold American institutions. A new Ku Klux Klan sprang up to fight so-called "un-American" ideas. It was directed mainly against Catholics, Jews, foreigners, and Negroes. Adopting the disguise and the methods of the Klan of Reconstruction days (sec pages 331-332), it spread terror over a large part of America. Where the Klan was strong, newspapers and politicians feared to lift their voices against it, and business and professional men had to join or lose their customers and clients. At its peak in 1923 the Klan had over five million members. In 1928 it helped defeat the Democratic candidate for President, Alfred E. Smith, mainly because he was a Catholic. The Klan expressed a kind of national feeling illsuited to a land of liberty. The "one hundred per cent Americans' who led it cared nothing for our great traditions of freedom and justice for all. Fortunately the Klan lost much of its influence by the end of the twenties. A period of lawlessness. In 1919 the Eighteenth, or Prohibition, Amendment was added to the Constitution. In spite of the fact that the Amendment was approved by forty-six of the forty-eight states, and probably at least two thirds of the people wanted it to succeed, prohibition was a failure. Those who wanted liquor were determined to have it, even at a very high price. The profits from selling liquor illegally were so great that sellers were willing to pay large bribes to the officers responsible for enforcing the law. Almost every city of any size had "speakeasies" and numerous bootleggers. Some of the liquor was brought in by smugglers, or rumrunners; some of it was made illegally within our borders. Much of this lawless business was in the hands of powerful and well-organized gangs of criminals. Often one gang stole liquor from another gang, this practice being known as "hijacking." Gangsters sometimes used the money they made in the liquor business to branch out into other kinds of crime, particularly kidnaping and racketeering. A "racket" usually consisted of forcing businessmen to pay the gang for so-called "protection." In the dry-cleaning business, for example, it was necessary to buy "protection" to keep the gangsters from secretly placing acids in the cleaning fluids. Gradually most of the friends of prohibition became discouraged. They began to think that perhaps it would be best to return the control of the liquor business to the states and to try, by education of the young, to solve the drink problem. By 1932 the Democratic party dared to take a firm stand in favor of repeal, and a year later repeal was voted. Business is given a free rein. For twelve years, the government was in the hands of conservative, or "Old Guard," Republicans. Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover, who occupied the White House in turn, believed that "the business of the United States is business." They wished to free private enterprise from government control and also to assist it in every possible way. They neither enforce the antitrust laws nor did anything else to limit the growth of big business. Congress was equally friendly to big business. It voted large sums of money, or subsidies, to aviation companies and shipowners. It helped nationwide advertising by keeping the postage rate for magazines below the cost of the service. In 1922 it raised the tariff to the two purposes: (1) to end the naval armaments race, and (2) to find a way to keep peace in the Far East. (See pages 561-562.) The Conference also produced the Four-Power Treaty and the Nine-Power Treaty. The alliance between Great Britain and Japan was replaced by the Four-Power Treaty. This bound Japan, Britain, France, and the United States to respect one another's possessions in the Pacific and to consult together if these possessions were threatened by any other power. In the Nine-Power Treaty the same four powers and five others (Belgium, Holland, Portugal, Italy, and China) agreed not to interfere with China's independence and to maintain the Open Door in China. The signers did not agree to defend China's independence by force; they merely agreed not to attack it. China's request that the powers give up extraterritoriality and other special privileges within her borders was not granted. Exclusion of Japanese immigrants creates new ill will. The Washington Conference resulted in somewhat better feeling between the United States and Japan. The naval race was stopped. The United States agreed that Japan should be the strongest naval power in the Far East. (See page 562.) Japan promised to uphold the Open Door. Some two years later, when Tokyo was destroyed by an earthquake, Americans quickly raised a large relief fund. For a little while there was real friendliness between the two nations. However, new friction was soon to develop over the immigration question. Following the Russo-Japanese War, thousands of Japanese settled in California. The Californians demanded that Japanese immigrants be excluded. (Chinese laborers had been excluded since 1882.) Not wishing to hurt the pride of a sensitive nation, President Theodore Roosevelt did not want Congress to pass an act to prevent Japanese immigrants from entering the United States. Instead, he got the Japanese government in 1908 to make a "gentlemen's agreement" not to give passports to laborers wishing to come to the mainland of the United States. Japan observed the agreement faithfully. Yet when the Immigration Act of 1924 was passed, Congress, against the advice of President Coolidge and Secretary of State Hughes, insisted on excluding all members of the Mongolian race, Japanese as well as Chinese. The proud Japanese people regarded this as an insult. They thought Congress should have given Japan an immigration quota, as was done for other nations. Japan's quota would have been only a hundred immigrants a year. By shutting them out completely, aroused the lasting resentment of the Japanese people. Growth of Chinese nationalism. While American-Japanese relations were growing cooler, American sympathy for China continued t0 increase. The republican movement in China, which began about the turn of the century, pleased Americans. They were pleased, too, by the growth of national spirit in China. Hundreds of Chinese students after 1900 went abroad each year to study. Thousands more went to missionary colleges in China, where they were taught by European and American instructors. These students came to realize that if China was to take its place in the world, it must adopt Western science and industrial methods, and must develop a strong and democratic government. They wanted to make China strong and free. This aim was also held by many Chinese businessmen in the port cities, who had been influenced by Western ideas. They joined with the educated youth of China to found the National People's party. (The Chinese name is Kuomintang [gwo' min tang].) Its aims were nationalism, democracy, and livelihood (a living for the people). Its leader. Dr. Sun Yat-sen, hoped to free his people from the injustices they suffered from their own rulers and at the hands of foreign nations. The first revolution took place in 1911. It drove out the Manchus (the family which had ruled for three hundred years) and set up the republic of China. But the people were not yet ready for self-government, and the feeling of national unity was still very weak. For the next fifteen years the country was in the grip of Chinese war lords, who set up their own governments in the provinces and defied the central government. Foreign powers supplied arms to the war lords in return for special privileges. After World War I the National People's party appealed to the United States, Great Britain, Japan, and other powers for help, but got none. Finally they turned to Soviet Russia, the only power which had voluntarily given up its special rights and privileges in China. With the help of advisers from Moscow, Sun Yat-sen reorganized the People's party and began to build an army. After Sun Yat-sen's death in 1925, the leader of the army, Chiang Kai-shek (Che ang' KT' shek'), became the head of the People's party. He led China's second revolution, 1926-28, and founded the Nationalist Government of China. For the first time in centuries China had a government with real power. The Manchurian crisis, 1931. Manchuria was a valuable Chinese province north of China proper. The great bulk of the population was Chinese, but most of the business and industry of the province. 