One of the important social developments taking place in the United States during the first half of the ISOO's was the rapid growth in population. (See chart, page 242.) By 1840 the inhabitants of the United States numbered 17 million people, and in the next 20 years the total in the states and territories increased to nearly 313s million. The western areas grew faster than the other parts of the country; by the middle of the century, almost half the population lived west of the Alleghenies. Another important trend was the growth of larger centers of population. In 1840, for instance, there were 44 communities with a population of 8000 or more, making up one twelfth of the country's total population. Twenty years later there were over three times as many cities and towns of that size or larger, making up about a sixth of the total population. By 1860 more than a million people lived in the combined areas of New York City and Brooklyn, New York. Immigration increases. A large part of this population increase was caused by waves of immigration to American shores. From the beginning, of course, the United States had been a nation of immigrants. The flow had started during the colonial period, as English, Scotch, Irish, ScotchIrish, Germans, Swedes, Dutch, and others came in search of homes, freedom, and fortunes in the New World. After the new republic was formed, new waves of immigration occurred: for example, during the ten-year period from 1821 to 1831, about 150,000 immigrants arrived. From 1841 to 1851 the total immigration figure was nearly 1%, million, and from 1851 to 1861 it I rose to more than 2M million. Many immigrants come from Ireland and Germany. Most of the immigrants in 1 the first half of the ISOO's came from the I British Isles and northern and western 1 Europe. In the years between 1820 and 1 1850 the greatest number of immigrants came from Ireland. Many Irishmen emigrated to America because they were unhappy under British rule. Then in 1845 1 Ireland's potato crop failed, and a severe I famine swept the country. During the next few years, hundreds of thousands of Irish- 1 men were literally starved into leaving their I native land. To them America was the • land of promise. Nearly all the Irish settled in the East, especially in the cities. The next largest group of immigrants to I America during these years were the Germans. Many Germans came because of I poor crops and hard times at home. Others 1 left their country because of persecutions after the failure of a revolutionary uprising I in Germany near the mid-century. Most 1 of the German immigrants turned to the | soil, and at least half of them pushed their 1 way across the mountains to the rich western farm lands. Conditions in America also influenced I the flow' of immigrants. Immigration always rose during prosperous times and fell 1 off during bad times. Except for the depression years following the Panic of 1837, 1 the years from 1820 to 1850 were generally prosperous. Immigrants meet hostility. As more and more people came from abroad, some native-born Americans raised a storm of pro? test. Most of the newcomers from across the ocean became laborers, farmers, or mechanics and were willing to work long hours for low wages. Employers were more than willing to hire them. Immigrants who settled in the cities were likely to make their homes in wretched tenements and shanties, because they could afford nothing better. Since low wage scales tend to lower the standards of living, native-born workers resented the threat to their own higher standards of living. Opponents of the Democratic Party also were disturbed because so many of the new Americans added voting strength to Democratic political machines, such as the Tammany Hall machine in New York City. Some religious groups also objected to the newcomers because many of the immigrants, particularly among the Irish and Germans, were Roman Catholics. Protestants were alarmed by the increase of Catholic churches, convents, and parochial schools. In the early 1850 s the scattered groups which opposed the immigrants formed a semi-secret political organization which called itself the American Party. When asked about the name and purpose of the party, its members replied: "I know nothing." Soon the party came to be called the "Know-Nothing" Party. The growth of population in the United States from 1790 to 1950 is shown in charts on this page, on page 423, and on page 584. About how large was the population in 1820? About how great was the increase from 1790 to 1820? What was the approximate population in 1860? Was the rate of increase more rapid before or after 1820? What was happening by 1860 to the proportion of people living in urban places? Immigration was an important reason for the rise of our population from 1820 to 1860.About how many million immigrants arrived during this time? Why did so many come from Ireland and Germany? Slavery retards southern population growth. Most immigrants were attracted to the North and West rather than to the South. There was little manufacturing in the South at this time, largely because the chief economic interest in this area was the growing of cotton. Mechanics and other skilled factory workers, therefore, had little reason to look southward. Nor were there many attractions for laborers and farmers, who would have to compete with slave labor in the cultivation of cotton. An immigrant who wanted to become an independent farmer was also discouraged by the prospect of competing with the great planters who owned large numbers of slaves. Few immigrants, therefore, were attracted to the slave states, and the South gradually lost ground in population in comparison with the North and West. The South develops social groups. Slavery also helped to create more distinct social classes in the South than were to be found in other parts of the country. In I860 the aristocracy at the top of the social ladder included about 6000 great planters and their families, out of a total southern white population of about 6 million. Then there were the well-to-do townsmen, the small independent farmers, and mechanics and tradesmen, which together made up the middle class. Still lower were the "poor whites" of the sand hills, the pine barrens, and the secluded mountain regions. Living in isolation on poor land and lacking opportunities for education, the "poor whites" endured poverty and hardship. At the bottom of the social scale were the slaves, who were believed to be absolutely necessary. So at last 1 teas going to America! The boundaries burst. The arch of heaven soared. A million suns shone out for every star. The winds rushed in from outer space, roaring in my ears, "America! America!" The first United States census, completed in 1790, was taken by 217 men. Riding through the thinly settled countryside, carrying their inkhorns and quill pens in their saddlebags, they made census records on odds and ends of paper, for the government was too poor to furnish regular forms. Their totals showed that the population of the country was less than 4 million. Many more census takers were needed in the year I860, for by that time the population had increased to more than 31 million. This figure had doubled 30 years later — to almost 63 million. With such swift growth came a number of problems. The population of the 1890's did not resemble that of 1860 in the way that an enlargement resembles a snapshot — in everything but size. The pattern had changed. The proportions of the groups within our population had shifted. Some groups were relatively larger, or had gained in prestige and power. Others, important 30 years before, had lost importance. Population centers had shifted, and living conditions had changed greatly. This chapter tells the story of changing elements in our fast-growing population and of certain conditions that resulted. The following topics cover this story: 1.An increase in immigration brings many changes. 2.Extremes of wealth and poverty develop in America. 3.Social problems demand consideration. An Increase in Immigration Brings Many Changes America continues to attract foreigners. The remarkable growth in our population between 1860 and 1890 resulted partly from a high birth rate and partly from the fact that immigrants from foreign countries were coming to America in larger numbers than ever. Over 9 million came from Europe alone during this period. By 1890 there were more than 12% million foreign born people in the country. Immigrants come for many reasons. Conditions in Europe were partly responsible for the migrations. A few persons were still leaving the lands of their birth to escape religious persecution. There was also political unrest; some men came to this country to escape army service in European wars. By far the largest number came in the hope of making a better living here. Some of them had suffered from the crop failures in parts of Europe between 1870 and 1880. Men who were thrown out of work during periods of economic unrest looked eagerly to America as a land of opportunity, especially those who were hearing glowing reports of America from relatives. The efforts of steamship companies to fill their steerage (lowest class) accommodations led to lower fares for the health officer vaccinating immigrant ocean voyage. As a result, more and more immigrants found it possible to break home ties and to establish new homes across the sea. More immigrants arrive in good times. The number of immigrants arriving in a single year depended upon economic conditions in America as well as in Europe. With the growth of American industry, some manufacturers attempted to recruit laborers abroad. There was much work to be done in this country, and there were not enough workers to do it. Factories had to be built, forests cut down, railroads constructed. Immigrants were more than welcome, particularly those who were willing to work for low wages and to live with few comforts and no luxuries. In hard times fewer immigrants came. During the depression which followed our Panic of 1873, for example, the number decreased until in 1878 less than 140,000 foreign-born came into this country. This total was the smallest since 1862. But with the return of good times the flood of newcomers grew until in 1882 the number was nearly 800,000 a year. Northern Europe sends the most immigrants. In the period following the War Between the States, as before the war, a larger number of new arrivals to this country came from the British Isles than from any other part of Europe. More came from Germany, however, than from any other single country. During the '70's and '80s there was a marked increase in the group from Norway, Sweden, and Denmark, most of them hard-working farmers. A GROWING POPULATION ENRICHES ITS LIFE homes in Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and the Dakotas. Large numbers of people continued to come from Ireland, though the totals never equaled those resulting from famine during the '40's and the '50's. By the early 1890's there was already a noticeable rise in the rate of immigration from southern and eastern Europe — Italy, Russia, Poland, and the Balkan countries. This increase in the number of southern and eastern Europeans was only the beginning of almighty wave that reached a peak in the early 1900's. Immigrants are blamed for social evils. Beginning in the 1870's there were objections raised in this country against the immigrants. Patriotic societies began to protest the admission of so many foreign elements to the "melting pot." They urged restriction of immigration to America. The foreign-born were blamed for the increase in crime in their sections of the great cities. If the newcomers were at fault, it was ow'ing in part to their ignorance of American laws and ways of life, in part to the fact that bad housing and poverty often lead to crime. Labor and industry favor restriction. Organized labor was a second group that favored restrictions on immigration. Its leaders were afraid that an unlimited number of people coming to these shores would mean ever-lower wages and that immigrants would furnish a constant supply of strike-breakers. Captains of industry made up a third group which began to want limits put on the number of newcomers. They had once favored free immigration because it gave them cheap labor. Now they began to blame the foreign-born for increasing labor unrest and growing violence in strikes. Foreigners were labeled "radicals." "The ranks of anarchy and riots number no Americans," stated Chauncey M. Depew in 1887. "The leaders boldly proclaim that they come here not to enjoy the blessings of our liberty and to sustain our institutions but to destroy our government, cut our throats, and divide our property." The Chinese are excluded. The first important attempt to restrict immigration affected the Chinese. In 1868 the United States had drawn up the Burlingame Treaty with China. This agreement allowed special privileges to Americans in China and gave Chinese citizens the right to travel and live in the United States. While the first transcontinental railroad was being constructed (page 364), the Chinese were welcomed to this country because they provided cheap labor. By 1879, however, American labor complained that it could not compete with the Chinese coolies who worked for starvation wages and lived under conditions that Americans would not endure. Because of such protests, President Hayes succeeded in modifying the Burlingame Treaty so that the United States had the right to "regulate, limit, or suspend" the entry of Chinese laborers. When even more drastic measures than this were demanded, a law was passed in 1882 which excluded Chinese laborers for a period of ten years and denied American citizenship to all Chinese nationals. In 1892 the period was extended for another ten years. This restriction continued in force until World War II. During this time only students and certain specified classes of Chinese were admitted to the United States. Special groups are barred. In 1882, another law was passed which reflected the tightening immigration policy of the United States. Objectionable persons like paupers, convicts, and the insane were forbidden to land on our shores, and the steamship companies were required to return to their homelands those who were not admitted. Three years later (1885) the door was closed to aliens who arrived under contract to w7ork for an American employer. Restrictions were extended in 1891 to exclude those suffering from contagious and loathsome diseases. Then a bill requiring all new arrivals to prove their ability to read and write was passed by Congress, but it was vetoed by President Cleveland. Cleveland insisted that it was better to "admit a hundred thousand immigrants who, though unable to read and write, seek among us a home and opportunity to work, than to admit one of those unruly agitators and Many more immigrants came to America from 1881 to 1890 than came from 1871 to 1880. Can you explain why? Why did immigration decline after 1890? Compare this chart with the one on page 243. What new reasons for immigration appeared after the War Between the States? The Rise and Fall of Immigration The center of population shifts. As millions were added to our population, certain important changes took place along with the increase. In the first place, the center of population shifted 150 miles westward from 20 miles southeast of Chillicothe, Ohio (1860), to 20 miles east of Columbus, Indiana (1890). The shift westward had been taking place gradually for many years, but during this postwar period the rate of change was very rapid. To be sure, the most densely populated section was still the one that included New England and the Middle Atlantic states of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. By 1890 this eastern section had an average of nearly 103 persons per square mile. The Mountain and Pacific regions (map, pages 12-13), by way of contrast, had an average of about 3 persons per square mile. Some states grow faster than others. A second trend was that some states grew very slowly in comparison with others. When we remember that the population of the country doubled between 1860 and 1890, the increase in some states may seem surprisingly low. At the same time, some states of the eastern seaboard, like New York and Pennsylvania, expanded rapidly because they were industrial. They provided homes and employment for hundreds of thousands of immigrants. Some middle western states — Illinois, Michigan, and Ohio, for example — attracted new people because of their opportunities in both industry and farming. Cities grow foster than rural sections. A third trend that accompanied the increase in population was the slower growth of rural areas than of towns and cities (see chart, page 423). Some rural areas actually declined in population between 1860 and 1890. Such a decline took place particularly in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, and New England, chiefly because the farmers living in these areas were unable to market crops in competition with the farmers of the Middle West. For one thing, the middle western farmers had the advantage of more fertile land. For another, the level open countryside made it possible for each farmer to cultivate more extensive areas. Large numbers of rural folk in the East migrated westward, and even larger numbers moved to the city. Prosperity follows the war. As you have already seen, the War Between the States stimulated American industry. During the years that followed, it grew by leaps and bounds. Among the important new industries which developed during this period were those centering around steel production, petroleum, and meat-packing. Other older industries, such as the manufacture of shoes and clothing, adopted machine methods and large-scale production. Between 1860 and 1870 the number of manufacturing establishments in the country as a whole increased about 80 per cent. The population of the United States was about how large in 1900? About how many people lived in rural areas at that time? In urban areas? Why did the proportion of people living in urban areas begin to increase so rapidly after 1860? This tremendous growth offered a golden opportunity to business leaders with vision, boldness, and executive ability. The wealthy class grows. It is not strange, therefore, that the number of wealthy persons increased greatly in this period. It has been estimated that in 1861 there were only three millionaires in the country. Before the turn of the century this number had increased to at least 3800, and about nine tenths of the country's wealth was controlled by one tenth of the population. Interest on bonds and dividends on stocks made it unnecessary for members of this top-income group to work. If they wished, they could spend their time in summer and winter resorts, European travel, and their palatial city residences. The period, called by Mark Twain the "Gilded Age," was one in which ability and success were measured very' largely by wealth. Under such conditions it is not surprising to find that many of the newly rich were spending money in showy ways. They lived in elaborate, over-ornamented homes and had many servants to wait on them. One such man was the financier Jim Fisk, who lived perhaps more extravagantly than anyone else in his day. In New York City he occupied a great marble home that contained his own opera house. Hundreds of canary birds in gilded cages sang in the rooms. He loved showy clothes, and once he arranged to meet President Grant while dressed in an admiral's uniform, decorated with gold lace. The poor live in misery. While a handful of the rich lived in luxury, millions of the very poor were filling the slums of the great cities. They lived in wretched tenement houses under crowded conditions that fostered disease and encouraged crime. Most of them were unskilled laborers, working for low wages. The Rise and Fall of Immigration millions More people came to America between 1901 and 1910 than at any other time. Why? What caused the sharp drop in immigration after 1930? The slight increase in the '40's? The Tide of Immigration Turns Immigration from southern Europe increases. In the years just before 1900 a noticeable change began to take place in the stream of immigrants to the United States. You will recall that up to about 1890 most of our immigrants had been coming from northern Europe — Great Britain, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries. But now the stream shifted to southern and eastern Europe. It was made up of Poles, Italians, Slovaks, Rumanians, Czechs, Jews, and Greeks, whose backgrounds made it more difficult for them than for the northern Europeans to adjust to American life. Cheap, fertile land was no longer available after the passing of the frontier, and most of the new immigrants flocked to industrial jobs in large cities. They accepted work at low pay. Within the cities they collected into little national groups, clinging to the language and customs of the countries from which they had come. Native-born Americans were suspicious of the immigrants' strange customs. Jacob Riis as early as 1890 described New York as composed of an Irish West Side, a German East Side, a "Little Italy," a Chinatown, and sections that were mostly Russian, Polish, or Greek. Under these conditions the process of Americanization became more difficult. Immigration reaches a peak. In the first ten years of our century7 immigration reached an all-time high with a total of S.S million, and was responsible for more than half the total increase in population. In those days the invitation inscribed on the Statue of Liberty could be taken literally: Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free. •• Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed, to me; I lift my lamp beside the golden door! The Japanese are restricted. You have seen in Chapter 22 that in the latter half of the 1800's there was a loud outcry in favor of restriction of immigration. This attitude gained strength after 1900. Early in the century people began to protest against the number of Japanese along the Pacific coast. In 1906 the Japanese became indignant at a decree of the San Francisco school board which barred children of Japanese parentage from the public schools. President Theodore Roosevelt persuaded the school board to withdraw its decree. Because of the strong anti-Japanese feeling, however, Roosevelt arranged an informal understanding with Japan known as the "Gentlemen's Agreement". Oriental pupils under sixteen were to be admitted to the regular public schools, but Japan in turn agreed to refuse passports. Japanese laborers who wanted to enter the United States. An immigration act in 1907 denied admission to all Japanese who did not possess proper passports. This law was interpreted to exclude Japanese who came from island possessions of the United States or from any country other than Japan. Although Japan observed the terms of the Gentlemen's Agreement, the Pacific Coast states continued to make restrictions on the Japanese. California denied Chinese and Japanese the right to buy farms or to lease them for more than three years (1913). Other states followed California's example. Japan found it difficult to understand the powers of the states with which the federal government could not interfere. The United States was accused of not keeping its part of the bargain. The Japanese were well aware that immigrants of European background were being given privileges that were denied to Asiatics. They considered these restrictions an insult to their national honor. Charles Steinmetz, son of German-Polish parents, came to America in 1889. He gained fame for research in electricity. Immigration is further restricted. In spite of restrictions against Asiatics and a few others, immigration continued at an average of nearly a million persons a year until World War I broke out. In 1917 an important change in our immigration policy took place. Over President Wilson's veto Congress passed an act which barred illiterates, vagrants, chronic alcoholics, persons believing in the violent overthrow of government, and other undesirable groups. After World War I ended, immigration increased to a total of 800,000 in 1921. Alarmed because of the widespread unemployment in the United States, Congress passed the Emergency Quota Act (1921). Under this act the number of immigrants favoring northwestern Europe. Certain groups — students, for example, or wives and children of resident American citizens — were not subject to quota restrictions. Neither were citizens of Canada, Mexico and the independent republics of Central and South America. Immigrants barred from citizenship, including Japanese, were totally excluded. Total immigration is limited. After 1929 the total number of quota immigrants was limited to about 150,000 a year. At that time each European country was given a quota based upon the percentage of the people of that national origin in the American population in 1920. During the depression of the 1930's immigration dropped far below quota limits, partly because many people who in normal times would have found employment were rejected on the grounds that they were "likely to become public charges." From 1931 to 1945, with the single exception of 1939, less than one third of the quota was filled each year. After World War II many people urged that the immigration laws be modified. They felt that this country should admit more people who had lost their homes and their means of making a living during the great struggle. Congress therefore passed legislation to admit a limited number of displaced persons. Moreover, in 1944 provision was made for the annual admission of 105 Chinese, and in 1946 the Philippine quota was placed at 100. Quotas are established. For each foreign country the act of 1924 provided a quota of immigrants (the limited number of immigrants which would be admitted from that country). The quota of European immigrants of any nationality to be admitted each year was to be two per cent of the number of persons from that nation living in the United States in 1890. How have United States immigration policies changed? 1. What change in the source of immigrants took place after 1890? Why did these newer immigrants tend to settle in the cities? 2. What restrictions were adopted with respect to the Japanese? Why did the Japanese feel that the Gentlemen's Agreement was violated? 3. Why was a quota system introduced after World War I? What were the provisions of the Johnson-Lodge Act? What countries were not affected by this legislation. 4. What changes in immigration policies were made during and after World War II? Descendants Make Valuable Contributions We are all immigrants or their descendents. The word immigrant is sometimes used in an uncomplimentary way by those whose ancestors arrived in this country many years ago. We should remember, however, that everyone in this country except the American Indian is either an immigrant or the descendant of an immigrant. Those aboard the Mayflower were immigrants. They came to America under conditions that do not exist today, but they too knew what it was to leave home and friends in order to start a new life in a strange land. Immigrants have developed our resources. The United States would not be a leading nation today if it had not become a melting pot of all nationalities. Merely to possess natural resources is of little benefit to a country. They must be developed, and such development calls not only for business management and inventive skill but also for much patient, tiring, and often lowpaid work. Much of that kind of heavy labor has been done by the foreign-born. They dug canals, mined coal, and worked Serge Koussevitzky, who left Russia for America in 1924, was for 25 years conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra. Louis Brandeis, liberal member of the Supreme Court, was one of many Jews who have made lasting contributions to American life. Foreign-born plowed the prairie lands, felled the forest giants, mixed and poured the concrete for the skyscrapers. They mined the iron ore and the silver, and drove the spikes in the heavy railroad ties. Immigrants become leaders in many fields. The foreign-born have also contributed leadership in politics, business, and the arts. Some of the famous immigrants who have left a lasting impression on American life are Carl Schurz and John P. Altgeld (both born in Germany) in politics, Joseph Pulitzer (Hungary) and Jacob Riis (Denmark) in journalism, James J. Hill (Canada) in business, Samuel Gompers (England) in labor organization, Alexander Bell (Scotland) in invention. Augustus Saint-Gaudens, perhaps the outstanding American sculptor, was born in Ireland. The great majority of first-rank American musicians, including the directors of practically all our great symphony orchestras, have been immigrants. Immigrants have settled in many parts of the country. On nearly every part of the country the immigrants have left an indelible stamp. In southern Pennsylvania, George Washington Carver, botanist and chemist, studied and taught better farming methods which have aided southern agriculture. For example, may be found customs and even a little of the language of the Germans who settled there before the Revolutionary War. The descendants of these settlers are still sometimes called "Pennsylvania Germans" or "Pennsylvania Dutch." A later German migration sent colonists to the Middle West in the mid 1800's; cities like Milwaukee and St. Louis have profited from the love of these Germans for freedom and their interest in democratic government. Certain communities in the northern Middle West have been enriched by the inflow of thrifty, hard-working Scandinavians, many of whom have become prosperous fanners and dairymen. Many cities, particularly industrial ones, have become the homes of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. French influence is very strong in Louisiana, where French, in addition to English, continues to be spoken. French law has had a distinct influence on the legislation of that state, and French customs and cooking attract many visitors to Louisiana every year. A wide use of the Spanish language persists in certain states of the Southwest, where historic mission buildings, Spanish architecture, and many customs survive to remind us that Spain once controlled this vast region. Spanish ha* contributed many words to our own Ian. The Negro population changes. There is one group of "descendants of inimigrants" that is different from the others in the fact that many of their ancestors came here from a foreign land unwillingly and were sold into slavery. In 1790 about 15 per cent of the population of the United States was classified as Negro. By 1940 the percentage had decreased to 9.8, not because the Negroes have decreased in number but because of the more rapid increase of white population brought about by immigration. Formerly the Negro population was concentrated in the South, and most of tlie southern Negroes were employed on farms. During World War I, however, when jobs were plentiful, millions of Negroes went north and west, in search of better opportunities. By 1940 eleven of our large cities had more than 100,000 Negroes each. New York's Negro population was nearly half a million. Almost half the Negro population in 1940 was living in cities, while about a third, almost entirely in the South, lived on farms. Negroes make great progress. Following the War Between the States and for many years thereafter, Negroes were handicapped by a lack of economic opportunities. They had to overcome great obstacles, but by the 1940's there was evidence that their economic position was improving. More and more Negroes were employed in professions and in business. Amateur and professional sports were increasingly open to them, and in 1947 Negroes played for the first time on major league baseball teams. Joe Louis, the heavyweight fighter, and Jesse Owens, the runner, have been acclaimed as all-American athletes. In no field has the Negro made more progress than in education. In 1865 a very large majority of Negroes were illiterate. By 1880, however, 30 per cent were classed as literate; by 1930, 84 per cent. By 1910 there were over 150,000 Negro college graduates. Booker T. Washington, founder of the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama, favored vocational education for Negroes, and this was also stressed at Hampton Institute, 590 SOCIAL CHANGES MAKE A NEW AMERICA in Virginia. Negro educators, who desired the same higher education for Negroes as for whites, saw their ideas carried out at Howard, Atlanta, Fisk, and other Negro universities. Educational opportunities for the Negro are steadily improving at both the public school and college level. Negroes contribute to the arts and sciences. Some of the important developments in American culture include Negro contributions. Negro spirituals are America's most distinctive contribution to religious music. Negroes have contributed outstanding concert and entertainment artists, including the singers, Marian Anderson and Roland Hayes, and the band leader, Duke Ellington. Countee Cullen, Langston Hughes, and Richard Wright have been among the successful Negro authors, and George Washington Carver and Ernest E. Just have been outstanding scientists. By 1930 the number had risen to about 11 million, and 253 out of every 1000 women were at work for pay. In 1940 nearly 30 per cent of the women between the ages of 18 and 64 were employed outside their homes. Two thirds of all the single women were earning money. Most employed women worked in domestic and personal service, factories, clerical occupations, and the professions. Woman suffrage becomes nation-wide. It was inevitable under these circumstances that women should demand full political equality with men. The fight for woman suffrage was a hard struggle; many of its bitterest opponents were women themselves. In the first years of suffrage parades in New York, the marchers would be met with cries of "Go home and wash the dishes!" But after 1910, under the leadership of such women as Anna Howard Shaw and Carrie Chapman Catt, active campaigning began to meet with real success. In that year Washington became the fifth state to give women full political rights. In 1911 California followed this example. Then How many women were employed in 1870? THE UNITED STATES BECOMES A WORLD LEADER The United States intervenes. Japan's policy of aggression in China alarmed the United States. Secretary of State Bryan bluntly notified Japan and China that the United States "cannot recognize any agreement or undertaking . . . [which impairs] the treaty rights of the United States and its citizens in China, the political or territorial integrity of the Republic of China, or the international policy relative to China commonly known as the open door policy." As a result of our protests, Japan gave up the extreme demands she had made on China. Two years later (1917) the United States and Japan attempted to reach an understanding over their aims in China. In the Lansing-Ishii Agreement the two countries declared that they would follow the Open Door policy and guarantee China's independence. On the other hand, the United States gave in to Japan by recognizing that "territorial propinquity [nearness] creates special relations between countries," and by admitting that "Japan has special interests in China." Japan is allowed to hold her gains. At the peace conference following World War I, Japan was able to consolidate her gains in the Pacific area. The treaty recognized her conquest of the German holdings in Shantung province and also her control of the German islands in the Pacific north of the equator (see map on next page). Japan agreed that eventually she would get out of Shantung, a promise which she later kept. The Pacific islands were granted to Japan in 1919 as a mandate under the League of Nations; that is, Japan was to have full authority to establish a government and to develop the islands as she wished, but she would be responsible to the League of Nations for her activities there. Japan was not supposed to fortify the islands, however.2 President Wilson did not entirely approve of these terms, but he agreed to them in order to obtain Japan's approval of the peace treaty and the League of Nations. Japan was now a strong power in 2 But Japan violated the mandate and fortified the islands. the Pacific, and her aggressive attitude toward China was a serious threat to the Open Door and China's independence. A disarmament conference is held in Washington. Partly because of the situation in the Pacific, President Harding called a disarmament conference to meet in Washington in the autumn of 1921. Naval rivalry' had led to an armament race which placed a heavy burden on countries already greatly in debt because of World War I. At first only Great Britain, France Italy, and Japan were invited to take part in the conference. Later, invitations were extended to all of the powers, except Russia, which were directly interested in the Far Eastern situation. A four-power treaty is signed. During the conference, much serious thought was given to the situation in the Far East. The object was to remove, if possible, conditions in that area which might lead to international conflict. With this aim in mind the United States, Great Britain, France, and Japan signed a treaty "to respect then rights in relation to their insular possessions and insular dominions in the region of the Pacific Ocean." Any disputes arising among these powers, which could not be settled by their own diplomatic representatives, were to be considered and adjusted in a joint conference of the four powers. Thus the treaty of alliance between Great Britain and Japan, which had been hi effect for many years, was replaced by a four-power treaty.3 The Open Door policy is preserved. In addition, a nine-power treaty among all the countries represented at the disarmament conference guaranteed the independence of China and the continuation of the Open Door policy. By this treaty equal opportunity in China was again promised for all. The nine powers went further and accepted the principle of China's control over her own tariff. They also called for tlie creation of a commission which would 3 In case of war, there was no chance that Canada, Australia, or New Zealand would support Japan against the United States. They put pressure on Great Britain to get out of the alliance with Japan, and she was eager to do so. As a result of these two treaties, the United States seemed to have acquired wide support for the principle of the Open Door and the independence of China. The United States Senate ratified the various agreements drawn up at the Washington Conference, but it did so with a reservation. The Senate stated that the United States had no intention of departing from its traditional policy of staying aloof from entangling alliances and from participation in the affairs of other nations. An immigration law brings further trouble. The immigration law of 1924 had serious effects upon our relations with Japan. Since 1907 Japanese immigration to the United States had been restricted under the Gentlemen's Agreement, but there had been no legal restrictions as such. Nevertheless, the Japanese population in the western states continued to grow. Several of them passed anti-Japanese laws, and demanded complete exclusion of the Japanese. In the immigration law of 1924, over the objections of President Coolidge and Secretary of State Hughes, Congress declared that "aliens not eligible for citizenship," which included the Japanese, be barred from admission into the United States and its territories, except for certain classes of individuals. Japan is angered. Japan was bitter over this discrimination. Her officials called attention to "grave consequences" which would result because the law would endanger the friendly relations between the two countries. In spite of this "veiled threat," Congress passed the bill by large majorities. President Coolidge signed the bill after stating that if the provision calling for Japanese exclusion had stood by itself, he would have vetoed it. Japan placed on record a "solemn protest" against the clause which put her people in a position less favorable than that of any Europeans. The day that the law went into effect was observed in Japan as a day of national humiliation. It was not exclusion that they resented; exclusion might have been accomplished in various ways. But racial discrimination could never be forgiven by the proud Japanese. The militarists in Japan (those who favored a warlike policy) also held the United States responsible for checking Japan's imperialistic aims in China. Many Japanese felt that their country had sufficient excuse for closing the Open Door in the Far East permanently, by force if necessary. Japan takes advantage of civil war in China. The march of events in China during the 1920's again played into the hands of the Japanese militarists. The Manchu dynasty in China had been overthrown in 1911 and a republic established. Beginning in 1923, a new nationalist government in China (called the Kuomintang) tried to build China into a modern state. The Kuomintang (gwo'min-tahng) was first headed by Dr. Sun Yat-sen and later by Chiang Kai-shek (chee-ahng' kye-shek'). It was not long before the nationalist government clashed with Japanese interests in Manchuria. In 1928 a militarist government in Japan notified both the nationalist government in Nanking and a rival government in Peking that it would not allow the civil war to spread into Manchuria and Mongolia. In Japan the army and navy were responsible, not to the civil government, but directly to the Emperor. The militarists were therefore able to carry out a "positive policy" in China, leaving the civil government to protest its peaceful intentions and its desire to carry out its international obligations. It was the Japanese army and navy that now took over in Manchuria and proceeded to carry out a policy which challenged the League of Nations, the nine-power treaty, the four-power treaty, and the Pact of Paris. Japan takes advantage of world conditions. World conditions at the time also favored Japan's policy of aggression. Beginning at the end of 1929, depression gradually enveloped Europe and America. The whole economic structure seemed about to collapse, leaving the leading powers with too many problems at home to permit them to carry out a vigorous policy in the Far East. At the same time, the League of Nations was too weak to deal effectively with a crisis in China. In the United States public opinion seemed to favor a policy of peace. Certainly, the American people would not have been in favor of using force to preserve the Open Door policy or the independence of China. Manchuria becomes a puppet state. The Japanese war lords late in 1931 took advantage of this situation to invade Manchuria. Soon all of Manchuria was overrun. China appealed to the League of Nations, but received no effective aid. Meanwhile, in 1932 Secretary of State Henry L. Stimson issued the so-called Stimson Doctrine. This repeated the Bryan warning (page 654) and informed Japan and China that the United States did not intend to "recognize any situation, treaty, or agreement which may be brought about by means contraiy to the covenants and obligations of the Pact of Paris of August 27, 1928, to which treaty both China and Japan, as well as the United States, are parties." In spite of the Stimson Doctrine, Manchuria was promptly proclaimed the sovereign state of Manchukuo — a Japanese puppet state. Secretary' Stimson then issued a warning that Japan's violation of the nine-power treaty might release the other powers from the limitation of the naval treaty and fortifications agreement (page 686). Somewhat later (1936), Japan responded by notifying the powers that she no longer considered herself bound by the provisions of the naval treaty. Japan leaves the League of Nations. In October, 1932, a League committee of investigation (the Lytton Commission) condemned the Japanese attack upon Manchuria and the establishment of the puppet state of Manchukuo. It recommended that Manchuria be established as an independent state within the Chinese republic. It further suggested that the special rights and interests of Japan in Manchuria be recognized and that the nations of the world co-operate to further the internal recovery of China. When the League Assembly adopted the report of the Lytton Commission, Japan walked out of the Assembly and soon afterward resigned from the League. Japan then insisted that she had the right to act as she saw fit to keep peace and order in eastern Asia. She opposed all attempts on China's part to use the influence of any other nation or nations to resist Japan. When Japan established an oil monopoly in Manchukuo and began to extend her conquests outside of that province, it was evident that the Open Door was closed. Japan claimed that by refusing to recognize Manchukuo the United States had given up any claim to Open Door treatment in that country. The American Far Eastern policy is relaxed. The administration of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, faced with serious social and economic problems at home, at first adopted a hands-off attitude toward Japanese expansion in China. At the time, the Far Eastern situation did not seem to affect American interests seriously. The Stimson Doctrine was not modified, but the President was not inclined to make the Japanese attitude a matter of international concern. American capital represented only about 6 per cent of all foreign investments in China. Our trade with China amounted to only 2 per cent of our foreign trade, while about 25 per cent of our foreign trade was with Japan. It was to our economic advantage not to provoke Japan, and strong popular feeling against war was at its height in the United States. Under the circumstances. Secretary of State Cordell Hull agreed with Japanese Foreign Minister Hirota that "no question exists between our two countries that is incapable of amicable solution." Secretary Hull insisted that American treaty rights be recognized but notified the Japanese Foreign Minister in 1934, "The American government has dedicated the United States to 