DAVID SAVILLE MUZZEYPROFESSOR EMERITUS OF HISTORY COLUMBIA UNIVERSITYA HISTORY OF OUR COUNTRYN E W EDITIO NZa-Z Z88888EAZZ<OTHET1xDXAZoneTHE>43-undZD-A.ZK>5Zis2. The First English SettlementTheFoundingofVirginiaIntheking, the general management of the oyear1606aLondonCompanyandaPly-panies,whilelocalcouncilsinAmerica1mouth Company were organized for estab- given power to preserve order in the selishing colonies in Virginia. King JamesmentsandtoregulatetradewiththeIndigranted them a charter permitting the Lon-Third,itprovidedthatthecolonistsshdon Company to found a settlement any-enjoy "the same liberties, franchises andwhere between 34° and 41° north latitude,munities as if they had been abiding and 1and the Plymouth Company between 38°within this our realm of England.'and 45°. Each company, after planting aPlymouth Company was a failure. Incolony, was given all the land fifty miles summer of 1607 the Plymouth Compnorth and fifty miles south of such colony,sent out one hundred and twenty colorand one hundred miles in from the coast. under George Popham, who started aseNeither company was to make a settlementment on the Sagadahoc (Kennebec) Rwithin a hundred miles of the other in theinMaine.Asinglewinterofdiseasecommon territory between 38° and 41°. Thestarvation was enough to reduce the co.charter also gave to a council of thirteen men,by half and send the survivors back to Iresident in England and appointed by theland with "their former hopes frozendeath."NofurtherattemptatcolonizawasmadebythePlymouthCompany,wThe Virginia Grants of 1606 and 1609 * Whatrights were transferred in 1620 to acontradictory claims do you find? Why did notcompany called the Council for New Ithese conflicting claims make trouble?land. But the London Company succeeinestablishingafeeblecolonyinVirgiwhichsurvivedtobecomethefirstpernent English settlement in the New WoIn the spring of 1607 three small shwith one hundred and four colonists aboarrived at the capes of Chesapeake IOntariswhichtheynamedHenryandCharlesEriehonor of the king's sons, and proceededthe river, which they named the JarCHARTERAbout thirty miles from the mouth of40°Open tobothOFriver they landed on a low-lying, heacompanies38° to 41°wooded peninsula and began to erect aTOPoint1609Comfortand rude dwellings. Their provisions35thLONDON COMPANYRoanoke I.been nearly exhausted in the five monvoyage, but instead of settling down to35°WESTtivate the land they hunted for gold andpassage to China. They quarreled amTHE VIRGINIA GRANTSOF 1606 AND 1609themselves and with the Indians, on w)London Co. 34° to 41°Plymouth Co. 38* to 45*they had to depend for such food as theyOpen to both companiesGrants to extend 100 miles inland38Charter of 1609 to London Co.: "Land 20030°miles north and south of Point Comfort, lyingfrom the seacoast up into the land from sea toses, west and northwest."the Susquehanna Indians in 1675 (because ofset it on fire. Bacon died of fever (or poison)his personal profit from the fur trade), aat the moment of his victory, and his "re-popular young planter named Nathaniel bellion" collapsed; but, as the first armedBacon raised an army of three hundred vol-resistance to the behavior of English officialsunteers on his own account and not only de-in the American colonies, it was prophetic offeated the Indians but drove. Governorthe great rebellion which took place exactlyBerkeley out of his capital, Jamestown, anda century later.3. The Settling of New EnglandThe Pilgrim Fathers . While Virginia neither money nor supplies, nor friendsatwas founded as a business enterprise by a court.company of London "adventurers," theAt length they succeeded in getting per-second English colony in America had a re-mission from the Virginia Company to settleligious origin. "Adventurers" was the termwithin its territory, and found some Londonused for the people in England who sub-"adventurers" who were willing to financescribed the money to provide ships and sup-the voyage. On September 16, 1620, theplies for the colonists; while the actual set-Mayflower, a none too stanch ship of onetlers in the colonies were called "planters."hundred and eighty tons, sailed from Plym-Some of the stockholders ("adventurers")outh with thirty-five of the Leiden congre-might, of course, go to America and becomegation and nearly twice that number of"planters," as in the case of the Massachu-Londoners who were not Separatists, besidessetts Bay Colony; but generally the men re-the crew. Dangerously overcrowded, andsponsible for financing the company re-overladen with furniture, household utensils,mained in England. The Separatists were soand barrels of provisions, the Mayflower, after"harried" by King James's spies and sheriffsa "longe beating" of sixty-five days, reachedthat in the year 1608 about a hundred fled tothe shores of Cape Cod. The colonists wereHolland, at that time the only country infar north of the limits of the Virginia Com-Europe where men were not persecuted forpany's land; but instead of proceeding south-their religious beliefs. But these exiles wereward they decided to stay where they were,not entirely happy, in spite of their freedomand, landing on the low, sandy shore ofto worship as they pleased. Being mostlyPlymouth harbor, December 21, 1620, theyfarmers, they found it hard to adapt them-began to build their town. Several reasonsselves to the industrial life of the city ofhave been given for this important decision.Leiden, where they were settled. Besides,Bradford says that the Mayflower was de-they did not want their children to grow upterred from sailing south to Virginia becausein a foreign land, where they would forgetshe "fell along dangerous shoulds [shoals] andtheir native tongue and be tempted to neg-roring breakers." Other suggestions are thatlect their strict observance of the Sabbaththe pilot was ordered to land the settlersday. They felt like "pilgrims and strangers,"within the jurisdiction of the new Council forlonging for a home under the English flag.New England, and that the Pilgrims hadAmerica beckoned; but the Pilgrims hadcome to fear that their religious liberty would42

town meeting of Boston assumed the govern-was given a new charter in 1691, which al-ment, appointed a committee of safety, andtered the independent Puritan character ofsent envoys to London to learn the will of thethe colony in three important respects: (1)new sovereigns, William and Mary of Orange.the governor was to be appointed by the kingThe "empire" of Andros was broken up.instead of elected by the freemen of the col-Connecticut and Rhode Island were allowedony; (2) liberty of worship was guaranteedto resume self-government under their oldto all Protestant sects; (3) the ownershipcharters. New York (where a certain Jacobof property and not membership in a PuritanLeisler had seized the power on the news ofchurch was made the basis of political rights.James II's downfall) and New Jersey re-Under this charter the Massachusetts colonyceived new royal governors. Massachusettslived until the American Revolution.4. The Founding of MarylandThe Proprietary Colony of Marylandwhich was to supersede the trading companyVirginia, Plymouth, and Massachusetts hadentirely and become the pattern for the col-all been financed by trading companies whichonies founded under the later Stuart kings,invited investors to buy their stock. In 1632Charles II and James II (1660-1689). Itappeared the first successful colony of a type is known as a "proprietorship." The kinggranted to a man or a small group of men(generally courtiers) a tract of land with largeThe Planting of the Colony of Maryland . Mostpowers of government. The proprietors ap-of the colonists who founded Maryland werepointed the governors, judges, and councilors,Roman Catholics, but persons of all faithsorganized the courts, authorized lawmakingwere welcomedassemblies, and drew their revenues from thePainting by Frank B. Mayer, in the State House, Annapolissale of land to the settlers and the profits oftrade. In short, they regarded their coloniessomewhat like private estates.In 1632 Charles I granted to George Cal-vert, Baron of Baltimore, the territory be-tween 40° north latitude and the southernbank of the Potomac (map, p. 49), togetherwith a very liberal charter. No tax was to belevied by the crown on any persons or prop-erty within the colony. Laws were to bemade "by the proprietor with the adviceof the freemen," such laws not to be contraryto the laws of England. The proprietor wasonly to present to the king two Indian arrowsat Easter as a symbol of his allegiance.George Calvert died before the king's sealwas affixed to the charter, but in 1634 his48overthrown in England. Then Maryland were deprived of their political rights. How-was taken away from the Baltimores and put ever, when the Baltimores turned Protes-under a royal governor. The Anglican Churchtant the colony was restored to them (1720),was established, and the Catholics, who com-and it remained a proprietary province untilprised less than 10 per cent of the population,the American Revolution.5. The CarolinasOwing a debt of both gratitude and moneyphilosopher John Locke, proved utterly un-to the Cavaliers who had helped him regainfit for the government of a sparse colony inhis throne, Charles II, in 1663, granted to athe American wilderness. The northern set-group of eight courtiers the huge tract oftlers on Albemarle Sound and the southernland between Virginia and the Spanish settle-group around Charleston, separated by threement of Florida, extending westward to thehundred miles, went their own ways, until"South Sea." The object of the proprietorsthey were recognized in 1711 as the colonieswas to build up a prosperous trade in semi-of North Carolina and South Carolina, withtropical products, such as silk, wine, ginger,agovernor for each. Pirates preying on therice, and indigo. They published A Briefrich islands of the West Indies used the shel-Description of the province, with a map, set-tered coast of North Carolina for their lairs.ting forth "the Healthfulness of the Air, theThe Spaniards, who claimed the CarolinaFertility of the Earth and Waters, and theterritory as their own, incited the Indians togreat Pleasure and Profit [that] will accrueattack the colony on the south. The pro-to those that shall go thither to enjoy theprietors, according to the charter, owned thesame." Settlers from Barbados and theland as feudal lords; and when the assemblyBritish Isles, and some German and Frenchof South Carolina tried to take it out of theirHuguenots (Protestants), were attracted tohands and sell it to settlers, they vetoed thethe colony by its growing industries and itsact. The assembly then rebelled against thepolicy of religious toleration, until by the endproprietors and petitioned King George I toof the seventeenth century it had a popula-be taken under his protection as a royaltion of more than fifty thousand.province (1719). The petition was granted,But the colony did not prosper politi-and ten years later the proprietors sold theircally. An elaborate constitution, the "Grand rights and interests in both Carolinas to theModel,' composed by the great Englishcrown for £50,000.6. The Dutch in the New WorldThe Dutch Colony on the Hudson.and its great river leading up to the heart ofThe best place on the Atlantic coast for thethe fur country. Yet it was not the Englishestablishment of a colony was the site ofbut the Dutch who took possession of thisNew York, with its splendid harbor and baychoice region. In September, 1609, in search50

of a passage to Cathay, Henry Hudson, anlabor, from the settlers whom the patroonsexperienced English navigator in the servicebrought over. Interested only in profitsof the Dutch East India Company, sailedfrom the fur trade, the despotic governorsup the river which bears his name, barteringneglected to protect the colonists against thetrinkets, liquor, and firearms for the valuableIndians and scorned their petitions for afurs which the Indians brought out in theirshare in the government. The last and ablestcanoes to his little vessel, the Half-Moon.of the Dutch governors, crusty old PeterFive years later Fort Orange was built onStuyvesant with the wooden leg, had to givethe present site of Albany. The States-up his claim to the Connecticut valley inGeneral of Holland created the Dutch West1650, but five years later he swooped downIndia Company to govern the colony, whichupon a Swedish settlement on the Delawarewas called New Netherland.River and easily reduced it to submission toThe first director-general (governor) ar-New Netherland.rived at Manhattan in 1623, the date takento mark the founding of New York City.New Netherland Becomes New York .Shortly afterward the third director-general,Every year the English government realizedPeter Minuit, bought from the Indians themore clearly the need for getting rid of thisisland on which the greatest metropolis of ourDutch colony, which lay like a wedge be-country now stands, paying for it sixtytween New England and the southern prov-Dutch guilders (twenty-four dollars), orinces and controlled the profitable fur tradeabout one tenth of a cent an acre. The com-of the Hudson. In 1664, therefore, Charles II,pany turned over the settlement of the colonyon the verge of a commercial war with Hol-to wealthy proprietors, or "patroons," toland, granted to his brother James, Duke ofwhom it gave large estates on both sides ofYork, all the land between the Connecticutthe river, and whom it allowed to exact feudaland Delaware rivers (map, p. 49). The firstdues, like rent, tithes, and even days of forcedknowledge that Director-General StuyvesantPeter Stuyvesant Defying the English At the far right is Governor Stuy-vesant, who is demanding that the Dutch resist the English. The citizensof New Amsterdam, however, preferred to surrender peacefullyMuseum of the City of New York Miniature group by Dwight Franklinhad of this denial of the right of the Dutchthat the new English proprietor yielded toto their settlement in America was the ap-the pressure (especially from the towns onpearance of the Duke's fleet in the harbor,Long Island founded on the New Englandwith the curt summons to surrender the fortmodel) to grant one. Two years later, onat the foot of Manhattan Island. Stuyvesantcoming to the English throne as James II,stormed and fumed, declaring that he wouldhe revoked this grant and made New Yorknever surrender; but the leading citizens,the pattern of absolute government toknowing that resistance was hopeless, finallywhich he tried to make all the colonies northpersuaded him to yield. New Netherland fellof Maryland conform. How his viceroywithout a blow, and the English flag wavedAndros failed in this plan we have alreadyover an unbroken coast from Canada to theseen.Carolinas. When its proprietor, the Duke ofAfter the confusion following the over-York, became King James II, in 1685, Newthrow of James II and the tragic fate ofYork was automatically transformed from aLeisler was past, New York went on for theproprietary to a royal province. There arerest of the colonial period with governorsstill traces in New York of its fifty years of

sent over by the king and with an assemblyDutch occupation. The names of the oldelected by the people. The Anglican ChurchKnickerbocker families remind us of thewas established, but other Protestant sectspatroons' estates, and from the car windowswere allowed to worship freely. Two inter-one gets glimpses of high Dutch stoops andesting facts were noted by visitors to Newquaint market places in the villages alongYork even in the seventeenth century;the Hudson.namely, the great variety of peoples andUnder Dutch rule the colony had had nolanguages and the absorption of the inhabit-representative assembly, nor was it until 1683ants in money-making.7.New Jersey and Pennsy lvaniaThe Jerseys Even before he had drivenTheir right to establish a government wasthe Dutch from his new province, the Dukeconstantly disputed by the governors of Newof York leased the lower part of it, betweenYork, and their attempts to collect rents fromthe Delaware and the Atlantic, to two of histhe land were resisted by settlers, many offriends, Lord Berkeley and Sir George Car-whom were Puritans from New England.teret. The latter had been governor of theFinally both proprietors grew tired of theisland of Jersey, in the English Channel, andstrife and sold out their claims to groups ofit was in honor of him that the province wasFriends, or Quakers, who, in spite of theircalled New Jersey. The new proprietors im-peaceful doctrines, could not bring order andmediately published "Concessions" for theirharmony into New Jersey politics. In 1702colony-a liberal constitution granting re-East and West Jersey were united into aligious liberty and a popular assembly withsingle royal colony, which for thirty-six yearsthe control of taxation. The proprietorsthereafter had the same governor as Newdivided their province into East JerseyYork though keeping its own legislature and(Carteret's) and West Jersey (Berkeley's). courts. New Jersey was overshadowed by its52Mural painting by J. Scott Williams, in the Post Office, New Castle, DelawareWilliam Penn Welcomed at New Castle . Why are the citizens representedas welcoming Penn with pleasure? What were Penn's relations withthe Indians?dungeons, were workhouses for the correc-Nevertheless, after Penn's death theretion and rescue of wrongdoers. His provincewere frequent quarrels between the pro-was the first to raise its voice against slavery,prietors, the assembly, and the people of theand his fair and kindly treatment of thecolony. The Scotch-Irish and Germans whoIndians saved his colony from the horrors ofwere filling up the western land complained,savage raids and massacres. Penn had anlike the frontiersmen in all the colonies, thateye to business as well. He advertised histhey were not getting their fair share of rep-province by attractive pamphlets publishedresentatives in the legislature at Philadelphia.in England and on the Continent, offeringMoreover, these frontiersmen, who wereland for sale on easy terms and for rent as lownatural-born fighters, had to bear the attacksas a penny an acre. In the "Frame of Gov-of the French and Indians on the border inernment" he gave his colony a liberal con-the wars of the eighteenth century, while thestitution. He came to America himself inwealthy pacifist Quakers who controlled the1682 and laid out the town of Philadelphiagovernment were slow to appropriate moneywith its streets at right angles and with amplefor the defense of the colony. A further causehouse plots. At the end of the seventeenthof complaint was the exemption of the landscentury it was the largest and most prosper-of the Penn family from taxation. Enough ofous colony. Evidently the "holy experiment"the spirit of the founder prevailed, however,was a worldly success.to carry the colony over its difficulties.8. The Colony of GeorgiaTo complete the list of the English coloniesit was founded long after the Stuarts hadwhich became the thirteen original states ofbeen driven from the English throne. Inthe Union, we must mention Georgia, though the year that George Washington was born54

tion. Religious and political persecution inCarolinas, until there were nearly four hun-Europe drove thousands to the New Worlddred thousand of them here at the time of theto swell the natural increase of the largeRevolutionary War. Altogether, the non-colonial families. Huguenots (Protestants)English stocks made up more than a quarterexpelled from France by Louis XIV's revoca-of the population in 1776.tion of the Edict of Nantes (1685) came toThe colonies were still far from the ideaNew England, New York, and South Caro-of a political union in the first three quarterslina. The defeat of the Scotch supporters ofof the eighteenth century. They were, never-the Stuart cause in 1715 and 1745 sent manytheless, closer in many ways. Stage lines andHighlanders to America. Germans, fleeingpost-office routes were connecting the chieffrom the devastation of the Rhinelands by thetowns from Portsmouth to Savannah. TheFrench armies, flocked to Penn's colony atIndian menace disappeared with the endingthe rate of nearly two thousand a year fromof the series of wars that lasted almost unin-1727 to 1754. Protestants from the north ofterrupted from 1690 to 1763. Trade betweenIreland (the Scotch-Irish), oppressed by thethe colonies increased rapidly. Commercialharsh English laws against their industriesfirms in New York and Philadelphia hadand commerce, came over to fill in the fron-accounts with firms in Boston and Charles-tier region from New Hampshire to the ton. Families of New England and Mary-Colonial Harvesting . Every able-bodied member of a farmer's family hadsome part in the harvesting. What processes does the modern combineperform in addition to the tasks shown here?forests for shipbuilding, and the supply of the countries of continental Europe. Thefish in the Northern waters was inexhaustible.wealthy planters, with their thousands ofSo the New Englanders took to the sea. Theiracres and many hundred slaves, were farstanch, swift ships carried rum to Africa;outnumbered by the small farmers with notlumber, shingles, barrel staves, horses, andmore than four or five slaves and by the "poorironware to the West Indies; and fish to allwhites"; but they directed public affairsports far and near. By the middle of the and gave the tone to Southern life. Theyeighteenth century the little town of Marble-imported furniture, silver plate, musical in-head, Massachusetts, was sending out overstruments, and dress goods from Englanda hundred and fifty fishing vessels a year.against their remittances of tobacco, andThe colonies south of Mason and Dixon'swere generally in debt to the manufacturersline were in sharp contrast to New England.of the mother country. They often sentThe Anglican Church was established in alltheir sons to school at Eton or Oxford.of them, but the harsh rule of the PuritanThe middle group of colonies (New York,clergy was missing. The county or parish,Pennsylvania, Delaware, and New Jersey)not the compact town, was the unit of gov-were of a much more varied type than Newernment. Indigo and rice from the swampyEngland and the South. Their populationcoast lands, tobacco from the large planta-contained more foreign elements, such astions extending along the rivers, deerskinsGermans, Dutch, Welsh, and Scotch-Irish.from the back country, and pitch and tarThey combined both the county and thefrom the woods of North Carolina weretown government. The large patroons'staple articles of commerce, sent to Englandestates on the Hudson resembled the planta-and, so far as was permitted by the English tions of the South, except that they em-laws which we shall notice presently, to ployed free white labor instead of NegroA Colonial Stagecoach Pick out as many items as you can that seemtypical of the period. All heavy luggage was carried in the boot. Hereyou can see the boot qpened. What today in an automobile correspondsto the boot?Mural painting by Bertram Goodman in the Post Office, Quakertown, Pennsylvania3. French and British ClashesThe French Menace Besides defendingAtlantic, the French were sending their ex-their local governments and their growingplorers, fur traders, and fort-builders uptrade against too much interference by actsthrough the St. Lawrence valley and theof Parliament and royal officials, the colonistsGreat Lakes and down the Mississippi, untilalso rendered valiant aid to the mother coun-the lilies of France waved over a vast empiretry in defending their borders against theextending in an arc of twenty-five hundredFrench and the Indians. The year aftermiles from the Gulf of St. Lawrence to theJamestown was founded, Samuel de Cham-Gulf of Mexico. The greatest of the Frenchplain, resuming Jacques Cartier's work ofexplorers in America, La Salle, reached theseventy years before, established the begin-mouth of the Mississippi in 1682, and namedning of the French empire in America by thethe whole basin of the great river Louisiana,settlement of Quebec (1608). Then, duringin honor of Louis XIV of France.the century of the planting and growth of theFor several decades these thinly settledEnglish colonies along the seaboard of the and scattered posts of the French gave theFrench Explorations of the Seventeenth Century . To what territory didJoliet give France a claim ? Champlain? Marquette? La Salle?L. SuperiorR.L. SuperiorMontrealMontrealoCHAMPLAIN,1609-1616R.L. HuronChamplainChamplainFalls ofFalls ofSt. AnthonyR.L HuronSt. Anthony(Hennepin, 1680)(Hennepin,1680)(Minneapolis)(Minneapolis)RankakeeFr. CrèvecoeururiRFt. PrudhommeArkaniasTransasFEAtlanticTheAtlanticOceanOceanGulf of MexicoGulf of Mexico

gress denounced the treaty of 1778 and sought to crush the Republican oppositionauthorized our ships to prey on French com-and secure their own party hold on the gov-merce. In the two years 1798-1800 a state of ernment by passing a set of laws that causedwar with France existed, and over eightytheir downfall.French ships were captured. But neitherSince most of the foreigners who came tocountry wanted war. When Talleyrand sawthe country joined the Republicans, thethat he could not browbeat the United States,Federalists passed a Naturalization Act, in-he hastened to assure our minister to Hollandcreasing from five to fourteen years the periodthat a new American commission would beof residence necessary for a foreigner to be-received with due respect by the French Re-come a citizen of the United States. Twopublic. Adams, to his everlasting credit,Alien Acts followed which gave the Presidentresisted the clamor of the Hamiltonian fac-the power for two years to send out of thetion for war, and sent envoys to France tocountry any alien whom he thought danger-reopen negotiations. Four days after theyous to our security, and, in time of war, tohad sailed from Philadelphia, Napoleon Bona-deport or arrest at will aliens belonging to anparte overthrew the corrupt Directory. In-enemy nation. Finally, a Sedition Act, totent on establishing his despotic power inrun to the end of Adams's term, punishedFrance and Europe, Napoleon wanted nowith heavy fines or imprisonment any personscomplications with the United States. Hefound guilty of "combining and conspiring toreadily agreed, in September, 1800, to a con-oppose the execution of the laws, or publish-vention by which he gave up the treaty ofing false, scandalous, or malicious writingsalliance of 1778 in return for our govern-against the President, Congress or the govern-ment's abandonment of all claims for dam-ment of the United States." It is only fair toages to our shipping by French cruisers sincesay that the wisest of the Federalists, such1793. It was a fair bargain, and it enabled usas Adams, Hamilton, and Marshall, dis-to enter the nineteenth century at peace with approved of these harsh acts, put throughall the nations of the world.Congress by the panicky "hyper-Federalists,"and that the President did not arrest or de-The Alien and Sedition Acts * Theport a single alien. For example, HamiltonFederalists rendered great services to thewrote to Secretary Wolcott, "Let us notcountry during the first decade of its historyestablish tyranny; energy is a very differentunder the Constitution. They set our finan-thing from violence." And Adams remarkedces in order and strengthened our credit at sarcastically to Secretary McHenry thathome and abroad; they encouraged domestic there was "as little danger of seeing a Frenchmanufactures and stimulated foreign trade;army on our shores as of meeting one inthey maintained the honor of the Unitedheaven." However, ten Republican editorsStates while bringing to a peaceful conclusionwere fined or imprisoned under the Seditionserious controversies with England, France,Act.and Spain. By the year 1800 the new govern-ment was firmly established. But alreadyThe Virginia and Kentucky Resolu-the Federalists had signed the death warranttions . The Republicans were quick to takeof their party. In the heyday of their power,up the challenge. Jefferson and Madisonin the exciting summer of 1798, they hadprepared resolutions to be introduced into157tions; and economy and honesty in the not yet been delivered to consider their ap-management of the country's finances. If pointments as never having been made.Jefferson's opponents feared or his followersHis first Congress repealed the Judiciaryhoped that he would attack the financialAct in 1802. But the Republicans were notsystem which Hamilton had set up (Bank,content with this. They instituted impeach-tariff, public funds), they were equally mis-ment proceedings against several Federaltaken. The Naturalization Act and a tax onjudges. The famous case was that of thewhisky which had started a riot, the WhiskyMaryland justice Samuel Chase of the Su-Rebellion of 1794, among the farmers ofpreme Court, who had made himself offen-western Pennsylvania, were repealed. Thesive to the Republicans by his bitter denun-offenders imprisoned or fined under the Sedi-ciation of the "Jacobins" in his charges to thetion Act were pardoned. The army and navyjuries in the sedition cases. The trial ofwere reduced, and Albert Gallatin, SecretaryChase before the Senate was an exciting andof the Treasury, a native of Switzerland, ap-colorful event, attracting the attention ofplied the savings to the payment of the pub-the whole country. His acquittal, though itlic debt, which he estimated would be entirelysorely disappointed the Republicans, was apaid off by the year 1817. These reformsfortunate thing, because, however unbecom-could hardly be called a "revolution."Hectoring the Judges At one point,however, Jefferson made a direct attack onthe policy of his predecessor. At the veryclose of Adams's administration the Federal-ists, defeated in the elections for the Pres-idency and Congress, tried to keep controlof the third branch of the government. Theycreated sixteen new Federal judgeships anda number of minor judicial offices, whichwere of course to be filled with Federalistappointees. Because President Adams wasstill busy signing their commissions late inthe evening of hrs last day in office, the newjudges were called "the midnight judges."This phrase gave rise to the myth that Jef-ferson's newly appointed Attorney-General,Levi Lincoln, stood over President Adams'sdesk on the night of March 3, 1801, with awatch in his hand, and when midnight ar-Painting by Charles Willson Pealerived ordered Adams to lay down his pen.Thomas Jefferson . The third President of theJefferson considered this attempt of theUnited States was, like Franklin, a man ofdefeated Federalists to retain "a dead clutchmany interests. A statesman and a diplomat,on the patronage" as indecent, and senthe was also a philosopher and a talented de-word to the officials whose commissions hadsigner and architect165

C H A P T E R T W E L V ETHE JACKSONIAN ERAI. The New DemocracyThe masses who hailed the advent of Westerners were, in Professor Turner's phrase,Andrew Jackson were not mistaken in their"men with bark on." Though not one in abelief that a new type of democracy had comehundred had probably ever heard of Emer-into power. The "revolution" of 1828 wasson, they would have readily agreed with hismore thorough than the "revolution" ofsaying "Europe extends to the Alleghenies;1800, because, while Jefferson held that theAmerica lies beyond."common man should be given the oppor-tunity through education and training to fitThe Labor Class . The West was not thehimself to take part in the government,only factor in the development of the newJackson declared that such education anddemocracy, however. The growth of manu-training were of trifling account. "The dutiesfactures in the Eastern states since the secondof all public officers areso plain andwar with England had given rise to a laboringsimple," he said, "that men of intelligenceclass (swelled by immigration from Europe)may readily qualify themselves for their per-which was becoming conscious of its strengthformance." Jefferson, the aristocratic Vir-and was demanding legislation for its socialginian scholar and statesman, believed thatand economic improvement. The factorythe competent should rule, subject always system took away the independence of theto the vigilant and free criticism of the peo- worker and made him a cog in a great ma-ple at large. Jackson, the assertive, self-chine. He was no longer the master of hismade frontiersman, believed that govern-own tools but the servant of the expensivement should be by the people as well as for tools owned by the capitalists. He had tothe people, and hence that the offices shouldenter the factory gates when the whistle blew,be "passed around," in order to give as manyand had to work from twelve to fifteen hoursas possible a share. It was chiefly the growinga day in such quarters and for such wages asinfluence of the new West that gave strengththe management provided. Women and chil-to the Jacksonian democracy. By 1828 ninedren generally toiled beside the men to ekeof the twenty-four states of the Union layout a living. Women comprised half the oper-west of the Allegheny Mountains, and they atives in the cotton mills of New England,contained more than one third of theand children of six or eight years of age12,600,000 inhabitants of the country. Inworked from daylight to dark for a dollar athese pioneer communities differences of so-week, "growing up," as one pathetic petitioncial rank disappeared. The voice and opinionput it, "as ignorant as Arabs of the desert."of the Western pioneer were worth as muchTrade unions had existed for many years,as those of any aristocratic merchant or and strikes had not been infrequent; butplanter in Boston or Charleston. These they were feeble and local affairs before the219Abuse of the Immigrant Vote . By doing small favors or even by payinga small sum, political bosses often were able to control large blocks ofimmigrant voters. Who was benefited? Why were not those whe had re-ceived the favors really benefited? What does the chain symbolize? Issuch control of votes democratic?the thing that Jefferson feared was beginning much as an honorable position of civic re-to take place in the Jacksonian era. Thesponsibility as a source of patronage withfactory system was gathering hundreds of which to reward the faithful "party workers."thousands of "hands" into the industrialWilliam L. Marcy, of New York, in a debatecenters of the North. Immigrants from Eu-in the United States Senate in 1832, made therope, attracted now not so much by the landremark "To the victors belong the spoils."as by the chance for a job in a mill, began toThis famous proverb, borrowed from the Ro-pour in by the tens of thousands to take themans, gave the name to the vicious "spoilsplace of the Americans who preferred to gosystem," which cursed our government forWest rather than work for a boss.half a century after Jackson's accession. ItThese immigrants furnished a cheap labormeant that with every change of administra-supply, and, being rapidly naturalized andtion the civil servants of the defeated party,enfranchised, offered the politicians a richhowever long or faithful their service hadharvest of votes. Politics, the science of gov-been, were turned out of office to make wayernment, came to be more and more the gamefor adherents of the victorious party.of capturing the offices. The art of flatteringthe people rather than of instructing themThe New President . The man who waswas cultivated. All the tricks of political ad-elected to the Presidency at this importantvertising-catchwords, cartoons, badges, ban-time of ferment, which marked "the rise ofners, stump speeches, clubs, and rallies-the common man" in politics and industrywere used to catch votes. And public office, and social planning, was a sharp contrast towhen once attained, was looked on not sohis predecessors, not only in speech and man-222

Henry Clay sought revenge for his defeat inour rising manufactures could count on the1832 by securing the Senate's rejection ofaddition of some fifty thousand new "hands"Taney as Secretary of the Treasury. But twoa year to supply the place of the independentyears later, on Marshall's death (1835), ClayAmericans who preferred seeking their for-saw Taney raised to the Chief-Justiceship oftunes in the West to working at low wagesthe Supreme Court. Calhoun, smarting fromfor a boss. Of course, the new immigrantsJackson's exclusion of his friends from thewere at the mercy of the political as well ascabinet, had used his casting vote in the Sen-of the industrial boss. The conservativeate to defeat Van Buren's nomination as min-classes generally, who abhorred Jackson'sister to England. But in 1833 he saw Vanhighhanded conduct in snubbing CongressBuren occupying his own former seat as Vice-and the Supreme Court, in making wholesalePresident and presiding over the Senate thatremovals from office, and in surrounding him-had rejected his appointment to London.self with a little group of politicians and news-Jackson emerged victorious from every attackpapermen (the "Kitchen Cabinet") who couldon his policies. In the eyes of the commonbe counted upon "to sneeze every time that hepeople he was a demigod. "General Jacksontook a pinch of snuff," also joined the Whigs.may be President for life, if he wishes," wroteThe Whigs, in 1836, held no national con-William Wirt. But Jackson did not wish an-vention, published no platform, put up noother term. In the spring of 1835 a conven-candidate against Van Buren. Instead, theytion of his party (now called Democrats) metadopted the "favorite sons" method of 1824,at Baltimore and on his instructions nomi- letting the various state legislatures namenated Van Buren for his successor.their candidates and hoping that by so divid-ing the electoral vote among the sections theyThe Election of Van Buren . Mean- could prevent Van Buren from getting a ma-while Jackson's enemies had formed a coali-jority and throw the choice into the House oftion against him and in 1834 had taken theRepresentatives. But Jackson's influence be-name of "Whigs." The Whigs were held to- hind his favorite was too strong. for thegether by no stronger tie than a commonWhigs. Van Buren carried fifteen states,hostility to the President. They comprisedwith a clear majority of 46 electoral votes.National Republicans, like Clay and Webster,Van Buren's running mate, Colonel R. M.who condemned Jackson's vetoes of the BankJohnson, of Kentucky, failed to receive a ma-charter and bills for "internal improvements" ;jority of the electoral votes, however, andstates'-rights men, like Calhoun and Tyler,the choice of a Vice-President was, for thewho resented his threat to South Carolina inonly. time in our history, thrown into thethe nullification controversy; "Native Ameri- Senate, which chose Johnson on the firstcans," who saw a danger in the numbers of ballot. In his inaugural address Van Bureneasily naturalized immigrants flocking to ourdeclared that he would "tread in the foot-shores to join the Democratic party and be-steps of his illustrious predecessor." It lookedcome the political tools of the "bosses.' Untilas though Andrew Jackson had entered bythe Jacksonian era the immigrants to Americaproxy on a third term.did not number more than about ten thou-sand a year, but from that time on they cameThePanic of 1837 . Before Martin Vanin ever-increasing hordes. In the early 1830'sBuren got fairly started on the path of his230

Wade of Ohio, Charles Sumner of Massachu-years of the truce, incidents occurred whichsetts, William L. Yancey of Alabama, andforeshadowed the renewal of strife. Hardly aGovernor Quitman of Mississippi. Evenmonth passed without a disturbance in aStephen A. Douglas of Illinois, the foremostNorthern city over a claim for the return of apolitical figure of the 1850's, a sincere advo-fugitive slave, or a meeting of hotheads incate of the Constitution and conciliation,the South to advise immediate secessionurged his cause in the language of abuse,from the Union. The flimsy truce betweenvituperation, and sarcasm. All through thethe sections was gradually being shattered.3. The United States Looks AbroadAmerica Asserts her "Manifest Des- the earth's surface." When the Hungariantiny" The combined effect of our economicpatriot, General Louis Kossuth, came toprosperity, our decisive victories in the Mex-America the next year, he was received byican War, and our expansion to the PacificCongress and the people with a welcome only.was to nourish a spirit of boastfulness in ourless enthusiastic than that given to Lafayetteleaders and people. Statesmen like Cass,a quarter of a century before.Douglas, Clay, and Webster talked of theIn the summer of 1853 Douglas made adestiny of the American flag to float over thetrip abroad and probably expressed the senti-whole continent from Hudson Bay to thement of a large proportion of his fellowIsthmus of Panama, and of the superioritycountrymen when he wrote: "Europe is tot-of our free democratic government over thetering to the verge of dissolution. When you"effete monarchies" of the Old World. Thevisit her, the objects which enlist your atten-failure of the potato crops in Ireland in 1845tion are the relics of past greatness, the brokenand 1846, and the revolutions of 1848 which columns erected to departed power." Andconvulsed the leading states of continentalHenry Clay, on his deathbed, wrote to Kos-Europe, sent to our shores hundreds of thou-suth that "for the cause of liberty, we shouldsands of immigrants who were welcomed to keep our lamp burning brightly on thisthe "land of liberty."western shore, as a light to all nations." TheOur government was quick to express itsAmericans of the mid-century were no moresympathy for peoples struggling for theirmodest than was Woodrow Wilson at thefreedom from European despotism. In De-time of the First World War in their idea ofcember, 1850, our Secretary of State, Danielthe role of the United States as an example ofWebster, sent a defiant reply to the Austrianjustice to an erring world.representative at Washington, who had com-We Become Interested in an Isthmianplained of the sympathy we showed to Hun-Canal * The most imposing work of man ingary in her struggle for freedom: "Thethe Western Hemisphere is the Panamapower of this Republic at the present moment Canal, through whose locks and Gatun Lakeis spread over a region one of the richest and and Culebra Cut thousands of ships passmost fertile on the globe, and of an extent in every year between the Atlantic and thecomparison with which the possessions of Pacific. How the United States acquired thethe House of Hapsburg are but a patch onCanal Zone and built the canal early in the272Mural painting by Eldora Lorenzini, in the Post Office. Hebron, NebraskaBuffalo Halting a Train . One of the hazards of transcontinental travelin the early days of the railroads was the herds of buffalo or bison. Likethe passenger pigeon, these animals seemed so numerous that no onedreamed there was danger of their becoming extinct. Passengers shotthem from the windows of trains for sport, or disembarked and killedthem at close range. The railroads often employed famed hunters to killthem by the hundreds for meat to feed their section gangs. Where todayare there herds of buffalo?Central Pacific eastward from Sacramento,rapidly, giving employment on the easternCalifornia, until their tracks met. Half theend to thousands of soldiers returning frompublic land in a strip ten miles wide on boththe war, while gangs of coolies imported fromsides of the track was given to the companies,China labored on the Central Pacific. Theand a government bonus in 6 per cent bondstracks met at Promontory Point near Ogden,was added for each mile of track completed;Utah, on May 10, 1869, where the last rail$16,000 a mile over the prairies, $32,000was fastened to a tie of California laurel bya mile across the arid plateaus between thea golden spike, and the locomotives drew to-Rockies and the Sierras, and $48,000 a milegether "until their noses touched." Thethrough the towering mountains. One hun-spike of gold, inscribed with the names of thedred million dollars' worth of stock wasdignitaries of the occasion, is still preservedoffered to the public at $1000 a share.in the museum of the Wells Fargo ExpressThough the land grant was doubled and fur-Company at San Francisco.ther favors were given to the companies byThe first through train from California toan act of 1864, capital was wary of investingNew York arrived at the Hudson River sta-in the project. The war had ended beforetion on July 29, after a run of six and a halfthe first rail was actually laid on July 10,days. The effects of this wonderful achieve-1865. Even then there were plenty of sensiblement, which brought the two shores of thepeople who maintained that it was an im- country within a week of each other, werepossible task to lay iron bands across eighteenimmediately felt. Our trade with China andhundred miles, from the Missouri to the Pa-Japan increased 100 per cent in the next threecific, through deserts and over yawning years. The freight carried by the Centralchasms. From 1866 on, the work progressedPacific jumped from 1,700,000 pounds in the341

basis for loans to the manufacturers, the rail-most of the refining business of the state.road-builders, the oil-refiners, and the otherAnother five years and he had absorbed the"captains of industry."important refineries in New York, Philadel-Again, unrestricted immigration broughtphia, and Baltimore, and was controllingswarms of aliens to our shores after the warnearly 90 per cent of the refinery business ofto supply "hands" for the new industries.the country. In 1882 the great Standard OilA law of Congress passed in 1864 allowed the trust was incorporated under the laws ofunlimited importation of laborers. In 1863New Jersey, consolidating all the subsidiaryonly 80,000 immigrants had come to America. Standard companies and putting their sharesThe number rose to 320,000 in 1866, tointo the hands of nine trustees, with Mr.380,000 in 1870, and to 420,000 in 1873,Rockefeller as the dominant director.before the great panic came to send theMeantime, to the business of refining hadfigures down below the 200,000 mark. Inbeen added the drilling of oil fields, the mak-Philadelphia alone over 180 new manufactur-ing of barrels, the transportation of oil bying plants were established in the last twohundreds of miles of pipe lines-in short, allyears of the war. The value of our manu-the operations of the production of oil "fromfactured products increased 200 per cent inthe wells to the lamps." The methods of thethe period from 1860 to 1880, and certaincompany were mercilessly efficient. Compet-sections of the country became great centersitors who refused to sell out at Rockefeller'sof special industries, such as the steel regionfigures were frozen out by price cuts in theirabout Pittsburgh and the textile sections ofregion. The company held the whip handsouthern New England.over the oil-carrying railroads, such as theErie, the Pennsylvania, and the New YorkThe Standard Oil Company These Central, dictating what rates they shouldvarious combinations, or "trusts," werecharge and compelling them to raise the ratesformed in transportation, banking, and lum-to other shippers, on pain of losing the enor-bering, and in the steel, coal, petroleum,mous Standard business if they refused. Anleather, whisky, sugar, textile, and other in-investigating committee of the New Yorkdustries. The Standard Oil Company waslegislature in 1879 declared that the railroadsone of the oldest and most typical of them.had paid ten million dollars in rebates to theToward the close of the War between theStandard Oil Company.States, John D. Rockefeller, a successfulyoung businessman in Cleveland, Ohio, be-Big Business and the Government .came interested in the possibilities of pe-These great business corporations got theirtroleum, which had begun to "gush" fromstart in the days when the government atwells drilled in western Pennsylvania in Washington was busy fighting the war and1859. Rockefeller set out to control the pe-solving the postwar problems of reconstruc-troleum business. In 1865 his Standard Oiltion. Lincoln, Grant, Stevens, Sumner, Wade,Company of Cleveland was operating on theWilson, Seward, Blaine, and the like weremodest capital of one hundred thousandwinding up the affairs of a generation indollars. Five years later he organized thewhich sectionalism, slavery, secession, andStandard Oil Company of Ohio, with a capitalwar were the burning questions, and they hadof one million dollars, and had control of little time or inclination to attend to the new348ical power away from the "bourgeoisie" (themiddle class) and convert the capitalisticcountries into socialist states in which classesshould disappear and the wealth should be-long to the laborers who created it. Marxfound followers in America, chiefly among theimmigrants who, fleeing from the revolutionsof the Old World, dreamed of starting arevolution in the New World. In 1872 a"National Labor Reform" party was organ-ized, which entered the Presidential cam-paign with a platform declaring that "ourgovernment is wholly perverted from its truedesign.In this beneficent country ofunlimited resources, with the land annuallygroaning beneath the products of humaneffort, the mass of the people have no supplybeyond their daily wants and are compelledBrown Brothersto become paupers and vagrants." TheSamuel Gompers . Gompers was born in Lon-candidate of the party, however, polled lessdon, but came to America in his early teens.than thirty thousand votes. A few yearsHis rise as a labor leader began when he repre-later (1877) a "Socialist Labor" party wassented the cigar-makers' union in the A.F.L.formed, also based on the Marxian doctrinesFor many years he was president of the A.F.L.,and made up largely of radical immigrantwhere he opposed socialist movements amongworkingmen. It appeared in several Presi-the unions under his jurisdiction. He was thedential elections up to the close of the cen-most powerful and conservative labor leadertury; but it never could command more thanof the nineteenth centurya handful of votes.Not even the more American "Socialist"nearly a million votes in 1912, and had visionsparty, organized in 1901 and led in five cam-of capturing the government in the nearpaigns by the genial and persuasive Eugenefuture; but they were split by the FirstV. Debs, could make much impression on aWorld War, and even under so able a leadercountry in which the ideas of individualismas Norman Thomas they could not equaland the opportunity of men to rise by theirtheir 1912 vote thirty-six years later. Theyown efforts from the ranks of the workers tonever carried a state in a Presidential election,independence and wealth were so strong as inand sent only an occasional member to theAmerica. The Socialists, to be sure, polledHouse of Representatives.4. Efforts at ReformThe Grangers . Almost at the same mo- ment service at Washington, started a kindment that the Knights of Labor were organ- of farmers' league called the Patrons ofized, Oliver H. Kelley, a clerk in the govern- Husbandry (1867). The object of the as-351

named General Winfield S. Hancock, like Arthur's help, to the legislature of New YorkGarfield a gallant soldier, but wholly with-for re-election. Factional spirit ran high andout Garfield's experience as a statesman.culminated in a dastardly crime. On theGarfield was elected by 214 votes to 155,morning of July 2, 1881, as President Gar-but his popular majority was less thanfield, accompanied by Blaine, entered the8000. It was the first election since 1860 in railroad station at Washington to take thewhich all the states of the South were abletrain for a college reunion at Williamstown,to express their choice freely. Embitteredhe was shot in the back by a cowardly wretchagainst the Republican party for its recon-named Guiteau, who had been seeking an of-struction policy, these states cast a solid votefice and who boasted that he was a "Stal-for the Democratic candidate (though he wart" and wanted to see Arthur in thewas the victor of Gettysburg!), and for aPresidential chair. After lingering in greatquarter of a century thereafter the "solidpain through the summer, Garfield died atSouth" was found in the Democratic columnElberon, New Jersey, on September 19.in every Presidential election. McKinley,Roosevelt, and Taft sometimes carried for-The Pendleton Civil-Service Act . Themer border slave states (Kentucky, Mary-accidental elevation of "Chet" Arthur to theland, Delaware, Missouri) in elections fromPresidency seemed like a calamity to the1896 on; but it was not until 1920 thatfriends of good government. Yet this formerthe Republican candidate Harding won acompanion of the bosses and spoilsmen rosestate of the former Confederacy (Tennessee),to a stature of dignity under the respon-and not until 1928 that the Republicansibilities of his great office, and gave theHoover carried states which had been putcountry an honest, vigorous, and efficientunder the military regime of the Reconstruc- administration. He insisted on fair terms totion Acts of 1867 (Virginia, North Carolina,China in the act of 1882 for the restric-Florida, and Texas). These states went backtion of Chinese immigration to the Unitedto the Democrats in 1932.States.Thousands of Chinese coolies had beenThe Assassination of GarfieldTheimported to work on the construction ofchoice of Garfield, instead of reconciling thethe Central Pacific Railroad. By 1870 thereRepublican factions, resulted in bitter strife.were over seventy thousand Chinese in the"Stalwarts" like Conkling had supported himcountry, nearly five sixths of them in Cali-and done much to secure his election; but hefornia. Their low standard of living arousedrefused to fulfill the promises they claimed hethe hostility of American labor, and there be-he had made to them during the campaign.gan a crusade against them, led by DennisHe appointed Conkling's chief enemy, Blaine,Kearney, the "sand lots" orator of San Fran-as Secretary of State, and removed the col-cisco. "Four dollars a day and roast beef"lector of the port of New York to make placeand "The Chinese must go" were the slogans.for one of the leaders of the Blaine forces inPresident Hayes secured the consent ofthe convention of 1880, William H. Robert-China to our "regulation, limitation, or sus-son. Stung by this "ingratitude," Conkling pension" of Chinese immigration, and on theand Platt resigned their seats in the Senatebasis of this agreement Congress forbade theand vainly appealed, with Vice-President entrance of Chinese laborers into the coun-360

C H A P T E R T W E N T YTHE RISING OF THE WESTI. Agriculture and Labor Seek Their RightsA Change of Scene * In thousands of good times after the panic of 1873-1878,acountry schoolhouses and town halls groups stream of settlers had poured into the statesof farmers, labor agitators, free-silverites,west of the Missouri. The population ofmen burdened with mortgages on their homesKansas was 364,000 in 1870; by 1890 it hadand impoverished by the decline in the prices reached 1,427,000. Nebraska grew fromof their crops, were meeting to denounce the 122,000 to 1,058,000; Dakota Territory,tyranny of the bankers and capitalists of the from 14,000 to 511,000. "A territory greaterEast and to demand that the government paythan the original area of the United Statessome attention to the distress of the mostwas peopled in half a dozen years," wrotenumerous classes of the people, namely theSenator Peffer of Kansas in the Forum offarmers and laborers, on whose toil the pros-December, 1889. A spirit of unbounded op-perity of the country was built. They ac-timism seized upon the settlers.cused both Republican and DemocraticSpeculation in land ran riot. In Wichita,leaders of indifference to their needs, andKansas, during the summer of 1887 a real-deserted the ranks of the old parties by theestate boom, like those of Los Angeles andthousands to join new organizations such asMiami in the 1920's, threw the little townthe Farmers' Alliance, the Agriculturalinto a fever of excitement. Lots bought forWheel, the Corn-growers' Association, anda few hundred dollars sold for as manythe People's Party. At first they were ignoredthousand two months later, and the trans-by the politicians or scornfully dismissed as actions for the summer totaled over thirty"wild-eyed revolutionists," "leather-lunged million dollars. The farmer as well as theorators," and "political rain-makers." Buttownsman bought land in June to sell atas their numbers grew and they began todouble the price in August. Then, too,make their way into the state legislatures andexceptionally abundant rain in the middleinto Congress, fear took the place of ridicule1880's tempted him to extend his acres west-in the minds of the Eastern conservatives,ward beyond the safe average line of suf-and sectional hostility succeeded indifferenceficient rainfall; and when Nature restoredand neglect. The government began to real-the balance by a succession of dry years, heize that it was a storm of menacing violencewas "starved back." Between 1886andthat was rising in the West.1890 the corn crop shrank over $70,000,000.Farms in western Kansas and Nebraska wereThe Western Land Boom . Encouragedabandoned by the thousands.by the homestead grants, the opening ofnew lines of railroads, the flood of im-The Farmer's Grievances . The causes ofmigrants from Europe, and the return of the farmer's distress were various. The best378management of her finances the solvency of ordered Japanese, Chinese, and Korean chil-Santo Domingo was restored and her credi- dren to attend separate schools provided fortors were satisfied. Heretofore we had only them. Up to the close of the nineteenthforbidden Europe to interfere with the gov-century not more than twenty-five thousandernments of the republics of the New World;Japanese immigrants had come to our Pacificnow we stepped in ourselves. This exerciseshores; but the crowded condition of theof the "police power" to prevent disturbances islands of Japan and the economic distressin Latin America is called "the Rooseveltcaused by the war with Russia sent the im-corollary of the Monroe Doctrine."migration up to seventy-five thousand byIn the same year that the Senate ratified1906. The Japanese government protestedthe Santo Domingo treaty, Roosevelt andagainst the San Francisco order as a violationPresident Diaz of Mexico co-operated inof the treaty rights of 1894, which gaveestablishing the Central American Court ofJapanese residents here the status of citizensJustice, to which the five republics betweenof "the most favored nation." Certain news-Mexico and the Isthmus of Panama agreedpapers of California and Japan whipped upto submit all their disputes with one another.the quarrel by mutual insults and appeals toIn 1908 a further step toward the security ofrace prejudice. Roosevelt summoned thethe Caribbean countries was taken in themayor of San Francisco and several of thecreation of a Central American Internationalanti-Japanese leaders to Washington andBureau to further the interests of education, warned them that they must leave the settle-trade, agriculture, and industry.ment of an international question in thehands of the Federal government, at theA Controversy with Japan Serioussame time assuring them that he would attrouble with Japan was threatened in 1906once "take action that would meet the needswhen the board of education of San Francisco of California." The result was the "Gentle-The Great White Fleet . In 1907 Theodore Roosevelt sent the fleet on around-the-world cruise which lasted the better part of two years. What doyou think were two of the purposes of this cruise?Brown Brothers

right to vote to any citizen on account ofthe rate of one a minute, and tens of thou-sex. Tennessee ratified the amendment assands of ignorant voters became the easythe thirty-sixth state in 1920, in time to allowprey of political bosses.the women of the country to take part in theIt was an accident that started the re-Presidential election of that year.form of the machinery of city government.In 1900 the city of Galveston, Texas, wasMunicipal Reform . The Industrial Revo-almost destroyed by a tidal wave. Like alution was so rapidly converting Americabankrupt corporation, it was put in theinto a land of city dwellers that by 1910 morehands of receivers. Mayor, council, andthan a third of our population lived in citiesboard of aldermen were removed, and aof over twenty-five thousand. Immigrantscommission of five able citizens was chosencrowded into the slum districts of the greatto manage the city. The experiment provedurban centers. The foreign-born formedso successful that other cities took it up.only 7.5 per cent of the population in theThe form adopted by Des Moines, Iowa, incountry regions, but in the cities of five hun-1908 has been most widely copied. Thedred thousand or over they comprised 33.6 percommissioners (usually five in number) arecent. They were sometimes naturalized atselected by the whole people of the city, andLoss of Restrictions in Voting . As the number ofeach one is responsible for an administrativepersons eligible to vote increases, the countrydepartment, such as finance, public health,becomes more democraticor public works. No franchise can be grantedor contract let without popular approval.THE INCREASING NUMBERThe small number of officials to be electedOF ELIGIBLE VOTERSgives the voters a much better chance to(% refers to those over 21)become familiar with the merits of the candi-dates. The commission form of governmentU.S.population89%has been extended to more than four hun-21 and over60 milliondred cities. Other cities have adopted a stillmore concentrated form of government, in45which a city manager is hired as an expert,nonpartisan administrator, invited usually30from a different part of the country. He hasgeneral supervision over the commissioners15and is charged with the appointment and15%dismissal of subordinates, like the manager017901920of a big business concern. The object ofthese new plans is to take the government ofthe cities out of the hands of corrupt bosses25%and rings and put it into the hands of ad-nministrative experts.11%iweThe Socialists . All these devices for the1790184018701920reform of national, state, and city govern-ment were looked on by the Socialists as use-442spection or repair of locomotives or cars, toobstruct the movement of trains, to trespasson the premises of the railroads where repairwork was going on, to intimidate any of theemployees of the roads, or even to communi-cate by telegraph or telephone to encourageto strike. This "most sweeping injunctionever issued in the history of labor disputesin America" was assailed by labor as a vio-lation of constitutional rights and an attemptto reduce the workers to a "condition ofBrown Brothersslavery." The strikers had committed noErnest Alexanderson and Michael Pupin . Alex-crime, said Mr. Gompers, in "quitting workanderson was born in Sweden and studied in hiswhen conditions became intolerable." Butnative country and in Germany. In 1902 hethe courts upheld the injunction, as in thebecame associated with the General Electriccase of the Pullman strike of 1894. TheCompany of Schenectady, New York. Someshopmen's strike was quelled by this drastictwo hundred patents of his include contribu-action of the government. According totions to radio, television, and the transmissionfigures made public early in 1924 by theof pictures by radio. Pupin, at the right, wasDepartment of Justice, it had caused nine-born in a part of Hungary that is now Yugo-teen deaths by violence, wrought the destruc-slavia. He came to America at 16, was gradu-tion of millions of dollars' worth of railroadated from Columbia University, and studiedproperty, reduced the income of the roadsabroad as well. Among his inventions are someby 20 per cent in 1923, and cost the govern-that extended the range of long-distance tele-ment nearly two million dollars for specialphoning and some that made short exposuredeputies sworn in by the Attorney-Generalpossible in X-ray photographyto preserve order.4. Establishing uotas for ImmigrantsThe Immigration Laws . Because Amer- when the war was over, there was dangerica has made it her boast to be a land ofthat we might be flooded by refugees fromrefuge for the oppressed and of opportunity the distressed countries of Europe. "Thefor the seekers of new fortunes, our doorsworld is preparing to move to America,"until the 1920's stood wide open to thewrote the Commissioner of Immigration.immigrants from the Old World. In 1914The war had also revealed some alarmingthe high-water mark was reached, with afacts in regard to our foreign population.total of 1,218,480 immigrants, of whom moreMany immigrants were neglecting to becomethan 800,000 came from Italy, Russia, andnaturalized American citizens, retaining theirAustria-Hungary, and 260,000 were illiteratesreal allegiance to the lands from which theyof fourteen years of age or over. During thehad come. Radical labor agitators werewar the numbers of immigrants fell off; butsuspected of "taking their orders from Mos-514

cow." Over one thousand newspapers in the any given year to 3 per cent of its peopleUnited States were printed in foreign lan-who were here according to the census ofguages, and over 10 per cent of the people1910. But this law was unsatisfactory, be-here could not speak English. American cause a large number of immigrants fromlabor leaders were disturbed over the influxthe eastern and southern countries of Europeof hordes of foreigners who were accustomed had come here before 1910 and hence hadto work for low wages, and patriotic citizenslarge quotas (Russia, 34,284; Poland, 25,-generally were alarmed at the numbers of827; Italy, 42,057). To turn the balancenewcomers who had no knowledge of Amer-more in favor of the northern countries, suchican institutions or ideals. If we were notas the British Isles, Germany, Norway, andto become what Theodore Roosevelt calledSweden, which had sent us so many welcome"an international boarding-house," some stepimmigrants in the nineteenth century, a newmust be taken to limit the unrestricted immi-law was passed in 1924, fixing the quota at 2gration of the prewar days.per cent of the number of the nationals ofThe method adopted was the quota sys-each country in the United States accordingtem. On May 19, 1921, President Hardingto the census of 1890. The new law cut downsigned the Emergency Quota Act, whichthe Russian quota to 2248, the Italian tolimited the number of immigrants that any3845, and the Polish to 5982, while it per-country could send to the United States inmitted 63,574 to come from the British Isles,Albert Einstein * Born in Germany, Einstein was educated in Switzerland.His entire adult life has been spent in teaching and studying. The leadingscientist of the age, he came to America in the early thirties and teaches atthe Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton. Best known for his theoryof relativity, he has also done much work on radiation. Here he is lecturingto a group of advanced studentsKisenstaedt-Pix51551, 227 from Germany, and 9561 from Sweden.the quota was filled each year. Then spe-The new law also provided that after July 1,cial legislation was passed permitting the1927, only 150,000 immigrants should be ad-entrance of a certain number of displacedmitted annually, divided among the severalpersons and refugees from the war-torncountries in proportion to the numbers ofareas. A Presidential directive in 1945their nationals here according to the censusauthorized the admission of a certain num-of 1920.ber of displaced persons, and in 1948 Con-After 1929, quotas were figured on agress passed a law admitting 205,000 dis-"national origins" basis which included placed persons and refugees during a two-the number of people who by birth or year period. There have been numerousdescent came from the various countries proposals to relax the restrictions, butwithin the quota areas. Until after the to date none has been accepted. TheSecond World War, immigration figures net result of these immigration laws haswere low. Between 1931 and 1945, except been to put a stop to the 'steady flow offor the year 1939, less than one-third of aliens to our shores.5. The Disarmament ConferenceThe Washington Conference The bility of ending the mad competition. Theprincipal event in the Harding administrationamendment passed without a dissenting vote,was the Washington conference for the limita-and the President sent invitations in Augusttion of naval armaments and for the insurancenot only to Great Britain and Japan, butof better relations in the area of the Pacific.also to France and Italy as important navalAlthough many months had passed since thepowers, and to China, Holland, Belgium, andsigning of the armistice, the burden of mili- Portugal as nations with large interests in thetary and naval expenditures had not beenFar East. Delegates from eight Europeanlightened. There were more men under armsand Asiatic powers therefore met at Wash-in Europe than there had been in 1914, andington for the opening of the conference onour own naval program called for the con-November 12, 1921. After a graceful speechstruction of over 800,000 tons of warships toof welcome by President Harding, Secretarybring us to an equality with Great Britain.Hughes, the chairman, came straight to theAs the nation with the largest naval con-point with the proposal of "a practical pro-struction program in the world, we had thegram which shall at once be put into execu-opportunity of showing our sincerity in thetion." He suggested a "naval holiday" for atcause of peace by starting the movement forleast ten years, during which no new battle-the reduction of naval armaments.ships should be built, and proposed "scrap-On May 15, 1921, Senator Borah pro-ping" a number of capital ships (that is,posed an amendment to the huge navalwarships of over 10,000 tons or carrying gunsappropriation bill of $494,000,000, authoriz- of over eight inches bore) either already builting the President to invite Great Britain andor in process of construction. The UnitedJapan, our chief naval competitors, to a con-States was ready to scrap 30 ships totalingference in Washington to discuss the possi-845,700 tons. Great Britain was asked to516



