Although English colonization began in the efforts of commercial companies to make money by trading with the Indians, the settlers soon turned to agriculture and found in the products of the soil both the means of their own subsistence and a surplus that enabled them to carry on trade with Europe. As the population and wealth of the colonies increased, they became more selfsufficient and less dependent upon the trading companies and proprietors who had sponsored them. At the same time, however, they became more dependent upon the British government. As time wore on, most of the commercial companies and the proprietors lost their American grants. The colonies they had established were taken over by the king and were ruled as royal provinces. The increase in colonial population. Unlike the French colonies to the north and the Spanish to the south, the English settlements along the Atlantic seacoast of North America increased rapidly in population. Growth resulted from a high birth rate among the colonists and the continual stream of immigration from Europe. Although many persons migrated from Europe to America in order to find more religious and political freedom, far larger numbers came in the hope of bettering their economic condition. "Land free . . . labor scarce." The population of England in the seventeenth century was about five million. The country could scarcely be called overpopulated, though many contemporary writers seemed to think that it was, for they spoke of idle and mischievous crowds and of the unemployed that flocked to the cities, and they complained of taxes to take care of the poor. The real causes of distress among the masses seem to have been not overpopulation but an uneven distribution of wealth, and the economic disturbances which usually accompany such important changes as England was experiencing in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Whatever the causes, writers of pamphlets and books and those who drafted petitions to the king for charters repeatedly pointed out the advantage of the colonies as the place to take care of the "swarms of idle persons," rid England of its beggars, reduce the cost of maintaining prisons and jails, and lessen the poor tax. The same writers who told how advantageous colonization would be to England also described the richness and bounty of the New World. John Winthrop, who became one of the leaders of the migration to the New World, wrote: "All towns complain of the burthen of their poore . . . and yet suffer a whole continent ... to he waste without any improvement." A coin of 1647 bears this inscription: "In Virginia land free and labor scarce; in England land scarce and labor plenty." Thus the lure of free land and the hope of economic betterment were used to attract to the New World the landless, the poor, and the unfortunate. Crude farming methods. The outstanding forces conditioning economic activity during the colonial period (1607-1776) were (1) the abundance of land and natural resources and (2) the scarcity of labor. Ninety-seven out of a hundred of the English colonists obtained a living from the land. It was a rude kind of farming. The tools of the farmer were the plow and the harrow, the axe, the spade, the hoe, the fork, and the flail —crude, homemade implements. Not every farmer could afford horses; hand labor or oxen were used for much of the heavy work. Land was so cheap that it was not necessary to use great care in its cultivation. The colonial population. 1. Large families. The population of the colonies in 1690 was a little more than two hundred thousand; in 1760 not much more than one and a half million. The first United States census of 1790 revealed a total population of nearly four million. The bulk of the population at the time of the American Revolution consisted of second- and third-generation Americans. The infant death rate was high, but families were large — eight, ten, and twelve children being rather common. Men and women married early and reared large families, for children were of value in the hard work of the farm and home. 2. Indentured servants. Many farmers and planters, anxious for laborers, were willing to pay the cost of the voyage of the immigrants who would agree to work for them for a period of years. The laborers who accepted these terms were known as "indentured servants." The terms of indenture varied, but were generally harsh. When the period of service was over, the indentured laborer became free. Sometimes he received a grant of land and became an independent farmer. 3. Debtors and criminals. The prisons of England were also a source of immigrants to the New World. For numerous offenders, transportation to America was frequently offered as a substitute for a term of years in an English jail. Many were political and religious offenders; some were debtors; some were jailed for petty offenses; some were hardened criminals. These "criminals," like the voluntary immigrants, were assigned to masters for a term of years, usually seven, and then given their liberty. 4. Negro slavery. Very important was the spread of another farm land. Thus, Penn offered 500 acres to the heads of families; Baltimore offered 1,000 acres to those who brought over five settlers; and the Carterets and Berkeleys offered 150 acres to each family settling in New Jersey. Those who received land grants in this way usually had to pay to the grantor a small annual fee called a "quitrent." Except for the Penns, Baltimores, and a few other large landholding families, quitrents did not yield a large revenue. The settlers tried to evade payment, and attempts by manor lords to collect the rents sometimes provoked violence. With the American Revolution, individual ownership took the place of the quitrent system. America was becoming a nation of small landowners. 4. Land speculation. In all the colonies, especially during the eighteenth century, as population increased and land along the seacoast became valuable, speculators were busy acquiring titles to large tracts of land in the interior. The products of colonial farms. The colonist found in the New World many plants, trees, and berries with which he was acquainted. From Europe were imported the seeds of the staple European crops and fruits, most of which grew well in the American soil and climate. From Europe also were imported livestock — cattle, sheep, hogs, horses, oxen — for these animals either were not found in America or the Indians had not learned to domesticate them. The Indians taught the early settlers to cultivate a native American plant — maize or Indian corn — that became the chief source of food supply for man and cattle and has continued to this day as our most important agricultural crop. The Indians also taught the early colonists how to grow and use tobacco, which became the great staple of Virginia and Maryland during the colonial period.Differing types of farms. Planters, small farmers, and pioneers on the frontier differed widely in their methods of farming and in the crops they grew. The planter operated a farm of large acreage with the help of slave labor, growing some one crop for sale. In Virginia and Maryland the main crop was tobacco; in South Carolina and Georgia, it was rice or indigo; and in the West Indies, sugar. Mixed farming was the usual type in the Middle Colonies and in New England. Many farms in the Middle Colonies were large and produced a quantity of wheat, oats, and barley for sale. Indeed, so much grain was exported from the Middle Colonies that they are sometimes referred to as the "Bread Colonies." Most New England farms were small, producing very little beyond the farm family's needs. No clear geographical line separated the three types of farmers. The colonization of America meant the spread into a savage land of European modes 1 of living, languages, ideals of life. In the Spanish and Portuguese colonies it meant a mingling with the natives, forming sometimes, as in Mexico and Brazil, a settlement practically native in appearance. In the English colonies, however, this was not the case, for wherever the English settled, they crowded the red men back into the interior. As a result, English civilization, as it spread into the American wilderness, remained predominantly English. The English language, law, customs, institutions, and ideals, modified by a new environment and influenced by other European peoples, were the foundations upon which the life and culture of the people of the United States were based. America as a nation of immigrants. The United States has been called a "melting pot," a term used to describe the fact that the people of different nations and races have found a haven in the United States, and have become one in purpose and ideals with those who preceded them. This mingling of races began even in colonial times, for there were many non-English elements in the colonial population. The Scotch-Irish. The term "Scotch-Irish" refers to the descendants of those people who settled in the northern part of Ireland (Ulster) in the seventeenth century. Some of them were English but the larger number came from Scotland. Nearly all of them were of the Presbyterian faith. Discouraged by restrictive laws, the Scotch-Irish early in the eighteenth century began to 'migrate in large numbers to the English colonies in America. Coming after colonization had been going on for nearly a century, they were attracted to the frontier by cheap land. In Virginia and the Carolinas, Scotch-Irish pioneers were among the first to settle in the foothills of the eastern Appalachians. They soon became known for their democratic frontier spirit, which acted as a check upon the aristocratic spirit that was beginning to flourish in the coastal settlements. The Germans. The disastrous Thirty Years' War (1618-48), which brought ruin to the thrifty peasants of central Europe, was one of the chief reasons why so many Germans migrated to America during the colonial period. Lured by the attractive advertising of Penn's agents in Europe, the largest number settled in Pennsylvania. About one third of Pennsylvania's population at the time of the Revolution was German. Thousands of Germans also went to New York and to the frontier sections of Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas. The French, Swiss, Dutch, and others. When the French Huguenots (Protestants) lost out in their struggle to secure control of France, thousands of them became exiles in the New World. They settled chiefly in South Carolina and in the seacoast towns of the Northern colonies. From the German-speaking cantons of Switzerland many settlers came to Pennsylvania and to North Carolina. Welsh, Scotch Presbyterians, and Irish Catholics also came in large numbers, many of them seeking religious freedom in the Middle and Southern colonies. Jews were present in nearly every seacoast city, although English law denied them the right of legal residence in any British possession. There were Swedes and Dutch who founded New Sweden and New Netherland. These non-English groups made up probably more than a third of the total population of the colonies. Although they were absorbed by the English, their presence is a factor in explaining the American Revolution, for it was much easier for them to revolt than it was for those of English descent. Social classes. The merchant, the banker, the sea captain, the lawyer, the landed proprietor, and the planter constituted a colonial aristocracy — of wealth, position, and influence. Closely identified with them in social position were the governing officials, both those elected by the colonists and those appointed by the king. Pastors of the various churches also held a position of influence, especially in New England. Scattered throughout the coastal settlements were numbers of small farmers, small tradesmen, and a few mechanics. These occupied an inferior position both socially and politically. Still lower in the social scale were the indentured servants, and, of course, the slaves. Roughly, then, there were three social classes: (a) the aristocracy — merchants, planters, clergymen, landed proprietors, government officials, lawyers, bankers; (b) the great middle class — small farmers, artisans; (c) a servile group — indentured servants and slaves. The effect of the frontier on class distinction. Back of the coastal regions was the great hinterland occupied by small farmers. This was too recently developed at the time of the Revolution for great social distinctions to have appeared. Here, as always in frontier communities. Colonial patriots and loyalists. In general the privileged people in the colonies, who formed a kind of American aristocracy of officeholders and hereditary wealth, went over to the king's support. At first they were called "Tories" and later "loyalists." In a total population of about two and a half million, it is estimated that about a third were actively on the king's side, while large numbers were indifferent. Along some parts of the Atlantic coast the population was so evenly divided that the Revolution was in effect a civil war. In New York, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Georgia, modem research seems to indicate that the loyalists were clearly in the majority. But, generally speaking, the loyalists were unorganized. The "radicals," however, were organized and kept up a bornbardment of effective propaganda. Gradually, more and more people supported them, or at least refrained from opposing the drift toward independence. 1.The underprivileged. Two groups of people were generally inclined to support the patriot cause: first, the people of the back country, occupying the settlements between the older established districts along the coast and the frontier; and second, the great majority of small tradesmen, small mechanics, and farmers. Overburdened with taxes and frequently in debt to merchants and landowners, these groups did not enjoy active participation in the colonial governments. They hoped that the Revolution would bring more political and economic freedom. 2.The wealthy merchants. For the merchants of the North, the decision to support the loyalists or the patriots was a difficult one. They feared lest independence would rob them of their trade or set up a radical order that would weaken their economic and social position. Yet many of them were won over to the cause of independence because they suffered severely under the trade restrictions imposed by England. They also realized that opposition to independence would probably mean the loss of their property, imprisonment, or exile. 3.The plantation owners. It was equally difficult for the wealthy planters of the tidewater South to come to a decision. Many remained loyal. On the other hand, large numbers, especially in Virginia and South Carolina, threw in their lot with the patriot cause. Their decision was partly influenced by the desire to occupy the western lands from which they had been barred by the Proclamation of 1763. Furthermore, many planters were indebted to English businessmen. Their total debt was estimated to be about £2,000,000. Many planters saw in independence a temporary escape from these burdensome obligations. During the war many planters paid off their British debts with the depreciated paper currency of the colonies. 4.The frontiersmen. Frontier settlers were unanimous and enthusiastic in their support of independence. During the quarter century preceding the Revolution, thousands of Scotch-Irish frontiersmen, with a considerable number of their English and German neighbors of central Virginia, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina, passed through the mountain barrier which had long delayed settlement, and occupied the valleys of the Ohio, the Cumberland, and the Tennessee rivers. James Harrod, James Robertson, John Sevier, and the great frontiersman, Daniel Boone, were among the leaders of the settlers to this southern frontier region. After the peace with France, 1763, land speculators saw their opportunity and secured grants of land beyond the mountains from the colonial authorities. The Proclamation of 1763, by which the royal government took over the supervision of the Indian country and land grants west of the mountains, interfered with land speculators, fur traders, and pioneers. In the Southwest, particularly, the Revolutionary War became a war for land and the freedom of westward migration. The olive branch and the sword. The Second Continental Congress, which met in May, 1775, three weeks after Lexington and Concord, was confronted with a situation which it could not ignore — the people of Massachusetts were in arms against the king's troops. Many delegates, putting the olive branch foremost, urged Congress to try once more a loyal petition to the king. But to many others the time for negotiation had passed. To them it was high time to put the sword foremost — to send men and supplies to the camps about Boston. A few even urged that the colonies should declare for independence. Congress adopted a middle course. Both the olive branch and the sword were held aloft. John Dickinson was directed to prepare a petition to the king (some called it the "olive-branch petition"). At the same time. Congress decided to do on a large scale what the provincial congresses and the town and county committees were doing within their smaller fields. The Congress readopted the "Association" of the First Congress, urged the several colonies to prepare for their defense, and organized a continental army. Upon the suggestion of John Adams, the Congress chose Colonel George Washington as commander in chief. Government during the Revolution. Relying upon the support of public opinion, the Second Continental Congress gradually assumed the functions of a central government for all the colonies. Because of the necessities of the situation, this bold but nonlegal exercise of sovereign power was tolerated. In the performance of its various tasks Congress was obliged to appeal to the several colonial congresses and the local committees to supply men, money, and materials. Bunker Hill, June 17,1775. Congress adopted as its own the army of New Englanders encamped in a semicircle around Boston. Since the nineteenth of April the militia of the various New England colonies — separate armies, in a sense — had been engaging the British regulars [61] Leonard Calvert, brother of Lord Baltimore and the first governor of Maryland, is shown buying land from the Indians. Maryland, founded in 1634, welcomed both Catholics and Protestants. The Maryland Toleration Act of 1649 is a Landmark in the development of religious toleration. C. Y. Turner This eighteen the century painting shows a Pennsylvania Dutch woman working on a built characteristic of re region. During the colonial period, women made most of the household necessities at home. Courtly Downtown Gnlleriw. New York City Painting owned by Mr and Mr. Marx The Parson Capen House in Topsfield, Massachusetts, is one type of early colonial architecture. Note the second story overhang and the central chimney, which has several flues, each one leading from a fireplace. Courtesy The Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities, Inc. of the unwritten constitution. Under the power to tax and to borrow money, Congress has established a national banking system and has stimulated industry by means of a protective tariff. Under the power to regulate foreign and interstate commerce, Congress has regulated immigration and created commissions to regulate railroads, trade practices, and the sale of securities. Under the power to establish post offices and post roads. Congress has undertaken to subsidize railroads, steamship lines, and airways, to prevent fraud, and to exercise a certain censorship over literature. States' rights. Those who advocate a narrow and strict interpretation of the "elastic clause" are said to be advocates of states' rights. Those who are in sympathy with a broad interpretation of this clause are said to be advocates of a strong national government. Through the decisions of the Supreme Court the conflicts constantly arising over the sphere of action of the nation and of the states are adjusted. Changing economic conditions, especially pronounced in recent years, have given rise to a demand for the still greater extension of the powers of the national government. It is argued, for example, that problems of labor, education, roads, health, social security, corporate organization, and the control of industry are not limited by state boundaries. It is claimed that these problems cannot be adequately handled by the individual states, acting independently, but that they demand a uniform program which the federal government alone can furnish. The division of powers between nation and state, therefore, is an item of great importance in understanding the way the United States undertakes to solve complex economic and social problems. The second important characteristic of the federal government is the threefold separation of government activities among the executive, the legislature, and the judiciary. Each of these three necessary branches of government is in some respects dependent on the other, and yet in certain respects they are independent. Each "checks and balances" the other. Parliamentary supremacy vs. separation of powers. In England the legislature is supreme. There the prime minister and his cabinet are really an executive committee of Parliament. They are responsible to it, and charged with the obligation of carrying out its wishes. The prime minister and his cabinet are unable to act without the approval of a majority of Parliament. In the United States the President has a fixed term of office of four years, and hence his continuance in office does not depend on legislative approval. Courtesy Chicago Historical Society The Treaty of Fort Greenville, 1795, ended one of the troublesome problems of Washington's administration — warfare with the Indians in the Northwest monopolies, and the United States continued to charge foreign ships entering American ports higher tonnage duties than it charged American ships. 3.Unsatisfactory clauses. Upon the question of the rights of neutrals during the war. Great Britain refused to move. She would concede nothing which would weaken the advantages a powerful navy gave her. Thus Jay had to accept the British list of contraband, which included foodstuffs as goods liable to capture if sent to France. The treaty was silent on the subject of impressment, or the forcible seizure of American sailors for service on British ships. Jay also failed to secure for American ships full privileges of trading with the English West Indies. 4.Ratification by the Senate. When the details of Jay's Treaty became known, they provoked a storm of criticism in Congress and in the press. Public assemblies burned Jay in effigy. When Hamilton, who was largely responsible for Jay's mission and the instructions he received, attempted to speak in defense of the treaty, he was stoned. Washington was vehemently criticized. The Senate ratified the treaty by a bare two-thirds vote in June, 1795, only at the insistent urging of Washington. Even the House of Representatives, which by the Constitution has no part in the treaty-making process, attempted to block its adoption by refusing to appropriate the necessary money for the expenses of the commissions created by the treaty. In the end the House of Representatives appropriated the necessary funds with only three votes to spare. (Part of this opposition was partisan, and part of it was deliberately fomented by French agents, who felt that the treaty was hostile to the interests of France.) The treaty, unsatisfactory as it was, served the main purpose of avoiding war. Its unpopularity resulted from the fact that it did not contain all that was expected. Pinckney's Treaty with Spain. Less was expected of Thomas Pinckney, the special envoy to Spain. He was fortunate enough, however, to obtain all that he had been sent to ask. In Pinckney's Treaty (1795), Spain (1) agreed to the claim of the United States that its southern boundary should be the thirty-first degree of latitude; (2) granted the United States the free navigation of the Mississippi; and (3) extended the right to land the goods of the Western farmers at New Orleans free of duty while awaiting ocean-going ships, a privilege commonly called "the right of deposit." Pacification of the northwestern Indians. While diplomats were negotiating in Europe, an armed expedition under the direction of General Anthony Wayne, "Mad Anthony" of Revolutionary fame, crushed the Indians at Fallen Timbers in northwestern Ohio. After this battle the Indians, by the Treaty of Greenville (1795), ceded to the United States southern and eastern Ohio. The rest of the old Northwest was left to the Indians. Together with Jay's Treaty, this success marked the beginning of the ascendancy of die United States over the Indians [150] A damn's unhappy presidency. In the last two chapters we have / noted some of the obstacles which John Adams encountered J. m after he became President in 1797. He was barely elected against a very strong opposition party, which continued to obstruct his policies. His foremost political adversary, Thomas Jefferson, held the office of Vice-President. He was harassed by diplomatic troubles with France. In addition to all these handicaps, he lacked the united support of his own party. Hamilton exercised less influence over Adams than he had over Washington, for Adams was notably independent, even stubborn, at times. So Hamilton and Adams were frequently at odds, thus tending to split the Federalist party. The Alien and Sedition Laws, 1798. While the Federalists were thus divided and uncertain in their leadership, they were frightened by the criticism directed against them by the Republicans. In 1798, during the near-war with France, they passed a series of laws which helped prepare the way for their own downfall. These laws are commonly known as the Alien and Sedition Laws. They were really four in number: (1) a Naturalization Act, lengthening the term of residence required for citizenship from five to fourteen years. This law, it was hoped, would make it impossible for the Republicans to increase their voting power with the new immigrants, who for the most part were sympathetic with Republican ideals. (2) An Alien Act empowered the President to deport any foreigner whom he considered dangerous to the peace. (3) An Alien Enemies Act, which never went into effect because it was to apply only to war conditions, empowered the President to deport subjects of any power with whom the United States might be at war. (4) The Sedition Act, the worst of the laws, was aimed directly at the critical Republicans. It provided for the punishment of "those who wrote, printed, or uttered any false, scandalous, and malicious statements against the government of the United States or either House of Congress of the United States, or the President of the United States." This law was a clear violation of the First Amendment to the Constitution, which guarantees freedom of speech and press. Ten Republican editors and printers were tried and convicted under the Sedition Act. Matthew Lyons of Vermont accused the President of "un[162] Colorado which bears his name. Lieutenant Pike, like Lewis and Clark, brought back with him a remarkable tale of hardship and adventure. Federalist criticism. The Federalist party took particular exception to the part of the Louisiana treaty which promised inhabitants of the new territory that they would be admitted to the Union. "They must remain," the Federalists said, "in the condition of colonies." They began to ask whether new territory could be admitted without the consent of every state. The opposition came chiefly from New England. Some were concerned about the migration of laborers from the shops and farms of the East; others were alarmed because the new territories would be opened to slavery. The Federalists feared that the unchecked extension of slavery by the admission of slave-holding communities like New Orleans would establish a permanent and powerful planter class. It was, of course, impossible to foresee at the time that a large immigration from Europe to the northeastern states would more than balance the advantages the Southern planters enjoyed. Federalist fears were regarded by their opponents as sectional jealousy. Against the Federalists it was argued that if the new territories were kept permanently as colonies, the country would be drifting away from the great ideals of the Revolution and the Ordinance of 1787. Federalist scheming. Senator Timothy Pickering, formerly Secretary of State, turned to projects of secession. At the head of a Federalist faction which had lost faith in Hamilton's leadership, he proposed to establish a northern confederacy composed of New England and New York. If Aaron Burr, the Vice-President, were elected governor of New York in 1804, the conspirators, of whom Burr was one, proposed to proclaim their separation from the United States and leave the other states to their own devices. In the election in New York Hamilton opposed Burr with such success that the latter failed of election. With the defeat of Burr, Pickering's secession conspiracy broke down. To have his revenge Burr challenged Hamilton to a duel, and at Weehawken, on July 11, 1804, Hamilton fell, mortally wounded. Burr's scheming with Pickering and his duel with Hamilton thoroughly discredited him with the Republicans. In 1805 and 1806 he engaged in a conspiracy with some discontented Westerners. Just what Burr hoped to accomplish is not definitely known; it is suggested that he sought either to set up an independent state on the Mississippi or to engage in an expedition against Mexico. Rumors were spread around to the effect that he was engaged in a plot to break up the Union. Jefferson ordered his arrest. Burr was tried for treason and acquitted. The re-election of Jefferson, 1804. Events seemed to combine in favor of Jefferson and the Republicans. Without bothering about an amendment, Calhoun introduced what is known as the "bonus bill," providing that the $1,500,000 which the government was to receive from chartering the second Bank of the United States should be spent for the building of roads and canals. "Let us conquer space. . . . The mails and the press are the nerves of the body politic. . . . We are under the most imperious obligation to counteract every tendency to disunion. ... If we permit a low sectional spirit to take possession of the House, this happy scene will vanish." Congress passed the bill; but on his last day of office Madison vetoed it, not because he disapproved of its purposes, but because he thought it went beyond the powers of Congress. Strange it is that Madison should have given way on the tariff and the bank, and yet have held to his original views on the question of internal improvements. Unsettled foreign problems. As the West became increasingly important in our domestic economy and in party politics, it also became influential in shaping our foreign policy. In the years immediately following the Treaty of Ghent (1814), the most pressing foreign problems were (1) the determination of our Northern and Western boundaries; (2) the treatment of the Indians who held the land the white man wanted; and (3) the settlement of the controversy with Spain concerning the ownership of West Florida. Agreements with England. 1. A commercial treaty. In the summer of 1815 a commercial treaty was concluded with Great Britain. The ports of the United States and the British Isles were opened to American and British merchants on equal terms, except that the British could not trade from port to port along the coast of the United States, and Americans could not trade with the British West Indies. (The restrictions on the West Indian trade were modified in 1830.) 2. The Rush-Bagot agreement. In 1817 an agreement was reached by the United States and Great Britain concerning the maintenance of navies in the Great Lakes. The British and American governments agreed to limit their armed vessels on the lakes to four small ships of less than one hundred tons, to be used for preventing violation of revenue laws. The British government dismantled, sold, or scuttled and sank about a score of armed ships, while the American government disposed of nearly twice as many. This famous Rush-Bagot agreement, which prohibited naval armament on the Great Lakes, became an example for land disarmament on the Canadian border as well. The march westward. Many of the Western settlers were immigrants from Europe — a stream of free labor which increased rapidly after the War of 1812. But the bulk of the Western pioneers came from the older communities. Hard times, resulting from the embargo, released large numbers of laborers who sought economic freedom by moving westward. The planter of the South had been facing ruin for years, owing largely to the exhaustion of the soil. As cotton came into greater demand, the planter migrated to the southwestern cotton belt, a region which slowly but surely took financial and political control away from the old seaboard South. The government's land policy. The westward movement was hastened both by the successful outcome of the Indian campaigns incident to the War of 1812 and by the government's liberal land policy. Originally the government, in urgent need of funds, sold the Western lands in large tracts to land companies. The law of 1796 provided for the sale of tracts of 640 acres at $2.00 per acre. This plan called for an investment beyond the resources of the average frontiersman, and gave rise to the speculator and land jobber. In 1800 Congress provided for the sale of a half-section — 320 acres — at $2.00 an acre, with payments extended over a period of four years. In 1820, yielding to popular demand, Congress permitted the purchase of 80 acres at $1,25 an acre. The rush to the West was so great that frequently pioneers settled on the land, cleared it, built a cabin, and began cultivation even before the lands had been surveyed or offered for sale. The "squatters" — as these unlawful first settlers were called — complained when the government undertook to offer their land for sale. Often they banded together to prevent anyone from bidding more than a certain price when the land was put up for auction. The Western influence was sufficiently strong to compel Congress to enact the Pre-emption Law of 1841, whereby squatters could secure a title to 160 acres by settling on the land, cultivating it, and paying for it over a number of years. But even this concession did not satisfy these settlers. The land-hungry did not rest until Congress in 1862 passed the Homestead Act, which permitted the head of a family to secure title to a quarter-section of land (160 acres) by establishing a residence and cultivating the land for a period of five years. The coming of the steamboat and the railroad. The great need of the West was for improved transportation. In 1807 Robert Fulton's steamboat, the Clermont, made a successful trial trip from New York to Albany, a distance of one hundred fifty miles, in thirty-two hours. Since the Clermont was a commercial success, Fulton frequently gets the credit for inventing the steamboat, although John Fitch, John Stevens.So profitable was cotton culture that the South was content to export it to England or the textile mills of New England rather than engage in manufacturing cotton itself. Cotton culture, so the South came to believe, demanded slaves, and the South became the defender of the institution of slavery. As the Southerners moved west the question of the extension of slavery into the West became acute; thus slavery became interwoven with the problem of westward expansion. After 1840 the institution of slavery thrust itself into national politics as a vital and absorbing issue. Like the West, the South was eager to see the territory of the United States expand. But expansion raised the question of slavery, and on that point the West was unwilling to follow the South. The demands of the South. The Southern plantation owner thought that it was economical to buy the manufactured goods he needed. He became dependent, therefore, upon the other sections and upon Europe for his supplies. Because the South realized that the tariff increased the prices it had to pay for commodities, it opposed the protective tariff. Like the West, it disapproved of the second Bank of the United States and the conservative banking policies advocated by the Northeast. Unlike the West, it did not favor internal improvements, nor did it desire to see the national government increase its powers. Because of its economic system the South became an ardent advocate of states' rights and, therefore, of strict construction of the Constitution. The rise of manufacturing. While the West and South were developing sectional economic interests, a similar process was going on in the Northeast. There, as we have seen, manufacturing took root. The value of cotton manufactures increased from $4,834,000 in 1820 to $40,.350,000 in 1840; woolen manufactures increased in value from $4,413,000 in 1820 to $20,696,000 in 1840. Twenty thousand tons of iron were manufactured in 1820 and 286,000 tons in 1840. The industrialization of the Northeast was stimulated (1) by the opening up of better agricultural land in the West; (2) by the presence of an abundance of raw materials; (3) by a cheap source of power in the rapid streams and waterfalls of New England, and at a later date in the coal fields of the Appalachians; (4) by the inventive genius of the people; and (5) by additions to the labor supply by immigrants from Europe. The first center of manufacturing was the New England states, especially Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. From this section industrialization spread to eastern New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, and later to Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. Equality of opportunity. Alexis de Tocqueville, a Frenchman famous for his keen powers of observation, visited the United States in 1831. On his return to France he wrote a book about what he saw. Democracy in America. Nothing struck him "more forcibly than the general equality of conditions among the people." Except for a few planters in the South and a few successful merchants of the coastal] cities of tire North, there were no people of wealth and few whose property had not been won through their own labor and self-denial. The population in 1840. The census of 1840 reported a population of 17,000,000. Of this number more than a fourth, 4,800,000, were employed in some form of manual labor, largely in agriculture. One person in every seven was a slave, and slaves were mainly occupied as farm laborers. The number of slaves had increased since the first census in 1790 more than threefold, but the white population more than fourfold. Between 1830 and 1840 immigration from Europe was increased sixfold; most immigrants remained in the cities on the Atlantic coast, but after 1840 many immigrants moved to the West. (See map, page 381.) The growth of cities. The canal packets and the river steamboats brought large regions in the interior within reach of Eastern markets.The cities were growing rapidly. New York in twenty years, from 1820 to 1840, increased from 120,000 to 300,000. By 1840 it had more people than either Boston or Philadelphia. St. Louis, the center of several lines of steamboats plying upon the Mississippi, the Ohio, and the Missouri rivers, was a thriving inland city. Along with St. Louis, New Orleans, Cincinnati, and Pittsburgh had become great centers of Western trade. Chicago, however, was still a small village and had not yet started on its way toward becoming the great metropolis of the Midwest. Industrial centers, like Lowell and Fall River, introduced a new phase of American history. In 1820, for example, most textiles were made in private homes. By the time of the panic of 1837 the majority were factory made. Pioneers in the far Northwest. The first Americans to live in Oregon were the fur traders. Then came the missionaries to work among the Indians. The reports that the missionaries sent back aroused interest in the East. In 1843 a thousand pilgrims gathered at the Missouri River, and under leaders of their own choosing made the long, perilous journey to the Willamette Valley. They proved that loaded wagons and herds of cattle could be driven to Oregon. Thereafter, the migration grew by leaps and bounds. In 1843 the Americans in Oregon organized a government of their own "until such time as the United States of America extend their jurisdiction over us." The hard times in the United States after the panic of 1837, the stories printed in local newspapers and missionary magazines, the love of adventure inborn in Americans, and the belief that the occupation of new lands was a patriotic endeavor — all operated to lure Americans to Texas and Oregon. The Oregon Trail, the Santa Fe Trail, and the Salt Lake Trail to California took on the aspect of national highways. In 1842 and again in 1843 the War Department sent Lieutenant John C. Fremont to the Rocky Mountains as a national "pathfinder." Fremont found no new routes, but his reports made older ones better known. The Lone Star Republic. A few years after Mexico had won her independence, trouble started in one of her provinces — Texas. For some years large numbers of Americans had been migrating to Texas, where they were received cordially and given land generously and cheaply. Worried by the growing number of these settlers (nearly twenty thousand), in 1829 the President of Mexico ordered that no more American immigrants be admitted to Texas. In addition to this cause for irritation the Texans had for a long time objected to the Mexican policy of freeing the slaves. The American inhabitants hoped to make the territory part of the United States. In 1836 the Texans, under the leadership of Sam Houston, revolted. Texas seceded from Mexico, declared itself independent in 1836, and drafted a constitution which legalized slavery. At the Alamo, the Mexican president, Santa Anna, destroyed the entire garrison of 166 Texans. "Remember the Alamo!" became the battle cry of the revolting Texans. At San Jacinto on April 21, 1836, a band of Texan volunteers under General Sam Houston defeated the Mexican army and captured Santa Anna. Texan independence was achieved. An election was held and Sam Houston was chosen president of the "Lone Star Republic." The demand for annexation. Houston and other Texas leaders frankly wanted their newly independent nation to become a part of the United States. They looked to President Jackson, well known as an ardent expansionist, to take the lead in securing the annexation of Texas ln 1836. But Jackson held back, fearing that it would stir up sectional leader of the United States into the Great Salt Lake Valley, Utah. By the 1 treaty of 1848 with Mexico these Mormon settlements in Utah became part of the United States. The status of California and New Mexico. In 1850 California had I more than 90,000 inhabitants. California prepared a constitution which I excluded slavery, elected a governor and a legislature, and asked for I admission to the Union. When Congress convened in December, 1849, 1 it could not ignore the demand of California for admission, nor could I it overlook the necessity for providing a government for the territory of I New Mexico — vital questions which could not be settled without bring- I ing the issue of slavery to the fore. Present in the Senate of this Thirty-1 first Congress were the great triumvirate, Webster, Clay, and Calhoun, I who for thirty years and more played a brilliant part in the nation's his- 1 tory. Benton, Cass, Douglas, and Jefferson Davis were also present. 1 Significant of the new era was the presence of a new group of leaders I with pronounced antislavery views — Sumner, Seward, Chase, and Hale. I Clay's proposals for compromise. Clay, the "Great Compromiser," I now seventy-three years old, had returned to the Senate after an ab- I sence of seven years. He proposed a series of conciliatory resolutions I providing for (1) the admission of California as a free state; (2) the 1 application of the principle of popular sovereignty in the remainder of ] the Mexican cession; (3) fixing the northern boundary of Texas at 38° 30'; (4) the abolition of the slave trade in the District of Columbia; and I (5) an effective fugitive slave law. A great debate ensued, not only in the halls of Congress but also in I the state legislatures and throughout the country. In the Senate there j was a series of remarkable speeches on the compromise measures. I Clay, asserting that peaceful secession was impossible, called upon the I quarreling sections to show a spirit of moderation and compromise. I He pleaded for "concord, harmony, and peace," but said that: "At this | moment we have in the legislative bodies of this capitol and in the I states twenty-odd furnaces in full blast, emitting heat and passion and intemperance and diffusing them throughout the whole extent of this broad land." On March 4, Calhoun, the champion of the doctrine of states' rights and of the interests of the South, appeared in the Senate. He was too ill with consumption to speak, so his speech was read for him. He spoke for the Union, but foresaw disunion unless the interests of his section were safeguarded. He pleaded that the North put an end to antislavery propaganda, that Congress extend to the Southerners equal rights with the Northerners in the new territories. On the seventh of March, Webster arose to defend the compromise. "I speak today for the preservation of the Union." His main argument in favor of the compromise was that Congress need not definitely exclude slavery from the new territories. Nature had already done that, for both the climate and the soil of the new region made it unsuited to slavery. "I would not take pains uselessly to reaffirm an ordinance of nature nor to re-enact the will of God. I would put in no Wilmot Proviso for the mere purpose of a taunt or a reproach." Webster's Seventh of March speech was severely criticized by New Englanders, who claimed that he was seeking Southern support in order to run for the presidency. Numerous public meetings denounced him — a bitter blow to the once popular idol. But many of more moderate views sympathized with Webster and shared with him the hope that compromise would heal the breach between the sections. A new note was struck in the speeches of Seward of New York, who declared that there was a "higher law" than the Constitution, and in that of Chase of Ohio, who said that the compromise was a base surrender to threats of disunion. The Compromise of 1850. Finally Clay's resolutions were put in the form of three bills, the first of which was promptly dubbed the "Omnibus Bill." This provided for the admission of California as a free state; that the northern boundary of the state of Texas should be fixed at 36° 30'; and that Texas should be paid the sum of $10,000,000 as compensation. The remainder of the Mexican cession was to be divided at the thirty-seventh parallel into two territories. New Mexico to the south and Utah to the north, and when admitted as states, the said territories or any portion of them "shall be received into the Union, with or without slavery, as their constitutions may prescribe at the time of their admission." This would extend to the new regions the principle of squatter, or popular, sovereignty. The second bill provided for a fugitive slave law, and the third for the prohibition of the slave trade, but not slavery, in the District of Columbia. For months there seemed little prospect that these bills would become law. President Taylor, who opposed Clay's measures, suddenly died in July. He was succeeded by Fillmore, who favored the compromise. In September the bills were passed, one by one. Effect of the new laws. Which side secured the advantage in this compromise? The settlement with Texas interested neither the antislavery nor the proslavery men. The removal of the slave markets from Washington to the cities beyond the district boundaries inconvenienced the slave traders only slightly. It was a measure both the South and the North were quite ready to pass, and it deprived the Northern abolitionists of one of their most effective propaganda phrases. They could no longer say that the trade in human beings went on under the very shadow of the national capitol. The application of the principle of popular sovereignty to the territorial government in New Mexico and Utah left both sections in doubt as to which had secured an advantage. If there were anything in the doctrine that slavery could not flourish in the arid lands of the Southwest, it would likewise fail to flourish in California. Yet to the people of the time the admission of California as a free state seemed a very real advantage to the North. Within a twenty-year period the population had almost doubled. More than a million of the increase in population between 1840 and 1860 was the result of immigration. The Irish potato famine of 1845 and the revolutionary disturbances of 1848 in central Europe, coupled with the boundless opportunities for cheap land and free enterprise, lured hundreds of thousands of Irish and Germans to the New World. The immigrants established themselves in the growing factory towns of the North and on the farms of the Northwest; they did not go South, where they would have been compelled to compete with slave labor. The South noted jealously the growing numerical strength of the North. There seemed little doubt that, as time passed, Southern influence in the councils of the nation was bound to be less and less. In I860 the South had a population of twelve and a half million, including about four million slaves. The population of the North was nineteen million and increasing rapidly. For every white man of fighting age the South could give its armies, the North had three or four. Economic conditions, North, South, and West. A larger population was not the only advantage of the North. The economic structure of the South was based, as we have seen, on the growing of cotton. The South did not grow all its own food nor manufacture the articles it needed. It depended on imports from the North or Europe. The North, on the other hand, was more nearly self-sustaining. It enjoyed the benefits of varied economic activities: manufacturing, commerce, farming, shipping. When the test of war came, the farms of the West a"d Northwest could supply the armies with food and supplies, and manufacturing in the Northeast could be adapted to war needs. Railroad construction, 1850-60. The ten-year period from 1850 to I860 (save for the panic year of 1857) was one of bustling activity and roads changed this, for goods began to move toward the Atlantic seaboard. Midwestern railroad cities had a remarkable growth and New Orleans declined in importance. The location of Chicago on the shores of Lake Michigan was destined to make it the great Midwestern metropolis. Slowly, Chicago began to outstrip St. Louis in population, although by 1860 it had just passed the 100,000 mark. As the Western terminus of the railroads, Chicago became the center of the growing traffic on the Great Lakes and of the trade in grain and livestock. Most of the new railroads connected the East with the West. The railroads carried the goods of the Eastern factories to the Western farmers, and also carried the products of the Western farms to the populous sections of the East, and to the Atlantic seaboard for shipment to Europe. Western grain had begun to rival cotton as America's chief export. As American farm products were sent to Europe in ever-increasing quantities, the ties between East and West were strengthened. The rapid growth of the West. The population of the West increased by more than four millions in the 1850's. California, Minnesota, and Oregon were admitted as states, and territorial governments were established for Kansas (admitted as a state in 1861), Utah, New Mexico, Washington, Nebraska, Dakota, Nevada, and Colorado. The railroads were one cause of this development. Other causes were, of course, the great fertility of the Western plains and the development of improved agricultural machinery. The most important of the new agricultural machines was the McCormick reaper, originally patented in 1834 but not perfected or produced in large quantities until the 1850's. In grain growing the reaper worked a revolution as far-reaching as Whitney's cotton gin, Cyrus McCormick had vision as well as confidence in the West when in 1847 he established his plant for the manufacture of reapers at Chicago near the center of the grain belt of the nation. The growth of American manufactures. The output of American factories doubled in value from 1850 to 1860; in the earlier year the value of American manufactures was about one billion dollars — a little short of the value of agricultural products. One thing that helped both the farmers of the West and the manufacturers in the East was the great increase in immigration. To the factory owners of the thriving Eastern cities the immigrant was a source of cheap labor. New inventions. However, a more important cause of the remarkable output of American factories was the large number of new inventions. The Patent Office, for example, issued nearly 6500 patents in the decade of the forties, while in the decade of the fifties the number was more than 28,000. In 1844 Charles Goodyear discovered the process of vulcanizing rubber; in the same year Samuel F. B. Morse perfected the telegraph. In 1846 Howe invented the sewing machine. McKay developed a sewing machine for use in making shoes. The formation of the Republican party. Antislavery men of the Northwestern and Eastern states met the challenge of the KansasNebraska Act by organizing a new party determined to exclude slavery from the territories of the United States. At first they called themselves anti-Nebraska men and found recruits among Whigs, Democrats, and Free Soilers from the Northern states. It was at Ripon, Wisconsin, in February, 1854, while the Kansas-Nebraska Bill was under discussion, that the first suggestion for a new political organization was made. The idea spread rapidly, and the name Republican was applied to the group. On July 6, 1854, at Jackson, Michigan, the new Republican party formally began its long career. Similar conventions were held in Maine, Massachusetts, New York, and elsewhere. The new party succeeded in winning elections in Michigan in the fall of that year. By 1856 the new party was strong enough to win 114 votes for its candidate, John C. Fremont, as against 174 for the successful candidate, James Buchanan. "Bleeding Kansas." Another result of the Kansas-Nebraska Act was the struggle between proslavery and antislavery men for control of Kansas. Slaveowners from Missouri began to move into Kansas, and to offset this an Emigrant Aid Society was organized in New England to encourage antislavery settlers to settle in the territory. Riots, massacres, and civil war between armed bands that supported one or the other side characterized what was aptly described as "bleeding Kansas." Popular sovereignty did not succeed in Kansas. The news of events in Kansas, distorted to suit one's purpose, helped greatly to solidify both North and South in their opposite stands on the issue of slavery. The Campaign of 1856. The Democrats met in convention while passions were still hot from discussion of the bloody conflict in Kansas. Their platform upheld the principle of popular sovereignty as the "only sound and safe solution of the slavery question." In order to avoid the Kansas-Nebraska Act as an issue, they nominated James Buchanan, whose absence from the United States as minister to England had kept him free from an active part in the controversy. The Republican party nominated as its first presidential candidate John C. Fremont, the "Pathfinder," and adopted a platform which opposed slavery •u the territories, but which tolerated it in the states where it already existed. A third party — the Native American, or "Know Nothing," party — was also in the field, with ex-President Fillmore as its nominee for the presidency. As the name indicates, the Native American party was alarmed by the increasing tide of immigration, and declared that 'Americans must rule America" and that "only native-born Americans should be selected for all state, federal, and municipal offices." The term "Know-Nothing" was quickly applied to the new party because in answers to questions regarding it, a member always answered *1 know nothing." In 1856 it attracted many supporters who hoped its policies Would draw attention from the slavery struggle. Buchanan had an [317] Mining, camps replaced by settled communities. Miners were the first settlers in the mountain states. Where gold or silver was found the place quickly fillet! up. In placer mining the surface soil was soon washed free of its deposits of precious metals, and the miners moved on, lured by stories of other prospects. In 1858 gold and silver were discovered near Mount Davidson in Nevada, and a year later the famous Comstock Lode was discovered on the Utah-Nevada border. At about the same time gold was discovered near Pikes Peak in Colorado, "Pikes Peak or Bust" and "Busted by Cosh!" are phrases which the hunt for the precious metals made common. Camp life clustered about the saloon, the gambling house, and the dance hall. Drunkenness, debauchery, and murder threatened to destroy the very life of the community. As time passed, vigilance committees composed of the better elements of the population drove out the worst, and brought law and order to these communities. One by one large sections of the region were formed into territories, and stable civil governments were established (Utah, 1850; Montana, 1S64; Wyoming, 1868). During the seventies and eighties mining corporations were organized. With the coming of the railroads these corporations shipped into the mining regions machinery which revolutionized the process of mining. The new mining methods were used in obtaining copper, lead, coal, and other minerals, as well as gold and silver. The change to agriculture. In the miners' frontier some towns boomed for a while, and then were deserted when the mines gave out. Virginia City, Nevada, was one of many such flourishing towns that ceased to be. Some of the miners moved on whither rumors of discoveries lured them; other returned home. Others went into cattle raising or farming. As the better lands of the Prairie West came to be occupied by small farmers in the 1880's, an overflow migration moved into the mountain valleys beyond. Here railroads and farm machinery, together with irrigation, worked a revolution in the half-deserted mining districts. Almost ever)'where through the Far West economic interests shifted to agriculture. The value of the farm products soon exceeded that of the mines. Moreover, the population grew faster than it had under the excitement of the discovery of precious metals. The level plains, clear of timber and other obstacles to cultivation, were brought under tillage without the tedious labor needed in other portions of the United States. Machinery driven by the power of horses and steam increased the speed with which the soil was conquered. The Indian problem again. The westward movement across the Great Plains and into the mountain states once again involved the United States in difficulties with the Indians. The homesteader wanted to destroy herds of buffaloes that ranged the plains, because they interfered with the settlement and cultivation of the plains. Tire buffaloes were one of the Indian's chief sources of food. They also supplied the scythe and the cradle gave way almost completely to McCormick's reaper in the cutting of grain in the West during the War between the States. McKay's shoe-sewing machines displaced the village shoemaker. Machinery supplied the place of the men called to serve in the army and each year yielded a greater output. 2.New resources and new industries. Only a nation with unusual resources can destroy wealth by military operations and replace the losses at once by the development of other forms of wealth elsewhere; yet this is what the North did during the War between the States. In western Pennsylvania, where oil had been discovered in 1859, the owners of oil wells and the lands on which they were located found fabulous wealth. In Pittsburgh, Cleveland, and Buffalo, oil refiners established a new industry and changed almost overnight the mode of lighting homes. With the opening of oil wells in the Middle West there followed a trail of booming cities and the growth of a "petroleum aristocracy." 3. Rapid settlement of the rich Western prairie lands. The greatest resource of the United States was the untilled lands of the prairie West. The westward movement of the frontier continued its course in spite of the war. In May, 1862, in keeping with its platform pledge, the Republican majority in Congress passed the famous Homestead Act. By the terms of this act any citizen or any alien who expressed his intention of becoming a citizen could acquire a farm of 160 acres on payment of a ten-dollar fee for registration of his title, provided he lived on and cultivated the land for five years. Soldiers were allowed to deduct the period of their army service from the five-year period of occupancy. It was the withdrawal of the Southern representatives from Congress which made it possible to pass this law, for they had long opposed giving such encouragement to westward expansion. Under the liberal terms of this act the Western prairie land was quickly settled. To a large extent, the settlers came from the East; but, with the close of the war, hundreds of thousands of immigrants, lined by the promise of free land and quick riches, came from Europe (pages 371, 601-602). In the same year (July, 1862) Congress also passed the famous Morrill Act, giving lands to the several states and territories to help them establish colleges. Each state was given 30,000 acres of land for every Congressional representative it had in 1860 or at the time of admission. The proceeds from the sale of the land were to be set aside to endow colleges which would teach "branches of learning related to agriculture and the mechanic arts." In all about 13,000,000 acres of the public domain were given to the states for the establishment of what have been called "land-grant" colleges. The effect of this act was to encourage the creation of state universities. The Morrill Act was of great value to American agriculture; it also ranks with the Land Ordinance of 1785 and the Northwest Ordinance as being among the most important laws of Congress for the encouragement of education. A contrast. Eighty years ago the United States was predominantly an agricultural community. Most of its inhabitants lived on farms and in small villages, dependent on foreign countries for the greater part of their manufactured articles and necessary capital.It was a relatively unimportant nation as far as world affairs were concerned. Today it is a world power. Instead of being dependent upon the rest of the world for manufactured products and for capital, the United States is dependent on the rest of the world for markets as an outlet for its surplus of manufactures, foodstuffs, and capital. Factors in the economic revolution. A peculiar thing about the development of the United States is the speed with which the transformation took place. There are, of oourse, many factors which explain this quick transformation, but these four are probably the most important: (I) the rapid development of means of transportation, enabling men and goods to be moved everywhere throughout a broad continent; (2) the application of machinery to fanning, which made it possible to utilize the fertility of the Great West; (3) the rapid increase in population, assisted by a liberal immigration policy and the willingness of foreigners to try their fortunes in this rich land of opportunity; and (4) the stability of the government, which made foreigners willing to lend the necessary capital for the development of our resources. The very heart of our present economic order is the system of communications and transit. This includes highways, canals, waterways, railways, telephone, telegraph, cable, radio, pipe lines, air lines, and the postal system. The transportation and communication system binds and knits the whole country into an economic unit for the production and distribution of goods. The transcontinental railroad — the wonder of the age. A little more than a hundred years ago the steam locomotive began to play its part in bringing about great economic changes. The beginning was slow, but between 1830 and the opening of the War between the States post of some of these improvements and the greed of some of the promoters, railroad rates were cut in two between 1850 and 1880. Favorable conditions for Western settlement. In 1865 the Great Plains west of the Mississippi were without railroads. But after the war, railroads influenced settlement in this region as in earlier times rivers had influenced settlement in the East. The places selected by the railways for stations became the centers from which the settlements spread. The division points of the railroads and other places which promised to become business centers took on the activity of "boom towns." All conditions were favorable for the rapid occupation of the region. No other part of the United States had ever had so complete a system of transportation at hand. The railway companies fostered the movement by special freight and passenger rates to settlers and tourists. Fuel, machinery, and materials for building were easily transported by rail. Moneylenders from the East lent the settler capital in return for a mortgage on his farm. Furthermore, there was a large number of people ready to move Westward. There were about two million veterans of the War between the States whose old community ties had been broken. Many of them were attracted by the opportunities which the free homesteads and the boom town offered to them, The railroads, eager to obtain settlers to buy their land and to increase their volume of business, advertised extensively, Steamship companies, too, by elaborate advertising campaigns throughout western Europe, lured new settlers to the West. Immigrants from Germany, the Scandinavian countries, and the British Isles came in increasing numbers. So influential was the advertising of the railroad companies, the steamship lines, and the new states which wanted to increase in population, that one authority has suggested that the "desire to get cheap labor, to take in passenger fares, and to sell land have probably brought more immigrants than the hard conditions of Europe, Asia, and Africa have sent." The prewar frontier. When the War between the States began, the frontier extended almost in a straight line through eastern Nebraska and Kansas. It also included the eastern part of Texas. The Far West, California, and Oregon had passed beyond the frontier stage, and so, too, had the Mormon settlements in Utah. In order for the frontier to be closed it was necessary that the mountain states and the Great Plains be settled. The movement to occupy this unsettled area proceeded eastward from the Pacific and westward from the Mississippi. In the process we can discern what has been called the miners' frontier, the ranchers' frontier, and the farmers' frontier. Indian with material for tent coverings, bow strings, and clothing. But the white man quickly and ruthlessly got rid of the buffaloes. Millions were killed each year. William F. Cody, in the employ of the Kansas Pacific Railroad, obtained his nickname of "Buffalo Bill" for the reputed killing of more than 4000 buffaloes in one year and a half. By 1885 most of the great buffalo herds had been destroyed. The Indian tribes rebelled against this destruction of their source of food and the encroachment of the white man upon their lands. When the Indian tribes had been forced westward, the United States adopted a policy of placing them on reservations and of making quarterly payments to the tribes for the lands they yielded east of the Mississippi. The tribal lands of the Indians, among the most valuable in the West, remained untilled. For a time federal troops guarded the lands of the Indians from white occupants. But the pressure of the white man upon the lands of the buffalo and the Indian was unceasing. Various Indian tribes, under the leadership of Red Cloud, Sitting Bull, Chief Joseph and others, made their last stand against the white invasion. One of the best-known incidents of these Indian wars was the annihilation of nearly three hundred cavalrymen under General George A. Custer by the Sioux Indians at Little Big Horn River, Montana, in June, 1876. More than one hundred pages were required to print a list of the engagements of the troops with the Indians between 1868 and 1882. During the same period Indian warfare cost the United States government $22,000,000. A "century of dishonor." President Hayes severely criticized American policy toward the Indians in these words: 'When the Indians had settled upon land assigned to them by compact and begun to support themselves by their own labor, they were rudely jostled off and thrust into the wilderness again. Many, if not most, of our Indian wars have had their origin in broken promises and acts of injustice on our part." Helen Hunt Jackson, in her novel Ramona, and in her history A Century of Dishonor, did much to arouse sympathy for the red man. Making amends. Upon the urging of President Cleveland, Congress in 1887 passed the Dawes Act, which gave farms to Indians who abandoned the tribal life. This law, which also provided that the Indian could not mortgage nor sell his farm for twenty-five years, was an attempt to destroy the tribal organization of the Indians and to make it possible for the government to treat them as individuals. More than half of the Indians availed themselves of this offer and became naturalized citizens. In 1906 the Burke Act abolished the twenty-five year probationary period established by the Dawes Act, and empowered the Secretary of the Interior to extend full property rights to Indians who Were competent to manage their own affairs. In 1924 Congress conferred full citizenship upon all the Indians, even those who still maintained their tribal organization on reservations. Again, in 1934, a com[373] has been so broken into by isolated bodies of settlement that there can hardly be said to be a frontier line." Throughout most of our history our ideals and institutions have been influenced by the existence of a frontier. The closing of the frontier meant that the American people had to adapt these ideals and institutions to a changed economic environment. Some of the new conditions may be briefly listed: 1. The closing of the frontier coincides with WESTWARD ADVANCE OF THE CENTER OF POPULATION, 1790-1900 the movement to conserve our natural resources and to restrict immigration. 2. The closing of the frontier also coincides with a period of expansion overseas. Searching for new frontiers, American capital overflowed into the Caribbean, South America, and Europe. 3. The closing of the frontier coincides with the rapid development of large urban areas. A large proportion of our people were crowded into cities, chained by the machine to factories, steel mills, and offices. 4. The closing of the frontier meant that workers could no longer escape their difficulties in the cities by going west and starting a homestead. This led to a sharpening of the conflict between capital and labor, to the problems of unemployment and insecurity, and to a demand for social welfare legislation. Early progress in manufacturing. For nearly a century the United States found its greatest wealth in the river and the ocean, the forest, the farm, and the mine. Although manufacturing made rapid strides, for nearly a century the United States was engaged primarily in the production of raw materials. The factory had its feeble beginnings before the close of the eighteenth century. During the War of 1812 and after, manufacturing secured help from the federal government in the form of protective tariffs. But the existence of an expanding market, the presence of raw materials, and the practical inventive genius of the people were probably more powerful stimulants to the growth of American manufactures than the tariff. The War between the States (pages 348-351) furnished a great stimulus, and American industry leaped forward. Within twenty years, from 1S60 to 1880, the value of domestic manufactures more than doubled. Following 1S80 the rate of advance was even greater; the progress has continued until today the United States leads the nations of the world in the variety and value of its manufacturing output. Factors in the development of American manufacturing. Once the Industrial Revolution gained headway in the United States, it made rapid advances. No interstate tariff barriers hampered access to a large and growing market. A fairly adequate banking and credit system facilitated trade. The high tariffs set during the War between the States, which were continued in effect, kept out foreign competition. Armies of labor. The economic revolution was much more than the substitution of machinery for manual labor on the farm and in the mill; it was more than the rise of the great factor)' to take the place of the wayside craftsman's shop. It also included the unending line of recruits who knocked at the doors of the great industrial organizations, many of which counted their workmen by tens of thousands. Men and women and children did the shop or mill work and, by force of circumstance, changed their mode of living and their ways of thinking. The labor supply came from many sources. Many of the laborers came from farms. Regular hours, the opportunities for companionship, for varied amusements, and for intellectual improvement in the cities attracted a steady stream of farm laborers to the industrial centers. (2) Many of the laborers were immigrants; between 1850 and 1914, instead of moving to the West, immigrants crowded into the factory cities. Employers maintained a powerful lobby to prevent the enactment of laws that would check this source of cheap labor. On the other hand, American labor organizations began to demand the restriction of immigration. The transfer of industries from the home to the factory and the ease with which machinery could be operated attracted into the wage-earning class women and children who formerly remained at home. Low wages paid to men made it necessary for women and children to add to the family income. Reasons for the development of a labor movement. The growth of an organized labor movement was the result of economic changes, fear of the loss of work, and low wages. 1. Economic changes. The successful organization of large groups of laborers in the United States coincides with the disappearance of the frontier, the development of large industrial combinations, and the growth of cities. In earlier years the existence of free land furnished an outlet for the underpaid and discontented. With the coming of the Industrial Revolution and the congestion it created, there was no longer a satisfactory escape for the toi * ing masses. The employers met some of their problems by forming pools, trusts, holding companies, and manufacturing associations. 2.Fear of the loss of work. The new working conditions in industry separated the employers and the employees. More than likely the higher officials of the corporation seldom saw the workrooms and knew little if anything of the conditions under which the workmen lived. Hiring laborers was as impersonal as purchasing raw materials. When money could be saved by cutting down the number of workers, employees were laid off or discharged as casually as the stopping of an unneeded piece of machinery. 3.Since industry was organized to make a profit on the investment of capital, businessmen used every means to accomplish that purpose. None offered greater promise of immediate results than low wages. Cheap labor in the form of children, women, and immigrants provided opportunities for profits. Early labor unions. The unionization of workers was pretty well under way at the time of President Jackson. Then local organizations of skilled laborers achieved some success. But local craft unions could not achieve as much as combinations of unions on a national scale. To these larger combinations labor leaders directed their efforts after the War between the States. Many national unions imitated the KnowNothing and the old Ku Klux Klan societies, taking on fantastic names, holding meetings in secret, with solemn ceremonies directed by officers with royal titles. Such, for example, were the Supreme Mechanical Order of die Sun, the Knights of St. Crispin, and the Noble Order of the Knights of Labor. There were also a few organizations of a more matter-of-fact type. One of these was the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, which has continued to the present day. The Knights of Labor (1869-86). The Knights of Labor was the first important attempt to organize workers on a national scale. 1. Organization. It was founded in 1869 by Uriah S. Stephens, a Philadelphia tailor, under whose leadership several local garment workers' unions in eastern cities expanded into a national union which included laborers of all kinds, skilled and unskilled, and even nonworkers. After the Knights of Labor dropped its secret features (1879) it rapidly grew in numbers. 2. Demands. Among the demands of labor at this time were the following: shorter hours, better pay, and better conditions of work; workmen's compensation; compulsory school laws; abolition of child labor; a graduated income tax; inheritance taxes; postal savings banks; government ownership of railroads, telephones, and telegraphs; the formation of producers' and consumers' co-operatives. These demands pitched battles have usually resulted when federal troops, the state militia, or the police have been used to break up a strike. At other times violence has resulted when corporations imported "strikebreakers" to end a strike. Strikes are a serious and important business. Evils in themselves, they are also symptoms of evils in our social and economic structure. The achievements of organized labor. The achievements of organized labor have been many. 1. Limitation of the hours of work. The eight-hour day became a reality, first in government work and then in practically all industries; recent legislation and practice has established forty hours per week as the standard work week (pages 587-588). 2.State laws. A number of laws have been passed by the various states for improving the conditions of labor — limiting the hours of work of women and children, compelling the installation in mine and factory of devices to protect the safety and health of the worker, and requiring the employers to provide compensation to injured workers. The sweat-shop system has been attacked by a number of state laws; government employment agencies have been established; free public education and compulsory school attendance have become facts. Many states had child labor laws, and, even before the Social Security Act of 1935 (pages 622-624), had adopted old-age and widows' pensions, and had begun to adopt plans of unemployment insurance. 3.Federal legislation. The federal government has also enacted a series of laws of benefit to labor. In 1884 Congress created a Bureau of Labor Statistics. In 1913 the Department of Labor was created as a separate department. The following year the Clayton Antitrust Act (pages 530-531) extended certain benefits to labor. In 1915 the La Follette Seaman's Act corrected the labor conditions prevailing on ocean-going vessels and on river and lake craft. In 1916, by threatening to tie up the transportation system of the country, the railroad labor unions virtually forced Congress to pass the Adamson Act, which established a basic eight-hour day for railroad employees. Beginning in 1921 Congress passed laws to restrict immigration, a great achievement for organized labor. Some of labor's greatest gains were won during the era of the New Deal and World War II (pages 583-588). 4.Congressional attempts to limit child labor. By 1916 the movement to abolish child labor had achieved considerable success in many of the states. Manufacturers in states with the strong child labor laws argued that their competitors in states which had no such laws enjoyed cheaper production costs. Congress therefore attempted to limit child labor by a law (Keating-Owen Act) which excluded from interstate transportation all goods made in factories which employed persons under fourteen years of age. The Supreme Court in 1918 (Hammer os. Dagenhart) by a vote of five to four declared this law unconstitutional on the ground that it was a violation of the Tenth Amend twentieth century to foment a feeling of ill will and discrimination toward the Negro, the Jew, and the Catholic. The fact that the movement was ridiculed by the bulk of the people and was comparatively short-lived gives some hope that as time passes, much of the prejudice against the Negro and other racial groups will tend to disappear. However, there was a revival of Klan activities after World War II. The yellow race. Other racial problems have become acute during America's industrial transformation. The liberal immigration policy encouraged large numbers of the yellow race to come to America. Their presence was tending to cause the same racial trouble in the Pacific coast states that the presence of the black race has caused elsewhere. To avoid another racial problem the government took steps in 1882 to check Chinese immigration and in 1907 brought Japanese immigration nearly to an end. Restrictions have been eased since World War II. For the Indian problem, see pages 372-374.) Factors tending to cause a decline in racial prejudice. Every now and then America suffers outbreaks of racial and religious intolerance, such as the "Know-Nothing" movement of the 1850's, the American Protective Association movement of the 1890's, the Ku Klux Klan movement of the 1920's and mid-1940's. These and other prejudice movements are directed against minority racial or religious groups. Part of the intolerance is caused by ignorance and stupid prejudices, and part of it is based upon the fear of economic competition. Unscrupulous leaders also see an opportunity to enrich themselves by organizing these societies. Agitators and vote-seeking politicians sometimes play upon racial sympathies and prejudices to further their own ends. Not only have the Negroes suffered from these unreasoned prejudices, but other groups as well — Jews, Catholics, and the various "minority" racial groups that make up the American people. In the past these waves of intolerance and prejudice have not enjoyed a very long life. The intermingling of various racial groups in many sections of the country, particularly in our large cities, and the ever-widening influence of the public schools have tended to emphasize the American ideals of tolerance and equality. However, false notions of racial inequality, popularized by the unscrupulous, and the economic competition for jobs have caused many to fear serious outbreaks of prejudice and discrimination. Undoubtedly racial and group intolerance is one of America's most pressing social problems. Much more has to be done before Americans may justly boast of their intelligence and their sense of justice'. A summary of important changes. In the previous chapter we reviewed the presidential campaigns of an interesting period in American history. It was a period in which the population of the country more than doubled: 31,000,000 in 1860, 38,000,000 in 1870, and 76,000,000 in 1900. It was a period when immigrants flocked to our shores by tens of thousands, when our cities grew rapidly in size and number, when politics gave flagrant evidences of its ugliness in the cities, in the states, and in the nation. It was the period when the prostrate South slowly recovered from the war and the "crime of reconstruction," when railroads spanned the continent, when big businessmen organized American industry, when the farm lands of the West began to yield rich harvests, and when national labor unions began to play an important part in American life. It was a period of great progress; it was also a period of unrest and discontent as the people struggled to adjust themselves to the great changes that were taking place. The people, then as now, formed many associations to champion the cause of various reforms. The country debated many issues; and some of them it still continues to debate. What is the best tariff policy? How shall we rid ourselves of political corruption? How shall we deal with "Big Business," with monopoly prices, with the "unfair practices" of railroads? How shall we rid ourselves of panics and depressions and extend prosperity to all groups and all sections? How can we develop a banking and credit system that will serve the needs of all and yield special privileges to none? And there was then, as always, the political question: what part should government play in helping the people find the answers to these questions? The rise of the West. As might be expected in a country as big and diverse as the United States, not all of these questions have been in the forefront of popular interest at the same time. In the last third of the nineteenth century — the period of the "emergence of modern America" — the outstanding political development was the revolt of the farmers of the West and South against the dominant influence of captains of industry, railroad magnates, and banking overlords. The West grew rapidly; with the help of laborsaving machinery the American farmers THE GREAT CRUSADE IS FOLLOWED BY REACTION AND NORMALCY Warren G. Harding, 1921-23. By the phrase "return to normalcy" President Harding meant that we should adjust our economy once again to the tasks of peace, forget our great adventure in world affairs, and set our domestic house in order — revise the tariff upward, curtail expenditures, pay our debts, and reduce taxes. Harding's administration concluded a separate peace with Germany, sponsored the Washington Conference on Naval Limitation and Far Eastern Affairs (pages 706-707), and in the domestic field initiated budget reform, a high tariff, and the restriction of immigration. 1. The national budget. Unbusinesslike methods had been followed by Congress in drawing up tax bills and in appropriating public funds. Several committees of Congress had a hand in the process and there was no co-ordination among them. The haphazard system of appropriations encouraged "logrolling" by the members of Congress, each of whom tried to secure for his own district elaborate post offices, expensive river and harbor improvements, and so on. The National Budget Act of 1921 created a Bureau of the Budget with a director at its head. It is the duty of the director to obtain estimates of future needs from the various heads of departments and to prepare the budget — an estimate of receipts and expenditures for the ensuing year. The budget is then sent by the President to Congress, which has the power to disregard or change the various items. Charles G. Dawes was the first Director of the Budget and gave the new system a good start. The fact that Congress can disregard the budget is the essential weakness of the plan; however, a vigorous President, if he so desires, can create a live public opinion which can do much to compel a 'logrolling" Congress to toe the mark. 2. The Fordney-McCumber Tariff, 1922. The Harding administration also undertook to revise the tariff. The result was the FordneyMcCumber Tariff, which raised the average level of duties to the highest point yet reached in the nation's history. The Fordney-McCumber Act contained one novel feature — a "flexible" clause permitting the later years place it as high as 50 per cent. The percentage of farm tenancy differs in the different sections, being as low as 6 per cent in the New England states and as high as 63 per cent in the South Central states. This trend of the farm population from independent landowner to propertyless tenant is in itself a social fact of great importance. Agriculture and the machine age. Despite the decline in the number of farms and farmers, America's farm production did not decline. The reason for this was the continued mechanization of agriculture and the increasing use of scientific methods of farming. The combine, the tractor, the internal-combustion stationary engine, the corn picker, the cotton sledder, the cream separator, and a hundred other kinds of machines took the place of farm laborers. As an illustration, in 1920 there were about two hundred fifty thousand tractors in use on American farms; in 1930 there were about nine hundred thousand. Because of superior mechanical equipment the American farmer produces a larger crop per man than any other farmer in the world. At the same time crop production per acre has been lower in the United States than in many European countries, due to tire fact that we have not felt any need to economize in the use of land. However, farm machinery is costly and its benefits can be secured only on large farms, or by a group of small farmers co-operating in its purchase and use. Scientific farming and machine farming have tremendously increased output. They have not solved the farmer's problems; they have aggravated them. As the farmer was bringing more land under cultivation, much of it poor land, and increasing his output through mechanization, he was losing his former world market. Canada, Argentina, Australia, and Russia competed increasingly with the American wheat grower; the British colonies, Japan, and China with our tobacco growers; and India and Egypt with our cotton growers. Moreover, the restriction of immigration and the decline in the rate of population growth prevented any large increase in the demand at home for agricultural products. Changes in the dietary habits of the people, as well as the substitution of tractors and automobiles for approximately ten million horses and mules, further limited the market for American farmers.Farm co-operative associations. Apart from the "industrialization" of the farm, probably the most important development among American farmers is the organization of co-operative enterprises of various sorts. This movement is in itself a significant social development, because the American farmer is, by tradition, imbued with a spirit of independence, initiative, and self-reliance. The present civilization of the Western Hemisphere is dominated by peoples of Old World origin. Ever since the days of Columbus, successive waves of immigration have poured into the New World. According to the first census (1790) the population of the country' was a little less than four million. The census of 1950 gave the continental population of the United States as close to one hundred fifty million. Immigration contributed no small part to this stupendous growth. Causes of immigration. The causes of immigration have been many; but outstanding at all times has been the economic motive — the desire for land ownership. Even when religious, political, and racial persecutions played their part in causing people to seek another place to live, the desire for economic improvement was usually present also. Colonial immigration. In the colonial period a number of different peoples of Europe settled on the Atlantic seaboard. There were, for example, French, Dutch, Swedish, German, Irish, and Scotch, although most of the settlers in what is now the United States were English. Since the English predominated, they determined the language, laws, and forms of government that became the basis of American life. The periods of immigration. There are about five great periods in the history of immigration to the United States: the first, from the close of the Revolution to about 1825; the second, from 1825 to the War between the States; the third, from the close of the War between the States to about 1890; the fourth, from 1890 to World War I; and the fifth, from World War I to the present. Immigration before the War between the States. In the first period a total of about three hundred thousand people came to this country, chiefly from the nations of northern and western Europe. In the second period there arrived about five million immigrants from the same countries. This migration included large groups of German and Irish immigrants, especially in the period between 1845 and 1855. The Irish potato famine of 1846 and 1847 and dissatisfaction with England's economic and political policies toward Ireland sent hundreds of thousands of Irish to our shores. Within a period of about seven years more than a million and a half Irish came to the United States. Political troubles in Germany in 1848 led hundreds of thousands of Germans to seek refuge in the United States. The beginnings of opposition to the immigrant. During this period the older settlers began to show signs of opposition toward the newer ones. The immigrant has always been content — at least for a few years after his coming — to accept a lower standard of living than those already here. The immigrants who furnished the bulk of the unskilled labor of the country crowded the earlier inhabitants out of the lowly and poorly paid jobs, and were later crowded out themselves by succeeding waves of immigrants. Labor began to oppose unrestricted immigration on the ground that immigrants tended to keep wages down and to lower the American standard of living. Prejudice toward the new immigrant also began to appear at this time. This prejudice was based on differences in religions and on differences in nationality. Very frequently, however, it was really caused by fear that the immigrant was taking jobs and economic opportunities away from the earlier immigrants. As early as the 1830's secret societies were formed to protest against the foreigner, and "native" Americans organized political movements to discriminate against him. One evidence of this feeling was the Know-Nothing movement of the 1850's; a more recent manifestation of it was the Ku Klux Klan movement of the 1920's; more frequently local groups have organized to propagandize their pet prejudices against particular foreign groups. Despite these "nativist" movements the general policy of the government toward the immigrant was one of welcome. Americans took pride in America as the land of opportunity, the haven for the oppressed. Immigration from 1860-90. The economic revolution after the War between the States required large numbers of workers. Manufacturers and the builders of railroads welcomed immigrants. The Western states also encouraged immigration. Larger numbers than ever before began to come to the land of opportunity. The chief source of immigrants during this period continued to be Germany and the British Isles; large numbers also came from the Scandinavian countries. The "new" immigration, 1890-1914. As the decades of the 1880's closed, it was noticeable that the origin of the immigrant stream shifted from northern and western to southern and southeastern Europe. For example, in the early 1880's about three fourths of the immigrants were from northwestern Europe. Some twenty years later, nearly three fourths came from Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Italy. Taking the census year of 1890 as an arbitrary date, it has become customary to refer to the immigration before that year as the "old" immigration and that since 1890 as the "new" immigration. By 1900, Mulberry Street was the heart of "Little Italy" in New York City. Many of the poorest Italian immigrants from southern Italy settled in this district. The problem of Americanization. The new immigrants crowded together with others of their own kind. Most of our great cities soon had areas known, for instance, as "Little Italy," "Little Greece," "Little Bohemia." Bewildered by their inability to speak our language, the immigrants read foreign-language newspapers and went to foreign-language churches and theaters. The older people found it almost impossible to become Americanized. The public schools, however, did invaluable work, and the second generation of foreigners quickly adapted themselves to the ideals and conditions of American life. Various organizations attempted to carry the work of Americanization to the adult foreigners, but the task was extremely difficult. The necessity for Americanization was obvious when war broke out in 1914. The problem that resulted while America was a neutral was embarrassing enough; it became a serious matter when the United States entered the war. Although most of the "hyphenated" Americans, as they were called, supported the country of their adoption, some did so reluctantly and some were outspoken in their sympathy with America's enemies. This wartime experience was a factor which strengthened tire movement for Americanization and the demands of labor for the restriction of immigration. Selective immigration. With the general immigration act of 1882 Congress began the practice of selective immigration. This law suspended Chinese immigration, the only definitely restrictive law that Congress passed until 1921. But between 1882 and 1921 Congress passed a series of laws which excluded certain classes of immigrants. In general these laws excluded: (1) criminals, (2) the mentally disabled, (3) those afflicted with certain diseases, (4) those likely to become public charges, (5) anarchists and other radicals who advocated the overthrow of government by force, (6) contract laborers, that is, those who were contracted for by steamship companies or industrial corporations, (7) polygamists, (8) aliens not eligible for citizenship (this referred chiefly to all Asiatics), and (9) those "who cannot read the English language or some other language or dialect." This literacy test was vetoed by Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson, but was finally passed over Wilson's veto in 1917. Restrictive immigration. After World War I there was a rush of immigrants to the New World. Fearing that the problem of Americanization would get beyond control, and that serious disturbances might attend the addition of large numbers to our labor supply during a period of adjustment, Congress passed an immigration bill. 1. The law of 1921. This law — the first to restrict immigration by numbers, or quotas — specified that each nation would be allowed to send to the United States each year no more than 3 per cent of the number of persons of that nation in the United States as shown by the census of 1910. The number expected to enter was about three hundred fifty thousand; but the law permitted so many exceptions that in 1924 twice that number entered the country. 2. Discrimination in favor of the old immigration. In 1924 Congress reduced the number of immigrants allowed to enter. Two per cent of the foreign "nationals" in the country, according to the census of 1890, were permitted to enter. On this basis the annual quota was about one hundred sixty-seven thousand. The 1890 census was used as a basis for the determination of quotas in order to cut down the proportion of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. One of the chief reasons for discriminating in favor of the peoples of northern and western Europe was the popular, although false, notion, that the people of northern and western Europe are superior mentally and physically to the peoples of southern Europe. This theory of "Nordic supremacy," although no reputable scientist sustains it, flatters the "Nordic." Hitler and the Nazis gave some popularity to this idea. The National Origins Plan, July, 1929. The 2 per cent feature of the law of 1924 was temporary. The permanent feature of the law is known as the "national origins plan." 1.Determination of quotas. The national origins plan of quota restriction, which finally went into effect July 1, 1929, provides that the total immigration from "quota" countries in one year shall be limited to 150,000. "The annual quota for any one nationality shall be the number which bears the same ratio to 150,000 as the number of inhabitants in continental United States in 1920 having that national origin bears to the number of inhabitants in continental United States in 1920 of European origin." The great difficulty in applying the principle was to determine the number of inhabitants in 1920 of the national origin of the group to be admitted. A special Quota Board was set up to determine this figure and the annual quota for each country. In filing its report, the Quota Board observed that "the information available raises grave doubts as to the value of these computations as the basis for the purpose intended." 2.Other features of the Quota Law. There are three other features of the law which need mention. First, the law specified that every country should be allowed to send a minimum of one hundred immigrants per year, even though its quota figure fell below that amount Secondly, the law definitely excluded Asiatic immigrants. In the third place, the Quota Law did not apply to the Western Hemisphere. 3.Nonquota immigration from the Western Hemisphere. Since 1929 nonquota immigration to the United States from countries of the Western Hemisphere has been as heavy in some years as the quota immigration from Europe. Thousands of laborers from Mexico have crossed the border into our Southwest. There they are welcomed by fruit and beet-sugar growers and other employers of unskilled labor. Some have proposed that quotas be assigned to the countries of Latin America, but nothing has been done, partly because the depression acted as a bar to immigration and partly because employers objected to cutting off the supply of low-paid laborers. The immigration of Asiatics. The way in which our immigration policy may influence our international friendships is best illustrated by the story of the exclusion of Asiatics. 1.Opposition to the Chinese. After the settlement of California in the middle of the last century large numbers of Chinese migrated to the Pacific coast, where they worked as unskilled laborers. Many were imported to work on railroad construction. Gradually opposition to Chinese immigration developed, and in 18S0 China, by treaty, recognized the right of the United States to "regulate, limit or suspend" the immigration of Chinese laborers. In 1882 Congress suspended Chinese immigration for a ten-year period. This restriction was later renewed. In 1894, by another treaty, the entry of Chinese laborers was prohibited for ten years, and in 1904 Congress continued the exclusion of the Chinese without any time limit. During World War II (1943) this law was repealed and the Chinese placed under the provisions of the Quota Law. 2.The "gentlemen's agreement" with Japan. Meanwhile, Japanese immigration began to grow in numbers. The Japanese, instead of engaging in manual tasks, obtained land and began to compete with American farmers. The presence of the Japanese became an issue in the politics of the Pacific states, particularly in California. Japanese children were for a short time excluded from the public schools. Japanese were not allowed to become landowners. The Pacific states even proposed to check immigration by state action. The Japanese government protested to the federal government, which could do nothing but inform the Japanese officials that it had no control over the school or land laws of states. The situation was tense. The whole problem was quietly solved by the famous "gentlemen's agreement" of 1907, by which Japan promised to refuse passports to Japanese laborers seeking admittance to the United States. The United States was content to let Japan control the migration of her own people. 3.Abrogation of the gentlemen's agreement. Although Japan lived up to her promise, congressmen from the Pacific coast, in the debate on the law of 1924, urged that the United States abrogate the gentlemen's agreement of 1907 and assume direct control over her own immigration policy. The protest of the Japanese ambassador and his statement that "grave consequences" might follow such an act stirred the nationalistic ardor of Congress, and the threat was answered by the insertion of a clause stating that "aliens ineligible to citizenship" could not be admitted. In approving the law of 1924 Coolidge expressed regret that Congress had seen fit to abrogate the gentlemen's agreement. This feature of the law of 1924 was a factor in weakening the friendly relations that Japan and the United States had maintained for some time. Refugees and displaced persons. Conditions in Europe in the 1930's brought up the question of modifying our quota laws to admit a large number of political and religious refugees. Nothing was done, however, until after World War II, when the problem of finding a haven for hundreds of thousands of displaced persons was particularly acute. In 1948 a law permitted the entry of 205,000 displaced persons over a two-year period. Many leaders in both the Democratic and Republican parties were dissatisfied because the law clearly discriminated against a large percentage of displaced persons. In 1950 the restrictions were removed and the number of displaced persons permitted entry was increased to 345,000. The McCarran-Walter Immigration Act of 1952. Congress enacted a new comprehensive immigration law in June 1952. Many had hoped that this law would do away with the peculiar provisions of the 1924 law. But the law in substance retained the provisions of the earlier law on maximum immigration and the quota system. It thus continued the discriminatory restrictions on immigration from eastern and southern Europe. The new law removed the outright ban against Asiatic and Pacific immigration but limited the immigration from this area to 2000. The law established a screening process in an effort to keep out "subversives and other undesirables." Special powers were given to the Attorney Ceneral to deport immigrants who were members of the Communist party or Communist front organizations, even after they acquired United States citizenship. President Truman wrote a vigorous message vetoing the bill, claiming that it was discriminatory, unenlightened, and that it would " intensify the repressive and inhumane aspects of our immigration procedure." But by a narrow margin Congress overrode the President's veto and the McCarranWalter Act became law. Words and Phrases Americanization, assimilation, contract labor, gentlemen's agreement, literacy test, national origins plan, "new" immigration, "Nordic supremacy," "old" immigration, restrictive immigration, selective immigration Questions for Understanding the Text 1.What are the chief causes of the movement of peoples? 2.What economic interests have opposed and what interests have supported unrestricted immigration? 3.What is meant by the theory of "Nordic supremacy'? 4.What has been the attitude of the United States toward Asiatic immigration? Assuming that you had been a member of Congress in 1924, prepare a brief speech explaining your vote on the question of abrogating the gentlemen's agreement with Japan. (If library facilities permit, compare with speeches actually delivered by members of Congress.) 5. Account for the repeal of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1943. At the same time that fuels were being wasted in use, water power which might have been utilized to check the waste of coal was little used. Not only was the water power not used, but the water was allowed to do much damage in floods. The control of floods depends in part on reforestation and in part on building basins or lakes to contain the surplus water. The damage done by the Ohio floods of 1937 alone has been estimated as high as $500,000,000. Limits to American resources. The increase in the use of natural resources became alarming to thoughtful students. In 1870 thirty million tons of coal were mined; in 1900, three hundred million tons. Similar increases in the consumption of iron ore, petroleum, and other mineral resources raised the question of the future of an industrial nation without natural resources. A government commission estimated that our coal supply would be exhausted in one hundred fifty years, our supply of iron ore in less than fifty years. Alarming guesses of this character stimulate the exploitation and discovery of new sources of iron ore, oil, and other raw materials, the search for substitutes and a more economical and efficient use of raw materials in order to postpone the approach of shortage or exhaustion (pages 377-378, 616). The government of Puerto Rico. For over half a century Puerto Rico was an unincorporated territory; that is, all parts of the American constitution did not apply to it. The main features of the Puerto Rican government, as fixed by laws passed in 1900 and 1917, were as follows: (1) The executive authority was vested in a governor appointed by the President of the United States. (By a law of 1947, the Puerto Ricans elected their own governor, but the President continued to appoint some administrative and judicial officials.) (2) There was a two-house legislature. The laws were subject to veto by the governor, but if the legislature overrode the veto, the law was submitted to the President of the United States, who had absolute veto. (3) The citizens of Puerto Rico were citizens of the United States. (4) Puerto Rico was represented at Washington by a commissioner who had the courtesy of the floor of the House of Representatives, but no vote. (5) Articles of commerce exported to the United States were exempt from customs duties, but were subject to revenue taxes just as if they had been produced in the United States. However, the tax collected on Puerto Rican products was turned over to the Puerto Rican treasury. Under this regime some Puerto Ricans agitated for complete independence, some for commonwealth status, and others for statehood, a proposal endorsed by the Democratic platform of 1932. The great majority of Puerto Ricans steadily advocated a greater voice in their own government. Thus they were greatly pleased when President Truman appointed a native Puerto Rican as governor and when Congress gave them the power to elect their own governor. Puerto Rico finally achieved "home rule" in 1952 when a constitution drafted by Puerto Ricans and approved in a popular referendum by a vote of 375,000 to 83,000 was also approved by Congress. The new constitution gives Puerto Ricans complete control of their own government, but at the same time links Puerto Rico to the United States as part of its federal structure. The status of "The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico," as it is referred to in the constitution, might be described as somewhat similar to that of a British commonwealth like Canada. The republics of Central and South America. There arc twentyone republics in the Western Hemisphere. At one time they were all under the rule of European powers — England, Spain, France, and Portugal. By a series of revolutions, of which our own was the first, they have achieved their independence, so that today on the mainland of North America, England alone retains any possessions — Canada, a member of the British Commonwealth of Nations, and, in Central America, British Honduras. In South America, England, France, and Holland retain possession of a small area known as Guiana. France and England also retain some islands in the Caribbean. The total population of South America is about 108,000,000; of Central America and Mexico, about 33,000,000. The most populous countries arc Mexico with about 25,500,000; Brazil, with 53,000,000; Argentina has a population of approximately 17,000,000; Colombia, 11,200,000; Peru, 18,400,000; and Chile, 6,000'()00. Rather advanced civilizations had developed among the natives of Mexico and Peru hundreds of years before the opening of the Western Hemisphere to European colonization. The Spaniards and Portuguese reduced the natives to virtual slavery, with two notable results: first, continued domination by wealthy aristocrats; and second, fusion of three main racial elements — Indian, European, and Negro. Resources of Central and South American nations. Central and South America are rich in mineral resources, raw materials, and in fertile fields which produce enormous amounts of grain and maintain a large livestock industry. South America is, therefore, one of the world's great sources of raw materials. Latin America exports 85 per cent of the world's coffee, 55 per cent of the beef, 25 per cent of the wheat and wheat flour, 30 per cent of the hides and skins, and 25 per cent of the wool. It also exports quantities of lumber and other forest products, tobacco, cotton, nitrates, tin, copper, and other minerals. Its great need is for textiles, machinery, and manufactured articles, and for capital to develop its resources and transportation system. The citizens of foreign countries — Germany, Italy, France, England, and Japan, particularly — have invested heavily in South America. Citizens of the United States have invested billions in Central and South America. Association and co-operation of equal states for the promotion of common ends; to still others the term Pan-Americanism has been regarded as an instrument of "Yankee imperialism." To get rid of the bad odor that formerly attached to the term "Pan-Americanism," the movement is now called Inter-American Co-operation, and the Pan-American Conferences are now known as the International Conferences of American States. The new names emphasize significant changes in American policy and in the spirit and character of the movement. An early Pan-American Congress. The ideal of in ter-American cooperation is a logical consequence of the Monroe Doctrine — in a sense the positive aspect of the Doctrine; namely, the promotion of friendly co-operation among the republics of the New World. Simon Bolivar, the great South American patriot and revolutionary, in the 1820's envisioned a federation of the American states for the purpose of protecting the Americas from European interference; he was the leading spirit in the promotion of a Panama Congress in 1826 (page 234). In the early years of the nineteenth century Henry Clay was the great advocate of close ties with Latin America. But the United States did not take part in any of the four American Congresses which were held in 1826, 1847, 1856, and 1864. The Monroe Doctrine, which might have been converted into an inter-American doctrine, remained exclusively a doctrine of the United States. The Pan American Union. Blaine revived the idea of co-operation and economic reciprocity among the Americas and became president of the first Pan-American Conference in 1889 (pages 648-651). The Pan American Union created by this first conference is supported by the contributions, apportioned according to population, of the republics of the Western Hemisphere. It is managed by a governing board representing all the republics of the Western Hemisphere. The Union issues a monthly bulletin in English, Spanish, and Portuguese. It is housed at Washington in the beautiful Pan-American Building, erected by Andrew Carnegie. In addition to making arrangements for the holding of the general International Conferences of American States the Union has arranged for many special conferences of journalists, jurists, scientists, educators, and others. Its aims are to develop commerce, friendly intercourse, and understanding and to preserve peace. International Conferences of American States. Since the first conference in 1889 eight others have been held: in Mexico City, 1901; Rio de Janeiro, 1906; Buenos Aires, 1910; Santiago de Chile, 1923; Havana, 1928; Montevideo, 1933; Lima, Peru, 1938; Bogota, 1948. The conferences give an opportunity for the exchange of ideas and the discussion of grievances, plans for arbitration treaties, and trade relations. They have also been instrumental in clarifying basic principles of international law. The ninth conference at Bogotd, the capital of Colombia, drafted a new charter for the organization of American states. Agriculture is possible on approximately 1,900,000 acres, but less than one third are actually under cultivation. The strategic value of Alaska and the Aleutian Islands as the shortest route to Japan was clearly demonstrated during World War II. 2. Hawaii. The Hawaiian group of islands, situated a little more than 2000 miles southwest of San Francisco, comprises a total area of about 6400 square miles. The population of the eight inhabited islands in 1950 was close to 500,000, only a small portion of which is native Hawaiian. About one fourth of the population are of Japanese origin; about one tenth are Filipinos. As a result of the United States immigration laws no Japanese were admitted in recent years, but the number of Filipino immigrants increased. The chief products of the islands are sugar and pineapples. The great bulk of Hawaiian trade is with the rest of the United States; about 90 per cent of Hawaii's imports from the mainland, while 98 per cent of her exports go there. THE PHILIPPINES PROVE TO BE A "TREASURE AND A PROBLEM" Population and races. The Philippine archipelago, situated some 500 miles off the coast of China, consists of 7000 islands, most of them being mere bits of rock sticking out of the ocean. The entire archipelago is about 1100 miles in length and nearly 700 miles in width. The Philippines have in all a land area of about 115,000 square miles. The population — more than 19,500,000 in 1950 — is composed of a wide variety of races, illustrating every degree of civilization. A few of them at the time of American acquisition were little more than savages; but under American occupation savage practices have been largely abandoned and the wilder tribes are approaching a state of semi-civilization. There are about seven main branches of language with perhaps eighty-seven different dialects. Ninety per cent of the population are Filipinos. Most of them are Christians, having been converted to Roman Catholicism by Spanish missionaries. About 400,000 inhabitants of the island of Mindanao are Mohammedans — called Moros by the Spaniards, after the Mohammedan Moors who once dominated Spain. Resources. It is almost impossible to exaggerate the importance of the islands as an agricultural producing center. Farming methods, however, still need considerable improvement, and only about one third of the available farm land is under cultivation. The chief products arc tobacco, sugar, hemp, and coconut oil. The islands also contain some minerals not as yet developed to any great extent. Government experts have reported that the islands possess about two million acres suitable for the cultivation of rubber. About 70 per cent of the trade of the Philippines is with the United States. The Philippine Commission. The government of the Philippines has been one of our country's most difficult tasks. Just before the Spanish-American War the Spaniards had crushed a Filipino revolt; at the time of the American conquest a number of the rebels expected the United States to assist them in achieving independence. When it became apparent that this was not the intention of the United States, a revolt led by Aguinaldo broke out against the Americans. It took the army some years to subdue the Filipinos. In 1901 the American military authorities surrendered control of the country to a civil body — the Philippine Commission — and William H. Taft became the first governor. In 1907 the Filipinos were given a legislature, but the Commission, appointed by the President, continued to act as an upper house. The Jones Act. Under Wilson the Filipinos were given a larger share in the government. In 1916 Congress passed the Jones Act, which established the government of the Philippines until 1935. Both houses of the legislature were elected by the Filipinos themselves; that is, those Filipinos who owned property, or paid taxes, or could read and write. The chief executive was the governor general, appointed by the President of the United States. He had the power to veto acts passed by the legislature; and if the legislature passed these bills over his veto, they had to be submitted to the President for his approval. Neither the United States nor the Philippine Islands taxed imports from one another. The Filipinos were never granted United States citizenship. The promise of independence. The Jones Act contained the following preamble: "It is, as it has always been, the purpose of the people of the United States to withdraw their sovereignty over the Philippine Islands and to recognize their independence as soon as a stable government can be established therein." This promise encouraged many Filipinos to agitate for independence. At times serious difficulties developed and various Presidents sent investigating commissions to study conditions and make recommendations. Each investigation produced administrative reforms and increased the opportunity of the Filipinos for self-government; but each reported against the granting of independence, largely on the ground that the Filipinos had not achieved a "stable political or economic system." But beginning in 1929 new forces within America were beginning to work on the side of Philippine independence. (1) Possession of the islands had not materially increased our trade with China and the Far East. (2) The cost of administering, fortifying, and defending the islands was beyond all proportion to the value of the Filipino trade; "imperialism" in the Philippines did not pay. (3) Military and naval experts questioned the ability of the United States to defend the Philippines successfully without weakening our defense of Hawaii, the Pacific coast, and the Canal Zone. (4) Migration of Filipinos to California, like the Japanese migration of twenty years before, led to a demand for a restrictive policy. We could hardly shut out the Filipinos so long as the Philippines belonged to the United States. (5) American competitors of Filipino exports desired a tarifs on Filipino products. Philippine independence. In January, 1933, Congress passed over President Hoover's veto a complicated bill granting independence to the Philippines, after a ten-year trial period of self-government. Before becoming effective this bill had to be accepted by the Philippine legislature; but that body rejected it in the summer of 1933 because it gave the United States the right to keep certain military and naval bases in the islands. Early in 1934 President Franklin D. Roosevelt suggested that Congress eliminate from the original bill the offending clause. On March 24, 1934, Congress passed the McDuffie-Tydings Act, carrying out the President's suggestion, and on May 1, 1934, the Philippine legislature voted to accept the bill. Independence was to be proclaimed on July 4, 1946. During the intervening years (1) the United States was to keep control over finances and foreign affairs; (2) free trade between the Philippines and the United States was to continue, except that the United States might impose its regular tariff duties on Filipino exports of sugar, coconut oil, and hemp in excess of certain amounts; (3) Filipino migration to the United States was limited to an annual quota of fifty, but after 1946 the regular immigration laws would apply; (4) beginning with 1941, the Philippines might impose gradually increasing export duties on goods exported to the United States; (5) the United States promised to enter into treaties with other nations to guarantee the neutrality of the island. In accordance with the provisions of the law, a Philippine convention drafted a new constitution. This was ratified in May, 1935. In September, Manuel Quezon was elected as the first president of the Philippine Commonwealth. A high commissioner was appointed to take charge of American interests in the islands. The new constitution contains a bill of rights, limits the president to one six-year term, and provides for a one-chamber legislature and a Supreme Court of eleven members, which has the power to declare laws unconstitutional by a two-thirds vote. There is also a provision for the compulsory arbitration of disputes between labor and capital. Having achieved this concession from the United States, many Filipinos were not so sure as formerly of their desire for complete independence. Thus, one of the Filipino commissioners suggested in the House of Representatives that independence be postponed, and President Quezon declared that "the Philippines are not anxious to be cut off completely from United States protectorship," although in campaigning for office he had declared, "An independent Philippines must depend on herself for protection." In May, 1942, the United States lost the Philippines to Japan; but after the reconquest of the islands in 1945, and shortly before his death, President Roosevelt assured the Filipinos that they would be given their independence. The United States and Japan. At the beginning of the twentieth century the United States looked with favor upon the growing strength of Japan. It thought that Japan as a strong nation might be a factor in supporting the open door policy and in checking the piecemeal partition of China by European nations. When the Japanese attempted to oust the Russians from Northern China in 1904, most Americans applauded. But Japan's success in the war was so great that American sentiment shifted, and ever since then the United States has feared Japan's increasing power in the Far East. Japan also had grounds for suspicion of the United States. President Roosevelt actively intervened to bring the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-05 to a close (in a peace treaty signed at Portsmouth, New Hampshire). During the negotiations Roosevelt urged Japan to be moderate in her demands upon Russia. Subsequently, many Japanese claimed that Roosevelt acted as he did in order to deprive Japan of the fruits of victory. Furthermore, Japan resented American hostility to Japanese immigrants (page 606). World War I and conditions in the Far East. Japan used the opportunity presented by World War I to insist that China agree to twenty-one demands. Hie net effect of these demands (1915) was to give Japan the dominant position in China and the Orient. Secretary of State Bryan sent a mild note of protest to Japan. China accepted Japan's demands after they had been considerably modified. Two years later, by means of the Lansing-Ishii agreement (1917) the United States recognized that Japan had special interests in China, "particularly in the part to which her possessions are contiguous." Many Chinese leaders began to feel that American friendship, as manifested by Hay's diplomacy and the return of a portion of the Boxer indemnity, had become lukewarm. World War I strengthened the Japanese position. The European powers were weakened by four years of conflict; Japan emerged stronger than ever. She received the German possessions in the Pacific north of the equator as a mandate from the League. She was also given control of Shantung, a Chinese peninsula which Germany had controlled. The Far Eastern question and naval rivalry. The United States and Japan, in a better position than the other participants in World War I, started an extensive program of naval construction. England tried to compete. In an attempt to check this rivalry, President Harding in 1920 issued a call for a conference at Washington to discuss Far Eastern affairs and the limitation of naval armaments. Since disturbed conditions in the Far East were the chief reasons for the naval construction, any agreement to limit navies depended upon the settlement of the problems of the Pacific. At the time, the Washington Conference was enthusiastically hailed as a great step toward international co-operation and peace. In the light of subsequent events, however, the Washington Conference is chiefly interesting as an object lesson of what can happen to formal statements of good intentions and solemn international treaties. The treaties limiting naval armament are described elsewhere (pages 750-752), but one clause of the naval limitation treaty deserves mention at this point. Japan and the United States agreed, with minor exceptions, to maintain the status quo as regards naval bases and fortifications in the Pacific. This agreement meant that the two countries would not enter into competition with each other to secure a preponderance of naval strength in the Pacific. We now know that Japan used the next twenty years to establish bases on numerous islands in the Pacific, many of which were mandated to her by the League of Nations at the end of World War I. Japan also violated the treaties concerning Far Eastern affairs. The more important agreements were: 1.The Four-Power Treaty. England, France, Japan, and the United States agreed (a) to respect one another's possessions in the Pacific and to refer all disputes that might develop to a conference of the four nations for consideration and settlement; and (b) to consult with each other and to determine the actions to be taken by all four nations if some other power should threaten aggressive action. 2.The Nine-Power Treaties. The treaties concerning China are referred to as Nine-Power treaties because they were agreed to by all the nations which had interests in the Pacific — England, France, Japan, Italy, China, Belgium, Holland, Portugal, and the United States. One of the Nine-Power Treaties was substantially an endorsement of the American policy of the open door. The Powers agreed (a) to respect the independence and territorial integrity of China; (b) to refrain from securing special rights and privileges in China; and (c) to support the principle of equal opportunity for all nations in trading with China. The Powers also promised to grant China full control over her own tariff policy and to take under consideration the surrender of "extraterritorial rights." (Extraterritorial rights are the special privileges that several nations had obtained to have their citizens tried under the laws and by officials of their own country rather than those of China.) INTERNATIONAL "ANARCHY" THREATENS COLLECTIVE SECURITY Chinese nationalism. The development of a strong nationalist movement in China, much more than these promises of the Powers, gave China a larger control over her own affairs. Thus, for example, in February, 1929, China assumed control of her own tariff, and in January, 1930, she announced that she would no longer recognize the extraterritorial rights of the Powers. However, she did not succeed in eliminating extraterritoriality until World War II. Japan finally withdrew from Shantung in 1929, as she had promised to do at the Washington Con[707] not able to get Congressional approval of many of the measures he advocated. Mr. Truman's failures in Congress were attributed to a coalition of Republicans, Southern Democrats, and a few conservative Democrats from other regions. The President's steady support of "civil rights legislation" (pages 811-813) alienated many Southern Democrats; still others in the South and elsewhere were opposed to what many critics of the Fair Deal began to describe as the "welfare state." A filibuster in the Senate by Southern Democrats effectively blocked Mr. Truman's "civil rights program." Enough Southern or conservative Democrats joined with Republicans to prevent the enactment of many other administration measures. The following items in the Fair Deal program were not carried out; repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act; creation of valley authorities, similar to the T.V.A., for the Columbia and Missouri rivers; admission of Alaska and Hawaii as states; approval of the St. Lawrence Seaway; passage of laws to provide federal aid to education, a universal military training program, an improved farm support program, and a national health insurance program. Congress also illustrated its independence of the President by overriding his veto of a new immigration law (page 607) and of a law designed to curb Communist activities (pages 816-817). In spite of these set-backs, however, the accomplishments of the Fair Deal were substantial. The minimum wage rate set by the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 at fortv cents an hour was raised to seventy-five cents. Congress, at the urging of the President, corrected weaknesses in the Displaced Persons Act and doubled the number of persons to be admitted (page 607). Federal rent controls were retained in modified form; the Reciprocal Trade Agreements program was continued. Although the President's National Health Insurance program, characterized by the American Medical Association as "socialized medicine," went down to defeat. Congress did appropriate funds for hospital construction, medical research, and a National Science Foundation (page 624). Congress, by laws in 1949 and 1950, subsidized slum clearance and authorized a public housing program (page 624) as well as a loan and mortgage system to encourage private construction. One of the most notable achievements of the administration was the improvement and extension of the social security system (pages 623-624). Throughout the four-year term to which Mr. Truman was elected, prosperity was general. During the spring of 1950 a mild recession occurred, with the number of unemployed increasing slightly. The outbreak of the Korean war in June, 19.50, put an end to the temporary recession. Government expenditures for war materials and the expansion of defense industries stimulated prosperity in the latter half of 1950 anti throughout 1951 and 1952. During this prosperous period, prices, taxes, and wages increased. Inflation became a real danger, [806] in their own faith those children whose parents requested such instruction. In the case of McCullom os. the Board of Education (1948) the Supreme Court (8 to 1) declared this practice unconstitutional on the ground that school property was thus devoted to a religious purpose and hence the practice was contrary to the principle of separation of church and state as expressed in the First Amendment. However, in 1952 the Supreme Court (Zorach os. Clauson) ruled that the released time program in New York was constitutional. New York children were not instructed in their religion on school property, but in churches or private property located near the school building. The policies of states and communities with regard to bus transportation also vary. Many provide free or reduced-fare transportation to school children regardless of the type of school they attend. In 1947, in Everson os. the Board of Education, the Supreme Court (5 to 4) ruled that the action of a New Jersey town in reimbursing parents for bus fares did not violate the Constitution. The issue of the separation of church and state has many aspects (for example, church property is tax exempt, and the federal government provides chaplains for the armed services). There are many who criticize the completely secular character of public education. There are others who criticize the released-time programs and the growth of parochial and private schools as divisive. They oppose the efforts of religious leaders to use the public schools in any way, direct or indirect, to inculcate religious teachings. In a few localities, Bible reading and assembly prayers and hymns have been criticized. It is not unlikely that the delicate issues involved in these cases and in the working out of a program of federal aid to education may come before the Supreme Court for final determination. The problem of civil rights legislation. During World War II, President Roosevelt, by executive order, set up a Fair Employment Practices Committee (page 449). The function of this committee was to provide to minority groups, especially Negroes, equal opportunities for work in factories having war contracts. The committee accomplished a good deal and demonstrated that the employment of whites and Negroes and people of different religious and racial backgrounds in the same factory did not cause the friction that many had anticipated. The committee was discontinued after the war. In 1945 New York passed the Ives-Quinn law which set up a Fair Employment Practices Committee for that state. This committee had marked success and ten other states have set up similar committees. In 1947 a distinguished committee appointed by President Truman to review the treatment accorded minority groups submitted a significant report on civil rights. Their report, circulated widely under the title 'To Secure These Rights," was a frank review of discriminatory practices of employers and labor unions and of restrictions in voting [811] and the ownership of property. The report revealed that the problem of discrimination was not sectional, but national, in scope and that it had many peculiar aspects. While various minority groups — those of Oriental descent, Indians, Jews, Catholics, and others —are subject to prejudice and discrimination, the unequal treatment of the Negro is the most serious and the most difficult. The report recommended various proposals, including a Federal Fair Employment Practices Commission and laws against poll taxes and lynching. The recommendations of the 1947 committee are commonly referred to as a program of "federal civil rights legislation," though the total problem of the unequal treatment of minority groups involves a much broader area of action than is suggested by these particular measures. President Truman's support of this program led to the "Dixiecrat" revolt in the Democratic party in 1948. Although several civil rights bills passed the House of Representatives in the past few years, filibusters in the Senate by Southern Democrats have prevented the bills from becoming law. The chief argument against the President's civil rights program is the old one that federal legislation would be an unwarranted interference with the sovereignty of the states. It is argued that each state should be allowed to solve these problems in its own way. It is further contended that the most satisfactory solution of the problem of prejudice and discrimination will result from education and persuasion and not from the use of force. On the other hand it is argued that the problem is national in scope, even influencing international policies, and hence requires national as well as local action, Although Congress failed to vote President Truman's civil rights program into law, there were notable gains throughout the country in furthering the basic ideal of achieving equality in the enjoyment of civil rights by all citizens. Fortunately the past decades have seen a marked lessening in the number of lynchings: 119 in the 1930's, and 29 in the 1940's. By the end of 1952 the poll tax was used as a condition for voting in only five states. Several states now have Fair Employment Practices Committees. Many labor unions no longer exclude Negroes. Various localities have taken steps to end discriminatory practices in employment, schools, and public conveyances. The armed forces have integrated units of whites and Negroes. Public housing projects in some parts of the country are open equally to whites and Negroes. In recent years the Supreme Court has made several important decisions dealing with civil rights. It has held that restrictive agreements prohibiting the sale of property to members of particular groups, while not illegal, cannot be enforced in federal or state courts (Shelley us. Kraemer, 1948); it has sustained the right of Negroes to take part in Southern primary elections; it has held that segregation in Southern railroad dining cars was contrary to the Interstate Commerce Act [812] President-elect Eisenhower selects his Cabinet. Mr. Eisenhower established a precedent by designating within a few weeks after his election the names of those to be appointed to the Cabinet and to a number of other important positions. All the Cabinet members were approved by the Senate and took office within a few days after Eisenhower's inauguration in January, 1953. One of the other appointments to receive early approval was that of Mrs. Ovcta Culp Hobby of Texas as Federal Security Administrator. Mrs. Hobby became a member of the Cabinet in April, 1953, when Congress created the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. The Eisenhower administration gets under way. President Eisenhower undertook to prune the Truman budget, but refused to sponsor a reduction in personal income taxes until the federal budget was balanced. There was opposition to cuts in defense spending, particularly to proposals to reduce the amount set aside for the Air Force. By executive order the Truman loyalty review boards were discontinued. Congressional committees continued to expose Communist infiltration, and "McCarthyism" provoked sharp controversy. Rent and price controls were relaxed. Congress enacted a law giving the Gulf states and California privileges in off-shore or tidelands oil fields. Congress established a Small Business Administration and provided for the admission, during the next three years, of 214,000 European refugees in addition to the fixed immigration quota. Congress delayed making any changes in the Taft-Hartley Law, the farm price-support program, and the Social Security program. In foreign affairs the most significant events were the death of Stalin, indications that Russia was inclined to be more conciliatory, the signing of a truce agreement in Korea, and the announcement by Russia that the United States no longer had a monopoly of the hydrogen bornb. In summarizing his first six months in office President Eisenhower told the people, "The future, both immediate and distant, remains full of trial and hazard. The end of our staggering economic burden is not yet in sight. The end of the peril to peace is not clearly in view." Words and Phrases 