The first permanent white settlers in the present United States north of Florida set foot at Jamestown in 1607. A century and three quarters later, at the time of the Revolution, the number of whites in the English colonies was about 2,500,000. This tremendous increase in population made possible the expansion of the colonies and in time their successful war for independence. This growth of population meant many migrants from Europe, but it also meant that early settlers had large families. A father and mother with ten or fifteen children or even more were not unusual and helped in an important fashion to populate the wilderness even though many of the children died when they were young. The new Americans to arrive before 1680 were very largely English in origin. Puritans found New England most attractive, particularly in the years before 1640 when they were a repressed minority in England. Catholics favored the Maryland region, and Baltimore became the center of American Catholicism. Quakers gravitated toward Philadelphia. Cavaliers, or Royalists, persecuted by the British Puritan government of 1640, favored Virginia and the Carolinas. All of these groups were English, and throughout the colonies the English stock was dominant. Most of these English migrants were people who left England of their own free will to try to improve their positions. But there were others. For many years Parliament permitted judges to send convicted men to the colonies rather than to jail. A man guilty of theft or even of murder might be sentenced to seven or fourteen years in America. While serving this sentence he was "indentured" to an American farmer or businessman. The English argued that this practice allowed a man to start life anew, but Americans protested. American laws to stop the practice were disallowed by England. Altogether some 50,000 criminals were sent to the various colonies.Migration from England declined about 1680 and became comparatively small after the Toleration Act (1689) gave more freedom to the various dissenting groups. As the migration from England declined, that from other parts of Europe increased, for in many countries there were large groups of people who looked with hope toward America as a country where they might improve their unhappy lives. Non-English. Other elements of the population were mainly Scorch, German and Irish. The Scotch came partly from Scotland, but also partly from northern Ireland, where they had been colonized by the English to help subdue the Irish. This latter group, sometimes called Scotch-Irish, was so successful economically that the English in time restricted them, whereupon many sought their fortunes on the other side of the Atlantic, and particularly on the frontier. The Germans were escaping from a homeland which had been invaded and devastated time after time during the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. Included in their number were such small sects as the Mennonites, Dunkers, Moravians, Amish and Quakers, who were seeking religious freedom. The Germans settled along the Mohawk in New York and. west of Philadelphia in Pennsylvania. The Irish had long found difficulties under English rule, and many of them saw opportunities in the American colonies to avoid the poverty that was so widespread in Ireland. The Irish did not concentrate so heavily as did the Scotch and Germans, but spread widely through the various colonies. These three large groups were joined by smaller numbers of people from other parts of Europe. The Huguenots of France wanted to escape the harsh measures of a fanatical Catholic king. Swiss, Dutch, and others felt the lure of a new country, and were willing to risk the little they had in the gamble for big opportunities. Non-English names such as Sullivan, Henry, Wilson, Roosevelt, and Faneuil appeared among the new arrivals. In time they and their descendants were to make important contributions to the New World. Indentured Servants. Many of these hopeful migrants had no possessions but health and hope. How could they pay their fares to the new land of opportunity? Their answer was to sell their services for a number of years and thus become "indentured servants." The merchant or ship captain who provided their transportation to America received his profit by selling their labor to the highest bidder. After working a specified rime, an indentured servant became free. Carrying indentured servants to America was anything but a pleasant business. Each captain packed his ship to the gunwales, usually allowing only a space of six by two feet per passenger. Food was the least and cheapest that would maintain life, and when the winds were unfavorable and the trip lasted longer than expected, men actually died of starvation. Crowded together, old and young, well and sick, men and women, without sanitary conveniences, many never survived the terrible journey. Most of the non-English migrants tended to land at Philadelphia and to settle in the back country. New England soil was poor, and the Puritans did not welcome other faiths with open arms. In New York the Dutch had monopolized the best Hudson River land and their successors showed no enthusiasm for the poor Germans and Scotch-Irish. The South also proved unattractive; vacant land near the coast was not good, and the favored southern crops were strange to the newcomers. Consequently it was the country to the west of Philadelphia that looked most attractive. Negroes. Another type of migration was the Negro. The first slaves seem to have been landed at Jamestown by a Dutch ship in 1619. For many years their number increased slowly, but by the latter part of the century a good many sea captains had discovered the profits of slave trading. At first England tried to monopolize these profits but in time Americans were allowed to participate, with the result that many a New Englander became rich by buying and selling human beings. He quieted his conscience by arguing that in America the Negro would receive the benefits of Christianity. The Negro definitely did not want to come to America, and equally definitely the conditions of the trip were terrible. And yet, to be fair, the treatment given the Negro was slightly better than that given the indentured servant—possibly because the Negro represented a larger cash investment. Every American colony had at least a few slaves, but the southern colonies had the greatest numbers. In the two colonies of Virginia and South Carolina the Negroes outnumbered the whites. The South did not welcome the Negro with unlimited enthusiasm in spite of its need for laborers. The Negro had to be taught the simplest ideas of farming and needed careful supervision for even the least difficult job. There was always the danger of a slave revolt. Manufacturing needed capital and therefore encouraged due formation of corporations. In Massachusetts the million-dollar textile corporation became common. In the corporation the funds could be contributed by various people, with each participating in the profits in proportion to the size of his investment. A small factory was usually owned outright by one man, who also ran the plant. Since most factories were small, the individual owner-manager was the rule—a condition which one day would change radically. Labor. Expanding factories were possible only if they could get a proper supply of labor, and labor was scarce. Most native-born men preferred to establish their own businesses or to be farmers, possibly in the West. Immigration was increasing, particularly from Ireland and Germany, but the Germans ordinarily went west to do farming, while the Irish had little experience, aptitude or desire for factory work. In consequence, agents of the New England mills toured the back country to recruit girls who wanted to earn a little money before they married. Other mills hired entire families, including children of five or six. Sometimes a mill, panting for labor, would refuse to hire the father unless the entire family worked. New England girls could not be drawn to such mill towns as Lowell, Chicopee and Waltham unless their parents were persuaded that the conduct would be controlled as carefully as if they were home. Consequently the mills established boarding houses for the girls, saw that they got in early at night and encouraged them to attend church. Since most of the girls were young, such a community was not only decorous but attractive. Some employers were autocratic but kind, treating their men and women as children to be protected against themselves. Others gave the worst possible conditions and pay for which they could attract labor, for most employers considered labor as a commodity like Hour or pork; the wise purchaser, they thought, paid as little as possible. The conditions of labor were anything but pleasant when viewed through modern eyes. Men worked commonly from twelve to thirteen hours a day, and sometimes longer, in badly lighted and poorly ventilated factories that were firetraps. Many employers were harsh, and when a man was fired he might expect to be placed on a "black list" which warned other employers not to hire him. But in spite of such conditions, labor was not mistreated according to the standards of that day. Men everywhere worked all the daylight hours, were not concerned over fresh air and had never heard of an inside bathroom. These were the customary conditions of all labor, and American labor was well paid because it was scarce. A girl working at Lowell received three dollars a week at a time when board and room cost only $1.25 and other prices were in proportion. Small children were the only people really poorly paid, often receiving no more than fifty cents a week. Unions. Laboring men desired to improve their position. Some of them saw their greatest opportunity in forming labor unions; others, including those who some day expected to run their own businesses, disapproved of unions. The real start of the union movement came in the late 1820's. By and large the unions were not in the new factories, but in the older skilled trades, such as printing and carpentry, where the workers could not be replaced overnight by untrained men. Many workers were worried over the new machinery—the weavers, for example, feared the coming of the textile mills. Labor unions grew fairly rapidly just before the panic of 1837, for unions had the greatest chance of success when business was humming and labor was in demand. The union movement of die 1830's was sufficiently vigorous to produce a General Trades Union (1834) to cover the entire United States. This union movement collapsed with the depression of 1837, to revive in the years just before the pandemic. Strikes. A workman, whether in a union or not, had several ways of trying to improve his position. The simplest was to look for a better job, but such action was difficult for a man with a family which might starve. Attempts might be made to get the boss to raise wages, but most employers were not easily persuaded. A more drastic method was for all the men in one shop, or several shops, or even in a whole town, to quit work in common. They hoped that the employer would find it cheaper to give in to his workmen dian to have his plant idle. When workers went out on strike, their usual demands were for higher wages and shorter hours; shorter hours meant the ten-hour day. In a few cases the strike succeeded, but generally it did not. The workers were poor and badly organized. Expansion Sentiment. The manifest destiny of the United States is "to establish on earth the noblest temple ever dedicated to the worship of the Most High—the Sacred and the True. Its floor shall be a hemisphere—its roof the star-studded heavens." Thus spoke the influential Democratic Review in 1838, and the sentiments were echoed by millions of patriotic 'Americans who felt themselves particularly favored by Providence and entrusted with the mission of bringing their high civilization to the rest of the world. As a young, vigorous and optimistic people, Americans looked back happily at the taking of West Florida, East Florida and Louisiana, and forward to similar expansion in the future. Would not the day come when the new republic would occupy all of North America, and possibly even expand to the south? Expansion required people, and the American population was growing rapidly. The 9,500,000 people of 1820 were to become 23,000,000 by 1850, which meant that population was doubling about every twenty-five years. Only a small part of this increase came from immigration, for although the Irish and Germans in particular were arriving in ever larger numbers, the official figures showed only about two million arrivals in the thirty years. Quite clearly the American birth rate was more important than immigration. More people meant the desire for more territory to provide them homes, especially because of the common belief that most of the Louisiana Purchase was unfit for whites. All the country from the western edge of Missouri to beyond the Rockies seemed waste land. But American eyes were good and could see beyond the great "desert." To the northwest they saw the attractive Oregon country, occupied jointly by England and the United States, which in time might become completely American. To the southwest, from Texas to California, they saw sparsely settled Spanish territory. Here the control was weak and became still weaker as Mexican revolutions followed each other in rapid succession. The successful Mexican, revolt of 1821 left the Southwest practically defenseless whenever an aggressive United States chose to act. Santa Fe Trade. Americans naturally felt their first great interest in the regions closest to them—that is, the present Texas and New Mexico. In particular, the New Mexican settlements along the upper Rio Grande, centering at Santa Fe, beckoned to American traders who were certain they could outcompete the Spanish merchants. Several efforts to exploit this trade were turned back by the Spanish until the revolution of 1821 opened the way for the Americans. As the Santa Fe trade developed, the traders left some Missouri River town such as Independence, headed straight for the Arkansas River, which they followed for some distance, and then cut directly West. As for the Far West, this region stayed in the Union. The most doubtful state was California, but even here the federal forces won. New Mexico was southern in sympathy, but this fact was of little importance because the population of the territory was small. Early in the war Texas troops went as far^west as the present Arizona, but they were soon pushed back by federal troops coming from California. The result was that New Mexico (including Arizona) remained in federal hands throughout the war. The division of opinion in the border states was typical of a civil war. In these states quite literally brother fought brother and father fought son. But even farther north and farther south there were differences of opinion. Union sentiment still existed in parts of the South, while opposition to the war was expressed by the "Copperheads," or southern sympathizers, of the North. Neither North nor South was ever completely unified in opinion. Population. In sheer numbers alone the North had a tremendous advantage. By i860 there were five Northerners for each two Southerners. No wonder the northern generals could throw troops into battle with prodigality, while generals had to be more saving of their human resources. Actually the situation was in one respect worse than the figures seemed to show. Almost four million of the South's nine million people were Negroes, and the great majority of these Negroes were slaves. In one way the Negro was no help to the South since he was not used in the army until near the end of the war, but in another sense he was very useful in raising food while his master fought. Even here, however, whites were needed for supervision and control. Practically equal in numbers to the Negroes were the foreign-born in the United States, with almost all of them in the North. Of four million foreign-born, fewer than a quarter of a million lived south of the Mason-Dixon line. The foreign-born probably helped the North more than the Negroes helped the South, because they could fight as well as work. Many of them entered the Union army. Counting heads does not necessarily give a true measure of comparative strength, for some men are better material for an army than others. Southerners had been more aggressive than Northerners; they had furnished most of the members of filibustering parties entering Texas, Mexico and Cuba. Dueling had survived. Southerners were more accustomed than Northerners to outdoor life, including riding, hunting and fishing. At the outset of the war they had a better start for military life. Southerners looked at their rivals from the North with a satisfied feeling of superiority. Northern cities and factories were filled with pale and unhealthy-looking workers. The cities had slums which bred poverty, political fraud, crime and disease. Several years of war were necessary to demonstrate that such men could fight as bravely and intelligently as men reared in the country. Class Divisions. Another intangible factor was the greater class division in the South than in the North. Not that there was an absence of class differences in the North, for there certainly was a tremendous gap from the Astors and Vanderbilts to the poor Irishman in the slums of the Five Points at New York. But in the North there were tremendous opportunities for poor boys to become rich, and hence men could move with relative ease from one class to another. The victory of Lincoln in i860 gave control of the federal government to the Republican party, which was to keep control almost continuously for over fifty years. The Republicans were primarily an alliance of eastern industrialists and western farmers. Both these groups had hopes which they could not realize as long as the southern planters were powerful. Now with the Republican victory and the secession of the South, their desires could be put into law. Republican Legislation. The first victory of the manufacturers was a new and higher tariff; the Morrill Act of 1861, plus later increases during the war, gave the highest rates that the United States had as yet seen. A little later (1864) a contract labor act gave the manufacturers the right to import immigrants on terms somewhat similar to those of the indentured servants of colonial days. A third law favored by the business classes was a National Bank Act, which came in 1863. Banks accepting federal regulation could deposit government bonds with the United States treasury and issue bank notes up to 90 per cent of the value of such bonds. The farmers also received certain of their desires. At long last a Homestead Act was passed (1862) which gave each settler on the public land 160 acres practically free of charge, provided he cultivated the land for five years. Since the opposition to aid for internal improvements was gone, a whole series of land grants favored the western railroads. The first of these grants went to the Union Pacific, but the war prevented much construction, and the road was not completed until 1869. Another Morrill Act (1862) provided land grants to the states for agricultural and mechanical arts colleges and universities, and in time many such institutions were to give valuable service to the farmers. The people who lived in the cities had in part come from the smaller towns and farms in search of greater chances to make wealth. Of these migrants a few were successful but more were not. Most of them were unskilled workers with no savings. When they lost their jobs they dropped immediately to complete poverty. Such a man if young might return to his father's farm, but otherwise his condition was pathetic, for he might end in a hospital or jail, or begging dimes on the street corner, or picking scraps from the rich man's garbage pail. Immigration. A very considerable share of the poorer people in the cities had come from abroad, and had settled near where they landed with the hope of getting some of the unskilled laboring jobs in growing American industries. The flow' of such immigration was particularly great after the business recession beginning in 1873. During most of the 1880's something like half a million newcomers were arriving each year. These new arrivals were an asset in furnishing labor for American industry, but they also produced slums. Slums bred disease and crime, even though the immigrant himself did not have a high crime rate. Furthermore, people who did not know the American language or customs were fine material for exploitation by the unscrupulous employer or hiring agent, or by the corrupt city boss. Living in districts of their own, they were slow in becoming Americanized. The immigration after 1880 was different in stock from that of an earlier day. Fewer of the newcomers came from the British Isles, the Scandinavian countries and Germany. More arrived from south and east Europe—from Italy, Greece, Poland and other countries. Most of these later arrivals had been small farmers, and their difficulties in adjusting to big-city industrial life were great. Many native Americans began to talk of the new immigration as undesirable—in just about the same way that an earlier generation had talked of the Irish and Germans. Actually the most important factor was not the difference of stock, but the lessening of American agricultural opportunity. In the past a considerable share of the immigrants had taken up western land. Now land had become scarce and almost all the newcomers remained in the cities, w'here their difficulties of adjustment were very great. The poor, the feeble-minded, and in fact all sorts of undesirables became public charges, to the distress of the native-born who paid most of the taxes. Quite naturally came a growing movement to limit immigration, particularly of those who were physical, mental and moral undesirables. City Reforms. The evils of city life brought a few efforts at reform. Epidemics inspired more paving and street cleaning, better water and sewer systems. Crime brought more and better policemen. Disastrous fires led to paid and uniformed fire departments. Crowded city streets encouraged more parks, although the supervised playground was still a thing of the future. Thus, little by little, the dues were beginning to take responsibility for the evils within their limits. No problem was more pressing to the cities than the relief of poverty. Private unorganized charity had never been successful. Without investigation or supervision, aid often went to the loafers and not to those who really needed it but were too proud to ask. Private charity was always least during a period of depression when it was most needed. A change was in prospect when a city-wide charity organization was formed at Buffalo in 1877. Other cities soon followed this example and began to give more effective relief to families in real distress. Another attack on the problem of helping the poor was the so-called "settlement house," which was established in a poor part of the city. Here the trained social worker tried to solve the problems of the people of the neighborhood, and these solutions were by no means limited to gifts of food and clothing. The settlement house was copied from European models. Most famous in the United States, although not the first, was Hull House, established by Jane Addams in Chicago in 1889. In spite of modest efforts at reform the conditions of die cities in 1900 were worse than they had been a century earlier. Slums, poverty and crime increased faster than reforms. Here was one of die pressing problems of a changing America. The next generation was to see important efforts to improve city conditions. Pensions. A third problem to enter politics was that of pensions for Civil War veterans. Quite naturally the Republican party, claiming the credit for having won the war, made special efforts to appeal to the veteran vote, and particularly through liberal pension legislation. Since the Democrats received much of their support in the South, and since Confederate soldiers were not eligible for federal pensions, the Democratic party was not so enthusiastic. The first pension policy was to limit aid to those injured in the war. The veterans' organization, the Grand Army of the Republic, worked for more liberality. Its first great success (1879) was in getting back payments—that is, a veteran would receive his pension all the time from the Civil War, no matter when he had actually been put on the pension rolls. Further legislation finally gave pensions to all Civil War veterans and their dependents, regardless of disabilities. Many individual pensions were granted by Congress as separate laws—often in favor of men who failed to qualify under the general laws. Frequently such a law was introduced by a friendly Congressman who took the need of the veteran on faith. Cleveland was particularly troubled by such laws and spent much time in investigating each case to see whether the recipient deserved and needed the money. This conscientiousness brought strong protests from the veterans, and when Harrison came to office the policy was changed. It just happened that at this time the federal government had a surplus of income over expenditures. Corporal Tanner, new chief of the Pension Bureau, remarked, "God help the surplus." Civil Service. A fourth question concerned the methods of appointing federal officeholders. Every President since Jefferson had removed at least some of his political opponents and given their jobs to men who sympathized with him. As the number of federal jobs increased, more and more loyal party workers could be pleased. Appointments, as of postmasters, were made ordinarily on the suggestion, or at least with the consent, of the Senator of the state concerned. Quite obviously to every one, many of the appointments were poor, and there was increased talk of establishing some system of examinations for a classified civil service list from which appointments should be made. Such action was supported by every President, but received more enthusiasm from the party out of power than from the one which could make the appointments. Even for the winning party, however, making appointments was always a headache, since often more people were angered than pleased. The opponents of civil service were not only those who wanted jobs for their friends, but also others who felt that the qualifications for many jobs could not be tested properly by an examination. Though President Grant had made the gesture of appointing a Civil Service Commission, President Hayes took the first effective action. Backed by his able Secretary of the Interior Carl Schurz, he worked for the merit system. When Congress failed to give him a proper law, he still tried hard to give appointments to the most competent men. Following this policy he removed Chester Arthur as collector of the port of New York; Arthur was a political ally of Roscoe Conkling and his administration of his office had brought grave charges of fraud. This action brought a fight which hurt both the party and Hayes's political future. Great impetus came to the civil service movement early in Garfield's administration. Several public scandals were uncovered, such as the "star route" frauds by which the Post Office Department gave contracts to its friends at unreasonable prices. In addition, the shooting of Garfield by a disappointed office seeker increased immensely, both inside and outside of Congress, the desire for reform. Rather surprisingly President Arthur, in spite of his background, gave full support to the movement. The first civil service law was the Pendleton Act of 1883, enacted by an overwhelming majority of both parties. A civil service commission was established to set tests for various governmental jobs. A "classified list" was made of jobs subject to such tests. The bill provided that political parties could not assess officeholders for campaign contributions; Though the first classified list was short, it was extended more or less regularly in the coming years. Cleveland was particularly active in its support. Immigration. A fifth political problem was the control of immigration. While the United States had always considered itself a haven for the oppressed from the rest of the world, there had for many years been a desire to limit the inflow. Quite evidently many of the newcomers were undesirable—poverty-stricken, feeble-minded, diseased, insane. Now after the Civil War the desire for restriction increased. The frontier was coming to an end. The cities were becoming crowded. Moreover, the later arrivals, coming from southern and eastern Europe, seemed unusually difficult to absorb into American society. The movement to restrict immigration received support from all classes of American society, but particularly from organized labor, which saw newcomers as competitors for jobs and as hard to organize into unions. The main opposition to restriction came from industrialists who wanted a plentiful supply of cheap labor. The first important restrictive legislation was passed in 1882. Chinese laborers were excluded after an understanding had been obtained with China. More important, the first general restrictive law was enacted during the same year; it excluded the insane, paupers and criminals. Time was to bring further exclusions, but the policy was to select a better class of immigrants rather than merely to cut the amount of immigration, regardless of desirability. Control of Business. A sixth problem was the control of business; we have already noted the Interstate Commerce Act (1887) and the Sherman Antitrust Act (1890). These were important laws even though their significance was not very evident until after 1900. In Congress the great majority of both parties supported them. The first was passed in a Democratic administration and the second in a Republican. There was no party fight on either one. Here were the main problems that entered politics during the 1870's and 1880's. Though several of them were extremely important for the future, the action taken at the time was no more than a feeble start. People's minds were engrossed in their personal affairs. The belief that any existing trouble was so large and important that its solution depended entirely on governmental action had not as yet found general acceptance. The twentieth century was to see a tremendous change in such opinion. Depression. There were a period of depression and transition. Jobs were hard to get, and farm prices dropped. Men were confronted by troubles which they could not meet, and they began to turn more 6oo Federation continued to expand, but at a much slower rate. Several factors produced this result. (1)The flood of immigration made unionization difficult. A million newcomers a year went largely into the mines and factories. Not t understanding American conditions or the English language, and considering their new pay as princely, they were poor listeners to the pleas of union organizers. Not until they had been in America some years did they realize that the pay which sounded so magnificent in Italy or Poland was not so satisfactory in the United States. (2)The leaders of the American Federation of Labor, and particularly Samuel Gompers, were becoming conservative. Mr. Gompers had several unfortunate experiences, of which not the least impressive was the McNamara case. John and James McNamara were union officials who had been accused of the bornbing of the Los Angeles Times. Gompers rushed to their defense, only to discover that the .evidence against the accused was overwhelming. Experiences of this kind had made Gompers and his friends slightly gun-shy. (3)The American Federation of Labor was also finding difficulty in organizing the new mass-production industries. How could workers on an automobile production line be divided among unions of electricians, carpenters and stone masons? The alternative was a general union for all workers in a particular industry, but to this solution the well-intrenched older craft unions objected loudly. The result was that the newer industries were but little organized, if at all. (4)Not least important were the actions of the employers. Sometimes they resorted to force, as did George F. Baer, hiring gunmen and strikebreakers if necessary. Also they had money to use for antiunion propaganda and to work against such laws as employers' liability acts. Headed by the National Association of Manufacturers (formed 1895) the employers fought such laws in the legislatures and then carried the fight to the courts, where they were frequently able to get the laws called unconstitutional. The employers could also undercut the appeal of the unions by doing welfare work of their own. They might provide an annual picnic, a basketball team or pansies for employees' window boxes. They might do personnel work. They might even establish unions of their own. The slowing down of the American Federation of Labor provided opportunity for the rise of a competitive national union which would appeal particularly to the less skilled workers. One attempt in this direction was the Industrial Workers of the World, formed at Chicago in 1905. Here was one big union which welcomed all kinds of workers. Actually it turned out to be too radical to appeal to any great number of Americans, and even though it fought a spectacular and winning textile fight at Lawrence, Massachusetts, in 1912, it drew little support except from the migratory workers of the West. The lack of success of the I. W. W. left the field open for a national labor organization which would attract the men and women whom the American Federation of Labor had made little effort to organize. Such an organization was not to arise, however, until the depression of the 1930's. The labor benefited from an eight-hour law (Adamson Act) and sailors from a Seamen's Act. An effort to stop child labor by congressional action was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court, which held that Congress did not have the necessary power. The farmer was not forgotten by the Wilson administration. In 1916 came the first act to lend federal money to farmers. Federal Farm Loan Banks made loans to groups of farmers, but not to individuals. Their business soon ran into the billions. Also of aid to the farmer was federal assistance to roads and to education. Most of this aid was on a "dollar-matching" basis—that is, the federal government gave a dollar for each dollar spent by the state. Under Wilson also came the first important restriction on immigration. For forty years various types of undesirables had been excluded, but now (1917) there was passed a literacy act which raised the bars against people who could not read and write. Wilson himself disapproved this law and vetoed it, only to have it passed over his veto. He held that literacy was merely a question of wealth and education and was not a proper test as to whether a man or woman would make a good citizen of the United States. Foreign Affairs. These laws passed under Wilson were important, but they were overshadowed by the tremendous events which were occurring in the field of foreign relations. Instead of confining himself to the domestic program about which he had talked and read and thought, Wilson was thrown into a world tornado which cast his domestic program into the realms of the unnoticed. As soon as Wilson entered office he found Mexican troubles hanging over his head, and was plunged immediately into foreign affairs. His position was particularly difficult since he found that his own high ideals clashed with each other in practice. He opposed American imperialistic expansion and the interference in the affairs of neighboring states. At the same time he was a firm believer in democracy. If he did not interfere in Mexican affairs there would be no democracy in Mexico, but if he interfered such action could be called imperialism. The final result was that he interfered—at first with a fleet and then with an army. He also developed the new American policy of refusing to recognize a country diplomatically when he did not approve of its government. Ultimately Wilson participated in world affairs more than had any American President for at least a century. Wilson's character would not permit him to stand aside and see his ideals violated, even if his firmness meant war. In practice Wilson's actions actually did mean war, so that a President elected on a domestic reform platform is now remembered less for these reforms than for conducting a foreign war. IMMIGRANTS came principally from eastern and southern Europe after 1890. The sharp drop in immigration during the Thirties was due to the law of 1924 which not only fixed the total number of aliens to be admitted annually, but also set a quota of the total for each particular nation. Inasmuch as the nations of northwestern Europe never send the number permitted them under the quota, the yearly total of immigrants is small. Law and order; to foster and perpetuate a 100-per-cent Americanism; to preserve the memories and incidents of our association in the Great War." Next in size was the Veterans of Foreign Wars, with a somewhat more restricted membership. Such groups spent much time and effort in giving legal and other assistance to veterans and in sponsoring legislation to benefit veterans, but they were also interested in purely social activities and in supporting measures they considered in the general public interest. They were opposed to the formation of any political party composed primarily of veterans. After World War II both of the above organizations modified their membership requirements to admit the new veterans, but in addition a number of newer organizations such as the American Veteran Committee and the American Veterans of World War II were formed. Immigration. The postwar period also saw an increasing drive against immigration. America was tired of foreigners and felt that the United States was sufficiently populated. The immigration laws of 1921 and 1924 imposed quota restrictions on immigration. Two temporary plans were used, but after July 1, 1927, a permanent plan was to be in effect. Total immigration was to be limited to 150,000 a year, with each nation so restricted that its total proportion of the American population in 1920 would not be increased. Immigration from most of Asia was to be barred completely except for a minimum per year. Determining the national origins of the American population of 1920 proved an almost impossible task. People had intermarried, so that the estimating of the part which actually was English or German or anything else was almost pure speculation. The Secretaries of State, Commerce and Labor agreed that the job was impossible, but Congress made them do it anyway. The results were highly inaccurate, but they did accomplish the congressional purpose, which was not only to cut down total immigration but to give preference to northern and western Europe over eastern and southern Europe. The quota laws made no restriction on immigration from the Americas or from United States dependencies. In actual fact the only extensive immigration from the Americas came from Mexico, which soon was sending us thousands of unskilled laborers who had been attracted by high American pay. The number was cut by executive rules—particularly by an order that any one coming with less than a thousand dollars was likely to become a public charge, and hence was inadmissible. The Filipinos sent quite a few of their number to replace earlier Chinese and Japanese laborers on the Pacific Coast. Under the new immigration laws the number of newcomers to the United States dropped perceptibly during the 1920's. During the depression the number further decreased, so that some years showed more people leaving than entering the United States. A three-hundred year tradition had come to an end. No longer was America a haven for the oppressed of the rest of the world, for we considered America completely occupied and to be preserved for those born here. Prohibition. No problem kept reappearing with more stubbornness during the 1920's than that of prohibition. The long fight against liquor had apparently been won in 1920 when the Eighteenth Amendment had come into force. Under the appropriate congressional legislation efforts were made to "dry up" the entire country. 