The Westward Movement The First Advance of the Frontier. While the colonists were learning to adjust themselves to their new life in America, they remained in groups along the great bays and navigable rivers. Because of the necessity for trade with Europe, very few settlers by 1660 were more than ten or twelve miles from deep water. But the settlements became crowded and the new immigrants were not content to take the less desirable lands. The intolerance of the men in authority became less bearable to the younger generation, who desired greater freedom. There was also the call of the frontier—especially of cheap land and opportunity—which lured later generations of Americans across the entire continent. Many settlers began to go westward and to search for new and more fertile lands. Before the dose of the seventeenth century, both sons of the original settlers and newcomers were, despite the dangers and hardships of the frontier, turning to it as a means of solving their social, economic, and religious problems. The colonies assisted the movement by granting lands for settlement. In New England the expansion of population was regulated by the colonial governments. One of the first inland settlements in New England was that of Concord. The General Court of Massachusetts authorized the settlement in September, 1635, and several families moved to the frontier site that autumn. Springfield was founded in 1636. Rhode Island and Connecticut, settled the same year, are typical of the normal westward drift of the Americans. Although the purpose of these two settlements was ostensibly to obtain greater religious freedom, the colonists also needed more pasturage for their cattle. By the close of the seventeenth century, there was an officially drawn frontier line for New England and the inhabitants were forbidden to desert the frontier towns on penalty of imprisonment or loss of their lands. After 1715, when the forced concentration in Massachusetts had ceased, expansion began to the west and north because of the increase of population and the rise in the price of old lands. In New York hostility of the Indian tribes, especially that of the Iroquois, prevented westward expansion. In 1698 more than two thirds of the inhabitants were still on Long Island and near the mouth of the Hudson. However, Albany and Schenectady were established as outposts. In the eighteenth century, German immigrants moved into the Mohawk Valley and made the farthest advance in that province before the Revolution. German settlers were also among the leaders in this westward movement in Pennsylvania. In the South, movement westward began almost as soon as settlement was made, since the Tidewater region afforded ample room for expansion. In August, 1650, Abraham Wood led an exploring expedition from Fort Henry at the falls of the Appomattox River southward as far as the falls of the Roanoke. The result of this expedition into the interior was put into a small pamphlet, The Discovery of New Brittaine, by Edward Bland, a member of the party. John Lederer, a German physician, led three expeditions, the first in 1669 and the other two the following year, across the Piedmont, and ascended the Blue Ridge. Lederer is the first white man whose ascent of the Blue Ridge is recorded. In 1671 a small party, among whom were Captain Thomas Batts, Thomas Wood, and Robert Fallan, set out for the country beyond the Blue Ridge and continued until they penetrated the watershed of the Ohio. Theirs was the first recorded journey of Englishmen into that section. In 1716 Governor Spotswood of Virginia led his famous company of men over the Blue Ridge into the valley of the Shenandoah. Such instances mark the beginning of the extension of the frontier which continually advanced westward until our country extended from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean. The Colonial People; Immigration to America. Our ancestors in colonial America came from across the Atlantic, bringing with them their institutions, ideas, and ideals, which they planted on American soil, and which in this new environment were modified and adjusted to American conditions. The first of these immigrants to America, about 100 in number, came from England in 1607. From this small beginning our country grew into a great nation. Growth in population by natural increase and by immigration continued so that by 1790 the population of the United States had grown to nearly 4,000,000. During the first hundred years nearly all of those who came, except the Negro slaves, were English, but by 1763 about 40 per cent of the population was composed of other groups, among which were the Germans, Irish, Scotch, "Scotch-Irish," French Huguenots, and Jews. In addition to these were the African Negroes, who by 1776 numbered about 500,000. The immigration movement, which began with the settling of America, has continued throughout our history, and by 1935 had brought more than 37,000,000 people to our shores. Many nationalities and racial groups have contributed to our cultural heritage and have greatly influenced the development of our civilization. Family Life. The first English settlement in America, at Jamestown, was composed almost entirely of men, but those interested in the colonization of America soon realized the importance of women in establishing a permanent settlement. They knew that it was necessary to build homes in order to make the colony a success. In 1619, ninety young women were sent to Virginia to become the wives of the settlers. Many lonesome men gathered at the shore as the ship arrived, chose their wives, and after paying one hundred twenty pounds of tobacco, each, for the cost of transportation, happily took their brides to their new homes. Dutch Reformed, Presbyterians, Catholics, Quakers, Mennonites, Lutherans, and Baptists. All of these prospered during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. It was on the frontier that the less formal religious sects found their chief support, for a highly organized church could not adapt itself to the informality of frontier life. New German and ScotchIrish immigrants settled in Pennsylvania, and from there went south into the valleys of the Appalachian system, including the Shenandoah Valley. In the western parts of New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and the Carolinas, there were introduced new racial and religious elements. The older colonies welcomed these new settlers, who improved the prosperity of the colonies and acted as buffers against Indian attacks. The new sects, together with their churches, built frontier schools for the promotion of education. As wealth increased, the colonists became dissatisfied with a religion which restrained them from spending their money for luxuries and amusements, and gradually the authority of the church began to diminish. Moreover, as opportunities for success in commerce grew, the ministry no longer offered the only opportunity of advancement to the young men. The Great Awakening. In the middle of the eighteenth century, however, a religious revival swept through the colonies—a revival which, because of its power and extent, has been called the Great Awakening. Under the persuasive preaching of George Whitefield, and the warning words of Jonathan Edwards, men were brought under a conviction of sin and a dread of death which helped to overcome denominational differences. Few were exempt—even practical-minded Benjamin Franklin paid his tribute to the persuasiveness of Whitefield. But reaction soon set in, and the revival had little lasting influence. Jonathan Edwards himself was removed from his parish, and after preaching to the Indians, became for a short time—until his death—president of the College of New Jersey. A little later, however, Methodism was brought over from England, where John Wesley had begun it, and through its evangelistic message, which was tarried by itinerant ministers to all parts of the colonies, drew many into its fold; and, unlike that of Whitefield, retained its gains because it had a permanent organization. After 1760, however, in the older eastern sections, politics became the dominant interest of the day, and much of the enthusiasm previously devoted to religion was then diverted into political channels. On either side, war was actually being waged. The Supreme Court later ruled that a limited war existed. The war is referred to as the Naval War of 1798, during which period the Americans captured eighty-five armed vessels. Washington was again named commander in chief of the army, though Alexander Hamilton was appointed major general in command, but no fighting took place on land. It was soon discovered that France did not want war, and near the end of 1798 the United States received assurances that France was willing to receive a minister from the United States, and would respect him as the representative of a free nation. A treaty was negotiated whereby the United States was released from the Treaty of Alliance, and in return gave up its claim to damages for injuries inflicted upon our commerce. The Alien and Sedition Acts. While the feeling against the French government was developing, the Federalists, who were in power in Congress, took advantage of their opportunity and passed laws intended to curb liberalism and suppress any French citizens in this country who were taking an active part against the Federalist program. The first of these acts was known as the Naturalization Law. Foreigners had theretofore been permitted to become American citizens after five years of residence, The new law provided that before acquiring citizenship, a foreigner must reside in this country for a period of fourteen years.* A second bill, known as the Alien Act, was passed, which empowered the President to deport (send out of the country) any aliens (foreigners) whom he considered dangerous to the peace and safety of our country. A third law, known as the Alien Enemy Act, provided that the President could I deport resident subjects of any country with which the United States I might be at war, and place restraint on those who remained in the United L States. The most objectionable of these acts was the fourth, known as the Sedition Act, which provided for severe punishment of any persons who I "shall... unlawfully combine or conspire together, with intent to oppose any measure or measures of the government of the United States. ..." It further forbade any person to ". . . write, print, utter or publish . . . I my false, scandalous, and malicious writing or writings against the government of the United States, or either house of the Congress of the United I States or the President of the United States with intent to defame . . . ." The Alien Act was not enforced, but under the Sedition Act there were a number of convictions. The Early Frontiersmen. Most of the settlers who first crossed the mountains were of German, Scotch-Irish, or Irish stock. Many German colonists who had moved to Holland during revolutions in their own country had been attracted by William Penn to his colony, where they settled b the Susquehanna Valley. They were commonly known as the " Pennsylvania Dutch." Some of them soon found their way into the mountain valleys, which they followed southward into the back country of Virginia and the Carolinas. They were good farmers and knew how to select good firming land. They were a sturdy people, well adapted to the hardships of frontier life. The Scotch-Irish settlers were not of mixed blood, as their name might suggest. They were people of Scotch descent whose ancestors had lived in northern Ireland, and before that had lived for centuries in the Lowlands of Scotland. During the reign of James I, many of the Scotch Lowlanders were induced to leave the poor soil of Scotland and settle in the northeastern part of Ireland. But the Irish soil was little better than that which they had left behind, and these staunch Presbyterians soon found themselves involved in religious disputes with the Irish Catholics. America, ore, easily attracted great numbers of them to her shores. There were also many Irish settlers who came to/the Catholic colony of Maryland for religious reasons, while still others had hoped to improve their economic condition on the fertile soil of the New World. The Scotch-Irish and the Irish settlers found most of the land in the Tidewater, and much of that in the Piedmont, already occupied, and constantly many of them pushed farther to the west into the Appalachians, domed to hardships at home, these settlers made ideal frontiersmen. America was fortunate in having such hardy, thrifty, and courageous men and women to lead in the conquest of the wilderness. The Settlement of the Old West; Treaty of Fort Stanwix. To prevent friction between the Indians and the English colonists in the West, the British government had attempted by the Proclamation of 1763 to prevent the settlement of the territory between the mountains and the Mississippi River. The vast district west of the Appalachians and lying between the Great Lakes and Florida was reserved for the Indians. The Proclamation Line, west of which white settlements were forbidden, was the watershed land draining directly to the Atlantic Ocean from that draining to the St. Lawrence River or to the Gulf of Mexico (map p. 118). In ij68, however, Sir William Johnson negotiated with the Iroquois Indians. Expansion Across the Mississippi. With the purchase of Louisiana in 1803 (p. 233) the movement to the West was further stimulated because of the large area of land acquired and because an outlet through the Mississippi River was assured. The East was bitterly opposed to the purchase of Louisiana. The democratic tendencies of the frontier were not at all in accord with the more conservative and aristocratic ideas of the original states. Since the treaty with France provided that the territory eventually was to be received into the Union as states on terms of equality with the others, the East knew that the ratification of the treaty would, in the course of time, mean the overthrow of the Eastern control of the government. Some of the eastern states actually threatened secession.. Migration to the Old Southwest. Another factor which led to Southwestern migration was the invention of the cotton gin in 1793 (p. 345). Cotton quickly succeeded tobacco as the staple crop of the South. The rich soil of Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana was especially well adapted to the production of this crop. Planters from the exhausted lands of the seaboard streamed into the new country with a large number of slaves. This migration was quite different from that into the other parts of the West, in that it included some of the most aristocratic families. Growth of Population in the West. In the period following the War of 1812 the most outstanding of all the western migrations took place. So great was the migration that an English traveler, Morris Birkbeck, in 1817 reported: "Old America seems to be breaking up, and moving westward." It brought millions of people to the new West. The population of the West in 1800 was less than 400,000, while in 1820 it was more than 2,000,000. The steamboat, invented in 1807, was an important factor in this movement. The West was a network of rivers on which rafts and flatboats had been used. With the coming of the steamboat the settlers could go upstream as well as down. Besides the steamboat, however, other means of transportation to the West were utilized. Morris Birkbeck described the migration through Pennsylvania along the National Road as follows: "We are seldom out of sight, as we travel on this grand track, towards the Ohio, of family groups, behind and before us. . . . A small waggon (so light that you might almost carry it, yet strong enough to bear a good load of bedding, utensils and provisions, and a swarm of young citizens,— and to sustain marvellous shocks in its passage over these rocky heights) with two small horses; sometimes a cow or two, comprises their all; excepting a little store of hard-earned cash for the land office of the district; where they may obtain a title for as many acres as they possess half-dollars, being one fourth of the purchase-money. The wagon has a tilt, or cover, made of a sheet, or perhaps a blanket. The family are seen before, behind, or within the vehicle, according to the road or the weather, or perhaps the spirits of the party,. ... A cart and single horse frequently affords the means of transfer, sometimes a horse and packsaddle. Often the back of the poor pilgrim bears all his effects, and his wife follows, naked-footed, bending under the hopes of the family." With this increase in population the following new states were formed and admitted into the Union, in less than twenty years: Ohio, 1803; Louisiana, 1812; Indiana, 1816; Mississippi, 18x7; Illinois, 1818; Alabama, 1819; and Missouri, 1821. David Crockett, a Typical Frontiersman. Conditions on the frontier are well illustrated by the life of David Crockett, who braved the dangers and the hardships of both the Old and the New West. He was born on the western slope of the Appalachians, in what is now Greene County, Tennessee, August 17, 1786. The frontier offered him poor opportunities for as education, but he became a famous hunter and Indian fighter. When k married a young Irish girl their worldly possessions consisted of nothing but an old horse. They had no furniture or tarm equipment of any kind. Se was able to borrow fifteen dollars, and with this he fitted out a cabin proposal to annex Texas but favored expansion into the Northwest. After he had gained the presidency he became somewhat milder in his demands. The one year's notice to terminate the agreement which had provided for the joint occupancy of Oregon was duly served upon Great Britain. In the negotiations which followed, Polk readily accepted the British proposal to compromise. Oregon was " reoccupied," but with the parallel of 490 as our northern boundary rather than that of 540 40'. The Mormons and the "State of Deseret." Soon after the settlement of the Oregon question an interesting migration to the West was begun by a religious sect named the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, but commonly known as the Mormons. Their leader, Joseph Smith, claimed to have discovered at Palmyra, New York, inscribed plates revealing the sacred Book of Mormon, which contained many of the teachings of the new sect. He and his converts made a settlement in Missouri and then moved back to Nauvoo, Illinois. There they suffered persecution because of their religious views; their leader was killed and they were ordered to leave the state. In 1846, under their new leader, Brigham Young, they began a great trek to the Far West, where they sought a home for their church in the unsettled region beyond the Rocky Mountains. While the main party spent the winter at the "Camp of Israel" near Council Bluffs, Iowa, Brigham Young pushed on with a small band and selected a site for the new home on Great Salt Lake, in what is now Utah. The main body of Mormons followed, to begin farming on lands they skillfully irrigated, and to build a beautiful city as their capital. A government called the " State of Deseret " was organized, but Utah was made a territory of the United States in 1850. Its admission as a state, however, was delayed by contests over polygamy, which was authorized by Mormon leaders (from 1843 till 1890) and was practiced by some of the Mormons. Sale of the Public Lands. During the entire westward movement the desire for cheap land was the motive that prompted most of the settlers to seek new homes in the West. As a rule the pioneers were poor and were able to pay only a nominal price for the public land. In fact many of them believed that the land should be free. Migration into the West, therefore, depended to a great extent upon the generosity of the government's land policy. The Land Ordinance of 1785 (p. 183) provided for the sale of the land at auction in tracts of 640 acres at a cash price of not less than one dollar an acre. Under this plan no settler could obtain western land unless he had six hundred forty dollars in cash. They were rounded up, branded, and then driven slowly, grazing along the way, to the Northern markets. Six hundred thousand cattle took the "Long Trail" in 1871. With the advent of the railroads into the West the "Long Trail" was considerably shortened. Dodge City in Kansas, Ogallala in Nebraska, and Miles City in Montana became famous as centers of the cattle industry. The great ranching frontier soon gave way to farming. The railroads brought into the West many farmers who took up the land and enclosed it with barbed-wire fences, greatly impeding the long drives. The Homesteader. The last wave of settlers into the West were the farmers, and with their coming the frontier passed into history. The settlement of the prairie land began in Kansas after the passage of the KansasNebraska Act (p. 366). Slaveholders and free-state forces contended for the control of the territory. After the rush into Kansas had subsided settlers began to stake out claims in Nebraska. Remnants of many a train of covered wagons, tiring of the long journey to Oregon or California and attracted by the fertility of the soil, stopped to make their homes on the prairie. Likewise when many gold-seekers had been disappointed in their get-rich-quick schemes they returned to Kansas and Nebraska and exchanged the pick for the plow. The Homestead Act of 1862 attracted many immigrants through the lure of free land. The demand for food supplies during the War between the North and the South, with its resulting increase in prices, was a further incentive to the settlement of the Western plains. In the period between 1862 and 1880 nearly 470,000 settlers filed applications for homesteads and about one third of that number received land. Waving fields of wheat and corn displaced the pastures, and the recently constructed railroads transported millions of dollars worth of foodstuffs to the Eastern markets. In 1886 an unusual land boom caused a second migration into Kansas. European immigrants poured into the country. Removal of the Indians. The Indians were the unfortunate victims of the westward movement. Acting upon the principle that there were "no good Indians but dead Indians," the frontiersmen forced them from their hunting grounds and homes with little regard for property rights and often with great cruelty. During the presidency of Andrew Jackson many of the Indians east of the Mississippi were removed to new homes in the West, which the government promised should belong to them permanently. With the discovery of gold and the resulting migration into the West many of the Indians who resented the incursions of the whites removed to reservations. Even then it was difficult to protect the property of the Indians to the background of our political issues. Although this question had been settled by the ancient method of trial by combat, yet it was given a legal setting soon after the close of the struggle in the case of Texas vs. While, in which the Supreme Court read into the Constitution, by interpretation, that the United States was an "indestructible Union of indestructible states." The war also put an end to slavery in the United States. Few are the people today, in either section, who will deny that the abolition of slavery was a benefit to the South as well as to the nation as a whole. The overthrow of the slavery system removed a dangerous question from politics, but it substituted another problem almost as difficult—the race question. The fall of the slave power was accompanied by the overthrow of the planting system in the South, and the triumph of the industrial system in the North. Between i860 and 1870, the number of factories in the United States increased 79.6 per cent, while the number of persons employed in them almost doubled. The triumph of industrialism meant the adoption of its habiliments—protective tariff, a liberal immigration policy, and government aid for the construction of railroads and internal improvements. Nevada was extremely difficult and much of the material had to be brought from the East around Cape Horn. Chinese coolies furnished most of the labor. On May 10, 1869, the road was completed at Promontory, Utah, north of Great Salt Lake, with elaborate ceremonies. The last spike, which was of gold, was driven into a polished California laurel tie with a silver sledge hammer. The driving of the last blows was reported to all of the Eastern cities by telegraph, and everywhere the event was hailed as being almost as important in bringing the sections of the country together as the triumph of the Union at Appomattox. Era of Railroad Building. The completion of the transcontinental railroad was the beginning of an era of unparalleled railway construction. Everywhere the enthusiasm for more railroads was unbounded. At the close of the War between the States there were about 35,000 miles of railroad in the United States; seven years later, the mileage was doubled; by 1880 it was over 93,000; and in 1920 it was more than 250,000. During this period of half a century an average of more than 4,000 miles of new railroads were constructed each year. At the dose of the period the United States had more railway mileage than all of the European countries combined, and about one third of the total mileage of the world. In i860 there was one mile of railroad to every 1,087 people in the United States, but in 1920 there was one mile to every 418. Some of the larger systems that came into existence during this period were the Northern Pacific, the Santa Fe, the Great Northern, and the Southern Pacific. Men whose names are most closely associated with the development of the railroads are Cornelius Vanderbilt, E. H. Harriman, James J. Hill, Jay Gould, and J. P. Morgan. About 1916 railway mileage seems to have reached a maximum, and since that time it has been slightly reduced. Improved highways, with an ever-increasing number of privately owned automobiles and truck lines, have made the railroads less profitable, but part of the shrinkage has been due to the abandonment of unprofitable parallel lines. The Boxer Rebellion. Aroused by the foreign aggressions, the Chinese organized anti-alien societies known as the orders of "Literary Patriotic Harmonious Fists," or "Boxers." Secretly supported by the troops of the empress of China, they began a series of outrages which culminated in the siege of the British legation at Peking (now Peiping), to which many of the foreign residents had fled for protection. For about two months the besieged party held its own against the "Boxers," while a joint force composed of American, Japanese, British, French, German, and Russian troops fought their way to the dty. Fearing that the powers would seize the opportunity to proceed with the partition of China, Secretary Hay hastened to announce to the world that it was the purpose of the United States to uphold the territorial integrity of China. This principle now became a part of our Far Eastern policy. The announcement had the desired effect, and the only penalties imposed upon China were the punishment of the leaders of the rebellion and the payment of an indemnity of $334,000,000. Our share of the indemnity was $24,000,000; but when it was discovered that the losses sustained by American citizens and the cost of the expedition amounted to only $11,000,000, the difference was returned to China. This was a friendly gesture which did much toward furthering cordial relations between the two nations. China set the money aside as an educational fund to educate Chinese students in American colleges and universities. Friction with the Japanese. A scries of events early in the twentieth century tended to cool the friendship of the Japanese for the United States. At the close of the Russo-Japanese War in 1905, the Japanese were disappointed because the terms of the treaty of peace were not as favorable as they had expected. They blamed this diplomatic defeat upon President Roosevelt, upon whose invitation the peace conference was held. The Japanese irritation which resulted from this affair was increased the next year when the school authorities of San Francisco excluded Japanese subjects from the schools attended by Americans and Europeans. The Japanese were insulted by this racial discrimination, and although the matter was adjusted by President Roosevelt, the affair served to intensify the bitterness of the Japanese toward America. The most serious of the problems that involved the two nations was that of immigration. Since 1882, Chinese immigrants had been excluded from the United States, and there was a strong sentiment in this country for the extension of this policy to include all Oriental laborers. In 1907 AN IMPERIALISTIC FOREIGN POLICY Japan entered into an agreement with the United States not to grant passports to laborers who wished to come to this country. This "gentlemen's agreement" was observed for nearly two decades; but when the Immigration Act of 1924 was passed, instead of assigning a quota to Japan, as was done to most other nations, the act excluded all members of the yellow or Mongolian race, including the Japanese as well as the Chinese. The proud Japanese people were incensed by what they regarded as a deliberate insult, and an open break between the two powers was narrowly averted. (Later American-Japanese relations are discussed in Chapters XXXIII and XL.) The Panama Canal; Early Interest. Sailors and engineers dreamed of constructing a canal across the Isthmus of Panama almost from the time it was discovered that this narrow strip of land was blocking a direct route from Western Europe to the Indies; but it was not until the middle of the nineteenth century that definite steps were taken toward launching the project. Experts were unable to agree upon the route. Some favored the short but difficult route across Panama, then a province or "department" of Colombia, while others believed that a more feasible route was one Many Americans favored the latter because of its greater proximity to the United States. In 1846 the United States showed its interest in the isthmian canal by negotiating a treaty with Colombia (then called New Granada). According to the terms of this treaty, the United States was granted the right of way or free transit by any means of transportation, in return for the guarantee of the neutrality of the zone and Colombia's sovereignty over the property, later attempts to modify this treaty in such a way as to give the United States greater concessions were unsuccessful. This treaty was in force at the time of the Panama revolution in 1903. American interest in the canal was greatly increased in 1848 by the discovery of gold in California (p. 317). Two years later, by the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty, the United States and Great Britain agreed that any canal connecting the two oceans should be jointly controlled by the two powers, should not be fortified, and should be open to the use of all nations. Conflicting interpretations of this treaty, and the outbreak of the War between the North and the South, prevented the launching of the project at that time. In tS6j, however, the United States showed that its interest had not waned, negotiating with Nicaragua for a right of way across that country. The visions of this treaty were very similar to those of the treaty of 1846 !h Colombia. A French Company Begins Construction. In spite of the early interest if the United States and Great Britain, the first work of actual construe sovereignty and might result in the violation of our Constitution. It was daimed that the requirement in the Covenant that member nations must, if called upon, place military forces at the disposal of the League to be used against offending members, would automatically lead us into wars; while according to our Constitution, the power of declaring war belongs to Congress. Some objected to our entrance into the League on the ground that it would be a departure from our traditional policy of isolation, which, as a matter of fact, we had long since abandoned; and that it would draw us into European politics. Others believed that the Treaty of Versailles was unjust and that the nations which had gained most in the division of the spoils would use the League as the means of preserving the favorable status quo. Still others feared that the League of Nations might attempt to interfere with such problems as the tariff, immigration, and naturalization, questions which they considered as purely domestic although they involved the citizens of other nations. And, finally, some Americans were alarmed at the fact that the Covenant of the League gave each of the dominions of the British Empire representation in the Assembly, and professed to sec in that arrangement the domination of the League by the British Empire. This argument was weakened, however, by the fact that few important questions were settled by the Assembly, and that each nation's interest was safeguarded by the requirement of a unanimous vote on all vital questions. Those who favored our entrance into the League believed that the United States, claiming to be interested in any measure to prevent war, could not afford to be indifferent to this most forward step toward the promotion of peace. The entrance of the United States into the League became the chief issue in the presidential election of 1920. The overwhelming victory of the Republican party, which claimed that the desired results might be achieved without our entrance into the League, indicated that the American public was definitely opposed to such a move. Co-operation without Admission. We must not be deceived into believing that our refusal to become a member of the League of Nations marked a return to our former policy of isolation. Our rapidly increasing investments in foreign states, growing from $2,625,000,000 in 1914 to $18,000,000,000 in 1932, gave us an increased interest in the stability of foreign governments. Isolation was impossible. President Harding soon realized that the United States could not remain indifferent to the activities of the League, and adopted the practice of sending "unofficial observers" who attended the meetings of the League and international conferences without direct participation. American citizens were encouraged by our CHAPTER XXXIV The American People—Their Growth in Population. In 1790 there were about 4,000,000 people in the United States, but by i860 the population had grown to about 31,500,000, of whom about 4,500,000 were Negroes. This increase was due largely to natural causes (increase of births over deaths), though immigration added about 5,500,000. During this period the area of the United States increased from 892,000 square miles to more than 3,000,000 square miles. Immigration to America, which was going on at a rapid rate from 1720 to 1763 (see p. 88), declined during the period from 1763 to 1815. This was due to the French and Indian War, the War for Independence, the Napoleonic Wars in Europe, the War of 1812, and European restrictions. However, after 1815 foreigners again came in large numbers. Accurate statistics on immigration before 1820 are not available; but according to reliable estimates about a quarter of a million immigrants came to the United States in the three decades prior to 1820. During the period from 1820 to 1S60 more than 5,000,000 came (see graph, p. 684). Immigrants came to America in the hope of improving their living conditions. Political revolutions, religious oppression, wars, and hard times in Europe brought many to the United States, which they considered a land of opportunity. Settlement of the West. In the West population increased rapidly after the War of 1812. Soldiers returning from the war, men unemployed because of the closing of factories, and plantation owners whose soil had been exhausted, turned westward. The successful Indian fighting of Jackson in the Southwest and of Harrison in the Northwest lessened the danger from Indians, and stimulated immigration to those sections. Growth of Population. The population of the United States increased from 31,500,000 in i860 to about 76,000,000 in 1900. Many foreigners continued to come to America during this period and were welcomed by the government and by industry. In 1864 the Federal government set up the Immigration Bureau in Washington for the purpose of assisting those coming from other countries to America. Some of the Western states also maintained immigration bureaus and sent agents to foreign countries for the purpose of stimulating immigration. Due largely to this encouragement, about 14,000,000 foreigners came to America during the last forty years of the nineteenth century. In the latter part of this period most of them Went to the cities, whereas a majority of the earlier immigrants had become farmers. Changed Character of Immigration. During the 80's a fundamental change took place in the character of the immigration. Before that time three fourths of the immigrants had come from northern and western Europe, while from that decade on they were mainly from southeastern Europe and the Near East. While the earlier immigrants sought farms, the newer arrivals supplied labor for factories and mines during a period when America was rapidly becoming industrialized. It was during the So's that the movement to restrict immigration began. Many citizens felt that since this "new" immigration was of racial stock different from the native American, it would be more difficult to assimilate, and impossible to Americanize. The immigrants often settled in foreign quarters of the cities, where they retained their own languages and their native customs. The disappearance of the frontier also brought problems of labor and of immigration into prominence. As long as Western lands remained, the dissatisfied people in the East were able to seek homes} in the West, where the frontier aided the Americanization process, but by 1890 this had become almost impossible. As the frontier gradually disappeared, labor unrest became more widespread and labor organizations became more hostile to the increasing number of foreigners. As early as 1882 Chinese laborers were excluded by an act of Congress, In 1885 a law was passed prohibiting laborers under contract from coming into the United States, and in 1891 Congress passed a law which prohibited the advertising for immigrants by American factory owners. In 1SS1 the office of Superintendent of Immigration was created, and a tax of fifty cents was levied on each immigrant. Before the end of the century there was agitation for a literacy test. A bill was introduced in Congress in 1896, providing for the exclusion of all immigrants between the ages of fourteen and sixty who could not read English or some other language. It did not become a law because of the President's veto. In the twentieth century more rigid immigration laws were enacted and enforced, as we shall see in the following chapter. On May 1, 1917, however, a law went into effect, excluding aliens over sixteen years of age who are physically capable but who cannot read. Concentration of Population. From 1900 to 1953 the population of the United States increased from about 76,000,000 to about 160,000,000. During this period there was a continued drift toward the city, a drift, however, which declined sharply in the decade 1930-1940. By 1950 about 64 per cent of our population was classified as urban, that is, living in cities, towns, or villages of 2,500 or more. Over one fourth of our total population lives in cities of 100,000 or more. According to the United States Census Bureau there were in the United States in 1950 one hundred six cities with a population of 100,000 or more. Many of these large cities formed the cores of still larger and more populous metropolitan areas. This development of metropolitan areas was made possible by rapid transportation, and has extended the influence of the city to larger areas. Some of the largest metropolitan areas are those focusing on New York, on Chicago, on Philadelphia, on Los Angeles, on San Francisco, and on Detroit. This increasing growth and dominance of large American cities, while slowed down during the depression decade 1930—1940, seems destined to continue, unless changed by the threat of bornbing. Immigration Restriction. During the period from 1900 to 1910 the number of immigrants to the United States was 8,795,000; from 1911 to 1915 there were 4,460,000; but from 19x6 to 1920, during the period of the war, the number dropped to 1,276,000. In 1921 the United States decided upon a radical change in its immigration policy, looking toward a more rigid restriction. It was felt that the disturbed conditions in Europe as a result of the World War, and the high taxes resulting therefrom, would cause too many poverty-stricken Europeans to come to this country. In the five years from 1921 to 1925, 2,639,000 were admitted. The number of immigrants arriving in one year, for the years shown here—one year in five 1926 to 1930 the total was 1,468,000, a decrease due largely to new laws. In 1921 the Emergency Quota Act was passed and remained in effect for one year. It provided that the number of immigrants of a particular nationality should not exceed three per cent of the number of persons of that nationality living in the United States in 1910. In 1922 the Emergency Quota Law was extended for two years more. However, it was considered unsatisfactory, and in May, 1924, a new Quota Law was enacted which admitted annually, from July 1, 1924, to June 30, 1927, two per cent of the number of a given nationality resident in the United States in 1890. After July 1,1927, the quota was to be "that proportion of 150,000 which the number of persons of a given national origin residing in the United States in 1920 bears to the country's total population in 1920." In 1929 a new immigration law likewise limited the number of quota immigrants to about 153,900 annually. Natives of Canada, Mexico, and Central and South America, however, may be admitted to the United States without regard to any quota. The Influence of the Machine Age. The invention of more and more labor-saving machinery destroyed the demand for immigrant labor. It made possible the production of more goods, and by increasing the efficiency in production, shortened working hours, thus affording more leisure time to our working population. The Machine Age produced social changes which affected almost every phase of American life. While the coming of the automobile provided additional means of transportation, it also served to draw people away from their homes. In many cases homes were neglected in order that cars might be purchased. Manufacturers devoted millions of dollars to the employment of artists and engineers whose task was the production of a beautiful car within the means of the average person. While the automobile tended to take many people away from the home, the radio attracted them to it until the automobile manufacturers met the situation by putting radios in the automobile. Although the principle of the radio had been known, it was not until 1920 that the first broadcasting station was established in the United States. Immediately, the radio surpassed other forms of entertainment in popularity and friends boasted to friends about the stations they had "picked up" the night before. As the radio established itself as a permanent feature of American life, producing companies entered upon a competitive business which resulted in the clear transmission of sound and the production of ornamental radio cabinets. Meanwhile, the airplane was introducing a new element into transportation. The efforts of S. P. Langley and of Wilbur and Orville Wright had borne fruit in 1903 in producing a heavier-than-air craft. Though it was largely in an experimental stage until the close of the World War, the airplane has since become an important element in transportation. Through its mail and passenger service, the nation has been drawn closer together than had been possible before. In addition to the automobile, the radio, and the airplane, other inventions have altered American life. Electricity has revolutionized the home, has made cities by night fairylands of beauty, and has helped to solve the traffic problem by its automatic lights. Gas stoves have lessened the labors of the cook, and the tractor has displaced older methods of farm labor, while the dictaphone has simplified the duties of the business office. 