*
FA
COPY RIGHT, ir.4
By LAI I) LA IV BROTHERS. In..
All Rights Reserved
Art director- -Raymon Naylor
lilarh and white drawings by
Raymon Naylor and George Armstrong. Jr.
Mufti in color by Cnraiul Map*
Black and white maps by
Gorancl and George Aiinsirong. Jr.
Printed in Ihfl'nited Stain r>l Antrim

A WORD FROM THE AUTHORS
History is a lot ol tilings. Inn mostly ii is a record of the |mm that
helps us undeisiaud the ptesem and prepare lor the future I he rctord is
largely taken up with what people did. where and why they did it. and
what happened afterward. This sounds pretty simple, jnd it is. in many
ways. Hut in other way it isn't quite so simple; ami you ran see why
this record might require a little study.
1 ake the history of your own country, for example. I hi* record von
arc about to read is called Our S'ation's Story. In it sve present to you
the people and events that tell the story of our country. People don't all
agree on what's nm»i important and what should b>c skip|wd or
skimmed over. We have tried to pick and choose the most essential
(acts—those that will give meaning to your study ol history. In telhng
the story, we start out with certain l«*i< ideas which we think will Ire
most valuable to you.
For one thing we love our country and aic proud of it and we want
to increase your love of it and pride in it. We think this is important.
We admire the men and women who helped make our country'' great
and kept it that way, and we want you to know more tbom them
and about what they' did. We want you to know how we got our stall as
a democratic nation and how sve have had to snuggle to stay' free and
independent.
flic growth of our country' is something we want you to know
about—how the vision of courageous pioneer* led to the settlement ol
this vast land. You will sex- iu the record the force and power ol
dreams put into action. Maybe this will encourage you to lay' plans and
g strive to make some of your own dreams come true. And t here's
a lot more in the record that shows how you «an make things Ireitet
today' and tomorrow and tomorrow For that's one ol the great value* ot
history'—it records the past, hut it illuminate* the future.
You will Irani almut ilic terrible wan we had to take panin. hut \<>n
will learn (at more about the wav* in which we have built up our
country and kept Irccdotil in it while (tcnple in many other couturier
were losing their*. You'll Irani here something about our economic
system <>1 lice enterprise and the vast help it has been ami is to us not
only in earning out living hut also in preserving our general free doms.
And you will leant about the liegitming ami progress of smh kinds
of work as public education, art. literature, and architecture in our
country. You'll leant how such cultural achievement! play a large pan
in the making of a great nation.
So wc have written OurXatiou's Story with these things and a lot of
others in mind You will find here, besides what we have wi ittm. maps,
pictures, chans, tables, exercises and other aids to understanding ami
enj oyment. Wc hope you will use them all ami that they will help you.
Kitt most ot all wc hope you will enjoy reading Out Xatiou's Story a
record ol what has happened to us and to those who came before us
Everett. 1 uppurgn Richard
A. Mcl.cmore
A NEWn OKU) IS FOUND
’ f The Und................................................1 36
2.	(tin Fuio|K'an Background...............................53
3.	The Struggle for a Continent............................69
A NEW NATION EMERGES
11 ife in die Knglidi Colonic* ....................................96
5l
Rebellion and I independent c........................................NO
Stcnos Thkbjb
THE NEW NATION DEVELOPS
' I'Mahljsliing a Federal Union.........................................154
• Tlie Federalist Regime..............................................173
ciunii	Puj
9.	The Fra of President Jefferson	198
10.	The War for Commercial Independence . ...	214
11.	A New Feeling of Nationalism.................................. 232
12.	|acktonian Democracy.	. .	248
13.	Our Nation » Developing Culture................................261
14. On to the Pacific ....	. 280
15............................................................................
17.	The Industrial Revolution in the United States.......................348
18.	Crowth of the Industrial Northeast	368
19.	The New West and the South	389
20.	F.mnomir Forces and Political Issues .	421
Suction Suvkn
POLITICAL AND CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
21.	Political Problems and Solutions...............................448
22.	The Crowing Demand for Reform .	465
23.	The ProgrcNtae Era	*9°
24.	Social and Cultural Changes....................................516
FMFKC.FSCf
28. The (Golden Twent in.............
» The Nov Deal.
JO. The t.rcal Powers lieiwccn Two Wait.
Ot'K r.IKT I^ W <*f iSD Pf.ACE-
II. The Se<ond World War
. 12. The Search lot Peace
1.1 The NahoninMid-cmniry
Ini DbCLAEATIOM 01 iNNnKMNCI
In»: COSSlrmrON OKmr. Umiuj Siaiks (with commentary)
Index.........................................
626
049
.678
708
742
768
80S
811
817
72
OUR NATION S STORY
establishment of colonics. The
demand for woolen textile* had
increased greatly with the revival of
trade in Oriental goods, landowners
found it more profitable to convert
their acres to |»astiirr than to till them
for crops. Since one man could watch
sheep over a laige area, many of the
farm workers in England I sesame
unemployed. The lot of these
unemployed was made svorsc by a
steady rise in prices. These two
factors—unemployment and the inc
rease in pi ices—led thousands of
Englishmen to lielieve that they
might earn a better living in other
|>arts of the world. For these reasons
many of them came to America
At the same time, profitable trade
was treating in England a wealthy
class who were seeking new oppot
tunities for investment. The British
East India (Xunpany had been
chattered in 1600 for the purpose of
securing a portion of the trade with
the Orient. Here was one group
willing to axvttme risks in financing
colonial enterprises in the iio|m‘ of
future profits, and here were other
groups anxious to get away Irotu
England and its poverty. When these
groups got together, (oloni/ution
would follow as a matter ol course.
Earlier attempts at colonization.
Attempts at cnloni/aiion by England
had been made in the 1580's
Differences in the Economic Life of the French, Spontih, end English Colonies
TI1E STRUGGLE TOR A CONTINENT
7.1
Elizabeth I
tvitlioul Jua’CM. Sir Waller Raleigh
had attempted four times to plant
colonies along the Carolina coast.
Raleigh's half brother, Sir Humphrey
Gilbert, foiled in a similar attempt to
plant a settlement on the coast of
Maine.
The thirteen English colonies. In
the years between 1607 and 173.1
Englishmen took the lead in set tling
that part of North America which
later svas to become the United
States. Thirteen serrate colonies were
established along the Atlantic
seaboard from New Hampshire to
Georgia. Two of these settlements,
which were begun by the Swedes and
the Dutch during this period, were
early brought under Ibitish control.
Most of this colonizing activity
took place while England svas ruled
by mrmliets of the Stuart dynasty.
James I
tn 1603 at the deal It ol Queen
Elizabeth I. last of the Tudor
monarch!, the crown passed to James
VI of Scotland, who. as James I ol
England, became the first of the
Stuart rulers. The Tudors had
generally had pleasant relations with
Parliament. The Stuarts, however,
brought to England the theory of the
divine right of kings, and had no use
for Parliament.
For over three centuries influential
people in England had shaied in the
government through Parliament. Iky
refusing to grant money for periods
longer than one year, Pailiammt had
made it necessary for the king to call
it into annual session. The Stuarts
looked upon these annual meetings of
Parliament as unnecessary
interferences with their royal powers.
When Chat let I inherited tbr throne
74
OUR NATION'S STORV
I6‘>!>, ...minions hei-amr serious.
In general, the king iv.it supported by
die Anglicans, and Parliament by the
Puritans. The struggle finally led to
civil wax. in which the Puritans under
the leadership of Oliver Cromwell
defeated Charles I. They look him
prisoner, and in 1649 had him
executed. Members of Charles's
lamriy lied to France.
and a commonwealth (republic i was
established in F.ngland After
Cromwell’s death in 16jH no
satisfactory successor could be found,
and the country tvas again threatened
with civil war. In 1660 Parliament
invited the Stuart family to return to
England, and Charles II became the
new English ruler.
English Settlements under the Early Stuart Rulers
The founding of Jamestown. The
lands in the New World which
England claimed were granted by the
English inlets to trading com- panics
or to favored individuals. Ilv 1606
two rival companies had been
organised—one composed mainly of
Plymouth merchants, and one
composed ol London merchants.
Three vessels sent out by the latndon
Company arrived in
Chesapeake Hay in May. 1607. The
expedition entered a river, which they
named the (antes in honor of the king,
and erected a fort and other buildings
at a site they named Jamestown
The colony's difficulties and final
success. The choice of site for the
colony was a poor one. Throughout
the summer the settlers were plagued
with malaria and other
THE STRUGGLE FOR V CONTINENT
75
The first women to ccme to Jonestown arrived in 1619, ond thus helped to
ettoblhh the colaiy at opermanent tettlement.
fevers. That the colony survived the
litst winter was due solely to com
obtained from the Indians.
The wilier* were working (or the
company rather than for themselves.
There was little incentive to produce
goods for the profit of faraway
stockholder*. In lb>0*l the Rowing
fin'd for Imam i.il siip|xiii of the
colony forced the reorganization of
the company, which thereafter
became known as the Virginia
Company. In cider to encourage
settlement, the company established a
new system ol landholding. Anyone
who paid his own ex|Kdtses to the
new colony received an outright
grant of filly acres of land. One who
persuaded others to tome received
fifty acres lor eatfi person so
|>ersiiaded. In addition, it wa*
possible lor one individual to secure
title to large tracts of land a situation
which encouraged the es
tabfishment of the plantation system.
In Ifil2 John Rolle developed a
method ol < tiring the tobacco which
tould fie grown in this latitude. The
development of a crop with a ready
market in England issiucd the success
of the colony.
Un|M>itant event* of 1619. There
were very few women in |ames- town
during the early years ol the colony.
In order to encourage the
establishment ol permanent homes,
the company in Hi 19 sent about a
hundred women to Jamestown To
secure a wile the settler was required
not only to win the lady of his choice
hut also to pay her passage. The fee
wa* 120 pounds of loltacco.
(Tolsacro was used lor money by
early Virginians.)
Another event ol that yc.it was to
leave it* stamp on fife in the I’nited
Stair*. A Dutch vessel
OUR NATION S STORY
purpose of the roads, canal*, and
railroads by which the difficulties
presented by chc Appalachian hairier
were being reduced Federal aid was
given toward these intnn.il
improvements. The South, naturally,
was opposed to any program which
would weaken the relations I»ctween
that section and the Northwest.
Free Western lands The demand
lor free Western land was strongest in
the Northwest where population
would grow rapidly if the conditions
of settlement could he made to attract
newcomers. Opinion in the Northeast
on this issue was divided Workers
and those with little money endorsed
it. as it would tend to drain off any
surplus ol labor and increase wages.
SETTLING THE WEST
It was opposed by employers who
wanted no scarcity ol labor and by
spec ulators in Western lands. The
Southern planter was opposed to a
policy of tree lands Isecause it would
work to the political disadvantage ol
the South. The rapid growth ol
population in the territories ol the
Northwest which were dosed to
slavery would add immeasurably to
the difficulties ol maintaining an
ecpial number ol slave and Iree states
in the Union
Immigration	restriction.
Conditions in Europe in the middle of
the nineteenth century gteatly stint
ulatcd emigration to the United
Slates. The unsuccessful revolution in
Germany in 1M4H and the potato
famine in Ireland in the early IRjO's
brought thousands of
EAST COAST STATES I REST OF THE U. S.
ivvifime
iiiiiMn
vtvtt imm
!•«•» •ap'atanN toP«’<*«<*!>***!AoprV.on
nos UII co*>
tram MCiwea w *•» imommo *ocm
am* iovm anawnc
Uir NATION DIVIDED
299
Many in ih* North ox wall ox in fh# South dhograadwMh William Lloyd Oortiton.
picturedhere CMbeing pulled through the streets with a rope aroundhit neck.
immigrants to American shores.
StHiir ol these settled in the
industrial cities of the Northeast. The
(letmam established themselves in
large numbers in Cincinnati. St.
I.mils. Cleveland. Chicago, and on
new farms on the frontier. Relatively
lew were attracted to the South. In
the industrial Northeast they were
welcomed by employers who lienc-
hlrd by their addition to the labor
supply. The workers in indutity.
however, looked upon diem as
competitors for join.
The lact that lew iinnugiaim set
tied in the South had a disturbing
fflcct on the it eight ol that section in
national politics. Immigrants who
settled in the North, even though
they were not citizens, added to the
population of their communities and
increased ilieii Wales repiesentation
in Congress
and in the electoral college. These
tin iimstaiMcs aroused opposition to
liberal immigration policies
throughout the South.
The increasing importance of the
slavery issue. For the most part, early
opponents ol slavery did not severely
condemn Southern slaveholders.
They realised that emancipation
would present serious social and
economic problems. In 1831.
however, antislaveiy agitation took a
new turn. In dial year William Lloyd
Carrison lHg.ui in lloslnn the public
at ion id die iih- rrator. In the first
issue of that papci. Garrison said: I
shall con
tend for the immediate enfranc
hisemenl of our slave imputation . . .
I will not equivocate—I will not re-
ticat a single inch and I will he
heard." Me had no sympathy for the
slaveholders; lie felt that slavery
OUR NATION'S VTOK\
In addition to a free right of way
through ihr |»nl>li« domain, rath
companv was given grants of
alternate section* ol land extending
twenty miles hark front each side of
it* trai ks. Fmilter aid was given in
the form of government bonds.
Federal aid to agriculture. Another
kind of legislation the South did not
approve of had to do with free
Wciurm land. The withdrawal of
Southern representatives front
Congrcu made it |xiuible lot the
federal government to provide free
Western lands. In IW»2 the
Homestead Act enabled settlers to
senile title to ISO acres of farm land
merely by ormpying and militating
the land lor five yea is and paying a
registration fee often dollars.
Perietal aid to agiimliure appeared
in another form with the passage ol
the Morrill Act in 1862. Far h state
was granted thirty thousand at res ol
the public domain lor each
icpresentatise it had in Con gress in
I860 or at the time of us
admission Funds derived from the
sale of these lands were to toe used to
endow mllcgc* piovulirig institution
in agriculture and the mechanic arts.
A total of more than twenty thousand
square miles was thus donated to aid
in the establishment of the so-called
land grant colleges.
Li lM~r.dir.it ion of immigration
laws. Prosecution of the war also
increased the need for civilian
workers. To meet this need ('.on-
gress in 1864 liberalized immigration
laws so as to permit entry to contract
workers. Manufacturing and
transportation agencies, anx inns to
gain the benefit of lower wage scales,
imported worker* by the thousands.
With a protective tariff, a sound
national currency, a policy of liberal
aid to railroad c oust rue lion, free
Western lands, and liberal
immigration laws, the ttend toward
industrial and agricultural expan sion
was certain to move forward rapidly
in the postwar years.
Summing l’p
The Industrial Revolution, as you have read, began in Fngland in the
eighteenth century''. In 1791 the first textile mill in America | was huilt by
Samuel Slater, an Fnglish mechanic- American manu-1 far luring grew
rapidly because the embargo of 1807 .md the War of 1812 cut off foieign
trade. Its growth was also aided by private and federal road construction,
and toy the building of canals.
The invention of the Meamboat and the locomotive increased the volume
ol transportation and lowered it* com. This helped ttoe I glowth of the West
as well as the development of industry''. The iron ore and coal fields of
Pennsylvania made possible a large-scale
THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN THE UNITED STATES Jta
application oi ilic Kelly -Ddscmci process lor production ol die cirri i
repined by industrial expansion.
The War between the States aided industrial expansion in lour ways:
(I) it HTr.itlv increased the demand for nianulactured products: (2) it
brought a higher tariff, thus protecting American in- duttry against
foreign com|>rtiiors: (3) it brought relaxed immigra tion laws, which
permitted entry of many low-wage industrial and transportation
workers: (4) it led to passage ol a National Banking Act. creating a
uniform currency. During the war. also, federal subsidies were granted
lor building railroads between the Fast and the Far West. Cultivation of
the newly-opened Western lands was aided by such inventions as the
steel plow, the reaper, and the thresher. Introduction of improved
strains of plants and animals helped to improve farming. Agriculture
was further aided by grants of land for stale colleges teaching mechanic
and agricultural art*
Next you will look over the reasons why industry in America
developed first in the Northeast.
F.xrACMU sox Br.rtrx IMr.xs tandim.
Can sou express the main thoughts?
1. How did the Industrial
Revolution make possible the inc
leased pres due tion of goods?
2.	In what areas were implore
ments of production activities basic
to the Industrial Revolution?
5. Hose did the Industrial
Revolution inc tease the need lot non
and steel?
4. In what way* did the War
between the States bring about
industrial expansion in the United
States?
tun sou recall significant details?
I. How was the Industrial Revolution
introduced in the United States?
Z What caused manufacturing to
increase in importance in the United
States during tire first twenty seats of
the nineteenth century?
S. How did tire term "railroad”
come into use?
4.	In what war's were trant|rorta~
tion facilities in the United Slates
improved during the fir»t hall of the
nineteenth century?
5.	In whar specific industries in
the United States had the factory
system displaced the domestic system
ol manufecturing by 1865?
Imrtpieiing Maps and Pictures
1.	On the pictograph on page
351, trace a journey from New
Oilcans to Washington by way of
Nashville. Name the rivers, roads,
and canals over which one would
have traveled in IH U).
2.	In the illustration on page 360,
note the ojieiations necessary' lor reap
ing grain in 1850. Compare these
methods with the use ol a modem
combine.
376
OFR NATION’S STORY
companies decided to divide (he
nation into four standard time belts —
hastem. Central. Mountain, and
Pacific—each one hour apart. The
system went into effect on November
18. 1883.
The steel industry. Because of the
wide distribution of essential
resources, the steel industry began as
a highly competitive business.
However, the man whose name it
generally associated with the rite of
this industry is Andrew Carnegie.
| Horn in Dunfermline.1 Scotland, he
emigrated with his parents to this I
country in 1848. when he was thirteen
yearn old. Before a year had | passed,
he was employed in textile mills in
Allegheny, he spent his spare time
mastering telegraphy.
'Dunfermline idOn-ftnatln)
and toon became a telegraph
operator for the Pennsylvania
Railroad. At the outbreak of the War
between the States, he was placed in
charge of all military railroads and
telegraphs in the fast. Carnegie saved
the greater part of his earnings and
became convinced that iron railroad
bridges would in time replace those
made of wood- He organized the
Keystone Bridge Works in 1862. and
built the first iron bridge across the
Ohio Rivet. To secure iron for further
bridge building, he organized his
own factory in 1863 and expanded
his metal produc ts to include axles
for railroad cars, iron rails, and
locomotives. He began, also, to lay
the basis for his future wealth by
investing heavily in iron-ore fields.
GROWTH OF THE INDUSTRIAL NORTHEAST
.177
While visiting in England in 1872.
Carnegie met Sir Henry Bessemer
and betaine certain that the tenure of
the iron industry lay in iteel. I'pon his
return, undaunted by the panic of
1873. he rudied to completion a new
steel plant just outside I'ittshutglt.
The demand for steel exceeded his
fondest hopes. Rail loads Isegan
buying large ipian- lilies for rails,
bridges, locomotives, and rolling
stock. Steel came to be uteri in the
erection of buildings, and in the
manufacture of pipe and wtrr and of
machinery for factories, mines, and
forms. The government used steel
armor plate in the building of
battleships.
Carnegie introduced a type of
organization in industry which
brought control ol every process in
production under the same
management. Even while engaged in
the manufacture of iron, he had
bought ore fields in Pennsylvania
and Minnesota The valuable coking-
coal holds ol the Connellsvtllr area
were owned almost entirely by llenry
Frick. To secure them. Carnegie
bought out their lormcr owner and
made him a partner. To transport
these raw materials to its factories,
the tampans built up its own Heit ol
lake steamers and its own railroads.
This type ol organization made it
possible to produce steel at a low
|trie e. While Enghsh competitors
were unable to manulacliire steel
rails lor less titan nineteen dobars a
ton Carnegie was able to produc e
them in America at a total cost of
less than twelve dobars a ton. Profits
of the steel industry were based not
only on lower production costs in the
United States hut also on the benefits
ol a protective lariH By |K‘>0 the
United States had outranked Great
Britain in the production ol this vital
machine- age commodity.
The steel industry was an impor-
tant factor in the economic revolution
in the United States. It provided the
material needed for our expanding
factories, mines, railtoads. and (arms.
Its workers Ik- came an important
part in the new industrial population,
and its need for labor was an
important factor in the stimulation of
immigration.
The oil industry . After Colonel
Edwin 1.. Drake drihed the first
successful oil web, western
Pennsylvania became a hub ol
activity similar to that which
followed the discovery'' of gold in
Cahfomia in 1848. New wells were
dribed wherever there was any'
prospect at ab of finding petroleum.
The oil was shipped to refineries in
Cleveland and Pittsburgh. The most
valuable product was kerosene, which
soon replaced candles and whale oil
as a source ol light. Other important
products were lubricants lor many'
kinds of machinery'.
Fierce competitive conditions
marked the early' years of this new
industry'. In I860 a voung Cleveland
produce merchant. John I).
Rockefeber, derided to try' his hand in
the |K-noleum business. Sam ucl
Andrews had developed a new
3WI
OCR N AHON S STORY
A few scttlen had	into
Ncliruka Territory whirl) hilt! I>cen
o|»encd at the same time. I'o escape
religious persecution the Mormons
had established a prosperous
community in the area around (deal
Salt lake. With hut one or two ext
editions, the rest of the region west of
the Missicsippi remained an unwilled
wilderness.
Within the next forty years, all of
the desirable land within this vast
region had Isem orrupied. I lei e was
an achievement ol no less gigantic
proportions than that accomplished in
the industrialisation of the Northeast.
The in< teased tempo of Western
settlement was the result of many fee
torn- -natural
resources awaiting development,
improved transportation, the desire to
escape conditions brought about by
the industrialisation of the Fast, and
enterprise. Northern prosperity
resulting from the war pros uteri
capital needed for the undertaking.
Conditions brought about by the war
or by the return ol peace pro- sided
the necessary people, and a favorable
government lent an encouraging
hand.
Transcontinental railroads. You
have read that in 1862 Congress had
ended years of drl*alr over a nans
continental railroad by charteimg the
I’nicM) Pat ifu Railroad and aid ing
in its construction through land
grants and loans in the form of
THE NEW WEST \\1> THF. SOI HI
391
government bonds.	Anii.il	con-
struttinn got under way alter the war
ended. Capital was provided bv
Eastern financier*.	IjEkii	was
supplied by veterans of the war. ini
migrants from Ireland and Ger-
many. -mil by Chinese coolie* ini
ported especially for that task. The
operation was in charge of a nuliiaiy
engineer. General Grenville Dodge.
The completion of the project,
despite the obstacles oil< ml by
mutual conditions. In	dians.
buffaloes, and finanri.il diffi cullies.
%vas due mainly to the tireless
energy and perseverance with which
General Dodge worked. The western
end of this fust transcontinental line
was the Central I'atilu (now the
Southern Pacific)
The meeting of the Union Pacific
and the (initial Pacific, at Promontory
Point. I Trait, on May 10. 1809, was
an occasion lm a national celebration.
Distinguished officials bound the last
rails together with a spike of Nevada
silver and another of (ialifomia gold.
The speeches marking the occasion
were carried to the East by telegraph,
later in I Ik- sainr year the Central
Pacific extended its line westward to
San Francisco Hay. An. excursion
train sponsored by the I lost on Hoard
of Trade in lf*70 was the first to
complete a transcontinental run. It
made the trip trom Host on to San
Franc isc o in eight days.
By EHG9 Congress had chartered two
other transcontinental lines.
With the driving of the ton roiliood spike cn Moy 10,1869. ot Promontory Point,
Utah, the Eoit ond West were united.
XflVfm MMn
OUR NATION’S STORY
U 6
hast had used lop lur building ihiir
Tint shelters, and rail* for lenses.
Pioneers on (hr prairie mined in sod for
ihrir In him*. Wood, precious as it was,
had to be used lor the It.one of the roof,
which was then covered with straw or
with a la>it of tod. fem ing in the fields
was e\en more dilhuilt. Stone ami mud
walls proved ineffectual barrier* to both
cattle and wild animals. Otdinary wire
fences strung on wooden posts were
little better. Then in 187-1 |osrph
Oliddm invented barbed wire. The
sliatp points pintruding from the main
wire were held in high respect by
marauding beasts and by tame animals.
Improvements in farm machinery.
Kqually important lor ihc development
of agriculture in the West was the
continued improve
ment of lartii mat hinny and the
invention of the grain elevator.
Improvements in plows, drills, harrows,
and cultivators were con stantly nuking
it possible for one man to plant and
cultivate a largri and larger acreage. An
improved reaper patented by the Maisli
brothers in 1858 introduced an endless
apron upon which the cut grain fell and
from which it could lie grasped and
hound into sheaves. In 1878 |ohn I
Appleby invented the self-binder which
bound the sheaves by machinery. Seven
years later the combined harvester and
threthei made its fust appt.ii ance. The
grain elevator also came intogeneial use.
It provided space for storing a highly
perish jblc commodity under conditions
which nude for easy loading and
unloading.
This typical sodhouse ©n o homestead out on the bleak prairies of Mon to to shows
the pioneers’ obility to odopt themielvei to their environment.
TW«1»Mg
THE NEW WEST AND THE SOI 111
The Changing Center of Population, 1790-1930
Railroad* and the settler*. A*
there problems and difficulties were
overcome, railroad* began to play ati
important tule in promoting Western
settlement. J ames J. Dill of the Great
Northern Railroad i« probably the
outstanding promoter nl this type. He
advertised throughout the Fast and in
F.uropc for persons to settle along his
rail- mad As an added inducement,
he offered reduced lares to the West
and carried sonic furniture and rattle
free. Once these settlers rear lied the
plains, Hill took an immediate
interest in seeing to it that they
became prosperous. In fart, lie left no
stone unturned in his cfToits to add
to the volume of business transac ted
by his railroad pmpnties.
Sources of Western imputation.
The people who took part in the
development of the agricultural
frontier came from many dillerent
places. During the War between the
States, eastern city dwcllets and
farmers rushed to tire region west of
the Mississippi to benefit by the
high prices then being paid for food
grains. Some Easterners emigrated to
the territories as a means of evading
the draft. After the war. many I'nion
veterans took advantage of the
opportunities to acquire rich land at
little coat. Fast em industrial workers
who longed for the independent life
of farmers were joined by thousands
of immigrants arriving annually from
Furope. Among those who came in
from foreign countries were
thousands of Scandinavians who
settled in the area west of the upper
Great Lakes, and many Germans who
set up new homes in Wisconsin.
Iowa, and Kansas.
I.umliering and fishing. Two other
industries contributed to the
development of the West. One of
these is the lumber industry''. The
growth of the industrial Fast and the
settlement of the West placed int
teased demand* on the timber
resources of the nation. The pine and
hr forest* of Washington and Oregon
and the redwood forests of California
were up|>rd to meet
OfR NATION'S STORY
shorter working day and to a
growing interest in recreational
puisuits.
For most workers, to the dangers
of technological unemployment was
added that of low of hit job resulting
Irom the operation of the business
cycle. A period of good times seemed
invariably to be followed by one of
depression. During good times—
when business was expand- mg—jobs
were plentiful and wages were high.
During depressions jobs were watte,
and the workers who held them had to
he content with greatly reduced
earnings. For many workers the
wages earned during "good times"
were not sufficiently high to enable
them to save enough to tide them
through the years of a depression.
Two such depressions took place
during the list half of (he nineteenth
century —the panic of 1873 and the
panic of 1893. In the years following
these panics, unemployment reached
unusually high totals and the suffering
among workers was severe.
Hie pissing of the Western frontier
affected adversely the batgain- ing
power of the industrial worker in the
Fast. As long as Iree land was
available, the factory worker could
threaten to move to the West if Ids
conditions of employment were not
improved. Sometimes even the threat
to move had the desired result. The
thousands who did lake to the pioneer
trail reduced to that extent the ninnlwr
of wotkets in the Fast and thus
improved the bargaining position of
those who remained as industrial
workers.
Immigrants ami the labor supply.
The numbers of those who took to the
pioneer trail, however, were more
than offset by the steady stream of
immigrants from Furope. Furopcan
workers were generally w illing to
accept wage scales which judged by
American stamlatds. were much too
low. The move, ment thus started
continued with little interruption until
the outbreak of the First World War.
In the half century between IfMif and
J9I4, over twenty-five million
immigrants came to our shores. No
other country in the history of the
world has assimilated so large an
alien element into its population in mi
brief a period Although Mime of
these immigrants were skilled labored
and piolessional workers, the
ovenvhclming majority were
unskilled. Then addition to the labor
force available to American
employers tended to lower wages for
other workers, laborers felt that they,
like the manufactured, were entitled
to protection limn this fotm of
competition.
A few employers in some indus
tries established conditions which
gave them sirtually complete control
over the economic lives of their
employees. The cotporations
involved owned not only the mine or
factory, but also the town built
around it. Workers were compelled to
live in factory-owned homes and to
buy the merchandise they needed
from factoty-owned
ECONOMIC FORCES AND POLITICAL ISSUES
stditv Prices charged were
considerably higher than those-
prevail jug in othci comparable com
muni ties. \i least a part of the
workers' wage* were paid, not in
cash, hut in credit at the company
store. Meal government officials,
police- men. and magistrate* as well
as teachcis and dcKton, were
company employees.
Workers in the textile clothing
industry were sometimes subjected to
another type of exploitation.
Memlieis of many newly-arrived
immigrant families were forced by
economic necessity to accept any
kind of employment. Their dire
needs contributed to the development
of the "sweatshop" system. Under
this system the mamiiatuiter needed
only a small central plant. From it
were issued the materials necessary
lor making dresses and suits.
Workers, generally women, took
these materials to their homes where
the sewing was completed. The rate
per piece was kept so low that they
could earn a living only by working
fourteen to sixteen hours a day. Vet
the competition lor this kind of work
was so intense dial employees were
glad to accept any wage offered.
Fortunately, the abuses related to
Ixrth the company ownership of
towns and the sweatshop system
were not widespread They were
significant, however, lor two reasons:
(1) they represented the extent to
which the least scrupulous could go
in their search for profits: (!f) they
provided union organizers
111
with strong arguments for the suit-
port of the organized labor
movement.
The aims of labor unions. Like
other economic gtoups in the nation,
workers wanted first of all. a larger
share of the increasing volume of
goods and sendees they helped to
produce. This want found expression
in a demand for higher wages.
Although the purchasing power of the
wages alreadv received was gradually
increasing, the improvements in
ecomtmic position already attained
only sensed to whet the appetite for
still further improvement. In view of
the lortuucs amassed hy the most
successful employers, workers felt
that they were entitled to still more.
In short they. too. were interested iu
deriving the maximum possible
benefit from the advances resulting
from the Industrial Revolution.
Many worker* were also
interested in reducing the number of
bouts iu the working day. Reducing
the hours of labor would have the
effect of increasing the number of
jobs available While few industries
operated oil a lull-lime basis, any
reduction in the munl>cr of hours
worked would have the effect of
spieading employment over an
increased number of days. A
shortened day would also reduce the
Isorcdom of monotonous repetitive
jobs. Further, if a ten-ham day were
established in an industry, those who
worked more than ten hours might
demand higher rates for overtime. In
ItMij most Ameri-
OIK NATIONS STORY
inj£ to accept the conditions which
the employe! offered. Thtt ptuc- tice
was known at a lockout.
I’nioni used other mean! betides
direct negotiation to improve their
bargaining position. They encouraged
(heir members to buy only those
pioduett bearing the union label at an
indiiation that they had been
manufactured under union conditions.
They worked to secure a union
shop—that is. one in which all
employees are inc I tided in union
membership. They also sought,
through political activity, to secure
conditions tinder which their
bargaining position would be
improved. They urged placing
restrictions upon immigration. The
adoption of a ten-hour day or an
eight-hour day for government
employees would strengthen their
hands in demanding a shorter
working day in private industry.
They were interested in expanding
the public school system, both
berause they recognized the
importance of education and because
they wanted to miner the number of
teen-age workers available to
employers. They worked for law*
that would require employers to adopt
safety devices and safety measures.
They wanted to secure the enactment
of legislation providing for
workmen’s compensation to victims
of industrial accidents. Practical as
well as humanitarian considerations
were involved in the demand lor
legislation regulating the conditions
of employment of women. They
wanted to outlaw
the abuses grow ing out of <
oiupany towns and the sweatshop
system.
Above all else* they wanted legal
protection for the right of workers to
oigani/e and to engage in activi- tics
designed to achieve what they
considered legitimate etuis. Some
employers, opposed to the growth of
unions in their plants, adopted the
practice of requiring applicants to
sign an agreement not to join a trade
union. Organized latrar called these
agreements “yellow- dog contracts."
Some managrrs fired all workers who
joined a union even though they had
not signed such a contract. Fmployers
handed together to establish "black
lists." denying employment to prisons
suspcc ted of acting as union 01-
ganizers At time* detective* were
employed to pose as workmen, join
the union, and then report to the
management the names of union
leaders and intended union activities.
Some employers sought to hieak
strikes by securing court orders or
injunctions forbidding unions to
continue their strikes or to engage in
picketing or other activities usually
accompanying strikes. If union
leaders tailed to comply w ith these
order*, they were immediatelv jailed
without trial for contempt of court.
Otganizcd labor wanted !>oth
yellow-dog contracts and government
by injunction to be outlawed.
Tlte rise of national unions. You
already know about the development
of early unions in ronnee
ECONOMIC. hUKLU A>1> I VUIItAt UStU
IrNMH Ah hit t
In Ihli cartocn published In 1886 Thomas No»> •mphotiitd th# cpiarrels botwosn
independent trade, or croft,union* ondthe Knight* oflabor.
lion with the reform movements of
ihr [j( ktonian era. Many local unions
survived the panic o( 1837. Ease of
travel resulting from the RTotvth of
railroads made it possible for leaden
ol craft unions to meet in national
conventions. By I860 the list of
national trade unions included
organisations of plumbers,
stonecutters, iron mold- en, and
printers. Labor organizations became
stronger during the war yean (1861-
1865). Join were plentiful, and the
cost of living increased rapidly.
Workmen joined unions in an effort
to keep their wages in line with
increasing living costs.
The National Labor Union. In
1866. under the leadership ol
William Sylvis ol the National Iron
Molders Union, the National labor
Union was launched This was the
first nationwide union of worker* in
different trades. At one time it
attained a membership ol 60Q000
workers. Decline of the organization
resulted from its support of the Ixibor
Reform party in the election of 1872.
The Knights of Labor. More
successful was the Noble Order of the
Knights of Labor, founded in I860 by
Uriah S. Stephens, a Philadelphia
tailor. Membership was open to all
workers, without regard either to
degrees of skill attained or to race,
religion, sex. or citizenship status.
Excluded only were those engaged in
the liquor business or then relatives,
lawyers, bankers, professional
gamblers, and	stockbroker*.
Specifically, the organization
supported the use of arbitration in
industrial disputes, the prohibition of
child labor, the eight-hour day, equal
pay lor tncti and women, and laws to
protect the safety and health of
workers. LI- Ions ol the organization
to establish co-operative stores and
factories met with failure.
OIK N YTION'S STORY
uo
The Knights attained ihiir great-
ra numerical strength following a
successful railroad strike in 1885.
Within two year* the membership rose
from 50.000 to over 700.000.
Politically, the organization was active
in securing the enactment ol the
Chinese Exclusion Art in 1882. ami of
another law in 1885 lor- bidding the
importation of contract workers.
The strength of the Knights
declined rapidly during the late
IHKO'i, Unsuccessful strikes on a
number of railroad lines alienated
public opinion. Skilled wotkers were
dissatisfied with the inclusion of
unskilled laborers in the same
organization. Included in the tin
skilled were many radicals of both
foreign and native extraction.
Violence- in industrial disputes, often
at the behest of these radicals, tended
to bring discredit upon the whole
organization. By IH90 membership
had dwindled to 100,000.
The American Federation ol
Labor. During the 1870s a nuin tier ol
cralt unions had continued I to operate
independently of the I Knights, hi
1881 representatives of national, state,
and local unions met at Terre Haute.
Indiana, and 1 laid plans for the
formation of a new international
federation of | craft unions. In 1880 at
another convention held in Columbus.
Ohio, this new organization was I
named the American Federation of
[Labor.
| The American Federation of
OalMir (AFL) is a loose- organization
which exercises little Influence over
the policies of member unions. It
consists of workers organized
generally on a craft basis. Local craft
unions combine to form their own
state and national organizations.
These national unions or their local
affiliates heroine the bargaining
organizations of their members. Tire
national unions issue charters to local
organizations which are the principal
members of the AFL. This central
organization helps in determine
gencr.il policies, handles public
relations, works for the passage ol
desired legislation, and assists in the
organization ol focal unions.
The man most responsible for the
growth of the AFL svas Samuel
Gompen. who lire ante its president
in 1886. He held that office
continuously, except for one year,
until his death in 1924. His father, an
English cigar maker, emigrated to the
United States with his Tamils in
1865. The son followed the trade of
his father and. as leadri ol the
National Cigar Makers' Union, took
an active part in the organi/a lion ol
the AFI.
Under (*oui|K-rs‘ leadership the
AFL usually adopted a conservative
position with regard to reform
movements. It supported only those
changes that seemed beneficial to
workers, relying as much u|M>n
economic as political means to
achieve its ends. Fxccpt in 1924. it
stcadlastly refused to ally itself with
third-party movements. In stead, it
adopted a policy of "re-
ECONOMIC FORCES AND POLITIC AL ISSUES
-Ml
«ar cling iu It lends, and punishing
Us enemies
By supporting the candidates ol
tiujor put ties friendly lo iu cause,
and opposing those whom it con-
»Hlcidl lo lie its nirmics. organized
labor came to exert considerable
uiHuriwr in Congress and in slate
legislatures. These policies
continued to lie those ol the
organi/a- tion under the presidency
ol William (•let'll. t«ho silttceded
(hmu- pen in 1924 and held office
until iiis death in 1953. Until the
rise of die Congress of Industrial
Organizations (CIO) in (he 1930‘»,
the AH.dominated theoigani/rd
labor movement in the United
States.
Unions had to maintain
reasonably good public relations il they
Heir to achieve their political mds.
Hetause strikes generally deprived
consumer*of essential goods or sendees,
the use of this we.i|M>n often had
political consequences. It may hr Mid.
however, that lahonng groups, whether
or not they were oigani/ed played an
important role in reforms designed to
adjust American life to the thanged
conditions resulting from the Indus dial
Resolution The rise of enlightened
management. Meanwhile, management
was seeking ways and means ol re- du«
ing industrial tension and on i
phasi/ing (he common interests ol
1 employers and employees. Al
though they were opposed to the
idea of craft unions, many employ
ers pteferted to deal with their mi
pioyces th tough some kind of
Gompert conferred with
th# Be.fish loborlsodar in 1894
organi/aiion. This resulted in (he
estahhshiumt oi company unions.
Sue h uninne were made up of
workers in a particular lactory or
cutpo- i.shon. Through such a union,
workers at least gained a voice w ith
management in the conitol ol the
conditions of employment. However,
company unions wete linwnrd upon
by leaders of the organized liimii
moyrment. They claimed that the
members of such unions lost thru jobs
when they opposed too actively the
wishes of employers.
Other corporations developed
profit sharing plans. Workers in some
cases received bonuses whenever the
company had an unusually simic-
sslnl sear. Othci companies made it
possible lor their employees to buy
steak on lasmahlr trims In either case,
employees came to
In 1877 roilrood jtriliers tef fire to the Union $»cfk>n in Pimbvrgh.
Sinking roilrood vvorken ere ihovvn d'oggmg the firemen ond engineer from o
Boltimore and Ohio freight troin ot Mortlniburg, Weit Virginia.
POLITICAL PROBLEMS AND -VOLITION*	DU
Kilted the use of violence l»v labor
unions. The use of state militia and
Icdcral troops to restore order was
generally approved. In the second
place, laws were passed in many
states restraining union activities.
Despite these setbacks, the labor
movement did receive some
favorable federal legislation during
this period. An eight-hour day was
established foi employees in
government work. Steps were also
taken to reduce the competition
provided by immigrant workers. In
1*68 the Burlingame Treaty had
lieen drawn up with China, giving
citizens of that country the right to
live in the United Stairs. Under this
treaty large numbeis ol Chinese
coolies were moving into California.
Hayes was able to modify the
Burlingame Treaty so that we
secured the right to "regulate, limit,
or suspend" the entry of Chinese
laborers. A Chinese Exclusion .Act
passed in 1882 excluded woikcrs
from China and denied American
citizenship to all Chinese aliens.
Another law passed in the same year
denied admission to pau- pert,
convicts, insane persons, and
individuals likely to become public
charges. Three yeais later the
importation of contract laborers was
forbidden.
Summing Up
You saw earlier that the progress of the Industrial Revolution made
workers and formers feel that they were not receiving a just reward for
their efforts. They turned to reform movements to overcome what they
considered an alliance between government and
business.
You recall that Republicans held the presidency and a large num-
ber of the scats in Congress from 1861 until 1885. Having gained
favor as an antislavery party, they easily retained it dining the Re-
construction period The three Republican Presidents of the pe-
riod all were well known military men. from the industrialized state
of Ohio. The spoils system was widely used in maintaining political
power. A consequence ol it was graft and political corruption.
To correct this abuse. President llaycs applied the merit system
in filling federal posts, widening the rift between the reform faction
and the Stalwaits of the Republican party. The assassination of
Garfield prompted Chester A. Arthur to hurry'' civil sendee reform.
Earmeit and debtors won a campaign to have fcdcial girmbaiks
nude redeemable in gold, latter they were joined by miners in a
(sorttally successful fight to have the govc-iniuriit buy and coin ipi.ui
les of silver. Both these measures he lped to bring money into
t)


SOC IAL AND CULTURAL C HANGES l)i KIIAPS you
have attended a moving pitture that carried you bad X to early
American times. Alter the film you may have said to yourself. I low our
country hatehanged since those days!
In the present chaptet you will see how a great number of these
changes took place between IH70 and 1920. You will see how our
native population grew and vast numbers <>\ immigrants also tame,
bringing new customs and new problems. Cities grew in number and in
size, and took on much of the complexity we see in them today.
Newspapers and magazines multiplied: the moving picture was
introduced. Interest grew in music, in literature, .ind in ait. and
American writers and artists achieved world-wide feme. There was
likewise a great growth ol educational institutions, both public and
private. An increase of leisure created new interest in athletics and other
forms of recreation.
You will sec in this chapter that all ol these changes in our national
life were closely associated with the growth of industry, and the
consequent increase in national wealth. This is one of the chief ideas of
the chapter. In studying, keep in mind the following questions:
I What are the other chief ideas?
2. In what ways have cultural activities liccti affected by the
Machine Age?
Changes in Population
Population growth. Wherever the
Industrial Revolution has taken place,
there has been a markedly fast growth
in population. As a new country the
United States had grown with striking
lapidity during the first hall of the
nineteenth century', even though its
economy was primarily agiiiul- tural.
A population of four million in 1790
had grown to over eight times that
nunilier by I860.
It would have been impossible to
maintain anything like that late ol
growth in later years had agriculture
remained our foremost occupation,
lor farming requite* a growing land
aica over which to expand I lie
lndiisin.il Revolution did. however,
prevent any lapid decline in the tate
of growth. The volume of goods and
sendees produced made it possible
to support a larger population and.
at die
»ame time, provided more and mi
nr people with the meant ol earning
a livelihood. By 1890 there were
twice at many people living in the
I'nited States at there had been at the
outbreak of the War between the
States. By 1930 their number had
doubled once again, exceeding, by
that date. 122.-000.000.
This great growth was due in part
to natural increase—that is. to tl»e
excess of births over deaths. The birth
rate, the number of births per thousand
inhabitants, remained relatively high,
but it was beginning to decline from
the figure reached during the earlier
sears of the nineteenth century. The
sire of the average family was
becoming smaller. Children were not
the economic asset in an industrial city
that they had been on a farm.
The achievements of medical
wiener, however, more than offset any
possible loss through smaller families.
Early in the nineteenth century an
Englishman named fdwaid Jenner had
developed vaccination as a preventive
for smallpox, one of the dread diseases
of earlier periods. Alter the War Ire-
tween the States, the germ theory of
disease had been developed by two
European scientists. Louis Pasteur i in
France and Robert Koch ’ tn
(Germany. Another Englishman.
Joseph Lister, had demon strated the
importance of cleanliness in Heating
open wound* ami
> Faucwr<p*ei*»'i * *<xh
in surgery. Antitoxins and scrums
wcie being developed for the
treatment and prevention of such
diseases as diphtheria, tetanus,
typhoid fever, and whooping cough.
It was discovered that insulin can
provide relief to sufferers from
dialietes. I)r. Walter Reed, an
American army doctor, established
that yellow lever was carried to
human beings bv the female of a
certain species of mosquito. The
housefly also came to lie recognized
as a carrier ol disease as well as an
insect |iest. Local and state
authorities, as well as the I'nited
States Public Health Service, helped
to wage an effective fight against
disease. As a result of these
developments, fewer children became
the victims ol infants’ diseases, and
more mothers survived childbirth.
Life expectancy at birth increased
Irani forty-nine years in 1901 to user
sixty-seven years by 1950.
Immigration a« a factor in popu>
lation growth. The need for more and
more workers in America has served
to draw people from other countries
to our shores. Never was this need
more pronounced than when
American enterprise began to engage
in large-wale production.
L’numi Statu
(MOWIIIINPort I AHON
1800	........5.508.185
M0	25.191.870
1900	......75.WL575
1950	150.697.M1
118
Ol'K N XT ION 'S STORY
The federal government had
adopted a lilu-i.il immigiation pol* i«
v during the War hetwren the States.
Aliens could become eligible for the
lM*nefns o| the Homestead Act by
taking out their first «iti/rmhip
papers—that is. an* uoiiiuing their
intention of ben lining Xmcricaii
citizens. The Cam- tract labor law
permitted representatives of Amrrkan
employers to hire workers in their
homelands ami to arrange to pay lot
their passage to the New World.
Steamship companies sought
passengers for their wrstwatd nips
across the Atlantic, and American
railroads seen- seeking occupants lor
the liberal land grants they had
received. Under these conditions the
atttac- tions of America were widely
advertised in Kuropean countries.
At the same lime millions of
huiopeans had good reasons to he
dissatisfied with conditions in their
native lands. Economic opportunity in
many countries was limited, both by a
lack of necessary natural icsourre* and
by the power o! cither a landholding or
an industrial
Si	
U.vnrii s	ir.«
1X1 MIC It	DtCADES
1865- 19	
IH65-I87 1	3.260,519
1875-1881	3.893.23C
1885-1891 ...	4.531.619
1895-1901	1.628.798
1905-1914	IU.I2I.1MC
Total 		. .26.436.106
aristocracy. To those who rcujg ni/cd
that they had little chainr i.f imptosing
their lot if they remained in Europe, the
United States seemed a land of
opportu- nitv. Others came to America
to avoid forced military sendee. Still
others wished to escape |»eiset niton
due lo iheit religion or to their position
as members of suhmergrd ita liimality
groups within European empires. To
these, America seemed a land of
liberty. The at tractiom offered b>v
liberty and op portunity acted like a
magnn to draw Euiopeant to our
shores. Smaller numbers Irom China
and Japan were similarly attracted to
the legion bordering the Pacific The
accompanying table shuns the numbers
in which immigrant* came. Each
succeeding decade of that half-century
witnessed a significant increase in the
number ar riving, icgatdlcis of
condition* either in the United States
or in other parts of the world. The
annual average in the decade inline
diatrly pined mg the out bieak o I the
Fiist World War wav over a million.
For the whole fifty-year priiod. the
annual average number of new arrivals
was over half a mil lion X mass
movement ol such proportions was
certain lo introduce urn social
problem* and to intensify others.
Social ptoblems «railed by
immigration. Many of the newcomers
se n Ini in the rapullv growing
industrial ciiics of the Northeast-
Thtougli slice* force of number*
SOCIAL \M) CULTURAL CHANCES
Tha paok in immigrotion to ttio Unit'd Stole* wos reoched btfwoon 1900 ond 1910.
they added to I he complexity ol the
problem* laced by these uib.ui
communities, as you will see later.
Other problem* atose. however,
because of changes in the sources
Irom vs liscli these people came.
Until 1890 the vast majority of
American immigrants had come from
the countries of not them and western
Europe—the British Isles. Germany.
Norway, and Sweden. The social and
cultural backgrounds from which
they came made it relatively easy lor
them to adjust to the civilization that
otlieis from the same sources had
huilt in the rimed States. After 1890.
although immigration from tin- lb it
»*h Isles remained relatively high,
that bom Germany and the
Scandinavian countries declined. 1 he
great growth in the number of new
arrivals u-viiltrd instead from the
immigration of the peoples of cite
countries of southern and eastern
Europe-Italy, Austria-llun- gar}'', and
Russia It included large numbers of
Czechs. Slovaks. Poles. Ukranians.
Hungarian*. Slovenian* and
Croatian* -submerged nationality
groups in the Austro-Hungarian and
Russian empires. So significant was
this change that it has Iwcmnc
customary to consider I M<>0 a* a
dividing date between an Old
Immigration and a New Immigration.
The New Immigration came from
an entirely different cultural
background. The people ol whom it
consisted had in their homeland little
oppoitunity to become fa-
Iumiuumi raost F	vaon
to United Stat es 1901-1905	
Italy	
Rwh	658.755
Austria Hungary	911.259
Genu any	
Britain and Ireland	585.169
mn>3i with democratic procedures
and democratic ideal*. At members ol
persecuted minorities or of nations
poor in natural resources, they were
accustomed to low standards of
living. Different c* in language added
to their difficulty in understanding
their American neighbors and in
making themselves understood. Their
customs, loo, seemed to set them
apart from the rest of the American
people.
In order to solve some of these
difficulties, immigrant groups
adopted the piactice of establishing
■’island” communities in urban
centers. Lath industrial city came to
have a Little Poland, a I ittle Italy, a
Little Hungary. Mining towns would
sometimes consist of people of one
naliofiality. Because of the low pay
the inhabitants ol such communities
rcceised as unskilled workers, these
nationality communities	often
reflected a lower standard of living as
well as a different culture from that
enjoyed by most native Americans.
The language barrier also added to
the difficulty of bridging the gap of
misunderstand iug. as you have seen.
Contributions made by
immigrants. In spite of these
conditions, the immigrant groups
made significant contribution* to
America's economic and cultural
growth. They willingly accepted the
mast strenuous baikbreaking work in
mines, on railroads, and in factories
at wage rates that few, il any, native
Americans would consider
satisfactory. They thus gave a full
100- cent value to the American
economy for every dollar they
received in pay.
As they became better acquainted
with the ways of the New World, as
their work skills improved, and as
they acquired homes and businesses
of their own. their influeme on
Amniian life increased. Anglo-Saxon
elements no longer entirely
dominated in the emerging American
culture. Items that appeal to the
tongue, the car. or the eye are
generally accepted for their true
worth, whatever their origin.
Americans were soon to discover that
foods like spaghetti, strudel, and
paptikadi were welcome additions to
any menu. On festival occasions, the
colorful native costumes pleased the
eye as polkas and other folk mutic
delighted the ear. Variety enriched,
rather than weakened, the capacity
for enjoyment
The names ol the foreign-bom
who became leader* in various
phases ol American life are legion
There is space here to name onlv a
few. Among them were Andrew
Carnegie, whose guiding genius re-
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL CHANGES
HI
nilitd in the development of large-
scale steel production; Samuel
Gompers. long-time leader of the
American Federation of Labor,
Charles P. Steinmetz. the electrical
•Viiard”: Edward W. Bok and )otepli
Pulitzer.* whose achievements in
journalism influenced the reading
habits ol a nation; Carl Srhun. liberal
Republican leader in Missouri: and
Irving Berlin, who wrote tunes
America still hums. In business and
industry, in engineering and
invention, in sci eme and medicine,
in literature and music—in short, in a
host of activities that went into the
making ol a better America, our
foreign bom leaders took an active
pan.
Americanization of immigrants.
These long-term benefits, however,
were not gcnrially immediately
apparent. Older Americans looked
upon the rising tide of newcomers
with doubt and suspicion. Ways
needed to be found to help the
immigrant to discard his Old World
ways. Some private institutions, like
settlement houses, engaged in the
work of teaching English to the new
arrivals, thus easing the difficult
problem of communication. In some
cases the nationality groups lonned
organizations of their own to assist in
this general purpose.
In the work of Americanization,
the public schools came to play an
important part. Often it was in the
schools that the children of
immigrant families gained their first
knowledge of the English language.
American history, and our democratic
government. There, under favorable
circumstances, they came into contact
not only with children ol native
Americans, but also with children of
immigrant gToups of other
nationalities. What was taught the
children in the schools was often
learned indirectly by parents in the
home. The sons and daughters of
immigrants enjoyed opportunities
equal to those of other children.
There were many Americans who
feared that immigrants were coming
at a much fester rate than our
Americanizing agencies could
provide for. To them, restriction
seemed the only desirable policy. For
years, two conflicting ideals had
influenced public attitudes toward
immigration. One of these was that
America should be a land of
opportunity offering hope to the
oppressed and peisrcutcd in other
lands. This sentiment was aptly
expressed in the following passage
from the poem written by Emma
Lazarus inscribed on the Statue of
Liberty, a gift horn the French people
commemorating the hundredth
anniversary of our independence:
“Give me your tried, yourjx>or,
Your huddled masses yearning to
breathe free.
Send these, the homeless,
tempest- tost to me,
I lift my lamp beside the golden
door!"
The other ideal represented the
desire to keep American imtitu-
522
OCR NATION'S STORY
tiom at they were. There war fear workers, and as you know, opposi-
that uncontrolled numbeis of li°n to Oriental immigration re.
immigrants arriving year after year ^ted in another type ol restriction,
would in time completely change the one based upon nationality. The
character of American civilization. Fxclusioii Act of 1882 suspended
Then, too, the low standards of Chinese immigration for ten years,
living ol manv immigrant groups This suspension was periodically
carried a threat to the efforts made renewed until 1901, when il was
hv American workers to improve again renewed but without time
their economic position.	limit.
Restriction of immigration. For	J apanese emigration to the I’nitcd
many years the restriction of Stafes did not begin until after the
immigration was considered to be Chinese had been ex eluded
primarily a function of the states Ja|xniese workers, however, were no
rather than of the federal more welcome in California than the
government. State regulation, Chinese had been. In response to the
however, resulted in an ineffective demands ol an aroused public, the
hodgepodge. In 1875 the Supreme San Francisco Hoard of Mutation in
Court declared that the federal 1906 issued an order baning children
government had final authority in of Japanese parentage from the
this field. The way was thus opened public schools. The enforcement of
lor congressional action.	dut order would have provoked
The first federal legislation on the diplomatic difficulties with the Jap
subject, beginning in 1882. was. for the 311686 government In opening up
most part, designed to exclude diat country to Western civilization
individuals whose personal | we bad made a treaty with Japan in
characteristics caused them to be which we promised to give Japanese
considered undesirable. A succession of nationals in this country the same
acts denied admission to such persons as rights as those of the "most favored
the insane, idiots, epileptics, and those nari°n.” President Theodore
afflicted with | contagious disease: Roosevelt exerted his influence in
paii|>crt or per- I sons likely to become solving the problem thus presented,
public charges: and convicted felons, an- The school boa id was persuaded to
| archists, and polygamists. In 1917 1 withdraw its order, and an informal
Congress added illiteracy to the hates for gentlemen’s agreement was made
personal exclusion. Applicants lor Wlth Japan, bv whitli no more
admission had to be able to pass a passports were to lie issued to Japan
simple reading test in either their own or eve laborers to enter the United
some other language. An act passed in Stales.
1885 forlude the admission of contract	As you will note later, alter the
First World War the principle of
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL CHANCE*
MS
exclusion on the Isasis of national The establishment of Negro col-
origin was to be applied to European leges in Southern states and the ad
luinrigiatiun as well.	mission of Negroes to institutions of
Status of the Negro imputation, higher learning in the North made it
Until 18(15 Negtoes had been primal possible for them to enter the
ily agricultural workers in the South, professions—law. medicine, dentistry.
Many Negioes continued in that the ministry'', and leaching. The
occupation after freedom had been adoption of civil sendee reform paved
twin. Some went to the emerging the way for admission to many kinds
industrial cities of the South where of government work. Negro leaders
they found employment in the mills were elected to city councils and state
anti factories. Others began to legislatures. As their economic
emigrate to the industrial cities of the position improved, more and more
North, particularly after the outbreak Negioes were able to acquire homes of
of the First World War cut oil their own.
European immigration. Their position As the status of the Negro
in Northern cities was similar to that improved, he was able to make more
•(corded other immigrant groups, diversified contributions to the
Their tutal backgrounds added to the economic and cultural life of the
problems of ad justing to life in these nation. Negro spirituals had alwavs
areas.	appealed to large sections of the
Gradually, these difficult American people, and Negro singers
conditions aroused the concern of won wide popular acclaim. Negroes,
enlightened tuemliett of both races. loo, gained feme lor their ability in
In 1909 the National .Vcsnciation lor sports. Early in the twentieth century'
the Advancement of tailored People Jack Johnson became heavyweight
was formed. Two years later the I'rhan boxing champion of the world.
League was organised, the principal Negroes also played an imponant part
purpose of which was to help Negroes in American triumphs in the revived
adjust to the problems of city life.	internal km.ll Olympic games.
The Rise ofh \d us trial Cities
From the farm to the city. You fuse Population giowth. however, was not
already studied the ways in whitli the evenly distributed over the nation.
Indiisttial Revolution eomrihuted to Some stales grew mote rapidly than
the development of a new America in others. More significant, however, was
which each major section—Northeast, the shift ol population from the farm to
South, and West-played a significant the city. In 1790 only about one
pan.	American ill
5T1
OUR N VIION'S STORV


•> vr \Q
I ho UniteJ Stales enforced the
open-door policy in China.
Rooeeveli It shown with the delegation
thot negotiated the treaty ending the
Rw sso Jap onese W o>
Russia and Japan increased their
Hold on Mane hut ia and Korea,
japan made an attack on Russia in
I'.KM and surprised the world ley
winning scsrral victories. The
|apanesc government, however, soon
came to the verge of collapse and
japan secretly asked President
Theodore Roosevelt to use his
influence to bring the war to a <
1<«> Russia iouiiva hetself on the eve
of a revolution at home, so both
routs tries were eager us stop
hostilities. Under these c ir«
iitnstanres, Roose veil invited the
belligerents to a peace conference at
Portsmouth. New Hampshire.
The Portsmouth Treaty. Japan
demanded, in addition to territorial
concessions, a huge indemnity. The
Russians refused to pay any
indemnity. The Japanese delegates
then abandoned the claim hut
secured territorial concessions,
lapsus special interests in Korea
were recognized and she receives!
the southern half of the island <4
Sakhalin, i' the Liaotung leasehold in
Mam hut ia. and the South Man
churian Railway, japan etnetged
from the contest the recognized
leader in the Far East. However, the
people of Japan were indignant and
blamed the United Slates when they
lailed to receive an indemnity Tins
was the first event in a series of
misunderstandings which tended to
sepatate the United States and Japan
Friction also developed •» Main Inn
ia. where American trad- ers claimed
that the open-door p" 1
•* Sakhalin <U’U
TIIF. EXPANSION OF AMERICAN INTERESTS
S7S
icy was not maintained. Thot events
helped bring on the war between the
I'nitj^tjte* and |apan
Iiiiviil»|e cn the Pacific coast.
Immediately alter the Russo-|apa-
nesr War, there was a wave ol
American immigration from Japan.
Aicording to an agieemciti made
with |apan in McKinleys
administration, the Japanese
government was to refuse passports
to lalxners bound lor the mainland oi
the I'nited States. The laborers,
however, were welcomed in Hawaii
where they could work on the sugar
plantations. Very often this was
ninel) the lust step toward entry into
the I'nited States.
Strong opposition to the Japa-
new in the I'nited States had
developed by 190fi. As you have
read, ill October of that year the San
Francisco school board ordered
Japanese children to be segregated in
special schools. The motivation lot
this order came from organized
labor, which resented the
competition of cheap labor. Although
President Roosevelt worked out a
compromise	"gentleman's
agreement" with Japan, the exclusion
of Japanese citizens from the I'nited
States continued to be a source of
friction between the two countries.
A show of force. Roosevelt lelt
that it would be advantageous to
impress the Japanese with the might
of the American navy. The I’nited
States then had the second hugest
licet in the world, while the |a|»nc*e
navy ranked fifth.
Sixteen battleships left I lampion
Roads m December. 1907. They
stopped in South American ports,
where much gocxl will for the I'nited
States was created. After the fleet
arrived on the Pacific cuast. it was
announced that it would continue
around the world. Scveial countries,
including |apau. asked that the fleet
visit them. The Japanese were
unusually cordial, and relations
improved.
The Settlement of International Disputes
I'nited Stales policy toward
Europe. The emergence of the
United States as a world power made
necessary'' a reconsideration of its
policies toward European nations.
The policy of complete isolation had
been outgrown. The widespread
interests of the United States
involved relations with all of the
nations of the world.
The Hague conferences. Around
1!K)0 there was a wide-spread desiie
to create an international
organization that would help in the
peaceful settlement of disputes. In an
attempt to forward this idea among
nations, the czar of Russia called an
international conference at Tire
Hague in 1899. A second conference
concerned with similar questions was
held in 1907.
Permanent Court of Interna-
rional Arbitration. One of the results
of The Hague conferences was
oi K s VnoN s vrom
KVi
Daugherty, alw committed suicide.
It ua« unnoted th.it he had become
seriously involved with lobbyists
.hkI might have been alraid ol
exposure.
Ilhcit on Harding. Hauling was
greatly depressed by the revelations
ol corrupt ion in his adiiiumti ation.
He decided to leave the • apital few a
trip to Alaska, making a number of
speeches en route. As the trip
progressed, his companions noticed
that both he and Mis. Hauling
seemed very tired. Harding betaine
seriously ill at San Francisco and
died on August 2. 1021. in a hotel in
that city. Calvin (-oolidge. Vice
President, was sworn in as President
a few hours later.
Oil scandals. A short time alter
Harding's death, attention was called
to the (act that certain oil reserves
which belonged to the Navy had been
leased to pi is ate companies by the
Department of the Interior. At the
recpiest of President Harding, these
reserves had been ttansferred to that
dqwrt ment by Secretary of the Navy
Denhy. Albert Fall, secretary of the
interior, then secretly leased the
California reserves to the Dohenv Oil
Company and the Wyoming reserves,
commonly known as the Teapot
Dome field, to the Sinclair Company.
News of the leases leaked out. and
the Senate started an investigation.
As a result ol the investigations. Fall
was convicted of accepting a bribe
and was sentenced to a term in jail.
Dmby was accused of faithlessness
in office and
he irsigned. It was also irvcaliil that
other lcsact officials and friends of
Harding had hren guilty ol at cepting
money lor the use of their inlltienre
in olluial actions. There- was no
evidence, however, that Hauling
liiintcll was corrupt.
The election of 1924. \s the elec
lion ol 1924 drew neat, the Re
publicans decided that Coolidge
should be the nominee ol the patty.
The affairs of state had been ton
dueled in a common-sense way.
which pleased the conservative rlr
ment. As President, hr had advo
cairtl the protective tariff and a re
(tuition in taxes. Charles G. Dawes
was selected as the candidate lot
Vice-President. Dawes had come into
prominence w hen he served on the
commission which devised the
scheme lot |»ayuicnt of trpuiaiioiis
by Germany
Flic Democrats (tad difficulty in
selecting a nominee. Support wa«
almost equally divided between
William (• McAeloo. former secte
tar}'' of the Treasury, and Allred F.
Smith, governor of New York. The
convention balloted more than one
hunched times, hut nriihci could get
the necessary two-thirds majority.
They finally selected |olin W Davis
of West Virginia, a former
amlsassador to Gtrat Britain, as a
compromise c andidatr.
Robert M. La Collette, who had
Itcen a candidate for the notnina lion
in the Republican party, broke away
with the other liberal Rrpub I nans.
He campaigned for President on the
Piogirssivc parts ticket
TOE GOLDEN TWENTIES
bS7
The > ampaign was quiet, as there
were no outstanding issues. Coo-
lidge made a few speec lies in which
lie staled again his belief in economy
in public alfans. efficiency of public
sendee, and adherence to the World
Court. The Democrats tried to
publicize the scandals of the Harding
administration hut made litlh
impression on the voters. The
country tvas more ptos|ieroiit than it
had been at the beginning of
Hauling* admiimtiatioii. People,
generally, were pleased with the way
in which (axilidge had administered
the government. The outcome was a
Republican landslide giving Coolidgc
382 electoral votes to 136 lot Davis,
la Follettc car ried Wisconsin.
The Administration of'Coohdge
Policies of Cooliclgr. When
Cnolidge came to the presidency as
the result of Harding » death, he
made few changes in policies and
personnel. When changes were
forced on him because of the oil
scandals, he replaced these men with
persons who caused him no
embarrassment. Others resigned
Irotu c aliinet posts lor one reason or
another but he was able to keep
several men. including Andrew
Mellon and Herbert Hoover, for his
entire administration.
In domestic affaits Coolidgc
believed that government should not
interfere in business. A high taiiff lor
the protection ol American industry
was maintained ihtmighoul Ins
administration. The lowering of
taxes released c apital for
corporations to put back into
business.
A new iniiiiigtation law enacted
in 1924 indicated a nesv policy with
ic-gatd to restriction. As you know,
the Cnited States had always lrcen a
haven ol teluge lot the peoples of
Europe, but sentiment svas gross ing
that ihis i miniiy could no longer as
similate large numbers of
immigrants who had backgrounds
widely different from that of the
average American. This new law put
immigration on a quota basis fixed at
c. |HTcent of the nationals from any
country'' in the United States in 1890,
In this way immigration from
southern and eastern Europe was
testricted, astoui|»r.uivcly lew
Colvin Coolidge
Dale
1882 Chine*: Exc lusion Art
of 1882
1903 Act of190S
1917 Imiiiigratitin \« ( of 1917
1921 Immigration Ait of 1921
(Fitst Quota Ait)
1921 Immigration Act of 1921
1926 Art defining Nonquota
Immigrant
1910 Nationality Art o( 19-10
1913 K<’|mmI of Chine*e
exclusion law* of 1882. lHKt.
1888. 1892. 189.1, 1898 1916
Act of July 2. 1916
1918 Act of June 25. 1918 <|>,s-
placed Persons Act)
19.1H Internal Security Art of
1950 (Subversive Aciiti
tics (aintiol Art)
1951 Amendment to Displaced
Pci Mint Act of 1918
■ 912 Immigration and National
itv Act of 1952 (McCan
ran Act)
Provisions
Excluded Chinese from citizenship (later
applied to all Asiatic*)
Excluded from naturalization and
citizenship all pciMint opposed to
organized government (anarchists)
Eirti qiecific iininigtation act; one
clause excluded alien adults unable to
read at least one language Established
the quota system, based on 3 per cent
of the number of people of a nationality
living in America at the time of the
1910 census Reduced quota to 2 j»er
cent, based on 1890 census; provided
for minimum iiiimigi.iti.ni ni |00 from
c.nii quote country'; 'ct IML000
maximal yearly immigration Admitted
persons of certain professions and
wive* and children of American
riii/ens on a nonquota basis Specified
ami defined security measures with
regard to entry, registration, and
dc|K>rtaiiun of aliens Admitted
Chinese to naturalization and
citizenship rights; established quotas
(or Chinese immigration Admitted to
rights of citizenship persons of races
indigenous to India and the Philippine
Islands Admitted displaced |>eisons
Irani countries with small quotas
Amended Imnugi.itmu Art ol 1917 and
Nationality Art of 1910 in regard to
|ierson» considered subversive
Teiminaiec! die provisions ol the
Displaced Peis ons Act, and ended the
state of emergency tlirrein proclaimed
Established new national quotas: set
the maximum number of immigrants to
lie admitted each year at 151.657
THE NATION IN MEM.t.M I Kt
"HI
Ih« Keeton Wot stimulolad production of new military oircroft, tuck ottko jot
shown obove, which wot developed by the Novy.
ihi adoption «>1 a program. Inn in
1947 ilie meiger was enacted into
law. The new law provided (or a
civilian secretary of detente in the
President's cabinet with three
underset rctaries. one each lor the
Army. Navy, and Air Forte. The act
also created new agencies for de*
feme: a national set uiiiy count il. a
resource* Ixiard. a restateli board, a
munitions Ixiard. and a joint board ol
chiefs of staff.
Air power. I lie incleased use of
air power lor delense was advocated.
Stuh lapid advances in the
improvement of airplanes was made
dial many ol the planes used in die
Second World War were obsolete.
It was felt that the United States
should have more ol the latest
improved aircraft. In the Berlin airlift
the Air Force gained practical
experience in tiantportation. The
combined United -States. British, and
French transport tvas able to take
fifty-five hundred tons ol supplies a
day into Berlin. This was a greater
achievement than any accomplished
during die war. Research was going
on in the field of guided missiles, hut
most of the development was a
military secret. The use ol jet-proiMiied
engines made it possible for aircraft
to fly greater distances with incicascd
speed.