However, "nothing succeeds like success," and never was that saying truer than in colonial times. The British poured money into America. New colonies sprang up and grew larger until they outdistanced Jamestown and Plymouth. Who were the leaders responsible for Britain's success? Where did all the money come from? British colonization was not just a business matter. Religion played a great part. At least four colonies were started as refuges for people who were suffering from religious persecution. Who were those people? Who were the men who took the lead in creating refuges for them? From Jamestown in 1607 to Georgia in 1732, this chapter traces the establishment of the thirteen British colonies. Here is the story of America when it was just a string of little settlements on the edge of the Atlantic Ocean. The defeat of the Armada cleared the way for British colonists. Five nations — Spain, Portugal, France, Holland, and Great Britain — had raised their flags in the Americas. It soon became clear, however, that flag raising would never win lasting possession of the new land. Only by sending settlers and homemakers could the land be held. The success of the Spanish colonies in South America proved this. Cabot's discovery gave England a claim to North America, but no successful English colonies were founded until more than a hundred years later. You have already learned the reason for this. England was a small weak nation in Cabot's time. Spain was strong and the Spanish navy ruled the oceans. Not until Drake and other British seamen defeated the Spanish Armada could England begin to build colonies. The destruction of the Armada in 1588 did not end Spain's empire. For many years Spain remained powerful in world affairs. But the defeat of the Armada did mark the beginning of a glorious age for Great Britain. Now the British could go forth to settle the New World. As you learned in the last chapter. Sir Humphrey Gilbert and Sir Walter Raleigh had tried to found English colonies or plantations in America. A colony meant, originally, a group of men and women who left their home country to settle in a land far away. English colonies were often called plantations because people thought they were like young trees that are dug up by the roots and planted in a different soil and climate. Some transplanted trees live, others die, and so it was with the colonies. Bad times in England encouraged settlement of America. It took great courage and determination to come to North America in the early seventeenth century. The land was an unknown wilderness where wild animals roamed. Terrible storms often lashed the coast. The Indians had already learned to distrust white men and attack new settlements. And the voyage to the New World was full of dangers. Many ships were lost trying to cross the Atlantic. Why did people leave their homes in peaceful English towns to settle in an unknown wilderness? What drove them to gamble their lives and their children's lives? There were several causes. Some came for reasons that were economic — that is, connected with earning a living. Times were hard in England. This was partly because of a change in farming. The big landowners found sheep raising more profitable than the raising of grain. Many of them made sheep pastures out of their farms. They ordered the tenant farmers and laborers to leave. Thus, thousands of farm workers lost their homes and their jobs. Where were these people to go? How could they earn a living? Many settlers died of disease, but Smith's leadership pulled the colony through. In the spring of 1609 another and larger group of settlers arrived. Smith was injured when some gunpowder blew up. He returned to England. Without his leadership the Jamestown colony's troubles grew worse. The winter of 1609-1610 was known as the "starving time." Disease, Indian attacks, and lack of food killed most of the colonists. But in the spring the' ships came again with food and new settlers. Somehow the colony managed to keep alive and even grow stronger. Success was won at last, but at fearful cost of human life. The leaders of the London Company learned to be more careful in choosing colonists. They sent over skilled workers and farmers — men who knew how to handle tools and who were not ashamed to work. They also sent some women to make homes for the men and boys. The Jamestown settlers never found gold, but they discovered something else that brought them big profits: they began to grow tobacco. Europeans were eager to smoke this "Indian weed," so Virginia tobacco found a ready market. Slowly the land was cleared of trees, and big fields of tobacco brought wealth to the colony. But there were never enough workers. In 1619 a Dutch ship brought twenty Negroes to labor in the fields. These were the first Negroes who came to the English colony. The planters welcomed them and treated them as indentured or bond servants. In time they were set free, but Negroes who came later remained slaves. The first American legislature met in 1619. The new settlers started other towns nearby. People began to talk of the Virginia Colony. It was named in honor of Queen Elizabeth, who was called the Virgin Queen. Jamestown slowly lost its importance. But it can never lose the glory of having been the first English colony that became well-established. It has another claim to fame. It was the first capital of Virginia; there the first American lawmaking body met in 1619. The settlers soon became unhappy about this arrangement. As Englishmen they were used to having a say in their government. The free air of the New World soon made them feel even more independent. Why should they take orders from a few men in England who happened to be head of the London Company? About this time, new men gained control of the London Company. They were willing to listen to the colonists' wishes. They sent over a wise governor who let the planters choose men to speak for them, or represent them. The representatives were called burgesses because each was elected by the people of a borough or town. The representatives came together and met as the House of Burgesses in Jamestown in August, 1619. That is a date to remember, for the House of Burgesses was the first lawmaking body in the colonies. For the first time, Americans sat down together and decided what rules they needed and what taxes they should pay. A. The New England Colonies The Pilgrims founded Plymouth in 1620. Thirteen years after the founding of Jamestown, another colony began far to the north. This was the Plymouth colony. The small group of men and women who founded it are called Pilgrims, a name that means wanderer. They came in a ship called the Mayflower. In their home town, Scrooby, in Virginia's House of Burgesses was the first American Colonial legislature. Their neighbors thought the Pilgrims were odd, because they met often to read the Bible and discuss its meaning. Sometimes government officials broke up such religious meetings, for in England everybody was supposed to attend the King's church. The Pilgrims decided to go to Holland because they had heard that in Holland people could worship as they please. The Dutch welcomed them and did not interfere with their religious meetings. But life was hard in Holland. Food was high and wages were low. Even * the children of the Pilgrims had to work twelve hours a day. The Pilgrims often felt homesick. They did not like to speak Dutch; it made them unhappy to see their children forgetting English customs and the English language. Some of the Pilgrims began to think that they should have gone to America instead men and women who thought such laws were wrong. They wanted to worship God in their own way. But if they refused to attend the national or state church, the ruler might put them in prison, torture them, perhaps even kill them. In England, Pilgrims, Puritans, and Quakers were severely punished for their religion. In the German lands people of many faiths were abused. Only in the New World across the sea was there hope of religious freedom. Four of the English colonies — Massachusetts. Rhode TslanH/ Maryland, and Pennsylvania — were founded by people who wanted religious freedom. Trading companies raised money for colonies. Thus, some people desired to come to America for economic reasons, some for religious reasons, and some because they loved adventure and freedom. But most of those who wanted to leave England were poor folk. Rich people seldom cared to leave their comfortable homes to settle in a wilderness. But as Columbus and others had found out, it took a great deal of money to travel to America. Hundreds of workers were needed to make a successful colony. To hire or build ships and stock them with food for the trip cost many English pounds for each colonist. But that was out of the question. A working man of the time earned a few pennies for a day's work. He could not possibly save enough to pay for the trip. The next step was to raise money to start a colony. Sometimes the men who formed the company put up the money themselves. More often they raised the money by selling s_hares of stock in the company.Business companies today still use this method to get money to build a new plant or start making a new product.) People who bought the shares received yearly payments or dividends out of any profits the company made. The company would give certain people who wanted to go to America a share of stock, passage to America, and fifty acres of land. In return they had to work for the company until they had paid back the debt. Often they were able to repay in five or six years. But not everybody could make such an arrangement. Usually the company chose men who had a good reputation and were experienced farmers. They expected them to bring their own farm tools and perhaps a horse or a cow and a pig. The very poor people who wanted to come to America themselves as bond servants or Indentured servants for a number of years — usually seven. That meant thatThey agreed to work without pay for that period in return for their passage to America. After they had worked for their masters for the years agreed upon, they became free men. Hundreds of them soon had farms of their own. Jamestown was founded in 1607. One of the early trading companies was the Virginia Company of London, sometimes known as the London Company. Several businessmen who lived in London got together and formed the company. Their aim was to carry on the work of Sir Walter Raleigh and found a successful colony in America. The leaders of the London Company were wise enough to learn from Raleigh's unhappy experience. They made careful preparations, for they did not intend to have the people in their colony starve to death. They bought three ships and a big supply of food, tools, and seed. Next they sent 100 men across the ocean to prepare the way for those who were to come later. The pioneer band reached the region we now call Virginia in 1607. They settled near the coast on a river they named James in honor of the English king. (Queen Elizabeth had died four years The map below shows early Virginia settlements. Note that they were near the coast. Jamestown was built on marshy ground so the capital later was moved north to Williamsburg. The Pilgrims sailed from England on the Mayflower. This painting shows how the Pilgrims gathered and prayed for guidance as the voyage began. In a new land the children would have a better chance to get ahead — and they would also have the right to worship God in their own way. So back they came to England to make arrangements to go to America. Somehow the Pilgrims managed to borrow money to buy land from the London Company and to pay their expenses on the Mayflower. They sailed from Plymouth, England late in the summer of 1620. A storm drove the Mayflower off her course so the Pilgrims did not land on the territory of the London Company. In December, 1620, they landed far to the north in the part of Massachusetts now called Cape Cod. They named their landing place Plymouth (PLIM uth), after the beautiful English town from which they had sailed. A big stone on which they are said to have stepped ashore from their boats is still preserved and is called Plymouth Rock. The storm that had blown them astray proved to be a good thing. The Pilgrims landed on the Massachusetts coast in December 1620. The painting below shows how the little group knelt and offered prayers of thankfulness after leaving the ship. Since they were going to a part of the Atlantic Coast claimed by two companies but held by neither, there would be no governor to rule them. So, before they had even landed, the Pilgrims decided to form a government of their own. Their written agreement is now called the Mayflower Compact because they drew it up in the ship's cabin and all the men on board signed it. In it they agreed to "make just and equal laws This is a model of the Mayflower, the famous little ship of the Pilgrims. Next, they elected John Carver to be governor for one year. Carver, a member of the Pilgrim band, was the first governor elected in the American way, by free choice of his fellow men. Miles Standish was the military leader of the colony. Hard work made the Plymouth Colony a success. Landing in the snow and ice of winter, the Pilgrims faced the problem of shelter from the cold. The women and children stayed on shipboard for a few weeks, while the men erected a building to serve as a church on Sunday, and for community meetings and as a hospital at other times. William Brewster was the religious leader. Next, the Pilgrims built a hut for each family. By then food was so scarce that for days at a time they lived on clams. Yes, and "thanked God," as Governor Carver wrote, "for abundance provided by the sea." No enemies troubled the Pilgrims then or for years afterward, for a strange disease had killed most of the Indians around Plymouth. But the same or another disease fell upon the half-starved Pilgrims, causing at least one death in every family. John Carver died; William Bradford became governor in his place. When spring arrived, only half of the little Pilgrim group had lived through the winter. But not one wanted to go back when the Mayflower sailed away. Hopefully the Pilgrims planted corn from seed they found in a deserted Indian storehouse. One day an Indian named Samoset (SAM oh set) appeared at Plymouth. The Pilgrims were badly frightened, but Samoset soon proved he was a friend. He brought his chief, the great Massasoit (MAS ah soit), to the colony. Later the settlers made a treaty of friendship with Massasoit that kept the peace for forty years. This map shows early settlements in Massachusetts. The Pilgrims settled Plymouth first, Later the Puritans founded several towns along the coast. Roger Williams sought freedom in Rhode Island. The Puritans were very religious people. Their ministers were the real leaders of the colony. They had come to America chiefly because they wanted to worship God as they pleased. But they were not willing to give the same freedom to people who differed from them. As one minister said, their idea was that persons of other religious beliefs "shall have free liberty to keep away from us." This situation led in a strange wav to the He did not like the way the He also founding of another colony in New England, the colony of Rhode Island. This is how it happened._____ A fiery young minister named In the spring friends came to the Indian camp to join him. Together they pushed on to what is now Rhode Island. There, in 1636, they founded a settlement. Williams named it Providence in memory, he said, "of God's merciful providence to me in my distress." The colony became "a shelter for persons distressed of conscience." Rhode Island welcomed all religions. Like Roger Williams himself, it came to stand for freedom of thought. Governor Stuyvesant of New Amsterdam. The English took over the New Jersey settlement along with New York. The Duke of York gave the region to his friends, Lord John Berkeley and Sir George Carteret; The Swedes, Dutch and English ruled Delaware. The Dutch had tried to start a colony farther south in the region we call Delaware. The settlers mistreated an Indian warrior; in revenge his tribe came by night to burn the village. Not a man, woman, or child was left alive. Great men of the colonial period. He founded Pennsylvania, which means Penn's woods. It was one of the" later colonies. It was started in 1681, sixty-one years after the Pilgrims came to Plymouth. William Penn was a handsome young man who disgraced and saddened his parents for a strange reason: he was too religious, they thought. William's father was a British admiral and a friend of the King. In spite of this, William Penn chose to join the most unpopular and persecuted religious group, the Quakers, or Friends. He spent time in prison, but nothing could shake his faith. Penn had a plan for his land. He decided to start a colony for poor people who wanted religious freedom and a chance to make a living by farming. To attract settlers, Penn used a method that is* still popular today: he advertised. He printed short advertisements in six languages and sent them to many parts of Europe. The land-hungry people of Europe could scarcely believe it. Every man could have forty acres of good land for about $10, which he could pay out of his first crop. And he could worship as he pleased; no one would bother him. Penn also hoped to make some money for his growing family out of the plan. Even if he sold the land for fifty cents an acre it would bring a big fortune. However, the expenses of starting the colony were great. Penn had to go deeply in debt. His creditors even had him put in prison when he could not pay all the bills. Penn's plans made Pennsylvania a great success. One of the first and the wisest things Penn did was to make friends with the Indians. He sat down with them under a great tree and made a treaty of friendship. As long as Penn lived he carried out the treaty. The Indians also kept their word, so Pennsylvania in the early days was never attacked by Indians. But after Penn died, his family cheated the tribes and Indian wars raged over Pennsylvania. On his first visit to America in 1682 William Penn made a careful plan for the chief city of his colony. He named it Philadelphia, a combination of Greek words that means "City of Brotherly Love." - Philadelphia later became one of the great American cities. For a time, it served as the nation's capital. Today it is still called "the Quaker City" in honor of the people who founded it. Another wise thing that Penn did William Penn made a treaty of friendship with the Indians of Pennsylvania in 1682. Below he is shown negotiating with them. The treaty kept peace for years. for a man to enjoy himself," a young Englishman wrote his brother in 1818. He went on to say that in America, "you may see prairie sixty miles long and ten broad at two dollars an acre that will produce seventy to one hundred bushels of Indian corn per acre. .. ." The young Englishman did not write anything about the severe hardships and suffering connected with the settlement of the West. Instead, he wrote with enthusiasm: "If you knew the difference between this country and England you would need no persuading to come hither. The poorest families [enjoy] beef, fowls, pies, eggs, pickles, tea, coffee, and good bread.. Is it so in England?" With letters like this going back to England, more and more settlers were coming to America. In America, families were on the move, too, heading West. What kind of roads did they have to follow? Who blazed the trails? As you read this chapter try to get a clear picture of the pioneers who went West. Where did they come from? Why did they leave their old homes? What kind of vehicles did they use? What routes did they choose? Who were their leaders? Americans kept moving west. Strange as it seems, many Americans paid little attention to the War of 1812. They were the Americans who were heading west. They had turned their backs on Europe and plunged into the wilderness. Year by year pioneers pushed the frontier, or edge of civilization, farther west. The westward movement is one of the key facts of American history. Jamestown and Plymouth Colony were founded by people who moved west from Europe. Later, most of their sons and daughters moved inland. From colonial times on, each generation had a desire to travel west. They wanted to see "the other side of the mountain" or find out what the world looked like across the river. The edge of settlement did not move west in a straight line, of course. Sometimes people simply hurried through the wilderness and started a settlement hundreds of miles away from the old frontier. For instance, California and Oregon were settled long before the Rocky Mountain region. But most of the time the population moved in a westerly direction. There were three definite stages or "waves" of settlement: (1) The first and slowest wave carried the frontier westward to the place where the Appalachian (ap eh LAYTCH yun) Mountains began. In early colonial days settlers started to move away from the coast. For a long time the mountains blocked further westward expansion. Early settlers lacked machines and tools to build roads and carry their belongings over mountains. And they were afraid of Indians and Frenchmen lurking along mountain trails. (2) The second, more rapid wave of settlement began when the French were driven from the Ohio and Mississippi Valleys in 1763. During and after the Revolution, Americans traveled northwest into Ohio and southwest into Kentucky and Tennessee. Year after year settlers kept moving to the land between the Great Lakes and Gulf of Mexico. (3) The third wave was the greatest and fastest of all. It carried the frontier across the Great Plains and the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific Ocean. The gold rush to California in 1849 and the covered wagons bound for Oregon were part of the last wave of settlement. As the frontier moved west, hunters, trappers, and fur traders came first. They were adventurous men who knew how to keep alive in the wilderness. Friendly Indians often showed them the best trails and hunting grounds. And the hunters and traders carried back word of good land they had found. Later came farmers who cut down trees to "make a clearing" where they could plant crops. Then it was time for hunters and trappers to move on. As the farms increased, towns and villages developed. Busy cities appeared on land that had been wilderness a few years earlier. Hunters and trappers were usually the first men to bring back word of new lands. They sometimes exaggerated, but their reports stimulated settlement of the West. Two reasons were a desire for adventure and the wish to obtain new land. In every settlement there were a few restless men who liked to get away from their neighbors. Farming had no attraction for such men. They wanted adventure. They found it by hunting or trapping or trading. When they came back to the settlement they told of land that waited for an owner beyond the frontier. And every eastern settlement held men who wanted better land for farming. Some were late-comers who found the best land already taken. Others had worn out the soil of their farms by planting the same crop year after year. New land will stand such planting for a time; but after a few years the soil "wears out" and refuses to grow another good crop. As Washington wrote in 1791: The aim of farmers in this country is not to make the most of the land, which 2is everywhere cheap, but to make the most from labor, which is dear. A farmer in England, where land is dear and labor cheap, improves his land highly that he may reap large crops from a small piece of ground. In this country much land is scratched over but never cultivated or improved. Need for new land caused a steady stream of Americans to move westward. For a while the presence of French to the north and in the Ohio Valley slowed up the march of pioneers. Not until the French were driven out could settlements be made far inland. After 1763, English settlers no longer had to worry about French enemies. But there were still many obstacles. Today, it is hard to realize how hard it was to travel and to build new homes less than 200 years ago. Here are three problems that faced early pioneers: THE WESTWARD MOVEMENT (1)Men and women who made new homes in the wilderness had to clear away the forest and make the land support them. Then the old folks stayed at home, while the young went farther west. (2)The pioneers had to drive back Indians who claimed the whole country as a hunting ground. Almost every mile of the westward march was marked by the graves of Indians and white people killed in the struggle for the land. (3)There were no roads beyond the frontier. Every new settlement was like an army that dares not advance without first making sure of a "lifeline" of supplies. The forests supplied material to build houses, and there was usually plenty of wild game for food. But for tools, guns, and other necessities, settlers required a town nearby where they could trade products of their farms for what they needed. As there were few steamboats until after 1815 and few railroads until the 1840's, growth of inland towns was slow. The Appalachian Mountains were a barrier to settlement. The most serious obstacle that blocked early westward advance was the Appalachian Mountains. Today you can cross the mountains in a few hours by train or automobile, or in a few minutes by airplane. But 200 years ago, people had to travel on foot or on horseback or ride in a wagon. The mountains seemed to mark the end of their westward march. The Appalachians are a mass of wooded hills and rock-capped mountains. They extend southwest from New England to Georgia and Alabama. Several ranges make up the Appalachian chain. The White Mountains of New Hampshire, the Green Mountains of Vermont, and the Adirondack Mountains of New York are part of the Appalachians. So are the Alleghenies in Pennsylvania, the Blue The map below shows the frontier in colonial days when settlers were moving west to the edge of the Appalachian barrier. This map shows paths across the Appalachians to the West. Note New York State route, Cumberland Gap, and southern route. Ridge Mountains of Virginia, and the Great Smokies in the Carolinas and Tennessee. Pioneers found ways to cross the mountains. To early settlers the mountains seemed to say "So far you may come, but no farther." But before long a few people tried to cross the rugged peaks. First to accept the challenge were the hunters and fur traders. Sometimes they followed an Indian trail for a while. Most of the time they had to chop and push their way through the forest. At last they reached the top of the Appalachians. Below they saw a beautiful country that seemed to spread out endlessly to the west. Hunters called it the The Appalachians arc rugged and forbidding in places. Here settlers are shown making their way over a mountain trail. "country beyond the mountains," and later "the New West." After a time hunters and traders learned there were easier ways to cross the mountains. Instead of cutting paths and climbing tall peaks, they looked for "gaps" and valleys between the mountains. Gradually there developed several main routes that people took to the West. You can trace these routes on the map on this page. One route led through New York. There the Mohawk Valley provided a fairly level way west to the flat land around Lake Erie. From there it was not difficult to travel south and west to the Ohio River. This river was called the "Gateway to the West" because boats could travel 262 THE WESTWARD MOVEMENT I down its waters for a thousand miles. For the pioneers from Virginia and North Carolina, the Cumberland Gap provided a way to Kentucky and Tennessee. The great hunter, Daniel Boone, made this route popular. Far to the south lay the shortest and easiest route. There the mountains tapered off into a coastal plain. Settlers from South Carolina and Georgia followed this route to the rich land that is now Alabama and Mississippi. Whatever route they chose, pioneers were almost certain to have trouble with Indians along the way. They often tried to avoid trouble by agreeing to buy land from the chief of one of the tribes. But one chief could not represent all the tribes that shared the land. Other tribes did not understand or recognize the purchase. They would attack any settlers who entered their region. Everywhere on the frontier, from North to South, a bloody struggle went on year after year. The pioneers fought for land they felt belonged to them. Hadn't they bought it in good faith? From their point of view they were in the right. The Indians also felt they were in the right. Men and women who followed blood-soaked trails into Indian country knew they were risking death every minute along the way. Nevertheless, the lure was so strong that every year more wagon's headed west. Daniel Boone blazed a trail to Kentucky. The most famous of the woodsmen and pathfinders was Daniel Boone. His grandfather had followed William Penn to Pennsylvania. From there Daniel Boone's father moved the family to Virginia and then to the North Carolina frontier. A friendly hunter told young The picture below shows a pioneer family attacked by Indians on the frontier. The early settlers needed strong walls and plenty of courage to fight off such attacks. DANIEL BOONE (1734-1820) Gazing into the campfire, the older hunter spoke softly: "West of the mountains I saw a beautiful land. Best hunting I ever found. Indians call it Kaintuck. No settlers there — yet." Young Daniel's eyes gleamed. "I aim to go to Kaintuck," he said. Years afterward, Daniel Boone led a few friends to Kentucky, following a path into the mountains. Suddenly it ended. "I wasn't lost," Boone insisted later, 'but I was bewildered for three days." At last Boone found an opening in the mountains — the Cumberland Gap. He led his friends through it into Kentucky. Later he returned to North Carolina (and in 1775 set out with a large group of settlers for the new land. Boone blazed the trail, marking the way for the thousands who later followed his Wilderness Road to the West. Boone himself was always on the move westward, crossing the Mississippi and hunting in the Rockies, but he is remembered chiefly as the hero of Kentucky — the man who found a "door through the mountains.' Daniel Boone about a land beyond the mountains that the Indians called "Kentucky." He described its forests, sunny clearings, and rich game. Years afterward, Boone made his way to Tennessee. From there he traveled with difficulty to Kentucky. LateLfBoone found an easier path or "a door through the mountain wall." It led through the Cumberland Gap. Boone marked the route for a road from Tennessee to Kentucky. It was called the Wilderness RoadyJ Boone led a group of settlers over the road in 1775. On the Kentucky River they built a fort called Boones. Many settlers followed Boone through the Cumberland Gap and down the Wilderness Road. In 1792 Kentucky was admitted to the Union — the first state organized in the land west of the Appalachians. Settlers reached Tennessee from North Carolina. A few years before Boone blazed his trail to Kentucky settlers from Virginia and North Carolina began to move into Tennessee. During the Revolution, the number increased. Many moved west to avoid capture by British troops who had conquered much of Georgia and the Carolinas. Leader of the Tennessee settlers was James Robertson. On his first trip west he explored the region along the Cumberland River. It was Indian country then, but Robertson felt it would be a fine spot for a settlement. He persuaded more than building the wilderness road 100 families to move to this region. In February, 1779, the group gathered near the Holston River in northwestern North Carolina. There were 250 men, and 130 women and children. All they knew was that they were going far away into Indian country to start a settlement on the banks of a wide river. Robertson told them the land was rich and that there were wild animals to hunt. To reach the place, the men would have to push their way over winding trails for hundreds of miles. It was decided that the women and children should go by boat. The way by boat was much longer, but safer. So, on the banks of the Holston, the fathers and older boys said goodbye to the women and children. Imagine how they must have felt as they turned for one last look at their families before they plunged into the woods! The journey over land took months; every mile was dangerous. Many men were killed by Indians as they scouted their way forward. Those who lived had to go on, leaving comrades buried beside the trail. How could they turn back? They were determined to have cabins built, and a little corn planted, when their families arrived. Nashville was founded during the Revolution. Meanwhile, in 20 roughly-made flatboats, the women and children began the long journey. They were guarded by a few men with rifles. Down the Holston they 265 floated into the Tennessee River. And that river (as you can see by the map on page 262) flows south to Alabama before it changes its course to the west, and then to the north. On its broad current they entered the Ohio River. Now the boats had to be rowed upstream, against the current, to the inflowing Cumberland River. Here at last was the "home river"; but where was the home? Such a journey — about 2000 miles as the rivers ran — had never before been made by women and children! Here or there, as the boats rounded a bend, Indian arrows from the nearest side of the river turned the voyage into a flight. Twenty-six of the company were killed; five more died of hardship. At last, from the first boat — the Adventure — there rose a joyous shout. On the riverbank ahead the travelers saw a column of smoke. There the men were waiting. Hardly were families re-united before they set to work. Some cleared land for cornfields; others turned the village into a fort by building a stockade. There was no time to mourn the dead while the living were in constant danger. The men worked in the fields, rifles at hand. Girls and boys watched the encircling forest. From sunset to sunrise sentinels kept guard in the fort. But in spite of this, nearly 100 people were killed or captured by Indians in the first year. Only a third of the original pioneers were left; yet not one, so far as is known, left the settlement. The village they started became the city of Nashville. It grew from a frontier fort to the capital city of Tennessee. There were hundreds of early villages of which as brave a story might be told. With blood and sweat, pioneers turned the wilderness into a land of plowed fields and thriving towns. Democracy moved west with the pioneers. Settlers who moved west Pioneers moved westward on many rivers. Below is shown a group traveling on the Tennessee. Note the horses and cow which the settlers knew would be very valuable in the new land. carried few possessions. There was little room in their wagons or boats for bulky furniture and tools. But something invisible and precious traveled with every pioneer: the English and American tradition of freedom. The Northwest Ordinance provided for democratic government in the Northwest Territory. The same rights were extended to other territories. Almost everywhere on the frontier people elected officials and ran their local governments. As soon as the population was large enough the territory could become a state. And inhabitants of the new state had the same rights and privileges as people in the original thirteen states. Take for example the town Nashville, that you have just read about. Soon after the first settlers arrived they called a meeting to decide how to run their government. They were following a custom that was old when the colonies began. Remember how the Pilgrims held a meeting on board the Mayflower? The Pilgrims chose a democratic government, where everyone could state his opinion and vote. The people of Nashville chose the same basic plan. In most cases it was the type of government they were accustomed to "back east." Westerners believed in equality. In many ways the West was more democratic than the East. In some eastern settlements many people were predemocracy on the frontier vented from voting by property qualifications, which meant that only men who owned a certain amount of property could vote. But people on the frontier had no patience with property qualifications. They said, "If democracy is a good thing, we can't have too much of it." Westerners believed in manhood suffrage, or the right of every man to vote. When Kentucky became a state, manhood suffrage was written into its constitution. Later Ohio, and then other western states, entered the Union with manhood suffrage. Slowly, the eastern states adopted manhood suffrage, too. But what about the women? In Europe and in older parts of the United States women could not vote. The old idea was that women were inferior in intelligence to men and should not concern themselves with matters outside their home. On the frontier, however, women had to work just as hard as the men. They proved themselves intelligent and willing to do their share in building new communities. Why, then, should they not have the vote? For a long time even in the West, there was resistance to woman suffrage, or giving women the right to vote. But in 1869 the territory of Wyoming included woman suffrage in its constitution. For this reason Wyoming is called the "Equality State." Colorado, Idaho, and Utah soon adopted the idea. But it was not until 1920 that an amendment to the United States Constitution [113] 267 Lewis and Clark explored the West. After 1800 the westward movement gathered speed and force. Thanks to Boone and other pathfinders, the land between the Appalachians and the Mississippi River soon became settled. The frontier had reached the Mississippi. There it stopped, for beyond was foreign territory. Hunters and farmers looked longingly at land across the river. Then, in 1803, came news of the Louisiana Purchase. Imagine how Americans felt when this vast land was opened to them. Who knew what riches — and what dangers — Louisiana might contain! President Jefferson himself was as excited as a boy unwrapping a Christmas gift. He had to find out right away what there was in it! Even before the purchase of Louisiana, Jefferson had asked Congress for money to explore the West. Some men in Congress grumbled. Eastern Federalists were not eager to spend money on western exploration. But Congress granted $2500 for an expedition. Jefferson appointed a young army officer who was his private secretary to lead the expedition: Captain Meriwether Lewis. Lewis was a tall, blue-eyed man who appeared awkward and shy. But the President knew he was brave and dependable. Like Jefferson, Lewis had a keen interest in science. He knew a good deal about plants and minerals. Jefferson let Lewis choose his The picture below shows Meriwether Lewis and William Clark with their followers on the Columbia River, the great "River of the West," which they followed to the Pacific Coast. Captain Lewis knew the man he wanted: red-headed William Clark, a brother of George Rogers Clark who had won the Northwest Territory. The two captains picked 43 husky young men for the expedition. They were a wild, rough bunch at first. Lewis and Clark gave them several months training under military discipline, for they knew the trip meant two or three years of hardship. Jefferson instructed Lewis and Clark to find out all they could about the new territory: its soil, climate, minerals, plants, animals, rivers, and Indian tribes that inhabited it. On May 14, 1804, the Lewis and Clark Expedition started from St. Louis, which was then a little fur trading town. They went by boat up the Missouri River through the territory of the Sioux (SOO) Indians. Winter they spent in the land of the Mandan Indians, in what is now North Dakota. Like most Indians, the Mandans were friendly when they first met white men. When spring came they started out again, following the Missouri River. One day in May, 1805, they saw — far to the west — the snowy peaks of the Rocky Mountains. Here the Louisiana Territory ended, but Lewis and Clark wanted to see what lay beyond. They crossed the Rockies and traveled through what is now Idaho and Montana. A young Indian woman named Sacajawea proved a most valuable member of the expedition. She was the wife of a French guide Lewis and Clark had hired. Lewis and Clark reached the Pacific. Sacajawea marched along cheerfully, carrying her baby on her back. One day on the trail she suddenly began a dance of joy. She pointed at Indians riding toward her. "This is my tribe," she cried. The captains learned that in childhood Sacajawea had been captured by an enemy tribe. Now she was traveling through the land of her own people, the Shoshone (shoh SHO nee) Indians. She remembered enough of the language to make friends with the Indians. One of the women had been her playmate as a child. When Sacajawea asked who was the chief of the tribe, she was told, "Camawait, your brother, who has long mourned you as dead." The Indians could not do enough for Sacajawea and her friends! They supplied pack horses and guides to lead the expedition through the mountains. Thanks to Sacajawea's influence, Lewis and Clark traveled over thousands of miles of wild country without great difficulty. They followed west-flowing streams to the Snake River which led them to the Columbia River. Then they floated down the Columbia which grew wider and wider. The Great Plains and the Rocky Mountains were far behind them. Lewis and Clark's exploration of the Columbia River Valley later strengthened the American claims to the region known as the Oregon Country and helped make it part of the United States. The men traveled 4100 miles of prairie, river, Indian trail, and mountain pass. At last, in November of 1805, they saw directly to the west the waters of the Pacific Ocean! They spent the winter on the coast and then went back to St. Louis by a different way. You can follow their route on the map on this page. Lewis and Clark did an astonishing job. Tn all, they traveled over 8000 miles through wild country. Part of the time game was abundant and they lived well on animals and fish they caught. At other times, especially on the Columbia, they very nearly had to starve to death. Only one man died on the trip. The rest returned in fine condition from a journey that lasted two years, four months, and eight days! The captains never for a moment forgot the main purpose of the expedition. They brought back a wealth of reliable information, specimens, charts, and maps. And they proved it was possible to cross the mountains to the Far West. They blazed the trail for thousands of Americans who settled the West. Covered wagons followed the route of Lewis and Clark along the Missouri. Tn many ways, the history of the West really begins with the Lewis and Clark Expedition. Zebulon Pike explored the Great Plains and the Rockies. While Lewis and Clark were crossing the Rockies, another man was exploring the northern part of the Louisiana Purchase. He was a 26-year-old army officer. Lieutenant Zebulon (ZE13 yoo Ion) Pike. He had joined the army when he was 15. In 1805 his commander ordered him to take a few men and find the source of the Mississippi River. Pike traveled north from St. Louis into Minnesota, trying to find where the great river began. He never found the exact source of the Mississippi but he explored the northern region of the Louisiana Purchase. The next year the army made Pike a captain. His orders were to explore the southwestern part of the Louisiana Territory. Pike's party traveled up the Arkansas River as far as where Pueblo (PWEB Ioh), Colorado now stands. They explored much of the Great Plains and reached the Rockies, far south of where Lewis and Clark had crossed. One day Pike and his men caught sight of a majestic mountain. It rose 14,000 feet and seemed almost to touch the sky! The mountain is now called Pike's Peak in honor of the explorer who found it in 1806. Later Pike pushed south to the Rio Grande (ref o GRAHN day) River, which is now the border between Texas and Mexico. Spain claimed this region, so Pike was promptly arrested as a spy! But the Spani^ds soon set him free on the Louisiana border with a warning to stay out. Pike brought back valuable information about the Southwest. He reported that the Indians west of the Mississippi were quite different from Eastern Woodland tribes. Eastern Indians traveled on foot or by canoe, but the Plains Indians were fine horsemen. Most of their horses were descended from a few fine animals that had escaped from early Spanish explorers. (There were no horses in the Americas until the white men brought them from Europe.) Around almost every Indian village Pike saw herds of horses grazing. The boys of the tribe had to watch them and tend them. If a horse ran away, or was stolen, the boys were in disgrace. The "Indian ponies" were tough little horses that could race over rough country like rabbits. They could live on dry grass and go all day without water. Pike's information was valuable. Pioneers read what he had written Zebulon M. Pike (below) helped explore the territory of the Louisiana Purchase. about the importance of horses in the region. They brought tobacco, cloth, knives, and other goods to exchange for Indian ponies. To cross the Plains they had to have Indian horses. Practically all travel was on horseback. Distances were so great and water holes were so far apart that it was not safe to travel on foot. A man who lost his horse was likely to die of thirst. All this and more Pike told Americans in a long report he wrote. As a reward for his bravery, and leadership, Pike was made a general. He died leading an attack on Canada in the War of 1812. Pike lived only 34 years but he gave his nation almost 20 years of unselfish service. Like Lewis and Clark, he was one of the great pathfinders. The Florida border was a trouble spot. While explorers traveled to distant corners of the Louisiana Territory, the Spaniards looked on suspiciously. Spain owned Texas and Florida, and once she owned Louisiana, too. Would Americans be satisfied with Louisiana? Or would they try to take Florida and Texas, which Spain still owned? The Spaniards had reason to be fearful. The War of 1812 increased bad feeling between the United States and Spain. During the war, Americans seized West Florida. After the war, it remained part of the United States — the only territory gained in the War of 1812. Trouble arose on the border between East Florida and Georgia. Runaway slaves fled to Florida. And the Seminole Indians of Florida sometimes raided or burned towns in southern Georgia. Spanish officials made little effort to stop such acts. Spain was having trouble with revolutions in her South American colonies. She could not spare troops to keep order on the Florida border. James Monroe, who succeeded Madison as President in 1817, was eager to get control of Florida. That seemed the only way to stop Indian attacks on Georgia. Spain gave up Florida. A crisis came in 1818, when Seminole Indians took the warpath into southern Georgia and Alabama. One war party was led by an English adventurer named Ambrister. A Scottish trader named Arbuthnot supplied the Indians with guns. Both were British citizens. President Monroe sent General Jackson with several hundred frontiersmen to deal with the Indians. Andrew Jackson's orders were to "pacify" the border; that is, to bring peace, but not to cross the border into Spanish territory. To cross the border would be an act of war. Jackson claimed he had a secret order from the. President to take forcible possession of Florida; but the President denied any such order had been given. The truth of the matter is not known and probably never will be. At any rate, Jackson 278 AMERICAN EXPANSION did what he thought should be done, and did it in frontier fashion. After chasing the Indians back to Florida, he crossed the border to capture Pensacola and another Spanish fort on the Gulf coast. In one fort were the British traders who had roused the Indians, and who now thought themselves quite safe. Jackson tried them by a military court; he sentenced one to be hanged, and the other to be shot. England was angered by such treatment of British subjects. But John Quincy Adams, Monroe's Secretary of State, persuaded the British the two traders got what they deserved. So England took no action. Spain also was angry. To her protest, Adams responded the time had come to settle the whole matter. Spain should either control Florida, Adams said, or give it up to the United States. Spain was not able to manage the colony, so she agreed to give it up. In return, the United States took over some five million dollars in claims against Spain. The claims were for damages Americans said they had suffered from Spaniards and Indians during the years of trouble on the border. So Spain did not receive any money for giving up Florida. The treaty was signed at Washington on February 22, 1819. The winning of Florida added land and resources to the United States. It also ended most of the conflict with Spain. American territory now extended to the Caribbean (This map shows Florida, which was gained from Spain in 1819 under the leadership of Secretary of State John Q. Adams. BEE an) Sea. The whole Atlantic coast south of Canada belonged to the United States. Texas was ruled by Spain and then by Mexico. Spain gave up Florida partly because she was trying to crush rebellions in her colonies south of the Rio Grande River. The new nations south of the border were able to hold on to independence. But most of them had to struggle hard to establish a strong government. In Mexico the period of disorder was especially severe. In those days the vast region of Texas was part of Mexico. When Mexico became independent in 1822, Texas became a province, or state, of Mexico. Most of the inhabitants were Indians. A Mexican governor ruled the area. In southern Texas, Roman Catholic priests had built a few missions Florida acquisition 279 or religious settlements. There they worked hard to teach Indians the Christian faith. They built small, attractive churches; sometimes they set up schools where Indians were taught to weave cloth and raise crops. You can still see the ruins of many Spanish missions in Texas and California. After the War of 1812 a few Americans settled in Texas. Land was cheap and well suited to cotton growing. At first Mexican leaders welcomed Americans to Texas. They wanted to get the land settled, and they thought Americans would develop the region. A young man named Stephen Austin received a large grant of land from the Mexican government. In return, Austin promised to bring at least 100 families to Texas. Austin did better; he brought 300 families! They settled on a fertile stretch of land between the Colorado and Brazos Rivers. You can find the map below shows Texas, which gained its independence from Mexico in 1836 and joined the United States in 1845. tin's settlement on the map below. Soon they were building homes, planting cotton, raising horses and cattle. They organized local governments and ran their own affairs. They did all this quietly and peacefully— just as their fathers and grandfathers had done when they started settlements on the frontier. Austin's colony is often called the "cradle of Texas." In seven years its population grew to 3000. In 1828, Stephen Austin wrote: "Commerce begins to enliven the shores of the river, and peace and plenty everywhere prevail. Those who are here are content." Americans moved to Texas. Several other Americans received similar grants of land. They brought hundreds of families to Texas. By 1835 five new towns had been founded. Many people moved up from old Mexico to Texas. Leaders in Mexico City began to feel a little frightened. The new settlers were coming so fast! They worked so hard and traveled so quickly! Were they going to take over Texas? Would Mexico be able to hold on to this rich province? The Mexican government was in a shaky condition. There were plots and revolutions. First one man, and then another, tried to run the nation. Under such conditions, a faraway province like Texas was bound to be neglected. In many ways, Mexico did not treat Texans justly. She did not give Here is how Austin, Texas looked in January 1840 when it was the capital of the young Republic of Texas. It was named for Stephen Austin, one of the founders of Texas. them a fair share in running the government. And Texans claimed they could not get an honest trial in Mexican courts. Little by little, misunderstandings developed. Mexico City was a long way from the Texas settlements. And communication was slow. Texas settlers did not bother to consult Mexico about many problems. The new settlers did not even trade much with Mexico. It was difficult and expensive to ship goods 800 miles to Mexico City. It was easy and more profitable to ship them a few miles across the border to the United States. Moreover, Texas settlers usually went to New Orleans, rather than Mexico City, to buy supplies they needed. There were other reasons why Texas and Mexico did not get along. Most — though by no means all — of the settlers had come from the United States. Few spoke Spanish. Their friends and relatives were in the United States, and they often sent their children there to school. Another cause of misunderstanding was religion. Many settlers were Protestants. They were used to freedom of worship in the United States. But under Mexican law, the Roman Catholic Church was the only church allowed in Texas. Texas declared its independence. Texas slowly drifted toward a complete break with Mexico. In 1830 the Mexican government passed a law that made Texans angry. The law said: 1. No more settlers from the United States could come to Texas. 2. No more slaves could be brought to Texas. This was a blow at Texas cotton growers who depended on slave labor. 3. A tax must be paid on all goods coming into Texas seaports. Texans felt this was intended to discourage them from buying in the United States. 4. Soldiers would be sent to Texas and forts would be built at important points. The settlers thought the troops were being sent to spy on them. They feared they would soon lose all the rights that they had. Samuel Houston was a hero of Texas. He won the battle of San Jacinto in 1836. When Mexico tried to enforce the law of 1830, fighting broke out and several people were killed. Stephen Austin was arrested and kept in prison for months. Texans held meetings to protest, and to decide on a plan of action. They began to look to Samuel Houston (HYOOS tun) for leadership. Houston had recently come to Texas. He was a friend of Andrew Jackson and had served as governor of Tennessee. He had lived, for a time, among the Cherokee Indians. They had adopted him into their tribe and called him "The Raven," because of his dark, shining hair. The President of Mexico at this time was Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna. Santa Anna was a dictator, that is, he had complete control of the government. He planned to smash opposition and take away all the rights of Texans to run their local affairs. With an army of 6000 men he started out to "teach Texas a lesson." The settlers in Texas made up their minds they would not be ruled by Santa Anna. On March 2,1836, they held a convention and declared their independence. Then they drew up a plan of government much like that of the United States. Sam Houston was chosen to command the armed forces, though there was no army as yet. Texas was now an independent republic. Texans had their own flag, a blue flag with one white star, so Texas was called the "Lone Star Republic." Texans remembered the Alamo and Goliad. In the meantime Santa Anna's army reached the mission town of San Antonio. There were only 187 Texans in the town. Under command of Colonel William Travis, they tried to defend the settlement. But they were driven back to the Alamo, the mission chapel which had been turned into a fort. Inside the Alamo's thick walls the handful of Texans held off 3000 Mexican soldiers for 11 days! They killed more than 500 of the enemy. When the hopeless fight was over, the defenders were dead or dying to the last man. Among the dead were two famous scouts, Davy Crockett and James Bowie. Next, Santa Anna marched southeast to the mission town of Goliad. There he surrounded a group of 300 Texans. They were soon forced 282 AMERICAN EXPANSION to surrender. Then they were lined up and shot. Santa Anna thought the slaughter at the Alamo and at Goliad would frighten Texans. He expected them to give up the fight. No man ever made a worse mistake. Thousands who had paid little attention to the trouble in Texas now became fighting mad. "Remember the Alamo! Remember Goliad!" they shouted. All over Texas, men seized their guns and rode away to join Houston's army. When news of the Alamo reached the United States many Americans hurried to join in the fight. Within a week Sam Houston and his army were on the march. He had only about 900 men, but every one had used a rifle since boyhood. On April 21, 1836, the Texans caught up with the Mexican army. A battle took place on the bank of the San Jacinto River. Santa Anna was taken by surprise. The general was asleep; his men were eating and drinking. The battle lasted 20 minutes. Santa Anna's army was cut to pieces. Only two Texans were killed and 23 wounded. Texas was a republic for nine years. Santa Anna was captured, but was soon set free and returned to Mexico. The victory at San Jacinto ended the war. The independence of Texas was won. Sam Houston became its first President. The United States and other nations recognized Texas as an independent republic. It is interesting to note that many Spanish-speaking people helped win independence for Texas. They loved liberty and they hated Santa Anna. In the war for Texas' freedom, Spanish-speaking and English-speaking settlers fought side by side. Like all new nations, Texas faced serious problems. The war had left a big debt. And Mexican officials would not recognize the independence of Texas. They claimed it was just a rebellious province. They warned they would declare war on any nation which took any part in Texan affairs. As you can probably guess, this warning was directed at the United States. Many Americans had long wanted to acquire Texas. And most Texans wanted to join the United States. Nevertheless, Texas remained independent for nine years. What caused the delay? There were two reasons: one was that the government at Washington did not want to go to war with Mexico. And Mexican leader, Santa Anna (below) tried to crush rebellion in Texas, but failed. The chart above shows how the various territories acquired by the United States compare in size and cost. Notice that the Gadsden Purchase of 1853 was the most expensive per acre. The post was named Astoria in honor of the company's founder, John Jacob Astor. But it takes more than explorers and fur traders to conquer the wilderness. Britain and the United States realized Oregon would probably go to the nation that was able to settle it and develop it. So they both did their best to encourage people to go to Oregon. Marcus Whitman and Jason Lee led the settlement of Oregon. American plans to settle Oregon received an unexpected boost from the Indians. Lewis and Clark had made friends with the tribes they met on their voyage down the Columbia. The wisdom of the two captains greatly impressed the Indians. A short time later, four young Indians climbed on their horses and headed east. They rode over mountains and plains for many days. Two riders died before the journey ended. But the other two reached St. Louis. There they delivered their message: the Indians of Oregon asked that white teachers be sent to help them. The churches were glad to answer the appeal. They sent several missionaries to Oregon. The most famous were Jason Lee, a minister, and Marcus Whitman, a physician. Their wives went with them. Whitman and Lee established settlements and sent back word of great opportunities in Oregon. Whitman and his wife, Narcissa, were later killed by the Indians they tried to help. Jason Lee was more fortunate. He founded a prosperous settlement in the Willamette (wih LAM et) Valley, where Salem, Oregon now stands. The missionaries proved that wagons could cross the Rocky Mountains. They followed old buffalo paths the Indians had used before the white men came. Between the old and the new frontier were a thousand miles of prairie — and another thousand miles of mountainous country. Over this vast region ran the Oregon Trait. The trip was too long and dangerous for any family to face alone. So they formed "wagon trains." Forty or more families would gather at some point near the Missouri River, often at Independence, Missouri. The "wagon trains" followed the Oregon Trail along the Platte River. They crossed Wyoming to Idaho, then followed the Snake River to the Oregon Country. The map on page 331 shows the route they followed. So many families headed west after 1843 people said the nation had "caught Oregon fever." Americans were clearly winning the race to settle Oregon. Some people talked of fighting the British and driving them out of Oregon. They said the United States should have the whole Oregon Country, all the way to the southern border of Alaska or latitude 54°40'. Their slogan was "Fifty-four forty or fight!" But nobody really wanted another war with Great Britain. And the British were willing to settle the matter peaceably. Great Britain and the United States divided the Oregon Country. The United States and Britain appointed commissioners to arrange an agreement. They drew up a treaty that divided the Oregon Country at the 49th parallel of latitude. The British got the northern part, now known as British Columbia. The United States got the southern part, which included the great Columbia River Valley. The states of Washington, Oregon, and Idaho were later formed from the territory. The Oregon treaty was signed and approved in 1846, just as the Mexican War was beginning. The Oregon treaty and the Mexican Cession rounded out the boundaries of the United States. From the Atlantic to the Pacific, from the Gulf of Mexico to Canada, Americans were free to explore and settle. The struggling little republic of 1789 was rapidly becoming one of the mightiest powers on earth! The map below shows the Oregon Country. We were forty miles from Albany, Forget it I never shall. What a terrible storm we had one night On the Erie Canal. Sang the canal workers as they worked the barges on the Erie Canal. The time was early in the 19th century and the future was bright. The canal "craze" grew; many states rushed to dig their own canals, to bring the West closer to the Atlantic. Then, suddenly, it ended. Strange new sounds began to be heard in the land: the hiss of escaping steam and the long, mournful whistle of a train. The railroad had become part of the Westward Movement. Who was responsible for this new means of transportation? What effect did it have? Jefferson had predicted it would take several centuries for Americans to settle the Mississippi Valley. How long did it actually take to sweep across the Mississippi and join the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans with a railroad? The following pages record the days when Americans were experimenting with the means of transportation to bind together their country into "one nation indivisible." 304 Roadbuilding began in early colonial times. Seventy years after the Revolution, the United States stretched from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean. By purchase, conquest, and exploration, Americans had won vast territories in the South and West. From Canada to the Gulf of Mexico, from Maine to California, the American flag waved. But it took time for population to catch up with the flag. Many parts of the country remained empty of people long after the Mexican War and the Gadsden Purchase. There were always plenty of Americans eager to push forward and claim new lands. What held them back or at least slowed up their advance? The answer is surprisingly simple: they had to wait for the building of a road or a waterway to the new territory. So, during the first half of the 19th century, the nation was busy building roads and canals to open up the West. When the first settlers came to America they found only a few little paths leading into the forest. Some were made by deer and other animals. The drawing below shows a section of the Pennsylvania Road in 1751. As you can see, it was little more than a trail over the hills. Others were made by Indians hunting through the woods. Such trails, however, did not usually lead where the white men wanted to go. Pioneers could follow them for only a short distance. Then the trails would end, suddenly, on the side of a mountain or in the middle of a thicket. Thus roadbuilding early became an important activity. Settlers were always cutting foot paths through the woods. Later they widened the paths so horses and two-wheeled carts could pass over them. Sooner or later someone would try to drive a big four-wheeled wagon over one of the paths. Of course he "got stuck!" So the pioneers had to cut down more trees to straighten and widen the road. For a while the wider road was adequate. But soon other wagons followed. Before long the road became worn down; deep ruts appeared and made travel dangerous. The settlers filled up the holes and tried to provide a firm surface with any material they could find: wooden planks, broken stones, Below is a scene on the Boston Post Road in 1763. Compare it with the picture at the left noting how fast roadbuilding improved. This wagon, the "Flying Machine," went from New York to Philadelphia in 1766. speed over early roads. A journey of two or three hundred miles usually took weeks. It is not surprising that some people never traveled far from the place where they were born. But most Americans were eager to see the world. In spite of trouble and expense, they kept moving. A few years before the Revolution, stage coaches became popular. The stage coach was a large, plain, heavy carriage drawn by four horses. It could carry from eight to fourteen passengers. When the road came to a river, the pioneers had another problem to solve. If the stream was narrow they could build a log bridge over it. But wide rivers were too much for early road builders. Near some rivers there were ferry men with boats to carry people and even horses to the other side. To cross other rivers, a traveler had to find a ford or shallow place where he or his horse could wade to the other side. When Thomas Jefferson rode from his home to Washington in 1801 he had to ford three rivers and swim his horse across five more. It took time and money to build even the rough narrow roads of colonial days, and money was scarce in early America. In some colonies the government made everyone who used the roads pay a special tax. In some northern towns, able-bodied men had to give a few days work each spring to build or repair roads. Stage coaches were popular. Ten miles a day was considered good 306 ROADS AND CANALS This picture shows a stagecoach traveling near Trenton, New Jersey in 1810. travel from New York to Boston in six days. One traveler described his trip like this: I set out from Boston on the new line of stages. We reached a resting place at ten o'clock at night. After supper we went to bed, with notice that we would be called at three in the morning. Then we arose and made ready, by help of a horn lantern or a candle, to proceed over bad roads. Sometimes we had to get out to help the coachmen lift the coach out of a deep rut. We reached New York after a week's travel, wondering at the ease and speed of our journey. At first, stage coaches traveled at the rate of two miles an hour. Later, when the roads were improved, the rate increased to six. In 1836 a trip of 300 miles took 50 hours of dayand-night travel. loll roads were profitable. On the frontier early roads were even worse than those in the East. Western states had no money to build the roads that were needed. So private companies were formed to build Here is shown the building of the first macadam road in America in 1823. toll roads in the various regions. The companies made money by requiring everyone who used the roads to pay a fee or toll. The toll roads were carefully built; first the top soil was scraped away; then a foundation of rocks was laid; on top of that was spread a covering of crushed stone or gravel. A Scotchman named John McAdam invented this type of road, and in his honor such roads are still called macadam roads. The top of finely crushed stone was rounded so that water would run off. Every few miles along the toll road there were gates, each with a tollcollector called a "keeper." The gate was at first a heavy post, to which was attached a bar long enough to stretch across the road. The bar was called a pike, and the keeper turned it to close the road until a traveler paid his toll. So the toll road was often called a "turnpike," or "pike." The first toll road was the Lancaster Pike, which opened in 1793. It ran west from Philadelphia to the STAGECOACHES AND TURNPIKES 307 This picture shows one of the later, more powerful engines that came into use about 1901 on the Santa Fe railroad. Now out-of-date, it is used on a branch line. that sent its steamships along the coast from Portland, Maine to New Orleans, Louisiana, and then to the Isthmus of Panama. From the Pacific side of the Isthmus, other Vanderbilt steamers carried passengers and freight to San Francisco. As chief owner of all these steamers, Vanderbilt became known as the "Commodore." After half a lifetime in the steamboat business, the Commodore surprised his friends a second time by selling his boats. Once again he guessed what the future would bring. He realized railroads were going to be more profitable than boats. Vanderbilt first bought enough stock in the Harlem River Railroad to control the company. Next he bought the Hudson River Railroad which ran from New York to Albany. Then he got control of the New York Central which ran from Albany to Buffalo. He soon combined the Harlem with the New York Central, and then with the Hudson River Railroad. Later Vanderbilt and his friends bought the Lake Shore, the Michigan Central, and various other railroads. The combined lines provided an all-rail route between New York City and Chicago. Thus he began the organization of the New York Central System, which is still serving America. Railroads reached the Pacific Coast. You have seen how quickly railroads were built west to the Mississippi River. There the building stopped for several years. At the same time, thousands of pioneers and gold seekers were moving west. They needed the rapid transportation railroads could provide. But no individual or private company could raise enough money to build a railroad across the Great Plains and the Rockies. The dangers and obstacles scared off even the most daring leaders. On the prairies, water was scarce and Indians were plentiful. Farther west, mountains, canyons, and roaring rivers seemed to say, "No road will ever be built here." However, engineers claimed a railroad could be built, if somebody would put up the money. Only the federal government had resources to finance such an undertaking. But the government did not want to get 320 ROADS AND CANALS into the railroad business right then. The problem was solved in this way: Congress offered to give large stretches of western land to any company that would construct a railroad there. After the railroad was built, the company could sell the land at a good price to settlers who moved into the region. In addition, the government offered to buy shares in the company. Under certain conditions, Congress would also lend money for construction. Two companies were formed to take advantage of the government's offer. One company began to lay track westward from Omaha, Nebraska, following the old Oregon Trail. As its name, "The Union Pacific," indicated, one object of the road was to bind the western states to the Union. At the same time, another company began to lay rails east from San Francisco. This road, the Central Pacific, followed the Pony Express route. (You will read about the Pony Express in the next chapter.) After six years of labor, the two building crews met near Ogden, Utah. The last stretches of the line were laid. Then, on May 10, 1869, the lines were joined by a spike of gold on one side and a spike of silver on the other. The first transcontinental railroad, that is, a railroad reaching from the Atlantic to the Pacific, was complete. Crowds of workers cheered as an engine steamed over the tracks. Their hard work had joined the East and West, and united the nation! However, one railroad was not enough for the growing West. Another transcontinental road, the Santa Fe, was built over the old trail through New Mexico and Arizona to California. Then in quick succession appeared the Southern Pacific, the Northern Pacific, and the Great Northern. The transcontinental roads played a leading part in the development of the Far West. It had taken 200 years to push the frontier from the Atlantic coast to the Mississippi River. But with railroads stretching all the way to the Pacific coast, pioneers of a later date were able to cross the wider western half of the continent — and build 17 new states — in the space of a single lifetime. (Below) A great day dawned for the West and the whole country when the first transcontinental railroad was completed on May 10, 1869. with one another. Powerful nations like Great Britain and France could conquer them one by one. It would be the end of the American dream of a strong free land. Webster and Hayne debated the states' rights questions. The question of states' rights was thoroughly discussed in the Webster-Hayne debate. It began in the Senate on January 19, 1830; it continued for weeks. JohnC. Calhoun was Vice-President at tb time, so he could not take part in the debate. Instead, Senator Robert Hayne of South Carolina spoke for the South. He attacked Massachusetts and other manufacturing states. He ended by declaring any state could set aside a law of Congress and leave the Union if it chose. Webster rose to answer the attack on his state and on the idea of federal supremacy. He talked for hours. Webster's "Reply to Hayne" is one of the most famous speeches in history. Webster ended with words that rang through the North like a trumpet call: "Liberty and Union now and forever, one and insepa rable." The Webster-Hayne debate gave both sides a chance to "blow off steam," but settled nothing. Northerners and southerners continued to suspect one another. Meantime, large numbers of Americans were moving west every year. New territories had to be organized, and each time the question of slavery came up. No matter what Congress tried to discuss, somebody would drag slavery into it. And that, John Quincy Adams wrote in his Diary, was "the signal for another outburst of violent passion." Newspapers would report the angry words and there would be meetings of aroused citizens in both North and South. The Compromise of 1850 settled another slavery crisis. The Missouri Compromise seemed to settle the question of slavery in the territories, but the matter soon came-up again. Machines changed American life. After the Civil War the United States changed rapidly. Everything began to move faster. Factories multiplied; inventions increased; and America became a leading industrial nation. All America seemed to be moving to the cities. And from foreign lands came thousands of immigrants, seeking new opportunities in factories. Thus the United States changed from a land of small farms and small businesses to a nation of great cities and busy factories. What brought about such rapid change? The answer lies in one word: machines. Until after the Civil War most Americans did their work and earned their living by hand labor. Electricity was just a word in the dictionary, and oil was something old folks used to ease the pains of rheumatism. Here is the way one citizen described life in Ridgefield, Connecticut about 100 years ago — before the machine age began: Nearly all of us were farmers. Even those not making a living by the land had each a farm, or at least a garden, with pigs, chickens, and cattle. Wages were about 50^ a day, and generally were paid in meat or vegetables or other articles; seldom in money, which was scarce. There was not a factory of any kind in the whole township. As a matter of course, we had a fattened ox ready for winter. This means that the ox, poor thing, would be eaten during the winter. One full barrel of meat was salted down; the rest was slightly salted and hung up in BEFORE THE MACHINE AGE the chimney to become dried or hung beef. All vegetables came from our own garden; our fuel came from our own woodland. Sugar was supplied partly from our maple trees, but more sugar came from the West Indies. There was no baker in the town. Each family made not only its own bread, cakes, and pies, but its own soap, candles, butter, and cheese. The making of linen and woolen cloth was also a domestic work. We raised our own flax and wool, dressed it, and spun it. A little spinning wheel, turned by a foot pedal, had its place in every home. Weaving was done by a traveling workman who came to the house, put up his loom, and stayed until the season's work was done. Twice a year, in spring and autumn, a tailor came and made clothing for the men and boys. A dressmaker and a milliner came in their turn to fit out the female members of the family. That was the way Americans lived in the time of your great-grandparents. Today, in the same Connecticut township, most people work in New York or one of the other cities nearby. Those who still farm the soil own tractors and harvesters. Almost everyone has an automobile; many families own two. Homes are lighted by electricity, and often heated by oil. Food is stored in freezers and electric refrigerators. Canned goods line the kitchen shelves. For goods farmers do not raise on their own land, they can telephone or drive to stores in the village a few miles away. Beef from Kansas, fruit from Florida and 401 Chapter 21 Many factors aided American development. You live in the Machine Age. And you live in the land where machines have reached their highest development. Every day, probably every hour, you use a machine or the products of machines. Yet, many boys and girls in some Old World lands seldom see modern machines. They live much as their ancestors did centuries ago. Machines are scarce and expensive, and most work is done by hand. How did it happen that the United States became the world's leader in manufacturing? The Industrial Revolution began in Britain. However, after 1865 the United States caught up with and soon passed Great Britain in production of manufactured goods. What conditions helped America to forge ahead? Freedom to experiment and the chance of winning great wealth encouraged American inventors. Other factors were important too. To develop great industries, natural resources must be available. The United States had huge deposits of coal and iron and almost every mineral needed by industry. A manufacturing nation also needs many workers, both skilled and unskilled. The United States had little trouble finding workers. Every year thousands of immigrants came from Europe to work in American factories, stores, and mines. And as harvesters and tractors reduced the number of workers needed on the farm, men and women from the growth of manufacturing country came to the city seeking factory jobs. Thus a plentiful labor supply, and a wealth of natural resources, aided American industrial development. Still, something more was needed to develop great industries: clever, capable leaders. Here again the United States was fortunate. In the history of almost every great American industry you will find one or more far-sighted leaders who made the most of opportunities America offered. You have already met some of these men: Cornelius Vanderbilt, Cyrus McCormick, Thomas Edison. There were many others. Almost all were poor boys; many were immigrants. In the growth of America's big industries, particularly those connected with new ways of travel and communication, "self-made men" played a great part. Carnegie made steel cheap and plentiful. You have seen how a great network of railroads spread across America in the 19th century. Later came the automobile which provided comfortable, convenient transportation everywhere in the country. The development of the railroads and the automobile industry required huge amounts of high quality steel at a reasonable price. Steel making is one of America's basic industries. Without it, the modern world could scarcely exist. Yet steel manufacturing on a large scale began less than 100 years ago. From the Old World to the New. Emigrants are shown boarding a New York bound ship in Hamburg, Germany many years ago. the housing problem becomes acute once more. But Americans have learned slums do not pay and they have made up their minds to get rid of them. Immigrants settled in cities. Many, though by no means all, of the people who settled in the slums were newcomers to America. After 1865, factories and mines needed an everincreasing number of workers. From faraway lands came masses of eager immigrants or people who moved to America from foreign lands. They were attracted by stories of good jobs and high wages. Many of the "greenhorns," as the new immigrants were called, had a hard time learning American ways. But most of them soon became hardworking citizens. They wanted more than anything else to belong, to become part of America, the land of their dreams. But it was not easy. They did not understand American methods and traditions. Some had a hard time learning English. And they often were cheated and exploited when they first arrived. Immigrants who came to America before 1890 had an easier time than those who have come in more recent years. Earlier immigrants usually went to work on farms. Most of them saved enough to buy a farm, or they obtained some free land under the Homestead Act. Before 1890 most immigrants came from the British Isles and western Europe. The potato famine of the 1840's caused thousands of Irish to come to the United States. And the failure of the Revolution of 1848 made many freedom-loving Germans flee their "Fatherland" for America. A little later, bad times and business failures in Scandinavia encouraged many Swedes and Norwegians to seek a new start in America. All these groups adjusted to American life without great difficulty. "New" immigrants met new problems. The story was different for workers from southern and eastern Europe who came after 1890. These groups — the Italians, Poles, and various Slavic nationalities — made up what was called the "New Immigration." (Those who came from northern and western Europe before 1890 made up the "Old Immigration.") When the "new" immigrants arrived, after 1890, almost all the good land had been claimed. Because of the new machines, farm workers were not needed. So Italians, Poles, and Slavic groups had to find jobs in factories or mines. Because most of the new immigrants had had little chance to attend school in their old homes, they found it hard to learn to read and write English. Many citizens feared that the new "wave" of immigrants was a danger to American democracy. They said the newcomers lacked knowledge and experience to vote intelligently. American workers complained that foreigners took their jobs and pulled down the scale of wages because they would work for low pay. Labor leaders asked the government to reduce the number of immigrants coming into the country. Congress began to restrict immigration. Ever since colonial days there had existed a certain amount of distrust of immigrants. Why, you may ask, should any American feel prejudice against immigrants? After all, the United States is a nation of immigrants. All Americans, even the Indians, are either immigrants or descendants of immigrants. Nevertheless, many people born in America tended to be critical of newcomers. One reason was the fact that a number of criminals and half-witted people had been coming to America. This situation caused Congress in 1882 to pass a law that forbade idiots, beggars, and criminals to enter the ever, the total grants who came to America. Until 1890, most immigrants to America came from northern and western. In the early 1880's, the public became excited about the immigration of Chinese workers or "coolies." Contractors had brought in thousands of Chinese to work on western railroads. The Chinese accepted low wages and lived in a way that cost very little. For this reason, other workers feared and hated them. There were riots and killings. Public opinion forced Congress to pass a law in 1882 that forbade immigration of Chinese laborers. Thus began a long series of laws to regulate immigration. In 1917 a new law required foreigners to pass a literacy (LIT er ah see) test to prove they could read and write. The flood of immigrants was reduced to a trickle. After the First World War conditions in Europe were very bad and the number of foreigners who wished to come to America was enormous. But the United States could not provide jobs and homes for so many newcomers. Therefore, Congress passed stricter laws to keep out immigrants. A quota system was adopted in 1924. This limited the number of immigrants admitted each year from any country to two percent of the number of immigrants from that country who were living in the United States in 1890. The percentage was called a quota. Here is an example: About 2,500,000 German immigrants were living in the United States in 1890. Two percent of 2,500,000 is 50,000. Therefore the number of Germans who would be admitted under the quota law was 50,000 a year. During the 1930's, immigration laws were made even more severe. Millions of Americans were out of work, and the government was determined not to add to the unemployment problem by admitting new job seekers. During this period the number of foreigners in the United States actually declined. This was because many immigrants who lost their jobs decided to return to their homelands. After World War II, a new problem arose. Thousands of Europeans had lost their homes during the war. Many had to flee from their own countries because of German or Russian persecution. They were called "displaced persons" or DP's. Most of them wanted to come to the United States. Congress passed a special act to admit several thousand displaced persons in addition to the yearly quota. In 1952, Congress passed a new immigration law, known as the McCarran-Walter Act. It kept many of the provisions of the 1924 law, including the quota system. Under the new law, no more than 154,657 immigrants could be admitted to the United States in one year. Immigrants enriched American life. It is important to remember that to a great extent it was immigrants who 498 CHANGES IN AMERICA built modern America. An amazing number of the bewildered "greenhorns" who landed in the United States without money or friends later became outstanding citizens. If you examine a list of leading Americans in any field — science, painting, music, business — you will find several immigrants among them. Earlier you have read about several immigrants who made important contributions to American life: Andrew Carnegie, Alexander Graham Bell, John Ericsson, Samuel Gompers. Other, more recent immigrants who have enriched America include: Enrico Fermi, a scientist born in Italy, whose research aided greatly in the development of atomic power; Michael Pupin (poo PEEN), a one-time shepherd boy in Hungary, whose inventions improved communication by telephone and radio; Irving Berlin, who came from Russia at the age of four and wrote songs that all America sings; Leopold Stokowski, who was born in London of Polish and Irish parentage and who became conductor of the Philadelphia Orchestra; William Knudsen (NOOD sun) of Denmark, who became President of General Motors, and who served as a high government official during World War II, directing production of war materials. What names can you add to the list of foreign-born citizens who have become famous? If you read the newspapers carefully, almost every immigrant contributions Here are two immigrants who made important contributions to America: (top) Leopold Stokowski, and Samuel Gompers (below). day you will learn of men and women who came to America a few years ago and who are now helping build a stronger, richer nation. Education for all became an American ideal. Closely connected with the problem of immigration was the growth of education in the United States. Immigrants and their children needed instruction in American traditions and methods of government. In recent years training for citizenship has become one of the chief aims of American education. Even in colonial times people were concerned about education. Massachusetts Bay Colony required every settlement of fifty families to provide 499 belonged to a rich and noble family who sent him to study in Spain. When Simon was 18 his uncle arranged a marriage for him, as was the custom. His bride was the lovely young daughter of a great Spanish family. Proudly, Bolivar took her home to Venezuela. But their happiness was short-lived. In a few months she died of yellow fever. Heartbroken, young Bolivar decided to devote his life to freeing his native land from Spain. For years Bolivar fought battle after battle in northern South America. When he had driven the Spaniards out of the region that is now Colombia, Venezuela, and Ecuador, Bolivar turned his attention southward. There, another great soldier, Jose San Martin, had already won independence for Simon Bolivar (1783 1830) is "South America's George Washington." His armies freed the continent of Spanish rule. Argentina and Chile. Bolivar united San Martin's troops with his own and led a vigorous campaign in Peru that ended Spain's rule in South America. Bolivar gave his entire fortune to the war. He also gave his health. Years of fighting and hardship wore out his slender body; he died of tuberculosis in 1830 at the age of 47. Today, Latin Americans regard Bolivar with the same respect and gratitude that people in the United States feel for Washington. There are 20 republics in Latin America. Independence brought new problems to Latin America. The people lacked experience in political affairs. Most of them were very poor and had never had a chance to go to school. As you might expect, they found it hard to run a government. And they did not remain united, as Bolivar had hoped. Instead, Latin America became divided into weak republics, separated in some cases by high mountains or dense jungles. Today there are 20 republics in Central and South America. Each has an interesting history; each has made contributions to the world's culture and wealth. A few, like Brazil and Chile, have marched forward steadily and now have considerable influence in the world. Others, like Paraguay and Ecuador, have lagged behind; they count for little in world politics. Time and space are lacking for a detailed study of all the Latin American nations. But in the following pages you will find a discussion of the more important republics. Mexico is a next-door neighbor. To citizens of the United States, the most important country in Latin America is Mexico — because Mexico is nearest. Mexico is a big country, one-fourth as large as the United States. It has almost twice as many people as there are in New York State. Mexico is rich in natural resources; drilling oil and mining silver, copper, lead and zinc are big industries. But the typical Mexican is still a farmer, scratching a bare living from a small patch of dry soil. Most Mexicans have both Spanish and Indian ancestors. And almost everywhere in Mexico you can see reminders of ancient Indian civilizations, and also of the influence of Spanish conquerors. Indian temples, lovely Spanish churches, snowcapped mountains and masses of tropical flowers make Mexico a fascinating place to visit. Perhaps you know someone who has driven down the Pan-American Highway from Texas to Mexico City. It is a wonderful trip, one that is increasingly popular. Americans who visit Mexico usually come home with a new respect and understanding of the problems south of the border. This is all to the good, for relations between Mexico and United States have often suffered because neither nation understood The Palace of Fine Arts in Mexico City took 27 years to build. It houses the works of Mexico's most famous artists. the point of view of the other one. Mexicans found it hard to forget or forgive the loss of Texas and the Mexican War of 1846 (pp. 279-88). Americans were impatient with Mexico's frequent revolutions and the way Mexican leaders borrowed money they could not or would not repay. Morrow won Mexico's friendship. Bad feeling between the two nations was so well known that in World War I a German diplomat offered to help Mexico get back Texas and California if she would fight against the United States. Mexico ignored the offer, but Americans did not. They suddenly realized the danger of being on bad terms with the folks next door. However, the situation in Mexico was so confused and Mexicans were so unfriendly it seemed hopeless to try to improve relations. But one man was able to change the whole Mexican relations Many went to prison. To such homeless and disgraced men the colonies offered another chance. Most settlers came to America with the hope of making a better living than was possible in Europe. Almost all the land in Europe was owned by noblemen. Ordinary men were lucky if they could rent some land from a noble. They had to give a large part of their crops to the owner. A man who owned even a little land was regarded as rich. Imagine how English farmers felt when they heard they could get many acres of good land in America and pay for it in a few years out of the crops they raised! The news was wonderful, "too good to be true." Here at last was a chance to get ahead in the world. But only the bravest dared to seize the opportunity to gain land in the wilderness. Some people hoped to get rich in a hurry. Other Englishmen hoped to find gold in America. Tales of Spanish treasure ships had excited the nation. People who could afford it crowded into a London theater to see a new play, Eastward Ho! One actor said to another, speaking of American Indians, "Why man, all their cooking pans are pure gold. The prisoners they take are chained with gold. As for diamonds and rubies, they go forth on holidays to gather them by the seashore to hang on their children's coats." Talk like this brought adventurers OPPORTUNITIES IN AMERICA to the American colonies. They did not want to work or build homes. They wanted to look for gold, fill their pockets, and hurry home. The treasure seekers did not make good colonists. A few men came to America for the same reason that Marco Polo had gone to China. They wanted to trade with the natives. The ships that came back from America brought news that Indians would exchange beautiful furs — beaver, mink, or otter — for a knife or a handful of glass beads. To every colony came traders who hoped to gain wealth in a way that was somewhat slower but more certain than finding gold or diamonds. A few men and boys came to America for the pure love of adventure. They wanted a change — something new and different. They were tired of the rules and regulations of the Old World. They longed to find a place where they could enjoy life in their own way. America has always attracted people who want freedom. Many of them became the pioneers and pathfinders who led the advance of civilization. Many colonists sought religious freedom. Besides those who came to earn a better living or find treasure or adventure, some people came to America for religious reasons. In 17th century Europe, the law compelled most people to go to the church their ruler favored. In every country there were brave 