THE STORY OF
American
«| WE HOLD THESE TRUTHS TO BE SELF-EVIDENT:
THAT ALL MEN ARE CREATED EQUAL, THAT THEY
ARE ENDOWED BY THEIR CREATOR WITH CERTAIN
INALIENABLE RIOHTS. THAT AMONG THESE ARE
LIFE. LIBERTY, AND THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS.
THAT. TO SECURE THESE RIGHTS, GOVERNMENTS
ARE INSTITUTED AMONG MEN. DERIVING THEIR JUST
POWERS FROM THE CONSENT OF THE GOVERNED.
The Declaration of Independence
Democracy
MABEL B. CASNER
Washington School. West Haven, Connecticut
RALPH H. GABRIEL
Sterling Professor of History. Vale University
With an introduction by
CARL SANDBURG
THIRD EDITION
Maps by hakold k. fave
HARCOURT, BRACE AND COMPANY
NIW YO*K • CHICAGO
r*\

ABOUT T HE AUTHORS
MABEL B. CASNER, educator, author, and lecturer, has taught American history and geography through-
out most of her adult life to 7th and Hth-gradc boys and girls in the public schools of West
Haven, Connecticut. As coauthor of several editions of this book and of Exploring Geography,
she has been a pioneer in the use of storytelling methods, illustrations, and meaningful study
aids in American schoolbooks. Miss Casner was graduated from Connecticut Stale Normal
School {now New Haven Stale Teachers College) and has done extensive specialized study at
Yale, Harvard, and New York Universities. She is an active member of state and national
educational organizations, especially those concerned with the social studies.
RALPH H. GABRIEL is Sterling Professor of History at Y'alc University. He has also Ircen a visiting pro-
fessor at the Universities of Colorado and Wyoming, at Stanford University, at Cambridge
University (England), and at the University of Sydney (Australia). In addition to textbook
writing. Dr. Gabriel has written several studies in American history, of which the best known
is the Course of A merican Demoeratie Thought. He has also been editor of the Pageant of
America Scries and the Library of Congress Series in American Civilization. In World War I
he was a lieutenant of infantry, fn World War H he lectured on American military history
and military government to selected jrersonnel of the United States Army.
ABOUT "THIS AMERICA”
CARL SANDBURG, in a special introduction to this liook, has compiled a message to American boys and
girls. The name of Carl Sandburg, poet, singer of folk songs, biographer, and historian, is
closely linked with the siory of American democracy. Born in Galesburg. Illinois, in 1878, he
grew to manhood in the Middle West, the heartland of America. Throughout his adult life
he has roamed into every corner of America, working, talking w ith the people, singing their
songs, and always writing. His writings bring alive countless scenes of American life from
Colonial times to our own day. His message, alongside the pictures (but not the maps) in
"This America," sets the stage lor the main text of this book.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND CREDITS
The sources of most of the pictures in this book are indicated alongside the pictures. For
other picture credits and identifications see page xiv. Permission to reprint certain passages
by Girl Sandburg is also noted on page xiv
COPYRIGHT, 1942, 1945, 1946, 1950, © 1955
BY HARCOURT, BRACE AND COMPANY, INC.
All rights reserved. No part of this liook may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph or
any other means, without permission in writing from the publisher.
PRINTED l.\ THE UNITED STATES OE AMERICA
Ic'8 * 55]
Contents
THIS AMERICA by Carl Sandburg	i
PART ONI (1492-1757)
UNIT ONE (1492-1757)
Europeans start colonies in the Americas
1	The Atlantic becomes a highway to the
Americas
2	Spain, Portugal, and France found
New World colonies
3	England plants sturdy colonies in
North America
4 Our American ways of living begin to
take shape
36
49
f,.j
8-1
PART TWO (1757-1860)
UNIT TWO (1757-1787)
The English colonies win their independence
5	The colonies unite against British rule	110
6	The colonies win their fight for freedom	i z5
UNIT THREE (1787-1823)
Free Americans form a strong democratic union
7	The states unite under a new plan of
government
THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES
8	The new nation has a successful beginning
9	Tbe United States speaks out in world affairs
10	Americans move westward beyond the
Mississippi
11	Roads, canals, and rails bind the nation
together
>52
169
*74
20)
214
235
247
V
UNIT FOUR (1833-1860)
The spirit of democracy grows in the nation
12	Our national government becomes more
democratic
13	Americans seek the goal of equal opportunity
14	Books, plays, and music express democratic
ideals
z60
277
287
A
UNIT FIVE (1787-1860)
Machines and industry spur America’s growth
15	Americans find new ways to earn their livings
16	Setilers move into the Southwest and West
3*5
PART THREE (1860-1920)
UNIT SIX (1860-1865)
A strong nation arises from the ruins of war
17	The Northern and Southern states pull apart
18	War Between North and South threatens the
Union
19	The reunited nation rebuilds for the future
356
367
385
UNIT SEVEN (1865-1917)
Americans build a strong industrial nation
20	Settlers move into the Great Western Plains
21	Invention, daring, and skill start new
industries
22	Industry, business, and labor gain new
strength
23	Cities become key centers in American life
24	Industrial growth challenges democratic goals
J02
.jifi
435
444
455
vi
REFERENCE SECTION
UNIT EIGHT (1865-1920)
The nation takes a leading role in world affairs
25	Americans become aware of the rest of the
world	47ft
26	The nation gains influence beyond its borders 495
27	The United States fights tyranny in
World War I	511
PART FOUR (1920 NOW)
UNIT NINE (1920-1945)
Americans defend democracy in a troubled world
28	The nation faces the threat of world
depression	530
29	The United States becomes a friendly
neighbor	549
30	Americans fight round the globe in
World War II	564
UNIT TEN (1945-NOW)
American democracy meets the Communist threat
31	Modern Russia arises to threaten the free
world	588
32	The United States leads the free world
in the West	607
33	The United States leads the	free	world	in Asia <>21
34	Americans practice and protect democracy
at home	635
YOU ARE AMERICA
Facts about the States of the Union	(>84
Facts about Principal Territories. Possessions,
and Dependencies of the United States	685
Facts about Presidents and Presidential Elections (>8fi
Important Events in American History	f»88
Index	692
vii
OUR AMIRICAN WAYS OF LIVING BIGIN TO TAJCt SHARI
101
With an armed force made up of
hit frontier neighbors, Bacon drove
Berkeley from power, but Bacon died
suddenly and the rebellion collapsed.
Nevertheless the rebellion made it
clear that the people of Virginia pos-
sessed a spirit of independence and
that they were willing to fight for their
rights.
0
A growing colonial popu-
lation pushes westward
At first the population of the colo-
ns grew slowly. By i (>90 there were
tilv about 250,000 people living in
the English colonies. However,
om if»(o until the colonies declared
it independence in 1776. the num-
o( people increased to over two
a half million (see page too),
icre were two reasons for this great
ease in numbers. Colonial families
re large. Ten to twelve children
ere not unusual. Not only were fara-
ies large, but all during the colonial
iod people continued to come from
rope to America. At first only the
Tglish came, but later people from
inland, Ireland. Germany, and
'nee moved to the F.nglislt colonies.
People came to get cheap land in
New World, and many came to cs-
:religious persecution. In ifiKpthe
^ of France decided to make France
ompletely Catholic country. All
'estams were forced to leave
:e. Many of these Protestants,
Huguenots, came to the Fnglish
.uics, where they formed large set-
ents, particularly around New Ro-
‘t. New York, and in South (iaro-
ijews, too, lied from religious pet-
ion in Europe to the American
colonies. The first group of Jews came
to Newport. Rhode Island, where they
could worship freely.
During thei Colonial period two
movements of people were going on at
the same time. Europeans were mov-
ing to the colonies and people from
the colonies were pushing westward.
As the population near the Atlantic
shore grew steadily larger, little by lit-
tle families began to move west.
The people who moved westward
were pioneers. A pioneer is a person
who settles in a part of a country
which has not been lived in before, ex-
cept by savage tribes and animals. An-
other important word to learn at this
point is frontier. The frontier is the
outer edge or fringe of the settled part
of a nation. It is a kind of unseen
boundary line: on one side are the set-
tlements, on the other are the forests
or plains to which the pioneers have
not yet gone. The children and the
children's children of the first settlers
in the Fnglish colonies cleared farms
out of the forest land on a frontier
reaching as far west as the Appalach-
ian Mountains. After the Appalach-
ians were reached, pioneers crossed
over to settle the land beyond the
mountains. In America the frontier
was always moving westward. As the
pioneers moved westward, they car-
ried their ways of living with them
just as settlers carried them across the
Atlantic to America.
German Settlers in America
In the first half of die eighteenth
century, thousands of Germans from
the Rhine Valley and even from Swit-
zerland crossed the Atlantic to make
their homes in the New World. A few
settled in the Mohawk Valley In die
colony of New York. Most of them.
Tin' R<»ttm*nn Arrhivi*
DANIEL BOONE. Boone was not
only a great hunter and woodsman,
but also an explorer who helped to
open the Kentucky region to settlers.
He is seen here leading a hand of
pioneers from North Carolina to the
new region, where they founded the
settlement of Boonesboro.
however, landed at Philadelphia and
went to the frontier to dear farms in
the forest. Some pushed southward
from Pennsylvania into the Shenan-
doah (shen'dn-dd'rt) Valley of western
Virginia and still farther into the west-
ern country of North and South Caro-
lina. The frontier of the eighteenth
century became the home of many
families speaking German and follow-
ing German customs.
Scotch-lrish Settle in America
In the north of Ireland lived Scots
who in the early years of the eight-
eenth century suffered hard limes.
Many of these Scots in Ireland —
Scotch-lrish. as they were called —
faced starvation. Also, they were per-
secuted by the English government be-
cause of their Presbyterian religion.
Shiploads of Scotch-lrish sailed to
America to start life over again.
A New People — Americans
As we have seen, in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries thousands of
Englishmen left their old homes to
start life afresh in America. More
thousands came later from Germany,
Ireland, and other European coun-
tries. All of these people soon ceased
to be merely Englishmen or Germans
living in America. They underwent a
change. They and their children be-
came the first Americans.
What changed the newcomer from
Europe into an American? One fac-
tor was the marriages between people
of different nationalities. When an
Englishman married a German wife,
the children learned both German and
English ways of lixing. Marriages be-
tween people speaking different lan-
guages or from different nations
changed the ways of lixing.
Another factor xvas that the Euro-
peans had come to a new world some
three thousand miles from their for-
mer countries. Rulers or friends in F.u
rope could not help them to solve
their everyday problems. The immi-
grants were on their own in America.
They were compelled to get along as
best they could. These conditions of
lixing trained the people to depend
only on themselves for the things they
needed.	,
In the Nexv World men and women
faced nexv problems, such as dealing
with the Indians. They faced other
problems. They bad to learn to gross
crops like corn which required nexv
-helped in America’s struggle for independence.
t
i
d
e
s
n
d
1ES CARROLL, Irishman of Maryland,
«d the Declaration of Independence.
W
¥
PETER MUHLENBERG, a German Lutheran,
left his Virginia pulpit to fight for liberty.
LS JEFFERSON, a Virginian of British
(cent, wrote the first draft of the Declara-
i of Independence.	CASIMIR PULASKI, from Poland, lost his life
fighting for American freedom.
|LYM SALOMON, a Jew of Philadelphia,
Nhis fortune to help the American cause. CR|Spus AnuCKS a Negro of Massachu-
^setts, was the first to die for American liberty.1
National Archives
BUILDING A LOG CABIN. Settlers who moved into forested country got their
building materials right from the forests. In this picture one man is cutting notches
in a log. The men on the house fit the notches together at the corners of the house.
Americans settle the west
bank of the Mississippi
The mighty Mississippi, rolling
from its source in the northern forests
to the Gulf of Mexico, was no obstacle
to the westward-moving pioneers.
Those from the East crossed it at
scores of places to found homes on its
western bank. Thousands of immi-
grants came up the river from New
Orleans to spread out their settlements
over the broad, rich valley of the
Father of Waters. Let us begin at the
south as we look at the men who built
the first homes along its western bank.
Louisiana Becomes a State
Since the early eighteenth century,
French people had lived in New Or-
leans and on the warm, flat plains
about the mouth of the Mississippi. In
the year following the Louisiana Pur-
chase, American officials organized the
Territory of Orleans. This Territory
though a few Spaniards lived at St.
Augustine, they were not able to keep
there. Slaves from the Southern
away to Florida where they
not be caught and returned,
metimes bands of marauders crossed
e border to raid and plunder Ameri-
n settlements and then returned to
safety of the Spanish colony.
Finally, in June 1818, the United
tes government warned Spain that
would no longer permit American
munities to be troubled by raids
om Florida. I11 the following year,
agreed to sell East Florida for
,000.000 with the understanding
the United States would give up
dairns to the region that is now the
te of Texas and to other large areas
tof die Mississippi.
After Florida became a territory of
United States, settlers began mov-
in. but Indian troubles prevented
yapid settlement. It was not until
that Florida was admitted as a
320
MACHINES AND INDUSTRY SPUR AMERICA'S GROWTH
Cyrus McCormick, who lived in the
Shenandoah Valley of Virginia, be-
gan experimenting in his father's
workshop. For a long time he worked
on a reaper, a machine for cutting
grain. Finally he made one which
could he drawn by horses. The neigh-
bors could scarcely believe their eyes
when they saw that Cyrus McCor-
mick's reaper was actually working.
This new machine enabled one man to
do the work of many men swinging
the old-fashioned cradle. McCormick
spent his life improving and manu-
facturing his machine. In the 1840's
he established a factory in Chicago
which is still turning out larm ma-
chinery. It is now the International
Harvester Company.
In 1837 a threshing machine was
invented to separate the grain from
the straw mechanically. Iron plows, a
reaper, and a threshing machine multi-
plied the production of wheat and
provided a surplus for export to
F.urope.
Besides the reaper for harvesting
grain, inventors developed machines
to mow hay, and a horse-drawn rake.
With the horse-drawn rake one boy
could rake as much hay as a number of
men could rake in the same time with
hand rakes.
Farm Machines Benefit the Nation
In the middle of the nineteenth
century, these new farm machines
were not yet |>erfect. They had many
weaknesses and defects, and they were
only beginning to come into use.
They were, however, bringing a new
day to the farmer. They were begin-
ning to do away with some of the
backbreaking labor of former times,
and they were making it possible for
the fanner to grow larger crops. The
production of larger crops was ex-
tremely important in those days. Al-
though in the 1850’s more people in
the 1’nited States lived on farms than
in cities, the populations of towns and
cities, especially in the North, were
growing rapidly. Thousands of fac-
tory workers, clerks, and many other
types of workers crowded into the
cities. These town and city people
depended upon the nation's farmers
for their food. New machinery which
enabled America’s farmers to increase
their crops brought great benefit to
the entire nation.
The nation grow s
in population
The young United States needed
people. Factories and farms needed
workers. Western lands needed set-
tlers. The population of the United
States grew to meet these needs. In
1790. the year of the first census, there
were less than 4.000.000 people in the
country. By 1830, the year after Jack-
son became President, the population
had grown to 13.000.000. There were
more than three times as many Ameri-
cans in President Jackson’s day as
there had been in President Washing-
ton's. By i860 the population had
continued to grow rapidly, exceeding
31.000,000.
There were two causes for this swift
increase in population. For one thing,
families were usually large. Six, eight,
and ten children were common in
American families. For another, large
numbers of immigrants came to the
United States.
Cheap, fertile land and the oppor-
GROWTH OF UNITED STATES
POPULATION
1790-1860	^

790
825
3,929,000
11,252,000
unity to work pulled immigrants to
tlK- 'nitcd States. Conditions in Euro-
lean countries pushed them away
rom their homelands. These imrni-
nnts as a rule settled in the North
nd avoided the South, where they
wuld have to compete with slave
tbor.
In the 1830s a potato famine re-
ared many Irish people to starva-
inn. To escape from the famine,
isiimen flocked to the United States
thcr alone or with their families,
hese immigrants found work build-
1® canals and railroads, and on the
s and in factories. Many settled
l New England and remained there.
In 1848 the German people tried
id failed to create a democratic gov-
rnnent in Germany. The Germans
m came by the thousands to the
Initcd States, where they settled in
big cities or on farms in Ohio,
ois, Wisconsin, Missouri, and
other Middle Western states. Immi-
grants from Germany brought with
them their skills as craftsmen or farm-
ers, their love of music, and an in-
tense hatred of slavery.
Immigrants from the British Isles
— the Welsh, the Scots, and the Eng-
lish— continued to come to the
United States, but in d5vindling num-
bers, because they could find work at
home in the new factories.
Cities Grow in Size
Not only did the population as a
whole increase, but the growth of the
cities in particular was astounding,
especially in the Middle West. Cin-
cinnati grew from a city of less than
10,000 in 1830 to more than 160,000
in i860. In twenty years, between
1840 and i860, St. Louis multiplied
its population of 16,000 ten times. Chi-
cago did not exist in 1800. By i860,
with a population of over 100,000, it
1820	1830	1840	1850	1860
8,000 immigrants entered the U.5. in 1820
AMERICA—THE LAND OF OPPORTUNITY
In the first half of the i8oo's, Europeans began to learn that they could move to
the United States when wars and hard times made living difficult in Europe.
was beginning the rapid growth that
was to make it the second city of the
United States. This growth of cities
took place almost entirely in the
North.
Q The North depends
on free labor, the South
on slave labor
The growth of factories in the North
increased the need for workers. Men.
women, and children filled the vari-
ous jobs that a factory created. Girls
and children tended machines, par-
ticularly in the factories that made
cloth. The working day was usually
from sunrise to sunset. Both machines
and factories were new, and the men
who ran the factories were slow to
make the machines safe. Mill towns
grew up about the factories so rapidly
that living conditions for the workers
wore often bad. The machines and the
factories were bringing about new
ways of living. Americans were try-
ing to learn to use the machine and
to make it serve the general good. In
those days they made many mistakes.
Unions Organized
In the time of Andrew Jackson a
few workers began to organize labor
unions. These early unions were
small and weak. None of them lasted
very long. But they did show that the
wage earner was trying to improve his,
lot by his own efforts. In addition
to shorter hours and more pay, the
workers demanded free education and
opposed child labor.
Wages
Because there were usually morel
jobs than workers to fill them, wages!
Sutter’* Fort Stale Historical Monument
THEY STRUCK IT RICH. Some of the California diggings were rich in gold.
This one, on the north fork of the American River, was one of the richest. Notice
that these prospectors could afford to hire Chinese helpers. This area was originally
called the Rich Dry Diggings, but was renamed the Auburn Ravine. According to
some reports, the diggings along the Auburn Ravine sometimes yielded as much as
fifteen thousand dollars' worth of gold a day to each prospector! Such stories
brought excited gold seekers from even' part of the United States and from Eu-
rope. Few struck it so rich, but many stayed on to help build the new state of
California.
and through the Gulf of Mexico to
Veracruz, Mexico. From there they
traveled northwestward into Califor-
nia by land. Some sailed down to the
Isthmus of Panama, crossed the Isth-
mus by land, and then moved in ves-
sels up the Pacific coast to California.
Still others went by ship all the way
around Cape Horn.
Many Eastern towns and cities were
almost emptied of their young men.
The United States in all its previous
history had never experienced any-
thing like the gold rush of 1849. Many
of the people who started for Cali-
fornia were quite ignorant about life
in the wild country. Frequently thev
suffered terribly. One forty-niner has
left a description of hardships experi-
enced in crossing the desert country:
The desert of the Southwest over
which we were to pass was a dry plain,
without a blade of grass, the soil being
soft, dry, ashy. The dust clouds which
arose almost choked one. Slowly, but
steadily, we walked on. The night closed
in upon hundreds of wagons, and the
road was lined by horsemen and travel-1
ers on foot. All walked who could, in
order to save their cattle; and as the I
night wore heavily on, all sounds ofj
mirth ceased, and the creaking of wheels]
The Bet t man it Archive
THE OVERLAND STAGE. In the early western days, stagecoaches like this one
carried passengers and mail on the long trip from the Midwest to California.
Look at the map on pages 16-17, and see if you can find their route. On the
return trip the stagecoaches carried gold from the California gold fields to the
mints in the East. They were often attacked by bandits.
Wi-
fi
j Two years alter the overland stage-
route to California was estab-
1. the pony express began to run
ren St. Joseph. Missouri, and
mento, California. In ten days'
e swift riders on horseback car-
1 across a distance of two
miles. As one rider reached
kcrtain village, another was ready
a fresh horse to take over the
i and continue the cross-country
route. For more than a year —
il the telegraph wires reached the
lie in iHfi2 — riders carried mail
between Fast and West,
them was " Buffalo Bill "
A Railroad to the Pacific
In 1864. pioneers in Nebraska saw
the digging of the first shovelful of
dirt for the roadbed of the railroad
that was to connect the East with the
Pacific. In the next few years, the
tracks of the Union Pacific Railroad
were laid westward across the broad
plains east of the Rocky Mountains.
Bands of puzzled Indians sometimes
looked on at a distance from the backs
of their horses. More than once the
red men fought the laborers building
the railroad. Many of the workers
were immigrants who had come from
China and Europe.. Mired hunters
shot buffaloes to provide meat for the
WAR BtTWttN NORTH AND SOUTH THRtAUNS THt UNION
37 !>
The Southern Home Front
When the able-bodied men of
Southern communities went to the
front, ihcir wives and daughters, with
the aid oT young boys and aged men,
managed the plantations and farms.
It was their task to see that food, cloth-
ing. and blankets were provided for
the armies and for themselves. Most
slaves stayed on the plantations even
after the Fmancipation Proclamation;
but each year the sufferings of the
Southern people increased because of
the blockade by the Union navy. The
wife of a Confederate general has left
an account of the hardships the
women of the South experienced dur-
Eg the war:
While my husband was at the front do-
lt active service, I was at home sirug-
ing to keep the family comfortable.
IWe were blockaded on every side, could
■ct nothing from without, so had to
Inakc everything at home: and having
fcern heretofore only an agricultural peo-
ple, it became necessary for every home
lube supplied with spinning wheels and
the old-fashioned loom, in order to man-
ufacture clothing for the members of the
Luily. This was no small undertaking.
I knew nothing about spinning and
loving cloth. I had to learn and then
Btcarh the Negroes. YVe had about one
Jidrcd head of sheep; and the wool
Idee! by these sheep and the cotton
vn in the fields furnished us with
material for our looms. After much
d work and experience we learned to
ke very comfortable clothing, some of
doth being really pretty. I often
der, as I [think about] those bygone
■n of labor and sorrow, and recall how
kcefullv we moved on and accom-
hed what we did.
Northern Home Front
In the North the women watched
it husbands and brothers inarch
off to war. When the men were gone,
the women did much of the work on
the farms. All over the North women
were busy making clothing and pre-
paring bandages for the wounded.
When the war first broke out, the
Northern people suffered from a pe-
riod of hard times. This quickly
passed, however, and business became
good. Factories, except those which
made cotton goods, hummed with
work. The armies needed uniforms,
guns, ammunition, tents, blankets,
and a great variety of other things.
The factories supplied these needs.
Immigrants from Europe took the
places of many workingmen who had
left their jobs to become soldiers. Un-
like the South, the North was not cut
off from the outside world by a block-
ade. Nor did it suffer much from in-
vading armies.
Enlisting Soldiers and Raising Money
At the beginning of the war both
the United States and the Confederacy
asked young men who were well and
strong to volunteer for army service.
Thousands of men on both sides be-
came soldiers of their own free will
and fought for what they felt to be
right. Both sides also drafted men
into the army.
Raising Funds to Pay for the War
War is a costly business. To get
money to pay the enormous expenses
was a difficult problem. In the North,
special taxes brought in large sums.
The government also borrowed money
from its citizens. The Confederate
government raised money by taxa-
tion and by borrowing at home and
abroad. The Confederate government
also printed paper money for its peo-
ple to use.
410
AMERICANS BUILD A STRONG INDUSTRIAL NATION
the old cow country during the last
days of the open range before barbed
wire enclosed the private ranches.
Charlie Russell was born in St.
Louis, Missouri, in t86.p As a boy he
was fascinated by the stories he heard
of the West. In school the only sub-
ject he really liked was American his-
tory, and the part he liked best was
the story of the settling of the great
West. Charlie was a born artist, and
as a boy he drew pictures of horses
and Indians, which he traded to his
friends. When he was almost sixteen,
his father sent him to Montana hop-
ing to cure him of his Western fever.
But Charlie Russell loved the plains
and never returned to St. Louis ex-
cept to visit.
In Montana he tried sheepherding.
a job he did not like. He then lived
and worked for many months with a
hunter and trapper. Then he got a job
as a cowboy. This was the work he
loved, and soon he became a first-class
cow hand. He thought as much of the
pinto he rode as of anything in the
world.
Charlie Russell was working on a
ranch on the northern plains of Mon-
tana when the terrible blizzard of the
winter of 1886 covered the grass with
deep snow. In the freezing weather
the cattle could not get food. They
died by the hundreds and thousands.
A large stockowner who lived in
Helena. Montana, sent a message to
the ranch where Charlie was, asking
him how his cattle wrere getting along
in the bitter weather. In reply, Char-
lie Russell painted and sent a little
water color of a starving cow, knee-
deep in snow'. The picture made him
famous among cattlemen. As a painter
of Western scenes, he found his life-
work.
Charlie Russell saw the West
change as settlers moved in. He saw
the railroads replace the old freight-
carrying wagon trains. He saw the cat-
tle country change from a free and
open range to a land of farms and
ranches fenced in with wdre. But Char-
lie had loved most the wild, free life of
the cattleman in the old cow' country,
although he saw that it had to go. He
spent his later years W'ith his brush and
pen recording in stirring paintings and
drawings the old West he knew and
loved. By means of his paintings and
books of Western stories illustrated
with his drawings. Charlie Russell has
preserved for us a glimpse of life on
the plains in the days of the open
range.
© The farmers settle
the Great Plains
As Americans learned more about
the Great Plains, they found out that
much of the region had sufficient rain
fall to grow certain crops. As a result,
farmers began to press against the
eastern edge of the cow country. Dur-
ing the 1870’s and 1880 s, farmers ad-
vanced swiftly westward. Many rail-
roads were built after the war, an
they supplied transportation into th
new' country. The Homestead
passed by Congress in 1862, provid
160 acres or public land to any ina
who would live on the grant five yea
and improve it.
But the families moving into th
region faced geographic conditi
unfamiliar to earlier Americans. C
the grassy plains there were almost
trees to provide lumber for hou
and other buildings or for rail fenc
AMERICANS BUILD A STRONG INDUSTRIAL NATION
4.50
(res), found some money among his
Christmas presents. He was pleased,
because it would enable him to carry
out a plan that had formed in his
mind. He went to the shops and
bought some soap and whitewash. In
playing about the city, Jacob had dis-
covered a tenement house built over
a sewer which was infested with rats.
The rats overran the house and made
wretched the lives of the families who
lived in it. Young Riis began a system-
atic war upon the rats. Then with the
soap and whitewash he cleaned away
the dirt and brightened the house. He
felt that families should live in clean
and dignified homes.
When Riis was older, he went to
Copenhagen, where he was appren-
ticed to a carpenter. Meanwhile, he
was being educated by his father, who
was a schoolteacher. In 1870, when
Jacob was twenty-one years old, he
emigrated to America and landed in
New York City. Like many another
European boy, he came to America to
improve his opportunities. He saw
that in America new industries were
rising, and the national wealth was in-
creasing. But he found it hard to get
started in his new country. His many
jobs included such different types of
work as farming, coal mining, and
peddling. Finally he got his chance
and became a police reporter for a
New V'ork newspaper.
Thus he found an opportunity in
America to use his educational train-
ing. Reporting took him constantly
into the tenement districts of the city.
He found conditions very bad. In his
newspaper stories and in the books he
wrote, he called these conditions to
the attention of the people of the city.
By his crusade in the press he caused
filthy tenements to be torn down. He
pioneered in the laying out of parks
and playgrounds. He exposed in his
news stories the fact that the city wa-
ter was impure, and brought about
the establishment of a new water sup
ply for New York City. He worked
for child-labor laws and their enforce
ment. He helped to organize boys’ and
girls' clubs, and persuaded schools to
provide rlubrooms lor the children.
When he died, Jacob Riis had done
much to make New York a cleaner
and better place in which to live.
Many people have come to the
United States from other countries be-
cause, like Jacob Riis. they have be-
lieved that in a democracy a person
has an opportunity to develop his tal-
ents. American civilization has been
enriched by the contribution of able
men and women who have adopted
the United States as their new home.
The Social Settlement
In the years between 1870 and
1920, when American cities were
growing so fast, every large city
contained hundreds of families that
needed some sort of help. A farm fam
ily would move into the city from the
country knowing nothing about the
problems of city life. An immigrant
family would come from a European
country (see page 490) to such a city
as New York or Chicago. The family
would not be able to s|>eak Fug
lish and would know almost nothing
about American ways. Public-spirited
men and women in the cities gave
thought to these people who needed
help. They tried to be good neigh-
bors. Many agencies came into being
to serve the needs of the less fortu
natc. One of the most important of
the agencies established for the bene-
fit of the poorer people was the social
a- n
Photo by Rnr Russel, Pcojh* .Vsoriates
A SETTLEMENT HOUSE HELPS NEW AMERICANS. Settlement houses
similar to Hull House were founded in crowded cities all over the United States.
The Henry Street Settlement in New York City, founded in 1893 by Lillian D.
Wald, is one of the most famous. In this photograph we see two elderly students
helping one another in an English class at Henry Street. Besides English, the
settlement house teaches these new Americans many other things they need to
know about our ways of living and working.
settlement. The idea came to America
from London, where the first social
settlement was established. A great
American woman, Jane Addams, took
the lead in developing the srscial set-
tlement in the United States.
JANE ADDAMS
As a child Jane Addams lived in
Cedarville, Illinois. When she was
three years old, her mother died.
Throughout her childhood her father
was her close friend. Mr. Addams
owned and managed a successful mill.
He was a man of public spirit and a
leader in community affairs. Jane Ad-
dams was handicapped throughout
life by a slight curvature of tlie spine
and frail health. Nevertheless, when
she grew older she attended Rockford
College, getting her degree in 1881.
She was then a young woman of
twenty-one. Her father sent her to Eu-
rope, where she traveled and studied.
Perhaps she had learned to sympa-
thize with people because of her own
misfortune. At any rate, in Europe
she turned to the study of social prob-
lems such as bad health, crime, and
bad housing. She visited London and
452
AMERICANS BUILD A STRONG INDUSTRIAL NATION
there spent some time in a famous-so-
cial settlement called Toynbee Hall.
She had found her life work. Coming
back to America Jane Addatns found-
ed in 1889 in the heart of Chicago a
community center called Hull House.
All around Htdl House stood tene-
ment houses in which hundreds of
families lived. |anc Addams provided
a place where the children and the
grownups of the neighborhood could
play and study together in a whole-
some way. Many of the neighboring
families were immigrants recently ar-
rived from Europe. Miss Addams pro-
vided classes in citizenship and also
in cooking, singing, dramatics, paint-
ing, printing, drawing, darning, and
many other kinds of activity. She be-
came famous throughout Chicago for
her work at Hull House, and her
influence spread to other cities. She
wrote books about the problems of
living in cities and about the work at
Hull House. Her fame spread not only
over the nation but to Europe, be-
cause of her work for her fellow men
she was respected, as she grew older,
as one of America's most useful citi-
zens. The great men of the nation
were proud to rail her a friend.
Q Cities contribute to
American democratic life
Making Democracy Work
Another problem of cities was to
achieve honest and efficient govern-
ment. In the big cities it was often dif
ficult for the voters to keep the man-
agement of the cities in their hands.
Political bosses often gained control
of the city governments by promising
jobs to people who helped to get them
votes and by casting votes unfairly.
Then, too. political bosses gained con-
trol of city governments simply be-
cause many voters did not t arry out
their responsibility to vote on election
days.
One of the most notorious bosses
in the early years after t8f»r, was Wil-
liam M. Tweed of New York City.
Boss Tweed controlled the Demo-
cratic party and managed to get his
candidates elected to office. In return
for Tweed’s support, these candidates
carried out his plans. In two years
Tweed and his gang increased the
debt of the city by about $70,000,000.
Most of this enormous sum Tweed
and his followers stole. In 1871 the
citizens became aroused by Tweed’s
corrupt government and voted his
gang out of office. Tweed was tried
and found guilty of the thefts and was
put in jail. When political bosses such
as Tweed run the government of cit
ies, democracy fails.
Gradually citi/ens learned that de-
mocracy requires constant watchful-
ness on the part of the voters. An in-
creasing number of cities established
city governments that were efficient
and could be easily watched by the
voters.
Contributions of Cities
Big cities created many problems,
but they also made many contribu-
tions to American life. They had
enough people to support and attend
museums, hospitals, centers for educa-
tion. theaters, and concerts. For ex-
ample. many cities established muse-
ums where people could enjoy paint
ings. sculpture, and other forms of art.
The cities also built and main-
tained free public libraries. They es
tablished zoos and museums of plants
487
AMERICANS BECOME AWAKE OF THE BEST OE THE WOKLD
of the world more dependent upon
each other. F.nglish factory workers,
for example, depended upon farmers
in Denmark, the United States. Aus-
tralia, and Canada for much of their
food. They also depended upon buy-
ers of their products in India. China,
America, and other nations and colo-
nies to keep them employed. Ameri-
cans too depended more and more on
foreign trade. They kept some of their
factories running with rubber, tin, and
raw materials from sources outside the
nation. Americans looked to Brazil
for their coffee, to Cuba for their
sugar, and to Central America for ba-
nanas. The growing dependence of the
United States on other countries for
markets, raw materials, and many
[manufactured articles encouraged
iAmericans to broaden their interest
|in world affairs.
Q Immigrants form
connections between the
United States and Europe
The United States took little inter-
t in the affairs of European nations
T many years after 1815. Neverthe-
there were many strong connec-
ns between Europe and the United
tes.
Great numbers of Americans con-
ued to visit Europe each year,
nv to attend European universities,
crican scientists visited Europe to
dy medicine, agriculture, chemis-
, and engineering. Other Arneri-
went to study music, art, and
ture. As a result of this sharing
ideas, Americans and Europeans
doped similar ways of living.
But of all the links between the
United Stares and Europe, immigra-
tion was one of the strongest. During
each decade thousands of immigrants
moved to the United States to mix
their ways of living with those of
Americans. (See pages 488—89.)
Why Immigrants Came
Europeans learned about opportu-
nities in the United States from many
different sources, but the letters they
received from friends and relatives in
the United States made the strongest
appeal.
Tn their letters to friends and rela-
tives in Europe, immigrants pointed
out the advantages of living in the
United States. They told stories of
cheap and fertile land and of a gov-
ernment that gave farms away. To the
European farmer living on a few acres
and counting a dozen chickens, a pig
or two, a horse, and a cow as his
wealth, the stories of American farm-
ers with 160 acres, 100 chickens, a
dozen pigs, and a herd of cows seemed
beyond belief. The letters also boasted
that no one in the United States had
to doff his cap to a noble or a govern-
ment official. In the United States, the
letters said, every man could vote.
The letters told of free schools for
children and state universities with
no fees to pay. They described jobs
to be had in factories, in mines, and
in building railroads. Europeans of-
ten passed the “ American letters ”
from hand to hand until they were
worn thin. The letters were printed
in European newspapers. They were
passed from person to person at fairs
and churches. These letters encour-
aged Europeans to leave their homes
and to move tc America.
Then, too, agents from the United
States encouraged Europeans to move
[continued on page 490]
Willing hands from overseas
—pitched in to help build our country os we
know it today. People by the millions were
needed to farm the land, to build canals,
railroads, and highways, to work in the fac-
tories. The immigrants came by the millions,
seeking the opportunities, the education, and
the freedom from tyranny that America had
to offer. The Statue of Liberty, seen by the
immigrants as their ships entered New York
Harbor, became the symbol of their hopes
for a new life in America. In a poem carved
near the entrance to the statue they might
read:
. . Give me your tired, your poor,
Your huddled masses yearning to breathe
free, . . .
Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed
to me,
I lift my lamp beside the golden door!”
IMMIGRATION 1860-1910
Thousands of immigrants
1,400
				1,285 ^	
					1,04 V
					
		455			
387 V	457	l \ M	r\	449 \	V		
154	/A/1					
/ jS y					
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
1860	1 870	1 880
154,000 immigrants entered the U.S. In 1860
1890
1900
1910
1820
1860
1910
PEAKS AND VALLEYS OF IMMIGRATION
I Peaks of immigration occurred when times were good in the United States and not so
I good in Europe. The valleys occurred when Europeans learned that times were hard in
Ithc United States and stopped coming in such large numbers.
±
America f-
-► Europe
THE MAYFLOWER-1620
65 days to cross the Atlantic Ocean
America f-
Europe
STEAMSHIP-1910
4Vz days to cross the Atlantic Ocean
490
THC NATION TAXIS A LEADING ROLE IN WORLD AffAIRS
to America. States that needed settlers
— Wisconsin, Iowa, and Minnesota,
for example — sent agents to New
York to persuade immigrants to move
to their states. The railroads sent
agents to Europe. The railroads were
interested in increasing immigration
because they wanted to sell their land.
The railroads also wanted to get farms
established along their lines so that
they could haul the crops of farmers
to market. Factories, mills, and mines
that needed workers also sent agents
to Europe to promise immigrants
jobs.
Not only did new opportunities pull
Europeans to the United States, but
cheap steamship fares made the trip
possible. Fares for the Atlantic pas-
sage were reduced to as little as thirty-
five dollars. The railroads ran immi-
grant trains with reduced fares to
many points of destination. Encour-
aged by new opportunities, immi-
grants moved to America by the
thousands.
Three Periods of Immigration
The movements of immigrants to
the United States can be divided into
three periods, although there was
much overlapping. During the first
period, from 1814 to t86o, immi-
grants came mainly from the British
Isles and from Germany (see page
321). After England and Germany
built factories, immigration from
these countries fell off because work-
ers could find jobs at home. During
the second period, beginning before
i860 and reaching its crest before
1885, the immigrants came mainly
from northwestern Europe. Since this
migration took place during the time
when the Middle Western and plains
states needed settlers, many of the im-
migrants settled on the farms and in
the cities of Wisconsin. Illinois. Min-
nesota, and other Middle Western
states. Many immigrants in this period
also found jobs helping to build the
railroads that tied the nation together.
The third period of immigration
lasted from 1885 to 1914. when the
outbreak of war in Europe made it
impossible for Europeans to mi-
grate. During this period immigrants
poured into the United States from
Italy and the other Mediterranean
countries and from Eastern Europe.
This stream of immigration was large
because people were needed to work
in factories. The growing cities also
provided many jobs for immigrants, I
The Italians found work digging sub- I
ways, paving streets, laying water and I
gas mains, and as factory workers, I
Many of them practiced in the United
States the trades they had learned in j
Italy. They found jobs as barbers,
shoe repairmen, tailors, stonemasons.I
and marble workers. Some also became I
farmers. Many Italians grew vegeta I
bles and fruit for the city markets.I
Italians formed agricultural colonies I
in the North Atlantic states and in
California.
Among the people from Eastern]
Europe were Poles, Czechs, Russians ]
Slovaks, and Hungarians. Because J
they speak similar Slavic languages]
they are generally referred to asl
Slavs. Most of these people lived unr
der the rule of the emperor of Austria-]
Hungary or the czar of Russia. Many]
of them came to this country to be]
free from kings and czars and to earn]
a better living.
Most of these immigrants had beoJ
farmers in Europe, but when they arl
rived in the United States they we
almost penniless. Many of them
AMERICANS BECOME AWARE Of THE REST Of THE WORLD 491
came factory workers or miners. They
found jobs in the steel mills, mines,
and factories of the great industrial
tenters.
In the migrations of Poles and Rus-
tians there were many [ews, just as
there had been many Jews in the Ger-
man migration. In many countries the
Jews were not permitted to worship
freely nor were they given the rights
of citizens. They came to the United
States partly because the Constitution
promised peoples of all religions the
same rights. Many of the Jews re-
mained in New York City to work in
the clothing and fur shops and to go
into small businesses.
Japanese and Chinese Immigration
Immigrants came to America not
ly from Europe but from China and
pan as well. After gold was dis-
vered in California, workers were
rce on the West Coast and the Chi-
were welcomed. The Chinese
nd jobs as cooks and laundrymen,
they also helped build the rail-
'd lines running east across the
mains. When the railroad lines
the nation were completed,
ricans began filling up Califor-
Uccause the Chinese had been
Wight up in the terrible poverty of
ir own country, they were willing
work for wages on which an Ameri-
family could not live. Because the
incse worked for low wages, the
rican workers objected to further
ncse immigration. For the same
:ns Americans also objected to
nese immigration. In 1882 the
ted States government passed a
forbidding Chinese workers ter en-
tire United States. In 1907 the
nese government entered into an
agreement with the United States to
prevent further immigration.
Contributions of Immigrants
In all fields the immigrants contrib-
uted to the building of the United
States. Immigrants helped to settle the
land and to build great industries.
They enriched American ways of liv-
ing. They brought with them their
love of music. They started singing
societies, orchestras, and bands in the
United States. They brought with
them their ways of preparing food
and thus added variety to American
cooking. They demonstrated that peo-
ple of different customs and of differ-
ent religions could live and work to-
gether as loyal citizens of democracy.
They contributed leaders in all oc-
cupations and professions. When they
arrived in the United States, most of
them were poor. Frequently they had
to accept the least attractive jobs. But
from these humble beginnings immi-
grants and the sons and daughters of
immigrants rose to positions of leader-
ship in music, in the theater, in busi-
ness, in teaching and other profes-
sions, in the government, and in la-
bor organizations. (See pages 492-93.)
Immigrants also contributed to the
remarkable growth of the population
of the United States after 1865. With-
in fifty years, the population leaped
from 35,000,000 to 100,000,000. Al-
though devoted to the ideal of
American democracy, the immigrants
brought the United States into closer
touch with events in Europe and Asia.
From their friends and relatives, they
received letters telling them of the
changes taking place in their home-
lands. When they returned to visit
their former homes, as many of them
did, they told their European friends
[continued on page 494}
AUGUSTUS SAINT-GAUDENS
Famous American!
CARL SCHURZ (1826-1906), from Germany, be-
come a well-known general and statesman.
CARL SCHURZ
HELENA MODJESKA
JACOB RIIS
AUGUSTUS SAINT-GAUDENS (1848-1907), from
Ireland, was a great sculptor.
ANDREW CARNEGIE
VILHJALMUR STEfANSS*
HELENA MODJESKA (1840-1909), from Poland
was one of tHe world's great actresses.
JACOB RIIS (1849-1914), from Denmark, was oj
famous journalist and reformer.
ANDREW CARNEGIE (1835-1919), from Scotland,!
was an industrialist and philanthropist.
VILHJALMUR STEFANSSON (1879-	), fronJ
Canada, is a noted arctic explorer.
VLADIMIR HOROWITZ
JOSEPH PULITZER
rom overseas

■ ENRICO FERMI (1901-1954), from Italy, won a
H Nobel prize in nuclear physics.
VLADIMIR HOROWITZ (1904-	) from Russia, is
0	brilliant concert pianist.
EPH PULITZER (1847-1911), from Hungary, be-
i a leading newspaper publisher.
JLY PONS (1904-	), from France, is a singer
1	soprano roles in opera.
IttSUO KUNIYOSHI (1893-1953), from Japan,
bon acclaim as a painter.
CHAEL PUPIN (1858-1935), from Yugoslavia,
sa scientist and inventor.
YASUO KUNIYOSHI
LILY PONS
MICHAEL PUPIN
494
THI NATION TAKIS A HADING AO Li IN WORLD AFFAIRS
about the United States with its de-
mocracy and its fertile farms and busy
factories.
These immigrants, who quickly be-
came Americans, broadened the inter-
est of the Americans in the changing
nations of F.urope and Asia.
REVIEWING THE CHAPTER
Words to understand. Nationalism,
industrialism, parliament, dominion,
Reichstag, czar, Shinto religion. “ Box-
er," " open door " policy, decade, inter-
dependence, emperor.
Events worth remembering. Perry
opens up jjorts of Japan, 1853; Alaska
bought from Russia. 1867; Boxer Rebel-
lion. 1900; World War I breaks out in
Europe, 1914.
Famous people to recall. Matthew
Perry, Franklin Pierce, John Hay, Sun
Vat-sen, Cyrus W. Field.
Places to spot on maps. Alsace-Lor-
raine, Norway. Belgium. Holland, Birm-
ingham (England), Manchester (Eng-
land) , Sheffield (England), Moscow.
Vladivostok. Siberia, Japanese islands,
India, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Hun-
gary.
TALKING THE CHAPTER OVER
1	What three key words help to ex-
plain the growth of the United Slates?
2	What two new nations formed in
Europe during the nineteenth century?
3	Why must a nation have each of the
following to be a democracy: a parlia-
ment or congress, a bill of rights, and
suffrage (the right of citizens to vote) ?
4	How did England and France grow
more democratic?
5	Why did Germany and Spain fail to
become democracies?
6	How did Russia respond to ma-
chines, democracy, and nationalism?
7	Tell the story of the opening of
Japan.
8	Explain this sentence: " The Jap-
anese learned industrialism by imita-
tion.”
9	How did Japan intend to use its
industries to build a strong nation?
10	Why was little Japan able to de-
feat big Russia?
11	Why might industrialized Japan
with strong feelings of nationalism
threaten the peace of the world?
12	In what ways was China an ad-
vanced nation and in what ways was
China a backward nation?
13	Why did industrial nations want
to divide China among themselves?
14	What was the “ open door " policy
set forth by Secretary of State John Hay?
15	How did each of the following
help to make the world smaller: the
compass, steam engines, iron and steel,
transcontinental railroads, the telegraph,
ocean cables?
16	How did industrialism make the
peoples of the world more dependent on
each other?
17	How did American democracy and
industries pull immigrants to America?
18	From what sources did the three
waves of immigration to the United
States come?
19	How have many peoples enriched
American life?
THEN AND NOW
1	Ellis Island, located in New York
Harbor, belongs to the federal govern
ntent. On this island is a famous immi-
grant station, through which many new-
comers to the United States have passed.
Do you know any recent immigrants in
your community?
2	We have read in this chapter of how
democracy failed to find a home in Rus-
sia. Speaking front your own knowledge,
would you say that Russia is democratic
today?
AMERICANS DEFEND DEMOCRACY IN A TROUBLED WORLD
546
pie. They understood I hat because
their industries were stronger and
because they had developed their de-
mocracy to meet new needs the nation
itself was stronger.
just as Americans were beginning
to sense that they had won a great vic-
tory and were looking forward to a
brighter future, wars broke out in
Asia and Europe. These wars forced
the United States to give its attention
to preparing for war.
Criticisms of the New Deal
While recognizing its great bene-
fits, many American citizens criticized
one or more aspects of the program
enacted under President Roosevelt
and called the New Deal. Critics of
the New Deal pointed to the mount-
ing debt as the national government
spent more money for public works
and relief than it look in in taxes. Be-
tween 1932 and 1940 the public debt
rose from over $19,000,000,000 to al-
most $43,000,000,000. Each year the
government plunged deeper and deep-
er into debt. After the worst of the de-
pression had passed, these critics urged
that the government reduce its spend-
ing to an amount of money that could
be provided by taxes.
Many Americans also criticized the
national government for going into
the husiness of producing electricity
in the TV A in competition with pri-
vate enterprise, which had for years
been producing electricity for the
people. The argument over the ques-
tion of whether or not the United
States government should compete di-
rectly with private business became
one of the most bitter issues caused by
the policies of the New Deal.
Criticism of the New Deal was as
much a part of the American demo-
cratic process as was the New Deal it-
self. Public criticism of the actions of
public officials is a necessary part of
democracy. It often brings to light
mistakes that, if not corrected, might
become serious. Public criticism also
keeps the voters informed on public
questions and enables them to cast
their ballots more intelligently. Nei-
ther of the European dictators. Hitler
nor Mussolini, permitted any public
criticism of their acts or those of their
subordinates. Denial of the right of
criticism is one of the primary charac-
teristics of a dictatorship.
^ The United States adopts
a new immigration policy
During World War I European im-
migration to the United States dwin-
dled rapidly (see chart on page 548).
At the end of the war, thousands
of immigrants began coming to the
United States to escape from the hard
times created by the war and to
share in the growing prosperity of the
United States. Although most Ameri-
cans were employed during the pros-
perous 1920's, many Americans feared
there was not a sufficient number of
jobs to provide employment at good
wages for the rising tide of immi-
grants.
The New Policy
As a result, Americans in 1921
made one of the most important de
visions in their history. They gave
up the policy of admitting into the
United States almost all Europeans
who wished to come. Instead they de-
cided to set a limit on the number. In
1921 Congress passed a law that lim
THE NATION TACIS TUT THREAT Of WORLD DEPRESSION
547
ited the number of immigrants that
could enter the United States each
year to around 350,000. In 1924 Con-
gress passed another law that provided
a more drastic limitation. By this act
only about 150.000 immigrants were
permitted to enter the United States
yearly. In the depression this number
was still further reduced. The Immi-
pation Act of 1924, however, did not
tet any limits on the number of im-
migrants that can enter the United
States from Mexico, Canada, and other
countries in the Western Hemisphere.
tefugees
During several of the depression
wars there were actually more peo-
ple leaving the United States than
[there were coming in. However, the
,’nited States in the trio's again bc-
imc a haven for persecuted people.
Many Europeans who loved freedom
from Hitler’s and Mussolini’s por-
tions. The immigrants were called
igees because they sought refuge in
it United States. The great Italian
hestra conductor Toscanini came
the United States in protest against
ussolini’s dictatorship. The famous
fcntist Albert Einstein came to the
Jnited States in 1933 when scholars
professors were being dismissed in
nany because of their political be-
or because they were Jewish.
/IEWING THE CHAPTER
I Words to understand. Peacetime
Is,prosperity, plants, building boom,
Burner, debtor nations, depression,
plus, collective bargaining. New Deal.
| Events worth remembering. Immigra-
Act, 1924: depression begins, 1929;
V.\ created, 1933: Social Security Act.
kj; National Labor Relations Act
Kgner Act). 1935.
Famous people to recall. Franklin D.
Roosevelt. Hitler, Mussolini.
Places to s|Mit on maps. Muscle Shoals,
Tennessee River, Paducah, Knoxville.
TALKING THC CHAPTER OVER
1	What conditions led to the pros-
perity of the 1920's?
2	What events caused the depression?
3	Why did the depression become
world-wide?
4	How did the German people meet
the challenge of depression?
5	What immediate problems did Pres-
ident Roosevelt's administration face?
6	How tlid the federal government
manage the problem of relief?
7	Why did the federal government try
to stimulate the building industry?
8	How did the government help agri-
culture and industry recover?
9	How did the national government
try to deal with each of these problems:
conservation, insecurity of the aged, and
unemployment?
10	How did the TV A attempt to use
the natural resources of the Tennessee
River Valley?
11	How did workers hope to help
themselves through their unions and
what methods tlid they use?
12	What are the two largest labor
organizations in our country?
13	How did the Wagner Act encour-
age the growth of unions?
14	Why tlid the United States emerge
from the depression stronger than ever?
15	What value ditl some of the criti-
cisms of the New Deal have?
16	What changes in policy did the
Immigration Act of 1924 effect?
THEN AND NOW
1	Have you ever seen an automobile
that was built in the lpzo's or earlier?
How is it unlike those built today?
2	After World War II the United
States had a building boom similar to
the one in the 1920’s. Were there any
building projects in your community?
IMMIGRATION 1910-1950
Thousands ot immigrants
1910
19J
IMMIGRATION DECLINES
Can you tell what caused immigration to fall off several times during this period? Wlwt
happened in 1914? In 19:1 and 1924? About 1930? After World War II the United
States allowed many homeless Europeans to enter the country. Where does this show
on the chart?
GROWTH OF UNITED STATES POPULATION
In 19150 there were 150 million people in the United States.
OUR HUMAN AND
NATURAL RESOURCES
The people
There are not as many people In the
United States as there are in India.
China, or Russia, but our population
is large and it is growing rapidly. We
have about 160,000,000 people now,
and there are signs that we will have
200.000,000 by the 1970's.
From the early settlers of the New
World. Americans have inherited
three ideas that have been especially
important in building our nation. We
believe that work is honorable; we
believe that all people should work if
660
they can; and we believe that the suc-
cess of the individual and of the na-
tion is founded on work.
Americans are a highly skilled peo-
ple. Immigrants brought many skills
to America from across the seas. Ger-
man cabinetmakers and farmers, Ital-
ian stonecutters and fruitgrowers,
Swedish carpenters and furniture mak-
ers, these and all the other immigrant
groups brought special skills to Amer-
ica. When they got here, they set to
work to help produce the goods, sen-
ices, and food that have made the
United States so prosperous.
American success in developing the
skills of its people is an important
reason why the United States leads the