America is many people—coming from different lands, worshipping in different ways, but all tolerant of each other's differences! Am an American" Day at Central Park, New York, brings throngs of citizens to celebrate their Americanism. Launching a New Government In 1798 the Federalists in control of Congress passed three laws designed to weaken the Republican party—a Naturalization Act, an Alien Act, and a Sedition Act. In the 1790's many French and Irish refugees came to this country; being antiBritish, they tended to join the Republican party. There was even an "American Society of United Irishmen" among the organizations supporting the Republicans. Therefore the Naturalization Act of 1798 extended the time necessary for a foreigner to become a citizen from five to fourteen years. There was almost hysterical fear of French agents who were thought to be using the Republican party as dupes to further their aims. So the Alien Act required all foreigners to register with the federal government and allowed the President to deport without trial any whom he considered "dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States." Finally, the Sedition Act forbade citizens to speak or publish anything false or malicious against the federal government or any branch of it. Violators were to be punished by fines up to $5,000 and imprisonment up to five years. Effects of Naturalization, Alien, and Sedition Acts. Both Adams and Hamilton had warned their party against abusing its power. As it turned out, the anti-Republican laws hurt the Federalist party itself more than the intended victim. The Naturalization and Alien Acts offended recent immigrants and drove them more than ever to the support of the Republicans. The ten Republicans, mostly newspaper editors, who were jailed under the Sedition Act were hailed by their followers as heroic martyrs to the sacred cause of freedom of the press. Typical of the effect of the Sedition Act was the 'case of Matthew Lyon, of Vermont, editor of a violently anti-Federalist paper. The Scourge of Aristocracy. Lyon was sent to jail for publishing the opinion that President Adams ought to be sent to an insane asylum. While in jail, he was elected to Congress. When after his release he set off for Philadelphia, he was accompanied on the first day of his journey by a parade twelve miles long. Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions. 1798-1799. The Sedition Act had given the Republicans an issue. In 1798 and 1799 the Republican-dominated legislatures of Kentucky and Virginia passed resolutions denouncing the act as unconstitutional because it violated the First Amendment, which says, "Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech or of the press." These resolutions. secretly written by Jefferson and Madison, are important in the history of the Constitution because they first present the theory of nullification. According to this theory the Constitution was simply a compact (agreement) among the states to set up the federal government as their agent. It was for the individual states to determine when their agent had exceeded its powers. If a state thought that a federal law went beyond the powers granted to the federal government in the Constitution. it had the right to "nullify" the law—that is. to declare it null and void and to refuse to obey it. The nullification theory was rightly denounced by the Federalists as tending to the breakup of the Union. If any stale could nullify any federal law it considered unconstitutional, the power of the federal government would cease. The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions were in-1 tended, however, simply as campaign I material for the presidential election oil 1800 and were followed by no action I undermining federal authority. Launching a New Government While expressing his belief in democracy and individual freedom, Jefferson said much which made the Federalists breathe easier. He proposed "the preservation of the General Government in its whole constitutional vigor," which surely did not suggest the idea of nullification presented in the Kentucky Resolutions of 1798 and 1799. He spoke of "the honest payment of our debts." This was a great relief to owners of federal bonds who feared that as an opponent of Hamilton's financial policies Jefferson would prevent repayment of the bondholders. Jefferson followed completely in Washington's footsteps in his definition of the foreign policy of the United States; he advocated "honest friendship with all nations, entangling alliances with none." Jefferson liked to speak of his election to the Presidency in 1800 as a "revolution." It was a revolution in the sense that men who distrusted democracy were replaced by those who believed in it, but it was surely one of the mildest revolutions in all history. Not only was there no violence, but surprisingly little Federalist legislation was repealed. The Alien and Sedition Acts had already run out and were not renewed; the period necessary for naturalization was reduced from fourteen years to five. The excise tax on whisky was repealed. The major features, however, of Hamilton's financial program remained untouched: the Bank of the United States, the Funding Act, and the assumption of state debts. Jefferson hoped to do away with the federal debt not by canceling it but by paying it off rapidly. Republican attack on the federal judiciary. The only point where the victorious Republicans made a major attack on the work of the Federalists was in trying to reduce the power of the federal judiciary and to drive some judges from office. The Republicans feared the judiciary for a number of reasons: (1) Federal judges, holding their positions "during good behavior" (which meant for life), were beyond the control of the people. (2) The federal courts had declared several state laws unconstitutional and so were a means of strengthening the power of the federal government and reducing that of the states. (3) During their last month in office the Federalists had "packed" the judiciary. They increased the number of federal judges by a law known as the Judiciary Act of 1801, and Adams promptly filled the new positions with Federalists. These new judges were known as "midnight judges" because the story went that Adams signed appointments until midnight of his last day in office. One of the first acts of Congress after Jefferson came into office was to repeal the Judiciary Act of 1801. After thus doing away with the "midnight judges" by abolishing their offices, the victorious Republicans went on to try to remove other Federalists from the judiciary by impeachment. In 1804 a Federalist district judge, John Pickering, was impeached by the House and condemned by the Senate for actions which indicated that he had gone insane. The House then impeached Justice Samuel Chase of the Supreme Court. Chase had attacked democracy in general and Jefferson in particular while addressing a Baltimore jury. York and traveled west by the Erie Canal. The typical citizen of the northwestern states lived on his own farm, which was cultivated by him and his family. On the very edge of the frontier he might live in an open-sided lean-to. Killing the trees by "girdling" (cutting the bark all around at the base) in order to let in the sun, he would plant a crop of corn. He might also raise a few razor-back hogs which would be allowed to run practically wild in the woods. For the rest, he lived on game. In longer-settled regions the farmer would probably build a frame house. He would raise much more varied crops—wheat, cattle, vegetables, and fruit. But no matter cost what then seemed colossal sums. The Erie Railroad, for instance, cost its builders half again as much as the United States paid for New Mexico and California. The railroad corporations thus became the first outstanding examples of "big business." The linking of Middle West and Northeast. The through lines from East to Middle West completed a development which the Erie Canal had begun: the conquest of the Appalachian Mountain barrier. there was too little soil to support rapidly growing populations. In Ireland, the greatest source of immigrants, the native population were denied home rule, and a wretched system of landholding kept them in poverty. The staple diet of Irish peasants was potatoes. When the potato crop was blighted in 1845, there was appalling suffering. It has been estimated that one million out of eight died of starvation; in the next ten years another million came to America. Some immigrants actually came to this country against their will. The German city of Hamburg, for instance, found it cheaper to ship its paupers to the United States than to keep them in poorhouses or in jail. Public and private relief agencies in Britain provided money for the unemployed to take passage to America rather than go into the dreaded "workhouses," where poverty was treated as though it were a crime. Most immigrants came here, however, in high hopes of a better life. European agents of railroad companies and steamship lines described America as a land where riches could be had almost for the asking. Recent immigrants sent letters home describing the high wages, cheap land, and bountiful diet over here. These "America letters" praised not only American prosperity, but American freedom and equality. Here, they said, were no class distinctions, no barons at the top and serfs at the bottom. Here no farmer had to tip his hat to the local squire. Here women were not expected to do heavy work in the fields, and workmen could leave their jobs if they liked. "If you wish to be happy and independent, then come here," wrote a German farmer from his new home in Missouri. The lot of immigrants. The lot of the new immigrant, however, was often hard. Once off the boat, he might become the prey of sharpers selling him a bogus railroad ticket, or a "farm" which later turned out to be under water. "Selling" the West. The ineffectiveness of the Homestead Act provided Westerners with a grievance, but probably did not much retard settlement. Although railroads sometimes discouraged the acquisition of free land, they actively promoted the sale of their own. They did not charge high prices because they wanted settlers to get the land into production. Landgrant railroads had "Bureaus of Immigration" to persuade farmers to settle along their lines. They maintained offices in the principal European cities, and agents in eastern seaports to meet immigrants is they left the boat. Steamship companies and western states joined the railroads in promoting the West. Advertisements described the region as so healthy that it cured all known diseases. The industrious man could expect to become wealthy; an $11,000 investment, it was claimed, might soon result in a steady income of $ 11,000 per year. The women were not forgotten, and the West was pictured as a happy hunting ground for unmarried ladies. "When a daughter of the East is once beyond the Missouri," said one railroad advertisement, "she rarely recrosses it except on a bridal tour." The result of all this was a fantastic expansion of farming. More land was occupied between 1870 and 1890 than during all the time from the first English settlement at Jamestown until 1870. The production of wheat, centering in Minnesota, the Dakotas, and Nebraska, quadrupled. Nor did all this growth take place at the frontier. In the previously occupied "corn-hog" belt, extending from Ohio to Iowa, output increased as rapidly as in the new wheat lands. Wisconsin became a great center of cheese production. Near every great city, truck gardens were developed to provide vegetables, and a "milkshed" to supply fresh dairy products. Difficulties of life on the Plains. The life of a Great Plains farmer seldom approached the glowing prophecies of railroad agents. The climate supposed to cure all known diseases turned out to be severe. In the good years, the Great Plains produced fantastic quantities of wheat, and steam engines were coupled to the threshing machines to harvest the crops. This illustration, however, exaggerates the number of machines. The Opening of the Great West In the summer the temperature might go over 100° F. for days on end. In winter there were terrible blizzards driving the snow through every chink of doors and windows, often alternating with periods of great cold. Prairie fires were a constant danger in the spring and fall. Sometimes there appeared, as if from nowhere, huge swarms of grasshoppers which ate everything green, and choked wells to the brim. Worst of all disasters was drought. The rainfall of the Plains region is markedly less than that in the wooded East, dropping from about 30 to 40 inches along the 98th meridian to as little as 10 inches just east of the Rockies. There are, however, alternating cycles of wet and dry years. The greatest push westward into the Plains took place in the early 1880's, during a wet period which offered false promise of abundant crops. In the late 1880'$ drought drove thousands back east in despair. William Allen White, the famous editor of the Emporia Gazette, thus described a family he saw returning from western Kansas: There came through Emporia yesterday two old-fashioned mover wagons headed The stock in the caravan would in-four horses, very poor and very tired, mule more disheartened than the horses, one sad-eyed dog. ... A few farm imnts of the simpler sort had been loaded wagons, but . . . the rest of the immenta had been left upon the battle, . . These movers . . . had seen it raining for months at a time. They had d the fury of the winter wind as it came _mg across the short burned grass. . , . have tossed through hot nights, wild worry, and have arisen only to find worst nightmares grazing in reality on brown stubble in front of their sundoors. White goes on to say that the family's revived amid the plenty of eastern is and they were ready to try again. The literature of the sod house frontier. The struggle of the farmers with the Plains produced a literature quite unlike that of the Wild West. Cowboys and miners were usually young men; their lives were adventurous; they were on the move. But the homesteader had taken on responsibilities difficult to shed; he had often pledged himself to a bank, had invested in tools and land, and started to raise a family. When misfortune hit, he had to weather it out. It is natural to find, therefore, that the literature of the Plains was realistic, sometimes bitter. This can be seen in the stories of Hamlin Garland, who was born on a Wisconsin farm in 1860. Garland's family moved west three times during his boyhood. In books such as Main-Travelled Roads and A Son of the Middle Border, he told "a tale of toil that's never done." Although describing moments of joy such as harvest time, or of beauty, as when the spring touched the Plains, Garland refused to say that "butter was always golden and biscuits invariably light and flaky." "I will not lie," he wrote, "even to be a patriot. A proper proportion of the sweat, flies, heat, dirt, and drudgery shall go in." The greatest novel about the Plains, O. E. Rolvaag's Giants in the Earth, was written not in English but in Norwegian. So many settlers came to the wheat country from Norway and Sweden that by 1890 four hundred Minnesota towns bore Scandinavian names. Giants in the Earth describes the heroic efforts of Per Hansa and his wife Beret to establish a farm in South Dakota. They eventually triumph, but the human cost is terrible: Beret goes slowly mad, and Per dies in a blizzard. There was also organization on a national scale, since a local union was often helpless in dealing with an industrial corporation doing business throughout the country. Difficulties facing the unions. In spite of rapid growth during the war and afterward, labor unions faced the following difficulties: (1) American labor was mobile and diverse. It was difficult to organize workingmen in this country because they would not "stay hitched," but moved from job to job. Young men, who in other countries might have became labor leaders, went into business for themselves or worked up into executive positions. The inflow of immigrants, averaging over a third of a million a year between 1870 and 1900, increased the difficulty of organizing unions. Ignorant of American wage scales and without resources, these newcomers often accepted low pay. A Contract Labor Law, passed by Congress in 1864, allowed employers to hire foreign laborers, bring them to this country, and keep them working for a year to repay passage. Variety in language, religion, and customs among the immigrants made it hard to weld them into an effective organization. To discourage unionization, some employers deliberately hired several different nationalities. (2) There was confusion of aims among labor leaders. Men who wanted to bring all workingmen together and promote widespread reforms were opposed by others who believed that unions should work only for the short-time benefit of workers in their particular craft or industry. A small but vocal group wanted to use the power of organized labor to overthrow the capitalist system and establish socialism (see pp. 412—413). Even more radical were anarchists who preached, "All property is theft; all government is tyranny," and tried to create class hatred by bornb-throwing and assassination. Although never composing more than a small fraction of the labor movement, socialists and anarchists aroused fear and dislike which was transferred to all workingmen's organizations. (3) Unions faced strong opposition from employers. Workers were often required to take an "iron-clad" oath that they would not join a union. If discharged for union activity, a man often could not get employment elsewhere because employers combined to keep "black lists" of all "troublemakers." Once black-listed, a laborer could get a job only by changing his residence, his trade, or his name. Once workers organized a plant, the employer could still fight back by a lockout (shutting the plant down) or by discharging union men and hiring in their place strikebreakers (also known as "scabs"). In any strike or lockout the odds favored the employer because he had the longer purse; few unions could afford to support their members through prolonged unemployment. (4) Public opinion was distrustful of labor unions. Laborers formed a minority group in America, and unions were an unfamiliar type of organization. Fixing wages and hours by collective bargaining between union representatives and employers seemed to violate the right of the individual to deal with the employer himself. Occasionally public opinion condemned employers when labor disputes resulted in violence. This happened during the Homestead lockout in 1892, when the Carnegie Corporation hired a private army of 300 Pinkerton detectives armed with repeating rifles. Generally, however, labor unions were held responsible when disorder occurred. This was partly because anarchists and extreme socialists were constantly predicting the day when the "toiling masses" would overthrow existing society. American Telephone A Telegraph Com pan Among new opportunities for women, opening up in the big cities, were jobs as stenographers and switchboard operators. Here in a New York City office of the telephone company, women were able lo earn their own living. Federal and state legislation reflected the political influence of labor. To keep imported labor from depressing wages. Congress passed the first laws restricting immigration. In 1882 Chinese laborers were excluded, and in 1885 it was forbidden to import workers under contract. Several states gave labor unions a legal status which they had never before enjoyed by granting them the right to incorporate. Nearly all states passed laws regulating working conditions and requiring minimum standards of health and safety. The gains won by legislation and by unions themselves were supplemented by the action of enlightened employers, motivated either by the desire to head ofl unionization or by genuine concern for their workers. The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad pioneered in providing its employees with old-age pensions and benefits in case of injury. The Pillsbury Flour Company in 1882 tried to increase its workers' sense of participation in the business by sharing profits; its example was followed by more than a hundred firms. Several reform movements which started in the Jacksonian period continued throughout the nineteenth century. Prohibition supporters formed a political party and from 1872 on put up a presidential candidate who never gained more than a handful of votes. Although some of his more impulsive actions might not have led people to expect it. Roosevelt played an effective part in bringing about peace between Japan and Russia. Roosevelt, as he expressed it, had brought the horses to water, but was not sure he could make them drink. Although not present at the peace table, the President indirectly affected the negotiations by persuading the powers to withdraw extreme demands. He induced Japan to give up claims for a money indemnity and Russia to agree to give up the southern half of the island of Sakhalin. By the Treaty of Portsmouth, Japan also took over Russian interests in southern Manchuria. In 1906 Roosevelt was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of his success in bringing the Russo- Japanese War to a close. Later difficulties with Japan. In spite of Roosevelt's previously pro-Japanese attitude and efforts to help Japan by arranging a peace, the Treaty of Portsmouth was followed by tension between the United States and Japan. When the President sided with Russia on the indemnity question, there were such serious anti-American riots in Tokyo that the United States embassy had to be guarded with troops. The ease of the Japanese victory caused fear in America and Europe that the white race was to be overwhelmed by the yellow race; this notion of the "yellow peril" was played up by the "yellow press." On the Pacific Coast feeling began to rise against Japanese immigration, resulting in discrimination against Japanese children in the public schools. This action was regarded in Japan as an insult. More significant than the tide of ill will, which soon subsided, was the fact that the recent war altered the balance of power in the Orient Now it was no longer Russian expansion that was most to be feared, but Japanese In a rather complicated series of maneuvers, Roosevelt attempted at the same time to soothe Japanese anger, satisfy Japanese ambition, save the Philippines from Japanese aggression, and show the Japanese that he was not afraid of them. Although the federal government had no power to force a city or state to change its education laws, the President persuaded the Californians to stop discriminating against Japanese school children. In turn, Japan agreed to halt emigration to America. This compromise, arranged in 1907, was known as the Gentlemen's Agreement. As regards the balance of power in the Far East, Roosevelt made a bargain which was partly embodied in the Root-Takahira Agreement of 1908. Both Japan and the United States promised to respect each other's possessions in the Pacific; both agreed to uphold the Open Door Policy in the Pacific. In return for these provisions favorable to the United States, we agreed to Japanese penetration of Korea, which was annexed in 1910, To impress Japan with American power, the President, in a truly Rooseveltian gesture, sent an American fleet to visit Tokyo in 1908. All sixteen battleships in the United States Navy were sent to the Pacific Coast, then to Tokyo, and then back to America by way of the Mediterranean. The United States Becomes a World Power New Mexico. Immediately Wilson sent American troops under General John J. Pershing across the border in pursuit of Villa. The expedition not only failed to catch the Mexican chieftain, but was resented by Mexicans of all parties. When war with Germany threatened early in 1917, our troops were withdrawn and Mexico was left to her own devices. Thus Wilson's Mexican policy not only failed to establish peace, but antagonized the Mexicans and many people in the United States as well. However, he had won favor with other Latin-American countries by abandoning "dollar diplomacy" and attempting to act on behalf of the Mexican people. The Panama tolls dispute. In a dispute with Great Britain over the question of tolls on ships passing through the Panama Canal. Wilson revealed his extraordinary command over Congress. In 1912, as the Canal approached completion. Congress passed a law exempting United States coastwise shipping from tolls. Great Britain protested this as a violation of the Hay-Pauncefotc Treaty which had guaranteed equal rates for ships of "all nations" (see p. 459). In 1914 Wilson appeared before Congress and in a very short message urged that the exemption for American ships be repealed. The President's principal argument was that in self-respect the United States should carry out treaty obligations to the letter. The President's action was apparently part of an arrangement whereby Great Britain agreed to withdraw support from Huerta if the United Slates would repeal the tolls exemption. Congress followed Wilson's advice, even though his opponents accused him of "cringing before the British throne." Other diplomatic policies. In minor matters, where the President did not personally intervene, the United States during Wilson's administration continued the policies of previous Republican administrations. In 1914 a treaty with Nicaragua gave the United States the right to lease lands necessary for a canal route, to oversee Nicaraguan finances, and to intervene to preserve order. When a bloody revolution broke out in Haiti in 1915, American troops landed and established a protectorate over the country similar to that which Roosevelt had instituted in Santo Domingo in 1904 (see p. 459). In 1917 the United States extended its naval control over the Caribbean area by purchasing from Denmark the strategically valuable Virgin Islands. The Wilson administration had to deal with Far Eastern problems similar to those which had confronted Roosevelt (see pp 461—463), There was continuing difficulty with Japan because of discrimination against Japanese immigrants on the Pacific Coast, and because of Japanese ambition to expand on the continent of Asia. On personal appeals from the President and Bryan, the state of California revised certain laws in order to reduce Japanese resentment. In 1915 Japan violated the Open Door policy by presenting the Chinese government with an ultimatum called the Twenty-one Demands which were designed to make China a Japanese protectorate. The United States protested this action, but was unable to prevent the Japanese from extending their power in the northern provinces of China. Although not a trained diplomat. Bryan was far from inactive as Secretary of State. Like Roosevelt (see pp. 463—464), he promoted arbitration agreements with other nations. These were called "coolingoff' treaties because the nations signing them agreed not to go to war for a year after a disputed point was referred to a committee of investigation. This would give time for popular excitement to die down, while diplomats worked out a peaceable solution. Bryan arranged twenty-one of these treaties. To its later regret, the German government was one sentiment for protection in these agricultural areas. Agriculturalists themselves supported the Fordney-McCumber Tariff because it placed high duties on food products. During the war the United States had seized German patents, especially in the fields of optical glass and chemical products. "Infant industries'' based on these patents demanded special protection. The return to protection was also part of the general retreat to isolationism. The Fordney-McCumber Act was designed to be "flexible"; it therefore set up a Tariff Commission to study costs of production here and abroad. On recommendation of the Tariff Commission the President might raise or lower duties up to 50 per cent. In practice, this meant that rates tended to go still higher. Federal finances. The First World War had raised the national debt from less than $10 per capita to over $200. The Harding and Coolidge administrations attempted to lower this burden by greater economy in government. In 1921 Congress created a Budget Bureau in the Treasury Department to introduce more system into federal finances. Until this time, income and outgo had never been coordinated. The efforts of the Budget Bureau to introduce economies were especially supported by Coolidge, with whom thrift amounted to a passion. After the Washington Conference there was no immediate threat of war, and military expenditures were greatly lowered. At one time the War Department was hard put to it to find money for six light tanks. Andrew Mellon, Secretary of the Treasury from 1921 to 1932. believed that heavy taxes on excess profits, inheritances, and large incomes "penalized success" and discouraged the investment of capital in productive business enterprise. Congress at Mellon's insistence abolished the wartime excise and excess-profits taxes and reduced rates on incomes by nearly two-thirds. Nevertheless, so great was the prosperity of the United States, with resulting high tax collections, that the national debt was reduced by eight billions between 1921 and 1929. Immigration restriction. During the 1920's Congress for the first time restricted the number of immigrants who might enter the United States. Such rein the I890's. as shown by the cartoon, immigrants were used as strikebreakers. It was therefore natural that labor unions demanded restriction. Immigrants tended to settle in little national communities in the big cities. Restriction had been demanded by labor unions for half a century, but up to 1914 the only groups excluded were Orientals, anarchists, and incompetents such as idiots, criminals, and paupers. In the decade before the First World War, immigration averaged nearly a million a year. Until the 1880's most immigrants came from northern and western Europe, a region with a relatively high standard of living and a high rate of literacy. By 1914 however, over two-thirds of the immigrants came from southern and eastern Europe, regions where living standards were lower and opportunities for education more limited. The "new immigration" tended to concentrate in cities, where there was the greatest chance for employment. They usually formed compact communities of the same national origin, so that every great metropolis had a '•little Italy," a "little Poland," a "little Greece," and so forth. This gave rise to the charge that the new immigration was difficult to Americanize. Congressional bills designed to reduce the new immigration by barring illiterates from the United Slates were vetoed by Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson. All three Presidents made the ante point in their veto messages: that illiteracy usually does not reveal lack of character or intelligence but simply lack ol opportunity. Finally a literacy test was vied by Congress over Wilson's veto in 1917. During and after the World War feeling against "hyphenated-Amcricans" was stimulated by the anti-German hysteria, by the "red scare," and by a sinister "native American" organization, the Ku Klux Klan When immigrants, to escape the hardships which the postwar situation imposed on them, started to pour into the United States, Congress took quick action. In 1920 Woodrow Wilson vetoed a bill to restrict immigration, but in 1921 Harding signed the Emergency Quota Act, Iwhich cut the number admitted from any country' in a single year to 3 per cent of the number of that nationality residing in the United States in 1910. Three years later the Immigration Quota Law made restriction a permanent policy. This law of 1924 provided that after 1927 the total number of immigrants admitted to the United States per year was to be 150,000. Their nationalities apportioned on the basis of the census of 1920. In spite of strong objection from President Coolidge. the 1924 law excluded Japanese entirely. The unfortunate result was to increase the effectiveness of anti-American propaganda put out by militarists in Japan. Death of President llarding. Those w ho had favored Harding's nomination in 1920 neither expected nor desired him to be a strong President. He fulfilled their expectations. With his massive head and fine presence. Harding "looked like a President," but lacked the intelligence, the knowledge, or the desire to direct policies. Had he carried out his expressed intention of surrounding himself with the "best minds," he might still have avoided failure. Some appointments were excellent, such as that of former President Taft as Chief Justice and future President Hoover as Secretary of Commerce. But too many jobs went to incompetent or dishonest personal friends. Corruption was even more widespread and on a larger scale than under Grant. The head of the Veterans Bureau, for instance, arranged fraudulent contracts which cost the taxpayers an estimated 200 million dollars. The Secretary of the Interior eventually went to jail for secretly leasing to private interests oil lands reserved for the navy at Elk Hills, California, and Teapot Dome, Wyoming, in return for bribes totaling over $300,000. When Harding began to learn what was going on, he complained privately that he had been betrayed. In the summer of 1923 he suddenly died in San Francisco on his return from a trip to Alaska. Women played a big share in the battle of production, with so many men away in the armed forces. Here women inspect various Linds of electrical equipment for use on merchant and naval vessels throughout the country. spend. But as industries shifted to war production, the amount of consumer goods on the market declined. The resulting danger of runaway inflation was attacked in various ways. Wages were stabilized at an increase of about 15 per cent, price ceilings were placed on farm products, and rents were "frozen." An Office of Price Administration (O.P.A.) limited the prices of consumer goods and rationed whatever products were in short supply, such as meat, sugar, shoes, and canned goods. The government also reduced civilian purchasing power by levying heavy income taxes and persuading people to buy war bonds. This many-sided attack on inflation was on the whole successful; the cost of living rose much more slowly than in World War I. World War II did not inspire the enthusiasm and idealism of either the War Between the States or World War I. The general attitude was that beating the Axis was a dirty job which had to be done. It is probably significant that there were no war songs to compare with "John Brown's Body," "Dixie," or "Over There." At the same time, there was little opposition to the war. such as that represented by the Copperheads in 1861-1865. It is probably not surprising that there was less disregard of civil rights than in the earlier wars. Conscientious objectors, for instance, were treated more leniently. Since the press and radio agreed to voluntary censorship, they were free from excessive government control. Nor was government propaganda in support of the war on the mammoth scale of World War 1 (see p. 519). There was only one important occasion when the normal rights of civilians were violated in the interest of national safety. In the excitement following the attack on Pearl Harbor, over a hundred thousand Japanese-Amcricans were removed from their homes along the Pacific Coast and herded into camps run by the army. 