OUR NATION'S STORY Bettmann Archive This street scene in early St. Augustine is from an old engraving. States. Two exploring expeditions undertaken in an effort to find other Indian treasure stores like those found in Mexico and Peru proved fruitless. Coronado, searching for the fabled Seven Cities of Cibola,' passed through the region English C Weakening the hold of Spain. Spain's failure to make any real effort to develop that part of the New World north of Mexico gave other European nations their opportunity. Both England and France were far from pleased with the papal line of Demarcation. The voyages of Cabot and Verrazano had provided each of these countries with the basis for a claim to North from Arizona to Kansas without finding anything more exciting than the Indian pueblos. De Soto, attempting to find gold in eastern North America where Ponce ffe Leon had failed, made his way from Florida to Kansas and discovered the Mississippi River. The settlement at St. Augustine. One Spanish colony was planted in the southeastern part of the United States during this period. In the early 1560's a group of French Protestants attempted to make a settlement near the mouth of the St. Johns River in Florida. The governor of Cuba, aroused by the effort of Protestants to plant a colony on lands claimed by the Catholic rulers of Spain, sent out an expedition to destroy the settlement. The Spaniards then founded their own colony at St. Augustine in 1565. It was the first permanent European settlement within the present limits of the United States. In the years following the discovery and exploration of the New World, Spain had grown to be the mightiest naval power in the world. Her only rival was England, whose captains dared to prey on Spanish shipping. The struggle for supremacy between these two powers came to a climax in 1588. A mighty Spanish fleet was met by a much smaller force of British and Dutch vessels. About half of the Spanish fleet was destroyed by a storm: and the remainder proved *10 match for the English and Dutch. The defeat of the Spanish Armada meant that Spain's naval supremacy was at an end. No longer would Spain be able to prevent the colonization of North America by England, the Netherlands, and France. Religious conditions in England. As you know from your previous study of history, the revolt against the Catholic Church, which broke out in Germany in the first quarter of the sixteenth century, soon spread to other countries. In 1534 the English Parliament passed the Act of Supremacy, making the king, Henry VIII, the supreme head of the church in England. This law established a state church, which became known as the Church of England, or the Anglican Church. Perhaps you will have a better idea of the religious struggle of the sixteenth century if you keep in mind that freedom of religion for the individual was unknown. With the breakdown of the universal church, it became customary for the religion of a nation to be determined by its rulers. Culver Service Henry VIII quarreled with the pope and established a state church in England. the home of a great number of dissenting sects. Among these were Puritans (so called because they wished to "purify" the Anglican Church of some of its practices), Baptists, Unitarians, Quakers, and Methodists. But only the Anglican Church had governmental support. Taxes were levied for its upkeep, and only Anglicans might graduate from universities and hold government offices. Persecution as well as discrimination was directed against dissenting groups, which included Catholics. Under such circumstances many English people welcomed an opportunity to find a refuge where they might worship as they chose. Thus many of them came to America. Economic reasons for colonization. Economic conditions in England also were favorable for the establishment of colonies. The demand for woolen textiles had increased greatly with the revival of trade in Oriental goods. Landowners found it more profitable to convert their acres to pasture than to till them for crops. Since one man could watch sheep over a large area, many of the farm workers in England became unemployed. The lot of these unemployed was made worse by a steady rise in prices. These two factors—unemployment and the increase in prices—led thousands of Englishmen to believe that they might earn a better living in other parts of the world. For these reasons many of them came to America. At the same time, profitable trade was creating in England a wealthy class who were seeking new opportunities for investment. The British East India Company had been chartered in 1600 for the purpose of securing a portion of the trade with the Orient. Here was one group willing to assume risks in financing colonial enterprises in the hope of future profits, and here were other groups anxious to get away from England and its poverty. In 1603 at the death of Queen Elizabeth I, last of the Tudor monarchs, the crown passed to James VI of Scotland, who, as James I of England, became the first of the Stuart rulers. The Tudors had generally had pleasant relations with Parliament. The Stuarts, however, brought to England the theory of the divine right of kings, and had no use for Parliament. For over three centuries influential people in England had shared in the government through Parliament. By refusing to grant money for periods longer than one year, Parliament had made it necessary for the king to call it into annual session. The Stuarts looked upon these annual meetings of Parliament as unnecessary interferences with their royal powers. English Settlements under the Early Stuart Rulers The founding of Jamestown. The lands in the New World which England claimed were granted by the English rulers to trading companies or to favored individuals. By 1606 two rival companies had been organized—one composed mainly of Plymouth merchants, and one composed of London merchants. Three vessels sent out by the London Company arrived in Charles I Culver Service Chesapeake Bay in May, 1607. The expedition entered a river, which they named the James in honor of the king, and erected a fort and other buildings at a site they named Jamestown. The colony's difficulties and final success. The choice of site for the colony was a poor one. The first women to come to Jamestown arrived in 1619, and thus helped to establish the colony as a permanent settlement. fevers. That the colony survived the first winter was due solely to corn obtained from the Indians. The settlers were working for the company rather than for themselves. There was little incentive to produce goods for the profit of faraway stockholders. In 1609 the growing need for financial support of the colony forced the reorganization of the company, which thereafter became known as the Virginia Company. In order to encourage settlement, the company established a new system of landholding. In 1612 John Rolfe developed a method of curing the tobacco which could be grown in this latitude. The development of a crop with a ready market in England assured the success of the colony. Important events of 1619. There were very few women in Jamestown during the early years of the colony. In order to encourage the establishment of permanent homes, the company in 1619 sent about a hundred women to Jamestown. To secure a wife the settler was required not only to win the lady of his choice but also to pay her passage. The fee was 120 pounds of tobacco. (Tobacco was used for money by early Virginians.) Another event of that year was to leave its stamp on life in the United States. A Dutch vessel purpose of the roads, canals, and railroads by which the difficulties presented by the Appalachian barrier were being reduced. Federal aid was given toward these internal improvements. The South, naturally, was opposed to any program which would weaken the relations between that section and the Northwest. These circumstances aroused opposition to liberal immigration polities throughout the South. The increasing importance of the slavery issue. For the most part, early opponents of slavery did not severely condemn Southern slaveholders. They realized that emancipation would present serious social and economic problems. In 1831, however, antislavery agitation took a new turn. In that year William Lloyd Garrison began in Boston the publication of the Liberator. In the first issue of that paper, Garrison said: "I shall contend for the immediate enfranchisement of our slave population . . . I will not equivocate—I will not retreat a single inch, and I will be heard." He had no sympathy for the slaveholders. In addition to a free right of way through the public domain, each company was given grants of alternate sections of land extending twenty miles back from each side of its tracks. Further aid was given in the form of government bonds. Federal aid to agriculture. Another kind of legislation the South did not approve of had to do with free Western land. The withdrawal of Southern representatives from Congress made it possible for the federal government to provide free Western lands. In 1862 the Homestead Act enabled settlers to secure title to 160 acres of farm land merely by occupying and cultivating the land for five years and paying a registration fee of ten dollars. Liberalization of immigrate laws. Prosecution of the war a|]n increased the need for civilian workers. To meet this need Congress in 1864 liberalized immigration laws so as to permit entry to contract workers. Manufacturing and transportation agencies, anxious to gain the benefit of lower wage scales, imported workers by the thousands. With a protective tariff, a sound national currency, a policy of liberal aid to railroad construction, free Western lands, and liberal immigration law's, the trend toward industrial and agricultural expansion was certain to move forward rapidly in the postwar years. Summing Up The Industrial Revolution, as you have read, began in England in the eighteenth century. In 1791 the first textile mill in America was built by Samuel Slater, an English mechanic. American manufacturing grew rapidly because the embargo of 1807 and the War of 1812 cut oft foreign trade. Its growth was also aided by private and federal road construction, and by the building of canals. The invention of the steamboat and the locomotive increased the volume of transportation and lowered its cost. This helped the growth of the West as well as the development of industry'. The War between the States aided industrial expansion in four ways: (1) it greatly increased the demand for manufactured products; (2) it brought a higher tariff, thus protecting American industry against foreign competitors; (3) it brought relaxed immigration laws, which permitted entry of many low-wage industrial and transportation workers; (4) it led to passage of a National Banking Act, creating a uniform currency. During the war, also, federal subsidies were granted for building railroads between the East and the Far West. Cultivation of the newly-opened Western lands was aided by such inventions as the steel plow, the reaper, and the thresher. Introduction of improved strains of plants and animals helped to improve farming. Agriculture was further aided by grants of land for state colleges teaching mechanic and agricultural arts. The steel industry was an important factor in the economic revolution in the United States. It provided the material needed for our expanding factories, mines, railroads, and farms. Its workers became an important part in the new industrial population, and its need for labor was an important factor in the stimulation of immigration. The oil industry. After Colonel Edwin L. Drake drilled the first successful oil well, western Pennsylvania became a hub of activity similar to that which followed the discovery of gold in California in 1848. New wells were drilled wherever there was any prospect at all of finding petroleum. The oil was shipped to refineries in Cleveland and Pittsburgh. The most valuable product was kerosene, which soon replaced candles and whale oil as a source of light. Other important products were lubricants for many kinds of machinery. Fierce competitive conditions marked the early years of this new industry. The meeting of the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific, at Promontory Point, Utah, on May 10, 1869, was an occasion for a national celebration. Distinguished officials bound the last rails together with a spike of Nevada silver and another of California gold. The speeches marking the occasion were carried to the East by telegraph. Later in the same year the Central Pacific extended its line westward to San Francisco Bay. An excursion train sponsored by the Boston Board of Trade in 1870 w*as the first to complete a transcontinental run. It made the trip from Boston to San Francisco in eight days. By 1869 Congress had chartered two other transcontinental lines. With the driving of the last railroad spike on May 10, 1869, at Promontory Point, Utah, the East and West were united. Bettmann Archive 406 OUR NATION'S STORY WEST AND THE SOUTH building East had used logs for their first shelters, and rails for fences. Pioneers on the prairie turned to sod for their houses. Wood, precious as it was, had to be used for the frame. of the roof, which was then covered with straw or with a layer of sod. Fencing in the fields was even more difficult. Stone and mud walls proved ineffectual barriers to both cattle and wild animals. Ordinary wire fences strung on wooden posts were little better. Then in 1874 Joseph Glidden invented barbed wire. The sharp points protruding from the main wire were held in high respect by marauding beasts and by tame animals. Improvements in farm machinery. Equally important for the development of agriculture in the West wras the continued improvement of farm machinery :Ul(j invention of the grain The grain elevator also came into general use. It provided space for storing a highly perishable commodity under conditions which made for easy loading and unloading. This typical sod house on a homestead out on the bleak prairies of Montana shows the pioneers' ability to adapt themselves to their environment. The Changing Center of Population, 1790-1950 Railroads and the settlers. As these problems and difficulties were overcome, railroads began to play hi important role in promoting Western settlement. James J. Hill of the Great Northern Railroad is probably the outstanding promoter of this type. He advertised throughout the East and in Europe fur persons to settle along his railroad. As an added inducement, he offered reduced fares to the West and carried some furniture and cattle free. Once these settlers reached the plains, Hill took an inmediate interest in seeing to it that they became prosperous. In fact, left no stone unturned in his efforts to add to the volume of business transacted by his railroad Properties. Sources of Western population. high prices then being paid for food grains. Some Easterners emigrated to the territories as a means of evading the draft. After the war, many Union veterans took advantage of the opportunities to acquire rich land at little cost. Eastern industrial workers who longed for the independent life of farmers were joined by thousands of immigrants arriving annually from Europe. Among those who came in from foreign countries were thousands of Scandinavians who settled in the area west of the upper Great Lakes, and many Germans who set up new homes in Wisconsin, Iowa, and Kansas. Lumbering and fishing. Two other industries contributed to the development of the West. One of these is the lumber industry. The growth of the industrial East and the settlement of the West placed increased demands on the timber resources of the nation. The pine and fir forests of Washington and Oregon and the redwood forests of California were tapped to meet shorter working day and to a growing interest in recreational pursuits. For most workers, to the dangers of technological unemployment was added that of loss of his job resulting from the operation of the business cycle. A period of good times seemed invariably to be followed by one of depression. During good times—when business was expanding—jobs were plentiful and wages were high. During depressions jobs were scarce, and the workers who held them had to be content with greatly reduced earnings. For many workers the wages earned during "good times" were not sufficiently high to enable them to save enough to tide them through the years of a depression. Two such depressions took place during the last half of the nineteenth century —the panic of 1873 and the panic of 1893. In the years following these panics, unemployment reached unusually high totals and the suffering among workers was severe. The passing of the Western frontier affected adversely the bargaining power of the industrial worker in the East. As long as free land was available, the factory worker could threaten to move to the West if his conditions of employment were not improved. Sometimes even the threat to move had the desired result. The thousands who did take to the pioneer trail reduced to that extent the number of workers in the East and thus improved the bargaining position of those who remained as ind workers. In the half century between 1864 and 1914, over twenty-five million immigrants came to our shores. No other country in the history of the world has assimilated so large an alien element into its population in so brief a period. Although some of these immigrants were skilled laborers and professional workers, the overwhelming majority were unskilled. Their addition to the labor force available to American employers tended to lower wages for other workers. Laborers felt that they, like the manufacturers, were entitled to protection this form of competition. Workers in the textile clothing industry were sometimes subjected to another type of exploitation. Members of many newly-arrived immigrant families were forced by economic necessity to accept any kind of employment. Their dire needs contributed to the development of the "sweatshop" system. Under this system the manufacturer needed only a small central plant. From it were issued the materials necessary for making dresses and suits. Workers, generally women, took these materials to their homes where the sewing was completed. The aims of labor unions. Like other economic groups in the nation, workers wanted, first of all, a larger share of the increasing volume of goods and services they helped to produce. This want found expression in a demand for higher wages. Although the purchasing power of the wages already received was gradually increasing, the improvements in economic position already attained only served to whet the appetite for still further improvement. In view- of the fortunes amassed by the most successful employers, workers felt that they were entitled to still more. In short they, too, were interested in deriving the maximum possible benefit from the advances resulting from the Industrial Revolution. Many workers were also interested in reducing the number of hours in the working day. Reducing the hours of labor would have the effect of increasing the number of jobs available. While few industries operated on a full-time basis, any reduction in the number of hours worked would have the effect of spreading employment over an increased number of days. A shortened day would also reduce the boredom of monotonous repetitive jobs. Further, if a ten-hour day were established in an industry, those who worked more than ten hours might demand higher rates for overtime. Unions used other means besides direct negotiation to improve their bargaining position. They encouraged their members to buy only those products bearing the union label as an indication that they had been manufactured under union conditions. They worked to secure a union shop—that is, one in which all employees are included in union membership. They also sought, through political activity, to secure conditions under which their bargaining position would be improved. They urged placing restrictions upon immigration. The adoption of a ten-hour day or an eight-hour day for government employees would strengthen their hands in demanding a shorter working day in private industry. They were interested in expanding the public school system, both because they recognized the importance of education and because they wanted to reduce the number of teen-age workers available to employers. They worked for laws that would require employers to adopt safety devices and safety measures. They wanted to secure the enactment of legislation providing for workmen's compensation to victims of industrial accidents. Practical as well as humanitarian considerations were involved in the demand for legislation regulating the conditions of employment of women. They wanted to outlaw' the abuses growing. Organized yH called these agreements yellow, dog contracts." Some managment fired all workers who joined a union even though they had not signed such a contract. Handed together to establish "black lists," denying employment to persons suspected of acting as union organizers. At times detectives were employed to pose as workmen, join the union, and then report to the management the names of unit* leaders and intended union. The Knights attained their greatest numerical strength following a successful railroad strike in 1885. Within two years the membership rose from 50,000 to over 700,000. Politically, the organization was active in securing the enactment of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882, and of another law in 1885 forbidding the importation of contract workers. The strength of the Knights declined rapidly during the late 1880's. Unsuccessful strikes on a number of railroad lines alienated public opinion. Skilled workers were dissatisfied with the inclusion of unskilled laborers in the same organization. Included in the unskilled were many radicals of both foreign and native extraction. Violence in industrial disputes, often at the behest of these radicals, tended to bring discredit upon the whole organization. By 1890 membership had dwindled to 100,000. The American Federation of Labor. During the 1870's a number of craft unions had continued to operate independently of the Knights. In 1881 representatives of national, state, and local unions met at Terre Haute, Indiana, and laid plans for the formation of a new international federation of craft unions. In 1886 at another convention held in Columbus, Ohio, this new organization was named the American Federation of Labor. Other corporations developed profit-sharing plans. Workers in some cases received bonuses whenever the company had an unusually successful year. Other companies made it possible for their employees to buy stock on favorable terms. In either case, employees came to In 1877 railroad strikers set fire to the Union Station in Pittsburgh. Steps were also taken to reduce the competition provided by immigrant workers. In 1868 the Burlingame Treaty had been drawn up with China, giving in the United States. Under this treaty large numbers of Chinese coolies were moving into California. Hayes was able to modify the Burlingame Treaty so that we secured the right to "regulate, limit, or suspend" the entry of Chinese laborers. A Chinese Exclusion Act passed in 1882 excluded workers from China and denied American citizenship to all Chinese aliens. Another law passed in the same year denied admission to paupers, convicts, insane persons, and individuals likely to become public charges. Three years later the importation of contract laborers was forbidden. Striking railroad workers are shown dragging the fireman and engineer from o Baltimore and Ohio freight train at Martinsburg, West Virginia. Summing Up You saw earlier that the progress of the Industrial Revolution made workers and farmers feel that they were not receiving a just reward for their efforts. They turned to reform movements to overcome what they considered an alliance between government and business. You recall that Republicans held the presidency and a large number of the seats in Congress from 1861 until 1885. Having gained favor as an antislavery party, they easily retained it during the Reconstruction period. The three Republican Presidents of the period all were well known military men, from the industrialized state of Ohio. The spoils system was widely used in maintaining political power. Perhaps you have attended a moving picture that carried you to early American times. After the film you may have said to yourself, "How our country has changed since those days!" In the present chapter you will see how a great number of these changes took place between 1870 and 1920. You will see how our native population grew and vast numbers of immigrants also came bringing new' customs and new problems. Cities grew' in number and in size, and took on much of the complexity we see in them today. Newspapers and magazines multiplied; the moving picture was introduced. Interest grew in music, in literature, and in art, and American writers and artists achieved world wide fame. There was likewise a great growth of educational institutions, both public and private. An increase of leisure created new interest in athletics and other forms of recreation. You will see in this chapter that all of these changes in our national life were closely associated with the growth of industry, and the consequent increase in national wealth. This is one of the chief ideas of the chapter. In studying, keep in mind the following questions: Population growth. Wherever the Industrial Revolution has taken place, there has been a markedly fast growth in population. As a new country the United States had grown with striking rapidity during the first half of the nineteenth century, even though its economy was primarily agricultural. The federal government had adopted a liberal immigration policy during the War between the States. Aliens could become eligible for the benefits of the Homestead Act by taking out their first citizenship papers—that is, announcing their intention of becoming American citizens. The Contract Labor Law permitted representatives of American employers to hire workers in their homelands and to arrange to pay for their passage to the New World. Steamship companies sought passengers for their westward trips across the Atlantic, and American railroads were seeking occupants for the liberal land grants they had received. Under these conditions the attractions of America were widely advertised in European countries. At the same time millions of Europeans had good reasons to be dissatisfied with conditions in their native lands. Economic opportunity in many countries was limited, both by a lack of necessary natural resources and by the power of either a landholding or an industrial United States Smaller numbers from China and Japan were similarly attracted to the region bordering the Pacific. Lite accompanying table shows the numbers in which immigrants came. Each succeeding decade of that half-century witnessed a significant increase in the number arriving, regardless of conditions ei tlier in the United States or in other parts of the world. The annual average in the decade immediately preceding the outbreak "I the First World War was over a million. Social problems created. The peak in immigration to the United States was reached between 1900 and 1910. they added to the complexity of the problems faced by these urban communities, as you will see later. Other problems arose, however, because of changes in the sources from which these people came. Until 1890 the vast majority of American immigrants had come from the countries of northern and eastern Europe—the British Isles, Germany, Norway, and Sweden. The great growth in The number of new arrivals resulted instead from the immigration of the peoples of the countries of southern and eastern Europe—Italy, Austria-Hungary, and Russia. It included large numbers of Czechs, Slovaks, Poles, Ukranians, Hungarians, Slovenians, and Croatians—submerged nationality groups in the Austro-Hungarian and Russian empires. So significant was this change that it has become customary to consider 1890 as a dividing date between an Old Immigration and a New Immigration. The New Immigration came from an entirely different cultural background. The people of whom it consisted had in their homeland little opportunity to become familiar with democratic procedures and democratic ideals. As members of persecuted minorities or of nations poor in natural resources, they were accustomed to low standards of living. Differences in language added to their difficulty in understanding their American neighbors and in making themselves understood. Their customs, too, seemed to sat them apart from the rest of the American people. In order to solve some of these difficulties, immigrant groups adopted the practice of establishing "island" communities in urban centers. Each industrial city came to have a Little Poland, a Little Italy, a Little Hungary. Mining towns would sometimes consist of people of one nationality. Because of the low pay the inhabitants of such communities received as unskilled workers, these nationality communities often reflected a lower standard of living as well as a different culture from that enjoyed by most native Americans. The language barrier also added to the difficulty of bridging the gap of misunderstanding, as you have seen. As they became better acquainted with the ways of the New World, as their work skills improved, and as they acquired homes and businesses of their own, their influence on American life increased. Anglo-Saxon elements no longer entirely dominated in the emerging American culture. Items that appeal to the tongue, the ear, or the eye are generally accepted for their true worth, whatever their origin. Americans were soon to discover that foods like spaghetti, strudel, and paprikash were welcome additions to any menu. On festival occasions, the colorful native costumes pleased the eye as polkas and other fo® music delighted the ear. 'arI/ enriched, rather than weaken the capacity for enjoymentIn business and industry, in engineering and invention, in science and medicine, in literature and music—in short, in a host of activities that went into the making of a better America, our foreign-born leaders took an active part. Americanization of immigrants. These long-term benefits, however, were not generally immediately apparent. Older Americans looked upon the rising tide of newcomers with doubt and suspicion. What was taught the children in the schools was often learned indirectly by parents in the home. The sons and daughters of immigrants enjoyed opportunities equal to those of other children. There were many Americans who feared that immigrants were coming at a much faster rate than our Americanizing agencies could provide for. To them, restriction seemed the only desirable policy. For years, two conflicting ideals had influenced public attitudes toward immigration. One of these was that America should be a land of opportunity offering hope to the oppressed and persecuted in other lands. This sentiment was aptly expressed in the following passage from the poem written by Emma Lazarus inscribed on the Statue of Liberty, a gift from the French people commemorating the hundredth anniversary of our independence: "Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, Send these, the homeless, to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden door!" The other ideal represented the desire to keep American institutions as they were. There was fear that uncontrolled numbers of immigrants arriving year after year would in time completely change the character of American civilization. Then, too, the low standards of living of many immigrant groups carried a threat to the efforts made by American workers to improve their economic position. Restriction of immigration. For many years the restriction of immigration was considered to be primarily a function of the states rather than of the federal government. State regulation, however, resulted in an ineffective hodgepodge. In 1875 the Supreme Court declared that the federal government had final authority in this field. The way was thus opened for congressional action. The first federal legislation on the subject, beginning in 1882, was, for the most part, designed to exclude individuals whose personal characteristics caused them to be considered undesirable. A succession of acts denied admission to such persons as the insane, idiots, epileptics, and those afflicted with contagious disease; paupers or persons likely to become public charges; and convicted felons, anarchists, and polygamists. In 1917 Congress added illiteracy to the bases for personal exclusion. Applicants for admission had to be able to pass a simple reading test in either their own or some other language. An act passed in 1885 forbade the admission of contract workers, and as you know, opposition to Oriental immigration re suited in another type of restriction one based upon nationality, 'pfig Exclusion Act of 1882 suspended Chinese immigration for ten years This suspension was periodically renewed until 1904, when it was again renewed but without time limit. Japanese emigration to the United States did not begin until after the Chinese had been excluded. Japanese workers, however, were no more welcome in California than the Chinese had been. In response to the demands of an aroused public, the San Francisco Board of Education in 1906 issued an order barring children of Japanese parentage from the public schools. The enforcement of that order would have provoked diplomatic difficulties with the Japanese government. In opening up that country to Western civilization, we had made a treaty with Japan in which we promised to give Japanese nationals in this country the same rights as those of the "most favored nation." President Theodore Roosevelt exerted his influence in solving the problem thus presented. The school board was persuaded to withdraw its order and an informal gentlemens agreement was made with Japan, which no more passports were to issued to Japanese laborers to enter the United States. As you will note later, after First World War the principle fusion on the basis of national origin was to be applied to European immigration as well. Status of tire Negro population, until 1865 Negroes had been primarily agricultural workers in the South. Many Negroes continued in that occupation after freedom had been won. Some went to the emerging industrial cities of the South where they found employment in the mills and factories. Others began to emigrate to the industrial cities of the North, particularly after the outbreak of the First World War cut off European immigration. Their position in Northern cities was similar to that accorded other immigrant groups. Their rural backgrounds added to the problems of adjusting to life in these areas. As the status of the Negro improved, he was able to make more diversified contributions to the economic and cultural life of the nation. Negro spirituals had always appealed to large sections of the American people, and Negro singers won wide popular acclaim. Negroes, too, gained fame for their ability in sports. Early in the twentieth century Jack Johnson became heavyweight boxing champion of the world. Negroes also played an important part in American triumphs in the revived international Olympic games. The Rise of Industrial Cities Effect on Harding. Harding was greatly depressed by the revelations of corruption in his administration. He decided to leave the capital for a trip to Alaska, making a number of speeches en route. As the trip progressed, his companions noticed that both he and Mrs. Harding seemed very tired. Harding became seriously ill at San Francisco and died on August 2, 1923, in a hotel in that city. Calvin Coolidge, Vice-President, was sworn in as President a few hours later. Oil scandals. A short time after Harding's death, attention was called to the fact that certain oil reserves which belonged to the Navy had been leased to private companies by the Department of the Interior. At the request of President Harding, these reserves had been transferred to that department by Secretary of the Navy Denby. Albert Fall, Secretary of the Interior, then secretly leased the California reserves to the Doheny Oil Company and the Wyoming reserves, commonly known as the Teapot Dome field, to the Sinclair Company. News of the leases leaked out, and the Senate started an investigation. As a result of the investigations, Fall was convicted of accepting a bribe and was sentenced to a term in jail. As President, he had advocated the protective tariff and a reduction in taxes. Charles G. Dawes was selected as the candidate for Vice-President. Dawes had come into prominence when he served on the commission which devised the scheme for payment of reparations by Germany. The Democrats had difficulty in selecting a nominee. Support was almost equally divided between William G. McAdoo, former secretary of the Treasury, and Alfred E. Smith, governor of New York. The convention balloted more than one hundred times, but neither could get the necessary two-thirds majority. The Administration of Coolidge Policies of Coolidge. When Coolidge came to the presidency as the result of Harding's death, he made few changes in policies and personnel. When changes were forced on him because of the oil scandals, he replaced these men with persons who caused him no embarrassment. Others resigned from cabinet posts for one reason or another, but he was able to keep several men, including Andrew Mellon and Herbert Hoover, for his entire administration. First specific immigration act; one clause excluded alien adults unable to read at least one language Established the quota system, based on 3 per cent of the number of people of a nationality living in America at the time of the 1910 census Reduced quota to 2 per cent, based on 1890 census; provided for minimum immigration of 100 from each quota country; set 150,000 maximum yearly immigration Admitted persons of certain professions and wives and children of American citizens on a nonquota basis Specified and defined security measures with regard to entry, registration, and deportation of aliens Admitted Chinese to naturalization and citizenship rights; established quotas for Chinese immigration Admitted to rights of citizenship persons of races indigenous to India and the Philippine Islands Admitted displaced persons from conn tries with small quotas Amended Immigration Act of 1917 and Nationality Act of 1940 in regard to persons considered subversive Terminated the provisions of displaced Persons Act, and state of emergency therein proclaim Established new national quotas, set 1 maximum number of inuni gran be admitted each year at 1546. The Korean War stimulated production of new military aircraft, such as the jet shown above, which was developed by the Navy. the adoption of a program, but in 1947 the merger was enacted into law. The new law provided for a civilian secretary of defense in the President's cabinet with three undersecretaries, one each for the Army, Navy, and Air Force. The act also created new agencies for defense: a national security council, a resources board, a research board, a munitions board, and a joint board of chiefs of staff. Air power. The increased use of air power for defense was advocated. Such rapid advances in the improvement of airplanes was made that many of the planes used in the Second World War were obsolete. It was felt that the United States should have more of the latest improved aircraft. In the Berlin airlift the Air Force gained practical experience in transportation. The combined United States, British, and French transport was able to take fifty-five hundred tons of supplies a day into Berlin. This was a greater achievement than any accomplished during the war. Research was going on in the field of guided missiles, but most of the development was a military secret. The use of jet-propelled engines made it possible for aircraft to fly greater distances with increased speed. 