About one hundred and seventy million people now live in the forty-eight states which form our Union. If they were equally distributed over the three million square miles of the country, there would be about fifty-seven inhabitants to the square mile. But our population is very "spotty." The tiny state of Rhode Island has seven hundred and fifty people to the square mile, whereas the state of Nevada, ninety times as large, has less than two. The four industrial states of New' York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Illinois, occupying less than seven per cent of the area of the United States, hold nearly thirty per cent of the population. The four mountain states of Montana, Wyoming, Utah, and Nevada, with fifteen per cent of the area, have about one per cent of the population. Our Negro citizens number more than sixteen million, and three hundred and fifty thousand Indians have survived the relentless march of the white men across their continent. On the whole we find that our population has grown from two main sources: first, from the natural increase and constant westward migration of the settlers who came to our shores in the colonial days, and secondly, from the heavy European immigration during the nineteenth century. In the seventy years preceding the First World War more than thirty million immigrants arrived in America. Two thirds of them came from Germany, Italy, Ireland, Poland, and Russia. America has been called the "melting pot" because of these millions of people of foreign speech and customs who have been thrown in with our native colonial stock to be fused into a new type of American. Their brains and brawn have brought many benefits. Certainly the mixture of peoples in America, like the variety of soil and climate in our vast continent, has had a constant influence upon our history. heavy duties. (2) They would easily find the passage to China. (3) They would advance the Christian religion by carrying the Gospel to the Indians. (4) And, above all, they would "abate the pride of Spain and pull King Philip down." The Attraction of the New World • Overseas commerce was bringing to one class of Englishmen the wealth necessary to finance colonial adventures. Other classes were finding living in England so difficult that they were ready to risk a fresh start in the New World. Many "country7 gentlemen" found it hard to keep up their estates, because of the rise in prices (inflation) which follows a rapid increase in the currency. The farmers were in distress because of higher rents and taxes and because of the enclosure system. Great tracts of land were being fenced for sheep pastures to supply wool for the weavers in Flanders. Since one man with two or three dogs could tend the sheep in a large pasture, the hundreds of men who would have worked on the same land, if it had been kept in farms, lost their jobs. We read in Queen Elizabeth's day of the great increase of idle "rogues and beggars." We note the government's attempt both to relieve them by the "poor laws," and to compel them, by threats of imprisonment and the whipping post, to work for wages which were not enough to keep body and soul together. The English yeomen, proud of their freedom, resented being treated either as objects of charity or as subjects for jail. True, Henry VIII's new nobility and the "lords of wool" had monopolized the land of England. But there were broader lands calling from beyond the Atlantic. Were these not the same lands which had enriched the hated Spaniard with shiploads of silver? Why was there not yet an English roof over an English head in the New Home Towns of English Colonists Place names link us with the past. Which of these names are familiar to you? How many appear on American maps today? What places near your home reveal the variety of nations whence our peoples came? World, where Spain had been established for more than a hundred years? The English flag should be raised in America! And so patriotism combined with land hunger, the love of adventure, and the hope of riches to furnish motives for the English colonization of the New World. James I's Foolish Course • To these worldly motives must be added the Englishman's belief in his right to hold and to express his own opinion on political and religious subjects. He admitted his loyalty to his king. But he did not believe that to be a good subject he must cease to be a free citizen! He was accustomed to exercise responsibility in local government and to speak his mind in Parliament. The great Elizabeth had won. Governor William Berkeley refused to defend the outlying settlements of the colony against the Susquehanna Indians in 1675 (because of his personal profit from the fur trade), a popular young planter named Nathaniel Bacon raised an army of three hundred volunteers on his own account. He not only defeated the Indians but drove Governor Berkeley out of his capital, Jamestown, and set it on fire. Bacon died of fever (or poison) at the moment of his victory, and his "rebellion" collapsed. But, as the first armed resistance to the behavior of English officials in the American colonies, it was a forerunner of the great rebellion which took place exactly a century later. The second English colony in America had a religious origin. The Separatists were so "harried" by King James's spies and sheriffs that in the year 1608 about a hundred fled to Holland. At that time Holland was the only country in Europe where men were not persecuted for their religious beliefs. But these exiles were somewhat unhappy in spite of their freedom to worship as they pleased. Being mostly farmers, they found it hard to adapt themselves to the industrial life of the city of Leiden, where they were settled. Besides, they did not want their children to grow up in a foreign land, where they would forget their native tongue and be tempted to neglect their strict observance of Sunday. They felt like "pilgrims and strangers," longing for a home under the English flag. America beckoned; but the Pilgrims had neither money nor supplies, nor friends at court. The Mayflower • At length they, succeeded in getting permission from the Virginia Company to settle within its territory. They found some London "adventurers" willing to finance the voyage. On September 16, 1620, the Mayflower, a leaky ship of one hundred and eighty tons, sailed from Plymouth. On board besides the crew were thirty-five of the Leiden congregation and nearly twice that number of Londoners who were not Separatists. Dangerously overcrowded, the Mayflower, after a "longe beating" of sixty-five days, reached the shores of Cape Cod. The Pilgrims first stepped ashore on November 21, at what is now Provincetown. They were far north of the limits of the Virginia Company's land. But instead of proceeding southward they spent a month exploring the Cape for a suitable place of settlement. They took on fresh water, fish, and Indian corn. On December 21, 1620, they moved to the low, sandy shore of Plymouth harbor. Here they began to build their first permanent settlement. Several reasons have been given for this important, decision. Bradford says that the Mayflower was prevented from sailing south to Virginia because she "fell along dangerous shoulds [shoals] and roring breakers." Another suggestion is that the pilot was ordered to land the settlers within the territory of the new Council for New England. Still others said that the Pilgrims had come to fear that their religious liberty would be in danger if they settled in Virginia, where the Church was tax supported. To most Americans today colonial times seem very remote and strange. Those of us who live in the states along the Atlantic seaboard, however, have many reminders of our forefathers. There are hundreds of colonial houses here with their pillared fronts and dormer windows. Slender white church spires overlook colonial burying grounds in which slanting, moss-covered headstones bear quaintly pious inscriptions. Monuments and markers in almost every town keep alive the memory of historic events. But even the direct heirs of the colonial Americans find it hard to understand the customs and thoughts of their ancestors. For these people had no better way of traveling by land than on horseback or in slow, springless stagecoaches. They had no light but that furnished by candles or whale-oil lamps. For water they depended upon what they drew up from wells or caught in barrels from the rain running down the roof. Nevertheless, the colonial period is as important in our history as the years of childhood and adolescence are in our lives. It was a long period. Almost as many years passed between the settlement of Jamestown and the Declaration of Independence as have passed since George Washington took office as first President of the United States. During those long, slow colonial years the foundations of the American nation were laid. The English colonies were gradually transformed into American colonies. Two Colonial Epochs • We may divide the colonial period into two parts about the year 1690. In the first period (the 17th century), which we have just studied, all the English colonies (except Georgia) on the mainland of America and in the West Indies were established. Most of the settlers came from England. At times there were spurts of emigration which brought several thousands to the colonies, as in the case of Massachusetts from 1628 to 1642. On the whole, however, the growth of the population was slow. As the seventeenth century drew to a close there were only about three hundred thousand people in the colonies. The greater part of them stayed rather close to the neighborhood of the original settlements.They were concentrated in the region about Boston, the Connecticut and Hudson valleys, Philadelphia, the Jamestown peninsula, and Charleston. Intercolonial travel was rare in the absence of roads and the presence of dangerous Indians. Each colony was more closely in touch with England and the West Indies than with its nearer neighbors in populated areas? What were the two natural ways inland? Which nationality groups peopled successive frontiers? How did each frontier encourage democracy? The eighteenth century, however, tells a different story. The population grew steadily until it reached some 2,750,000 on the eve of the American Revolution. Religious and political persecution in Europe drove thousands to the New World to swell the natural increase of the large colonial families. Thousands of Huguenots (Protestants) were expelled from France by Louis XIV's revocation of the Edict of Nantes (1685). They came to New England, New York, and South Carolina. The defeat of the Scotch supporters of the Stuart cause in 1715 and 1745 sent many Highlanders to America. Over 50,000 Germans, fleeing from the destruction of the Rhinelands by the French armies, flocked to Penn's colony between 1727 and 1754. Protestants from the north of Ireland (the Scotch-Irish) were oppressed by the harsh English laws against their industries and commerce. They came over to settle the frontier region from New Hampshire to the Carolinas. There were nearly 400,000 of them here at the time of the Revolution. Altogether, the non-English stocks made up more than a quarter of the population in 1776. The colonies were still far from the idea of a political union in the first three quarters of the eighteenth century. They were, nevertheless, closer in many ways. Stage lines and post-office routes were connecting the chief towns from Portsmouth to Savannah. The Indian menace declined with the ending of the series of wars that lasted from 1690 to 1763. Trade between the colonies increased rapidly. Commercial firms in New York and Philadelphia had accounts with firms in Boston and Charleston. Families of New England and Maryland, Pennsylvania and the Carolinas, intermarried. Virginians, like James Madison, were being sent to college in New Jersey (Princeton). By 1750 there were in the colonies many tens of thousands who had no attachment to England. Already the descendants of the original settlers were thinking and speaking of English officials or visitors who came over as "strangers." The struggling, isolated English colonies of the seventeenth century had become the prosperous, self-reliant American colonies of the eighteenth. All the colonies had representative assemblies elected by the people allowed to vote. The colonies with western frontiers had a common problem in the rivalry between the "back country'" and the older settlements on the coast. They quarreled over such matters as money for defense against the Indians and a fair share of seats in the assemblies. The merchants had a common interest in and grievance against the acts of Parliament and the orders of the Board of Trade in London governing commerce. Those common problems determined the trend of our history in the eighteenth century. Furthermore, conditions in colonial America prevented the rise of separate social classes as in Europe. We had no kings or I nobles at one end of the social scale, and no I downtrodden serfs or peasants at the other. Land here was abundant and cheap. Even the poor "redemptioner," who had to work for five years or more in order to pay his way over to America, could get a small farm when I he became his own master. There was, to be [sure, a colonial "aristocracy," consisting of the rich merchants of New England and New ; York and the great planters of the South. But it was an aristocracy of wealth and not of birth. It was constantly broken into by men | who made fortunes in commerce or land speculation or money-changing. As industries like iron and woolen manufactures grew, the number of wageworkers in mills and factories increased. But still they were few as compared with the "yeomen," or farmers, who made up over 90 per cent of the population at the time of the Revolution. At the bottom of the social scale were the Negro slaves, who were bought and sold like cattle. Slavery existed in all the colonies, and there were few voices condemning it as a moral evil. In the North the Negroes were used as house servants and were comparatively few in number. But they increased rapidly in the South, where their labor was fitted to hot work in the tobacco and rice fields. Many of them were brought from Africa by the rum-distillers of Massachusetts and Rhode Island. By 1775 there were more than half a million Negro slaves in the country. All but a few thousand lived south of Mason and Dixon's line. Three Types of Colonies • Though the colonies had much in common, we may divide them into three groups according to their chief interests and occupations. (1) New England was the land of the Puritans, where religion dominated the scene. The clergy' controlled public affairs until the rise of the merchants and lawyers in the eighteenth century'. The towns, with church and school as their center, were the units of settlement. These had to be laboriously cleared of stones. But there was fine timber in the forests for shipbuilding. And the supply of fish in the northern waters seemed inexhaustible. So the New Englanders took to the sea. Their stanch, swift ships carried rum to Africa, to return with slaves for the Southern trade. Lumber, shingles, barrel staves, horses, and ironware flowed to the West Indies. Fish were shipped to all ports far and near. By the middle of the eighteenth century the little town of Marblehead, Massachusetts, was sending out over a hundred and fifty fishing vessels a year. The colonies south of Mason and Dixon's line were in sharp contrast to New England. The Anglican Church was established in all of them, but the harsh rule of the Puritan clergy was missing. The broad county or parish, not the compact town, was the unit of government. Indigo and rice came from the swampy coast lands and tobacco from the large plantations extending along the rivers. Deerskins from the back country, and pitch and tar from the woods of North Carolina were regular articles of commerce. All these products were sent to England and, so far as was permitted by the English laws, to other countries in Europe. The wealthy planters, with thousands of acres and many hundred slaves, were far outnumbered by the small farmers with not more than four or five slaves and by the "poor whites." Nevertheless these planter aristocrats directed public affairs and gave the tone to Southern life. They imported furniture, silver plate, musical instruments, and dress goods from England and were generally in debt to the manufacturers of the mother country. They often sent their sons to school at Eton or Oxford. (3) The middle group of colonies (New York, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and New Jersey) were of a much more varied type than New England and the South. Their population contained more foreign elements, such as Germans, Dutch, Welsh, and ScotchIrish. They combined both the county and the town government. The large patroons' A Colonial Stagecoach Pick out items which seem typical of the colonial period. Heavy luggage was carried in the boot of the coach, which you see opened. What corresponds to the boot in an automobile today? Mural painting by Bertram Goodman in the Post Office, Quakertown, Pennsylvania Ducking Stool and Stocks • Public embarrassment and ridicule were widely used to correct such faults as gossiping, idleness, and drunkenness. What light do they throw upon the times? Why are they illegal today? The merchant class rose to wealth and power as in New England. By 1750 New York and Philadelphia had outdistanced Boston in commerce. The Anglican Church was established in New York and New Jersey. The Quakers predominated in Pennsylvania. But there were many other religious bodies, such as the Presbyterians, the Dutch Reformed, and the Jews, enjoying freedom of worship. The ablest of the early governors of New York, Thomas Dongan, was an Irish Roman Catholic. Wheat was a chief article of export. As the colonial period advanced, however, manufactures developed. Iron, glass, and pottery began to compete with such products as cereals, furs, lumber, and livestock. Rivalries between North and South Sectional Rivalries between North and South • On what three issues were these two sections divided? How would you have stood on these issues? Why? The Tariff of 1816 • Soon after the Bank bill became law, Madison signed another bill which gave even stronger proof of the nationalistic spirit. While our foreign trade was suffering from the war, large amounts of capital which had been invested in shipping were switched to manufacturing. By the close of 1815 there were already one hundred and forty cotton mills within a radius of thirty miles of Providence, Rhode Island. Pioneer industries of iron and of wool and cotton were scattered through the Ohio Valley from Pittsburgh to Cincinnati. The British manufacturers, who had supplied the American market ever since colonial days, did not wish to lose it now. Even before the Senate had ratified the peace treaty of Ghent, British ships were waiting off Sandy Hook. They were loaded with goods made by the cheap labor of England. They planned to "dump" these on the American market at lower prices than those at which the same goods could be produced in the new American factories and mills. In a single year the British sent over ninety million dollars' worth of merchandise to "ruin" our "rising manufacturers." In order to protect these "infant industries" against British competition, Congress passed a tariff act (April, 1816). This made now six lines of eight stars each, representing the forty-eight states. We must think of the country in the years of Monroe's administration as a great geographical framework. It contained rather isolated communities, with different types of inhabitants and occupations and traditions. These differences caused conflicting ideas on a great number of questions. Were the agricultural or the commerical and industrial interests the more important? What kind of currency or what types of banks were best? Should the government at Washington help to develop the more "backward" parts of the country or leave them to shift for themselves? Did "democracy" mean that all adult male citizens, regardless of their birth, wealth, or religious opinions, should have the privilege of voting and of holding office? Had the national government the right to forbid slavery7 in the territory of the United States west of the Mississippi? The growth of our population and prosperity after 1815 served only to intensify sectionalism. Each of the sections of the country was devoted to what it felt to be its own special needs. Quite naturally, each section did its best to persuade the government to favor its views. This is why practically all the national measures which we have noted in the first half of this chapter were bitterly disputed in the 1820's. The "era of good feeling" soon gave way to an era of bad feeling. The Industrial East • We have already seen what a change the war made in the roe in the field. The Federalists had been absorbed by the Republican party. Monroe was re-elected with only one dissenting electoral vote. Capital switched from shipping into manufacturing. New England, New York, New Jersey, and eastern Pennsylvania became the center of an industrial section of the country. This gradually extended out into the Ohio Valley. For a time the shipping interests of the seaport centers (such as Boston, New York, and Baltimore) tried to encourage foreign commerce as against the development of manufactures. They wanted freedom of trade. Daniel Webster of Massachusetts, for example, voted against the tariff bills until 1828. But the industrial interests gained steadily until they became the main interests of the section. The manufacturers wanted, first of all, a high tariff to protect their industries against British competition. In order to have an abundant supply of laborers for their mills and factories, they favored immigration. They opposed the rapid settlement of the West which drew men off into the wilderness. They wished a large population to grow up within easy reach of the manufacturing centers in order to provide a market for their goods. Finally, they wanted a sound currency and banking system to protect business credit. The Planters of the South • The interests of the South were quite different from those of the North. The campaigns for popular education, for the abolition of slavery, for the release of debtors from prison, for the safeguarding of health in the factories, and for the humane treatment of patients in hospitals and asylums—are but a few of the reform movements of the time. They testify, however, to the new interest in the welfare of the "common man." And our nation today is the better for the courageous leadership these daring reformers displayed. Thomas Jefferson believed that the life of American democracy depended upon the free, self-reliant owners and tillers of the soil. They would keep a watchful eye on their public servants. They would guard against any invasion of their "unalienable rights" of "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." Once let men become herded in cities (the plague spots of civilization), they would degenerate into an idle, vicious, restless "proletariat" easily led by demagogues. Just the thing that Jefferson feared was beginning to take place in the Jacksonian era. The factory system was gathering hundreds of thousands of "hands" into the industrial centers of the North. Immigrants from Europe were attracted now not so much by the land as by the chance for a job in a mill. They began to pour in by the tens of thousands to take the place of the Americans who preferred to go West rather than work for a boss. These immigrants furnished a cheap labor supply. What is more, being rapidly naturalized and given the ballot they offered the politicians a rich harvest of votes. Politics, the science of government, came to be more and more the game of capturing offices. The art of flattering people rather than of instructing them was cultivated. All the tricks of political advertising—catchwords, cartoons, badges, banners, stump speeches, clubs, and rallies—were used to catch votes. And public office, when once attained, was not looked on as an honorable position of civic responsibility. It was rather seen as a source of patronage with which to reward the faithful "party workers." Abuse of the Immigrant Vote • By doing small favors for the thousands of newcomers strange to our ways and in need of help, political bosses were able to control large blocks of immigrant voters. Who gained? lost? Why? William L. Marcy of New York in a debate in the United States Senate in 1832 made the remark "To the victors belong the spoils." This famous proverb, borrowed from the Romans, gave the name to the vicious "spoils system," which cursed our government for half a century. It meant that with every change of administration the civil servants of the defeated party were jobless. Regardless of merit or length of faithful service, they were removed to make way for supporters of the victorious party. The man who was elected to the Presidency at this important time of ferment was in sharp contrast to the men who had occupied the position before him. Not only did he differ in speech and manners but in his ideas of the nature of the first office in the land. Our former Presidents had considered themselves as "executives," to carry out the laws made by Congress. They respected the "checks and balances" of the Constitution. By these checks Congress and the President had a mutual control over each other's actions with the Supreme Court as the final authority. But Jackson had little regard for Congress. Was it not the "aristocratic" House that had kept him out of the Presidency in 1825? And he had no awe of the Supreme Court. He believed that the President had as much right as Congress or the Court to decide what laws were desirable or constitutional. So he vetoed more acts of Congress than all previous Presidents put together. On one occasion he even defied the Supreme Court with the remark "John Marshall has made his decision; now let him enforce it." Indeed, Jackson considered that his own will was the will of the American people. They had chosen him to be their spokesman. He liked to think of himself as a Roman tribune. This officer, elected by the masses of plebeians, could sit by the door of the aristocratic Senate and shout his veto of laws injurious to the interests of the commoners. Jackson's character and patriotism were above reproach. But his intense devotion to what he believed to be good for the country often led him to hasty judgments. He was inclined to believe that those who were opposed to his policies were enemies of the country. He was seldom without a quarrel, personal or public. On the other hand, no President has ever had a more devoted band of followers! They were challenged by his keen personality, the daring of his military achievements, and the vigor of his championship of "the forgotten man." They were drawn to him in enthusiastic devotion, as the magnet gathers the iron filings in its field. About Andrew Jackson there was little neutrality. People were either for him or against him. To his opponents Jackson was a selfish demagogue. They said he would do anything necessary to please the mob in his desire for one-man power. They labeled him "King Andrew" and feared that his contempt for Congress and the Supreme Court could only result in the downfall of good government. Yet, the nation prospered. Jackson's Quarrel with Calhoun • Before many months Jackson had a quarrel with Vice-President Calhoun which led to the most serious consequences. It started with the President's disapproval of Mrs. Calhoun's attitude in a social feud which was raging in Washington. Secretary of War Eaton had married a sprightly tavern-keeper's daughter, Peggy O'Neill. The wives of some of the cabinet members, led by Mrs. Calhoun, refused to recognize her socially. Jackson, whose own departed wife had been slandered, sprang to the defense of Airs. Then he won a great diplomatic victory by forcing the government of Louis Philippe of France to pay us 23,500,000 francs in claims of our citizens for American property seized by. At home Jackson swept out of his path every opponent and rival. The aristocratic Biddle had scornfully written: "This worthy President thinks that because he has scalped Indians, ... he is to have his way with the Bank. He is mistaken." But it was Biddle who was mistaken, and who died in disappointment the year after his Bank of Pennsylvania went down. Henry' Clay sought revenge for his defeat in 1832 by getting the Senate to reject Taney as Secretary' of the Treasury. But two y'ears later, on Marshall's death (1835), Clay saw Taney raised to the Chief-Justiceship of the Supreme Court. Calhoun, smarting from Jackson's exclusion of his friends from the cabinet, had caused the defeat of Van Buren's nomination as minister to England. But in 1833 he saw Van Buren occupying his own former seat as Vice-President and presiding over the Senate that had rejected his appointment to London. Jackson emerged victorious from every attack on his policies. In the eyes of the common people he was almost a god. "General Jackson may be President for life, if he wishes," wrote William Wirt. But Jackson did not wish another term. In the spring of 1835 a convention of his party (now called Democrats) met at Baltimore. On his instructions they nominated Van Buren to succeed him. Meanwhile Jackson's enemies had formed a coalition (alliance) against him under the name of "Whigs." The Whigs were held together by no stronger tie than a common dislike of the President. Four groups came under their banner: (1) National Republicans, like Clay and Webster, condemned Jackson's vetoes of the Bank charter and bills for "internal improvements." (2) States-rights men, like Calhoun and Tyler, resented his threat to South Carolina in the nullification controversy. (3) "Native Americans" saw a danger in the numbers of easily naturalized immigrants flocking to our shores to join the Democratic party and become the political tools of the "bosses." Until the Jacksonian era the immigrants to America did not number more than about ten thousand a year. But from that time on they came in ever-increasing numbers. In the early 1830's our growing industries could count on the addition of some fifty thousand new "hands" a year. They took the place of the independent Americans who preferred seeking their fortunes in the West to working at low wages for a boss. Of course, the new immigrants were at the mercy of the political as well as of the industrial boss. (4) The conservative classes also joined the Whigs. They hated Jackson's dictatorial conduct in snubbing Congress and the Supreme Court. They shuddered at his wholesale removals from office. They were alarmed by his little group of politicians and newspapermen (the "Kitchen Cabinet") who could be counted upon "to sneeze every time that he took a pinch of snuff." All four of these groups were convinced that the reign of "King Andrew" must be broken. The Whigs, in 1836, held no national convention, published no platform, put up no candidate against Van Buren. President Tyler wrecked this program by twice vetoing a Bank bill. He refused to support the distribution scheme or a tariff high enough to create a surplus in the Treasury. For this he was read out of the Whig party (to which he had never really belonged) as a "traitor" and a miserable "President by accident." Clay resigned from the Senate in disgust in 1842. And all the Whig members of the cabinet, except Secretary of State Daniel Webster, also retired. The Webster-Ashburton Treaty Webster remained at his post because he did not wish to seem to take orders from Clay. Moreover, he was engaged in an important diplomatic negotiation with Great Britain, which he hoped would succeed. Our relations with England were, in fact, more strained in 1841 than they had been at Settlement of Our Maine Boundary. There were five reasons for this: (1) Many British investors had lost money in the depression following the panic of 1837. Several states had even refused to pay their bonds. (2) Bitter feelings still remained from the Caroline affair. (3) The Southern planters were enraged by an act of the authorities of the British island of Nassau. A shipload of slaves had mutinied on board the brig Creole, killed the captain, overpowered the crew, and brought the brig into port. The British had set them free. (4) The stream of American immigration into Oregon was threatening to sweep away the equal rights of the British there. These rights had been guaranteed by the terms of the joint occupation. (5) Finally, war had actually broken out between the lumbermen of Maine and New Brunswick. The cause of the dispute was the location of the northeastern boundary between the United States and Canada as determined by the treaty of 1783. A fortunate change in British politics in 1841 brought Lord Aberdeen, a friend of the United States, into the Foreign Office. In the summer of 1842 Aberdeen sent Lord Ashburton (also a friend of America and a personal friend of Webster) to Washington. Here in pleasantly informal discussions most of the points of controversy were settled. The Webster-Ashburton Treaty fixed our northeastern boundary in its present location. It divided the twelve thousand square miles of territory in dispute almost equally between New Brunswick and Maine. In the spring of 1843 Webster, unable to work in harmony with the administration, also resigned his cabinet position. 1) Mexico owed about fifteen million dollars to British capitalists. For this debt, lands to ic north and west of the Rio Grande had een mortgaged. (2) An independent state of exas under British protection would be of at commercial value. It would furnish gland with plentiful supplies of cotton d a market for her manufactures, unmpered by the tariff of the United States. 3) Finally, Lord Aberdeen wrote a letter to the British minister in Washington, in which he expressed the hope that slavery would be pt out of Texas. It had already been abolished in the British West Indies. Engtid even went so far, in 1843, as to promise a large loan to Texas and to secure the recognition of her independence from Mexico. She would need only to consent to remain an dependent, free-soil republic. But, in spite of these offers, the Texans ill favored annexation. In April, 1844, oun completed a treaty with the Texan ster. It provided for the reception of Texas not as a state but as a territory of the United States. She was to surrender her public lands. But Adams's gloomy prophecy was premature. The Senate, on June 8, rejected Calhoun's treaty by the decisive vote of 16 to 35. Only sixteen votes could be found for the treaty in a Senate which contained twenty-six members from the states of the South. This fact shows that the plan to annex Texas cannot be regarded simply as a "gigantic conspiracy" to add slave territory to the Union. Discord Increases between North and South. A truce, however, brings no peace unless both sides are satisfied. The "good feeling" of the early 1850's was as misleading as the good feeling of the early 1820's. The apparent success of the compromise measures only led the extremists in North and South to more determined opposition. The older leaders, with their respect for the Constitution and its spirit of compromise, were passing from the scene. Their places were being taken by bold and impatient men, like Benjamin Wade of Ohio, Charles Sumner of Massachusetts, William L. Yancey of Alabama, and Governor Quitman of Mississippi. Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois, the foremost political figure of the 1850's, was a sincere supporter of the Constitution and conciliation. But even he urged his cause in the language of abuse and sarcasm. All through the years of the truce, incidents occurred which foretold the renewal of strife. Hardly a month passed without a disturbance. It might be in a Northern city over a claim for the return of a fugitive slave, or a meeting of hotheads in the South to advise immediate secession. The truce was gradually being shattered. America Asserts Her "Manifest Destiny" • Three achievements combined to develop a spirit of boastfulness in our leaders and people: (1) Economically we were prosperous. (2) We had won decisive victories in the Mexican War. (3) We had expanded to the Pacific. Statesmen like Cass, Douglas, Clay, and Webster now talked of the destiny of the American flag to float over the whole continent from Hudson Bay to the Isthmus of Panama. They spoke of the superiority of our free democratic government over the monarchies of the Old World. The potato crops failed in Ireland in 1845 and 1846. And the revolutions of 1848 upset the leading states of continental Europe. These events sent to our shores hundreds of thousands of immigrants who were welcomed to the "land of liberty." Our government was quick to express its sympathy for peoples struggling for their freedom from tyranny in Europe. In December, 1850, our Secretary of State, Daniel Webster, sent a defiant reply to the Austrian representative in Washington. The latter had complained of the sympathy we showed to Hungary in her struggle for freedom. "The power of this Republic at the present moment is spread over a region one of the richest and most fertile on the globe, and of an extent in comparison with which the possessions of the House of Hapsburg are but a patch on the earth's surface." The Hungarian patriot, General Louis Kossuth, came to America the next year. He was received by Congress and the people with a welcome only less enthusiastic than that given to Lafayette a quarter of a century before. In the summer of 1853 Douglas made a trip abroad and probably expressed the sentiment of a large proportion of his fellow countrymen. He wrote: "Europe is tottering to the verge of dissolution. When you visit her, the objects which enlist your attention are the relics of past greatness, the broken columns erected to departed power." And Henry Clay, on his deathbed, wrote to Kossuth that "for the cause of liberty, we should keep our lamp burning brightly on this western shore, as a light to all nations." Two days later Representative Preston Brooks, Butler's nephew, entered the Senate Chamber. While Sumner was bent over his desk at work, Brooks attacked him savagely with a heavy cane. Sumner struggled to rise to his feet, wrenching his desk from the floor. But he was too dazed to resist his attacker, who continued to rain blows upon him until he fell to the floor unconscious. Brooks was censured, but a motion to expel him from the House failed to get the necessary two-thirds vote. He resigned and appealed to his supporters in South Carolina. They re-elected him with only six dissenting votes. He was toasted at banquets in the South and presented with souvenir canes. The seriously injured Sumner was gradually restored to health by the skill of European doctors. Over three years passed, however, before he was able again to take his seat in the Senate. In the week following the raid on Lawrence, the murders on the Pottawatomie, and the attack on Sumner, the Democratic national convention met at Cincinnati. The delegates took care not to nominate any candidate who could be held responsible for the strife in Kansas, which was then at its height. Passing over both Pierce and Douglas, they chose James Buchanan, a dignified and conservative Pennsylvanian. He had been Secretary of State under Polk. Moreover, he had been absent from the country as minister to England when the Kansas struggle was started. His "availability" thus consisted chiefly in two negative facts: He had no connection with Kansas and no abolitionist leanings which would offend the South. The first national convention of the Republican party was held at Philadelphia on June 17. Its platform declared that it was "both the right and duty of Congress" to legislate for the territories of the United States, and to abolish in them "the twin relics of barbarism," slavery and polygamy. The mention of "polygamy" was directed at the Mormons, a sect founded in 1827 by Joseph Smith. He claimed to have discovered on a hillside near Palmyra, New York, a divine revelation written on plates of gold. The Mormons made converts rapidly. They attempted to found settlements in Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois, and suffered considerable persecution. Finally in 1847, under their new leader Brigham Young, they migrated to the valley of the Great Salt Lake, Utah, which was then Mexican territory'. The next year, by the Mexican cession, they came again under the rule of the United States. Though the Mormons established a peaceful and prosperous community at Salt Lake City, their practice of plural marriages (polygamy) was later declared illegal by our courts. The Republican party further demanded the immediate admission of Kansas as a free state. Instead of choosing a man of political experience, like Seward or Chase, the convention nominated John C. Fremont of California. His romantic career as the "Pathfinder" of the Far West and the "Conqueror of California" had won him a reputation far greater than his abilities. Still the party slogan, "Free soil, Free speech, Fremont," had considerable appeal. There was also a third party in the field called the "Native American," or "KnowNothing," party. This party had grown out of the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, a secret association formed in 1853 to combat the influence of immigrants, especially Roman Catholics, in our politics. It got its nickname from the reply, "I don't know," which its members made to any inquiry about its activities. In the troubled days of the middle 1850's the Native Americans attracted a good many undecided Whigs and some Democrats to their ranks. They even carried a number of state elections. But in the presidential election of 1856, while their candidate Fillmore polled 875,000 votes, they won only the state of Maryland. It is interesting to note that it was the colony of Maryland that had been founded for the religious freedom of the very' same group the Native Americans now attacked. Buchanan Is Elected President There were frequent warnings that the triumph of the "Black Republican" ticket would mean the end of the Union. "To the fifteen states of the South," said Rufus Choate of Alassachusetts, "Fremont's government would appear an alien government, and, worse than that, a hostile government." On the other hand, every week of the continuance of the disturbances in Kansas was making converts for the Republicans. Three things saved the election for the Democrats. One was the tireless campaigning of Douglas. Another was the fear of the business interests that the Republicans would disturb prosperity by radical legislation. The third was the restoration of something like order in Kansas by Pierce's use of Federal troops. In a sense this confessed the failure of "popular sovereignty" but it won votes. Buchanan carried the South, together with California, Illinois, Indiana, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. His electoral vote was 174 to 114 for Fremont. The Dred Scott Case Stirs the Country • President Buchanan expressed the hope in his inaugural address that the long agitation over slavery was now "approaching its end." Two days later (March 6, 1857) the Supreme Court handed down one of the most famous decisions in its history. In 1834 Dr. Emerson, an army surgeon stationed at St. Louis, had taken his slave Dred Scott into the free state of Illinois and later into the free Minnesota Territory. Some years after their return to St. Louis, Dred Scott sued Dr. Emerson's widow for his freedom. He claimed that his residence on free soil had freed him. The highest court of Missouri denied his suit. Then Scott was sold to a New Yorker. If a citizen of one state sues a citizen of another state, the case is tried in a Federal court (Constitution, Art. Ill, sec. 2). His case, therefore, went to the Federal circuit court of Missouri, which reaffirmed the decision of the state court. It declared that Scott still remained a slave and, as a noncitizen, had no right to bring suit. Of course the Negro slave, Dred Scott, did not start his case himself. It was managed and financed by abolitionists who wanted to test the position of the courts on slavery. The case finally came up to the United States Supreme Court, which had only to determine whether there had been any error in the procedure of the Federal court in Missouri. It decided that there had not, and there the case should have ended. Old and New Immigration Northwest Europe was the source of most of the old immigration? Whence came the new? Which group "melted" most easily? Why? What did each nationality contribute? Why did Labor oppose unrestricted immigration? Manufacturing plants were established in the last two years of the war. The value of our manufactured products doubled in the period from 1860 to 1880. Certain sections of the country became great centers of special industries, such as the steel region about Pittsburgh and the textile sections of southern New England. The Standard Oil Company • Various combinations, or "trusts," were formed in transportation, banking, and lumbering, and in the steel, coal, petroleum, whisky, sugar, textile, and other industries. The Standard Oil Company was one of the oldest and most typical of them. Petroleum had begun to "gush" from wells drilled in western Pennsylvania in 1859. Toward the close of the War between the States, John D. Rockefeller, a successful young businessman in Cleveland, Ohio, saw its possibilities and set out to control the petroleum business. In 1865 his Standard Oil Company of Cleveland was operating on the modest capital of $100,000. Five years later he organized the Standard Oil Company of Ohio, with a capital of one million dollars, and had control of most of the refining business of the state. Another five years and he had absorbed the important refineries in New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore. The result was that he was soon controlling nearly 90 per cent of the refinery business of the country. In 1882 the great Standard Oil trust was incorporated under the laws of New Jersey. The organization which succeeded the Knights in 1881 owed its formation to Samuel Gompers, a member of the cigarmakers' union of New York. The AFL, of which Gompers was elected president every year but one from 1885 to his death in 1924, was an aristocratic organization as compared with the Knights. It consisted of the workers in the skilled crafts of the United States and Canada. And it left to each craft union a large direction of its own affairs. Moreover, it kept out of politics. It devoted itself wholly to securing better economic conditions for the workers. It sought (1) higher wages, (2) shorter hours, (3) security of positions, (4) sanitary conditions in the factories, (5) protection of women and children against overwork, (6) the right of collective bargaining with employers, and (7) the recognition of the unions by legislatures and courts. The Federation never contained more than a small fraction of the workers of the country in its dues-paying membership. And such important organizations as the railroad brotherhoods and some miners' federations were outside its ranks. Nevertheless, it exerted an influence far beyond what its numbers would seem to justify. Labor and Politics • Although the American Federation of Labor kept out of politics, other labor organizations did not. Some adopted the European plan of capturing the government at the polls. Karl Marx, in his Communist Manifesto, had cried out "Workers of the world unite! You have nothing to lose but your chains!" In his work on Capital he had predicted that the workers would take political power away from the "bourgeoisie" (the middle class). They would convert the capitalistic countries into socialist states. A cigar-maker by trade, Gompers was president of the American Federation of Labor for almost forty years. Between 1881 and his death in 1924, he was the most powerful conservative influence in American trade unionism. Classes would then disappear and the wealth would belong to the laborers who created it. Marx found followers in America, chiefly among the immigrants who, fleeing from the revolutions of the Old World, dreamed of starting a revolution in the New World. In 1872 there was organized a "National Labor Reform" party, which entered the presidential campaign. Its platform declared that "our government is wholly perverted from its true design___In this beneficent country of unlimited resources . . . the mass of the people have no supply beyond their daily wants and are compelled ... to become paupers and vagrants." The candidate of the party polled less than thirty thousand votes. A few years later (1877) a "Socialist Labor" party was formed. It also was based on the Marxian doctrines and was made up largely of radical immigrant workingmen. It appeared in several presidential elections up to the close of the century, but it never could command more than a handful of votes. Not even the more American "Socialist" party, organized in 1901 and led in five campaigns by the genial and persuasive Eugene V. Debs, could make much impression here. The ideas of individualism and the opportunity for men to rise by their own efforts from the ranks of the workers. This farmers' league was started by Oliver H. Kelley, a clerk in the government service at Washington. The object of the association was (1) to spread agricultural education and (2) to create social fellowship among the farmers. The "grange," as the local unit was called, was a kind of club. Here the farmers met with their families to enjoy games and a picnic supper. Or they might listen to a lecture on improved methods of cultivation or discuss a plan for "chipping in" to buy a new reaper. At first the Grangers took no part in politics. They welcomed the new railroads which increased the value of their land and furnished transportation for their products. By 1875 there were thirty thousand granges in the country. In the upper Mississippi Valley (Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Iowa), where more than one third of the wheat was grown, they boasted a membership of over half a million. In California they organized co-operative banks. In Iowa they built grain elevators and started the manufacture of farm machinery. But these independence and wealth were too strong. The Socialists, to be sure, polled nearly a million votes in 1912, and had visions of capturing the government in the near future. But they were split by World War I, and even under so able a leader as Norman Thomas they could not equal their 1912 vote thirty-six years later. They never carried a state in a presidential election, and sent only an occasional member to the House of Representatives. Conditions soon brought about a strong desire for political action. The following indicate causes for discontent: (1) the growing expense of farm machinery', (2) the monopoly of land by absentee owners, (3) the rising price of fertile acres after the frontier began to be filled, and (4) the mounting interest charges on the farmer's mortgages. All these threatened to reduce him to the condition of a tenant working the land for a master, like the Southern sharecropper. The granges then became active politically. They sought control of state legislatures to enact laws for the farmers' protection. The Granger Laws • In about a dozen Western states new parties were formed under such names as "Independent," "National," "Reform," and "Anti-Monopoly." They fought (1) for the control of railroad and grain-elevator rates, (2) for lower interest on loans from the Eastern bankers, and (3) for a cheaper currency. Beginning with Illinois in 1870, the farmers won the legislatures of several of these states. They passed a number of measures known as granger laws. In 1928 Hoover won four states which had been put under the military regime of the Reconstruction Acts (Virginia, North Carolina, Florida, and Texas). The historical South has looked upon the Democratic party as its chosen instrument. It has required a dramatic issue such as prohibition, or a popular hero such as General Eisenhower, to persuade Southerners to cross party lines. The Assassination of Garfield • The choice of Garfield, instead of harmonizing the Republican factions, resulted in bitter strife. "Stalwarts" like Conkling had supported him and done much to secure his election. But he refused to fulfill the promises they claimed he had made to them during the campaign. He appointed Conkling's chief enemy, Blaine, as Secretary of State. He removed the collector of the port of New York to make place for one of the leaders of the Blaine forces. His new Postmaster General even went so far as to expose a nest of rascals and grafters in the "Star Route Frauds." Stung by this "ingratitude," Conkling and Platt resigned their seats in the Senate. They vainly appealed, with Vice-President Arthur's help, to the legislature of New York for re-election. Factional spirit ran high and ended in a terrible crime. On the morning of July 2, 1881, President Garfield, accompanied by Blaine, prepared to take the train for a commencement address at Williams College in Massachusetts. As he entered the railroad station in Washington, he was shot in the back by a cowardly wretch named Guiteau. This disappointed office-seeker boasted, "I am a Stalwart and Arthur is President now." Garfield died on September 19, after lingering in great pain through the summer. "Chet" Arthur's rise to the Presidency seemed like a great misfortune to the friends of good government. It was feared that this former companion of the bosses and spoilsmen might wink at graft and corruption. Yet he rose to the responsibilities of his great office, and gave the country' an honest, vigorous, and efficient administration.He insisted on fair terms to China in the act of 1882 for the restriction of Chinese immigration to the United States. Thousands of Chinese coolies had been imported to work on the construction of the Central Pacific Railroad. By 1870 there were over seventy thousand Chinese in the country, nearly five sixths of them in California. Their low standard of living aroused the opposition of American labor. There began a crusade against them, led by Dennis Kearney, the "sand lots" orator of San Francisco. "Four dollars a day and roast beef" and "The Chinese must go" were slogans. President Hayes secured the consent of China to our "regulation, limitation, or suspension" of Chinese immigration. Now, on the basis of this agreement, Congress forbade the entrance of Chinese laborers into the country for twenty years. Arthur vetoed the bill because "suspension" of immigration for twenty years was equal to forbidding it. He forced Congress to reduce the period to ten years. But at the close of the ten-year period Congress renewed the exclusion of the Chinese. Arthur tried to prevent raids on the Treasury by vetoing bills which set aside huge sums for small harbors and unnavigable rivers. He proposed a fair revision of the tariff. He laid the foundation for our modem navy. Finally, he signed the act which has been called "the Magna Carta of Civil-Service Reform." He said that we were bound by the Monroe Doctrine to intervene, "however reluctantly," and to "exercise an international police power." With the consent of the president of Santo Domingo, he therefore negotiated a treaty making the United States the receiver for the bankrupt republic. Then he appointed an official to collect the revenues. The Senate refused to ratify the treaty. But Roosevelt went on with the policy under an "executive agreement" until the Senate gave way in 1907. Under our management of her finances Santo Domingo was soon able to pay her debts and her creditors were satisfied. Heretofore we had only forbidden Europe to interfere with the governments of the republics of the New World. Now we stepped in ourselves. This exercise of "police power" to prevent disturbances in Latin America is called "the Roosevelt corollary of the Monroe Doctrine." In 1907 Roosevelt and President Diaz of Mexico co-operated in establishing the Central American Court of Justice. To this the five republics between Mexico and the Isthmus of Panama agreed to submit all their disputes with one another. In the next year a further step toward the security of the Caribbean countries was taken. A Central American International Bureau was organized to further the interests of education, trade, agriculture, and industry. Disagreement with Japan A serious problem with Japan threatened in 1906. At that time the board of education of San Francisco ordered children of Japanese, Chinese, and Korean parents to attend separate schools provided for them. Up to the close of the nineteenth century not more than twentyfive thousand Japanese immigrants had come to our Pacific shores. But the crowded condition of the islands of Japan and the economic distress caused by the war with Russia sent the immigration up to seventy-five thousand by 1906. The Japanese government protested against the San Francisco order as a violation of the treaty rights of 1894. These gave Japanese residents here the status of citizens of "the most favored nation." Certain newspapers of California and Japan fanned the flames with insults and appeals to race prejudice. The Great White Fleet In 1907 Theodore Roosevelt sent the fleet on a round-the-world cruise which lasted almost two years. What were two purposes of this cruise? Roosevelt summoned the mayor of San Francisco and several of the anti-Japanese leaders to Washington. He warned them that they must leave the settlement of an international question in the hands of the Federal government. However, he promised them that he would at once "take action that would meet the needs of California." The result was the "Gentlemen's Agreement" of 1907. The terms were simple. (1) Japanese children under sixteen years of age were admitted to the regular public schools. (2) The Japanese government agreed to prohibit the immigration of Japanese laborers to this country. Again in 1909 Roosevelt had to step in with a threat of Federal action. This was to prevent the California legislature from passing bills to keep the Japanese from holding land. But it was only a truce. Four years later the legislature at Sacramento passed the act forbidding aliens ineligible to citizenship to hold land in the state. Our Fleet Sent Round the World • It was perhaps chiefly to impress Japan with the naval strength of the United States that Roosevelt decided to send a fleet of battleships around the world. Many people protested against leaving our own shores unprotected. Some even predicted that Japan would attack our Pacific coast as soon as the fleet had put to sea. But the President, as commander in chief of the navy, had a right to send the vessels where he pleased. He had money enough, he said, to send them as far as San Francisco. They could remain there if Congress refused to appropriate the funds for the rest of the voyage. The fleet, of twenty-eight battleships left Hampton Roads, Virginia, on December 16, 1907. They circled the world by way of the Strait of Magellan, San Francisco, Hawaii, Australia, the Philippines, China, Japan, the Suez Canal, and the Mediterranean. At every port of call the men and officers were received with enthusiasm. Nowhere was there greater friendliness than at Yokohama and Tokyo. They returned to Hampton Roads on February 22,1909, without the slightest accident in their long voyage. President Roosevelt was there to greet them. It is difficult to tell whether this was a contribution to world peace. But the voyage of the battleships was certainly a dramatic illustration of Roosevelt's belief that a show of force was the best guarantee of peace. It was truly a spectacular climax to a spectacular administration. In his first message to Congress (1901) Roosevelt spoke of the conservation of our natural resources in forests, minerals, and water power. He described it as "the most vital internal question of the United States." Our government had given away its unoccupied lands in the days when they were supposed to be endless. Our people had proceeded to waste the natural resources of the country by careless mining of the coal and reckless cutting of the forests. They neglected to fertilize the fields, and they let the oil flow from the wells to film the surface of the rivers. It was clear that a campaign of education in responsibility was necessary. Why did the percentage of eligible voters jump upward on each of the dates given? What percentage of the eligible voters in your town do not vote? Why? What might your history class do to increase voter turn-out? The politicians began to realize that the woman vote, like the labor vote, or the farmer vote, could mean the difference between victory and defeat. The large Eastern states, which had resisted the movement, began to fall in line, beginning with New York in 1917. Finally in 1919 both houses of Congress passed the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution. It forbade the United States or any state to deny the right to vote to any citizen on account of sex. The thirty-sixth state (Tennessee) ratified the amendment in time to allow the women of the country to take part in the presidential election of 1920. Municipal Reform • The Industrial Revolution was rapidly changing America into a land of city7 dwellers. By 1910 more than a third of our population lived in cities of over twenty-five thousand. Immigrants crowded into the slum districts of the great cities. In the rural areas the foreign-born formed only 7.5 per cent of the population. However, in the cities of five hundred thousand or over they comprised 33.6 per cent. They were sometimes made citizens at the rate of one a minute. Thus tens of thousands of voters unfamiliar with our way of life were easily influenced by political bosses. An accident started the reform of the machinery of city government. In 1900 the city of Galveston, Texas, was almost destroyed by a tidal wave. Like a bankrupt corporation, it was put in the hands of receivers. Mayor, council, and board of aidermen were removed. A commission of five able citizens was chosen to manage the city. Other cities soon took up the experiment. However, the start of World War I checked Japanese immigration and turned the attention of the Mikado's people to schemes of expansion in China. There was considerable tension with Great Britain over the Panama tolls question. Wilson warned Congress that this threatened to tie his hands in dealing with "other matters of greater delicacy and nearer consequence." The Senate gave way and thereupon voted for the repeal of the exemption of American coastwise vessels. Just what these "other matters" were Wilson never explained. It may be that he was referring to the situation in Mexico, in which he needed England's support. Or he may have been thinking of the visit which Colonel House was shortly to make to England, France, and Germany to help prevent a European war. We could not honestly advise these nations to deal justly with one another if we ourselves refused to obey the terms of the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty. During the summer of 1913 Secretary Bryan negotiated treaties with more than thirty nations. They pledged (1) to submit disputes to the investigation of an international commission, in case diplomacy failed, and (2) to refrain from fighting for a year until the report of the commission should be received. But these "cooling off" treaties were ignored when World War I broke out. More cordial relations with Colombia were secured by the treaty of 1914 (see page 422). The most serious of all the diplomatic problems that Wilson had to handle in the first two years of his administration was caused, however, by disorders in Mexico. Porfirio Diaz, the president-dictator of Mexico, had ruled the country with a rod of iron for over thirty years. In 1911 he was driven from power by a revolution of liberals headed by Francisco Madero. But Madero proved too weak to control the revolutionary spirit which he had aroused. As a result, Mexico was torn by a war of rival groups, each trying to get control of the capital and the treasury. President Taft had forbidden the shipment of arms and ammunition to any of the rival Mexican groups. He had also strengthened our border guard in order to keep the disorder from crossing the Rio Grande. Then in February, 1913, a cruel and ignorant general, Victoriano Huerta, proclaimed himself president. Madero was arrested. On his way to jail, he was murdered in the street, probably by Huerta's orders. A few days after Madero's murder, Wilson took office. Huerta had managed to hold his own against several other revolutionists. In fact he claimed that four fifths of the provinces of Mexico accepted his rule. Over twenty foreign governments recognized him as de facto president of Mexico. Our ambassador at Mexico City urged President Wilson to do the same. He declared that not to recognize Huerta meant "chaos" in Mexico. Americans had invested about a billion dollars in Mexican mines, railroads, plantations, and oil fields. It was the protection of those investments that appealed to the Americans who favored the recognition of the Huerta regime. But President Wilson had his own ideas on our obligations to the Latin-American countries under the Monroe Doctrine. In his first statement on foreign policy, just a week after he took office, he said: "It shall be one of the chief objects of this administration to cultivate the friendship and deserve the confidence of our sister republics of Central and South America. . . . Cooperation is possible only when supported at stock were pooled, and hundreds of passenger trains were cut out of the schedules. The public was asked to travel only when absolutely necessary. While the government exercised some direction and control, the actual operation of the railroads was in the hands of the same executives as before. Wages of railway workers were increased and necessary new equipment was provided. Production rose and farmers began to pay off their mortgages, to paint their farms, and to buy expensive farm machinery'. The price of land rose too. But $2.26 wheat enabled farmers to extend their acreages, cultivating marginal land that would not have paid them under ordinary conditions. We shall see in a later chapter how an agricultural depression followed. Because of the enormous demands upon the industries of the country, labor received a consideration during the war which it had never had before. Four million men were taken away from the mills and factories to fill the ranks of the army. Immigration, which had been above one million in 1914, sank to a little over one hundred thousand in 1918. A million women filled the gap to some extent. But still the shortage of labor led to serious difficulties in industry'. W'ages shot upward as government and private firms bid against each other for workers. To prevent wasteful "turnover" in labor, the government went into the employment-agency business. Practically all the skilled labor was allocated to its most useful work. Labor supported the war wholeheartedly. "This is labor's war," said Samuel Gompers. When millions of men were called to the colors, their essential jobs on the home front were filled by patriotic women. What influences do you suppose these new experiences had upon family life? standards of living? demands for political rights? male prejudices? American Federation of Labor agreed not to engage in strikes during the war. Early in April, 1918, a National War Labor Board was created to act as a court of arbitration in labor disputes. Some fifteen hundred cases were submitted to this board. In the few instances in which labor refused to accept the decisions, the President used the pressure of public opinion to compel the men to return to their work. In extreme cases, he took over the plant. Labor was not only held to its promise not to strike, but employers were forbidden to discharge workers for their activities in the unions. As a consequence, membership in unions doubled. However, labor's economic gains during the war were questionable. While wages were high, prices were much higher. The result was that real wages (what wages buy) were lower in 1919 than in 1913. Early in 1922 President Harding appointed a committee to negotiate with our debtors. Soon they had made agreements to pay in installments spread over a period of many years. The arrangements were most generous and the interest rate nominal. By 1927 we had made contracts with sixteen debtor nations to pay us eventually about 11 billion dollars. At first most of them paid their semiannual installments in June and December Many gains made in union membership during the war were lost in the recession which followed. With over three million soldiers thrown upon the market, strikes were generally unsuccessful. Bitter labor-management struggles, such as those of the coal miners and railroad shopmen, bordered upon class warfare. Hardwon Federal child-labor laws and a minimumwage law for women in the District of Columbia were declared unconstitutional. Secondary' boycotts were found illegal, and sweeping Cool Miner Cabins, West Virginia. "Sixteen tons and what do you get? Another day older and deeper in debt." What are other reasons why the coal miner's life has not been a happy one? As economic conditions worsened, however, they began one by one to default on these payments. Finally, only Finland continued to pay. Today-, neither we nor our debtors any longer figure payments on the debts of World War I as items of the budget. The billions that we lent to the Allies in both World Wars I and II are now recognized as part of our contribution toward those victories. Widespread opposition was raised to union pleas for the closed-shop idea. Moreover, company-dominated unions were organized in the railway, metal trades, electrical, and other industries. By 1927 these already had 1 £ million members. The power of organized labor was indeed at ebb tide. The Immigration Laws • Organized labor was especially opposed to competing with a flood of cheap labor imported from abroad. But America had made it her boast to be a land of refuge for the oppressed and of opportunity for the seekers of new fortunes. Inscribed at the base of the Statue of Liberty is the invitation, "Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free . . . Send these, the homeless, tempest to me. I lift my lamp beside the golden door!" In this spirit our doors until the 1920's had stood wide open to the immigrants from the Old World. In 1914 the high-water mark was reached with a total of 1,218,480 immigrants. Of these more than 800,000 came from Italy, Russia, and Austria-Hungary, and 260,000 were illiterates of fourteen years of age or over. During the war the number of immigrants fell off. However, when the war was over, there was danger that we might be overrun by refugees from the distressed countries of Europe. "The world is preparing to move to America," wrote the Commissioner of Immigration. Labor and the millions of demobilized veterans seeking work after the armistice were convinced that reasonable restrictions should be placed upon our hospitality. The war had also revealed some alarming facts in regard to our foreign population. (1) Many immigrants neglected to become naturalized American citizens. They retained their real allegiance to the lands from which they had come. (2) Radical labor agitators were suspected of "taking their orders from Moscow." (3) Over one thousand newspapers in the United States were printed in foreign languages. (4) Over 10 per cent of the people here could not speak English. (5)American labor leaders were disturbed over the hordes of incoming foreigners who were accustomed to work for low wages. (6)Patriotic citizens generally were alarmed at the number of newcomers who had no knowledge of American institutions or ideals. If we were not to become what Theodore Roosevelt called "an international boardinghouse," some step must be taken to limit the unrestricted immigration of the prewar days. The method adopted was the quota system. On May 19, 1921, President Harding signed the Emergency Quota Act. This limited the number of immigrants that any country could send to the United States in any given year to 3 per cent of its people who were here according to the census of 1910. But this law was criticized because its quotas favored immigration from the eastern and southern countries of Europe, such as Russia, Poland, and Italy. To Ernest Alexanderson, born in Sweden, we owe many scientific ideas regarding radio, television, and transmission of pictures by radio. To Michael Pupin (right), born in what is now Yugoslavia, we owe advances made in long-distance telephoning and X-ray photography. Cite other ideas we owe to immigrants. Educational opportunities, and social institutions in northern and western Europe made it easier to "Americanize" these immigrants. A new law was passed in 1924, fixing the quota at 2 per cent of the number of the nationals of each country in the United States according to the census of 1890. The new date chosen resulted in cutting down the quotas from eastern and southern Europe to about one eighth of what they previously had been. It boosted the quotas for the British Isles, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries in great measure. Mexicans and Canadians were exempt, and Japanese were barred. The new law also provided that after July 1, 1927 (opposition delayed this until 1929), only 150,000 immigrants should be admitted annually. They were to be divided among the several countries in proportion to the numbers of their nationals here according to the census of 1920. After 1929, quotas were figured on a "national origins" basis. World War II changed the picture temporarily. Then special legislation was passed permitting the entrance of a certain number of displaced persons and refugees from war-threatened areas. Many of the world's finest scientists entered under these provisions. President Truman issued a special directive in 1945 authorizing the admission of more displaced persons. Three years later Congress passed the Displaced Persons Act of 1948 authorizing entrance for about 400,000 more. Further special legislation enabled over 100,000 "war brides" to enter. Then in 1952 the McCarran-Walter Immigration and Nationality Act went into effect. It codified all the existing immigration law's in one act. It gave the largest quotas to the highly educated, the technically skilled, and to close relatives of American citizens. The following year conditions in the refugee camps in Europe encouraged Congress to pass special legislation making it possible for 214,000 extra orphans and others to enter. Security precautions and lack of United States sponsors, however, held down the number admitted. In the ten postwar years about two million immigrants found refuge here. Booming economic conditions eased their adjustment. The principal international event in the Harding administration was the Washington Conference. It was called (1) to limit naval armaments, and (2) to promote better relations in the Pacific area. Although many months had passed since the signing of the armistice, the burden of military and naval expenditures was still heavy. In spite of the "war to end wars" there were more men under arms in Europe than there had been in 1914. Our own naval program called for the construction of over 800,000 tons of warships to make us the equal of Great Britain. We now had the opportunity of showing our sincerity in the cause of peace by starting the movement for the reduction of naval armaments. On May 15, 1921, Senator Borah proposed an amendment to the huge naval appropriation bill of 494 million dollars. It authorized the President to invite Great Britain and Japan, our chief naval competitors, to a conference in Washington to discuss the possibility7 of ending the naval competition. The amendment passed without a dissenting vote. The President thereupon sent invitations not only to Great Britain and Japan, but also to France and Italy as important naval powers. Significant Facts about Immigration Where have a majority of all of our immigrants come from? In which decade did the "old" immigration reach its peak? the "new"? How did the percentages of "old" and "new" stand in 1890? 1910? What has been the principal effect of legislation since 1921? From where do "displaced persons" come? In July, 1947, the National Security Act was passed and signed by the President. It provided for (1) a single cabinet department having a civilian Secretary of Defense, (2) three non-cabinet secretaries of the army, navy, and the air force to serve under him, (3) a Joint Chiefs of Staff, (4) a National Security Council, (5) a National Security Resources Board, and (6) a Central Intelligence Agency. These new agencies were given considerable responsibility to do the research and planning necessary to advise Congress and the President on measures essential to the national security. Leaders of the armed forces repeatedly asked for a system of universal military training. But the most that Congress was willing to do was to extend the selectiveservice program. This kept about one million men in the army and half a million in the navy. Many of these were stationed in Germany, Japan, and in scattered strategic bases. The tonnage of our naval vessels exceeded by one million tons that of all other nations combined. But the air force, which at the close of the war surpassed all others, was now down to about 5000 planes. A strong drive was launched to expand the air force, but Congress, intent on cutting the budget, was slow to respond. It was not until 1950, when the threat of World War III loomed out of the invasion of South Korea, that the nation again demanded armed forces adequate to meet its responsibilities for world leadership. Congress and the President. The second session of the 80th Congress sat from January 6 to June 30, 1948. It was an election year, and President Truman submitted seventeen major measures designed to meet the needs of the nation. Only seven of these were passed: (1) a bill to draft men from 19 Wide World. "Mister Bipartisan" and "Mister Republican" • Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg of Michigan brought statesmanlike leadership to a genuine bipartisan foreign policy. Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio was chairman of his party's policy committee in the Senate. He was thrice defeated for the Republican nomination for the Presidency. to 25 years of age for twenty-one months of service in the armed forces, (2) appropriation of six billion dollars for foreign aid, (3) government support of farm prices, (4) extension of the Reciprocal Trade Agreements for one year, (5) a bill raising the social security benefits for the aged, the blind, and dependent children, (6) extension of rent controls, and (7) admission of 205,000 displaced persons into the United States during a period of two years. In a further effort to get his program adopted, Truman called Congress into extra session on July 26, 1948. It was an astute political device to put what he called the "do-nothing Congress" on the spot just before the election. But the only positive result of the session was authorization of a loan of 65 million dollars to the UN for its new headquarters in New York. In March, 1956, many Southern congressmen signed a "Declaration" protesting the court decision as a "clear abuse of judicial power." They pledged themselves to "use all lawful means" to reverse the decision. In the meantime the voices of moderation throughout America, recognizing that basic social changes take time, were counseling gradualism: "Go slowly if you must, but go." Social security was expanded in 1955 to cover 103; million more persons. Over half of these were farm workers. Benefits under the Cld-Age and Survivors Insurance were increased as well. Ninety per cent of the nation's workers could now expect benefit payments upon retirement. In July, 1956, the retirement eligibility age for women was reduced to 62. And provision was made for pensions as early as age 50 for workers who are totally disabled. By June, 1955, 1 million people were receiving an average of fifty dollars per month in benefits. The size of the total security operation may be seen in the fact that from 1937 to 1955 the Trust Fund had received 40 billion dollars including interest, and paid out 18 billion in benefits and administrative expenses. Recognizing that immigration policies affect the welfare of a nation so largely consisting of descendents of immigrants, the President appointed a commission to study the entire immigration and naturalization program. This commission recommended complete revision of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952. Congress responded with the Refugee Relief Act of 1953, allowing an additional 214,000 immigrants to enter. 1. "The teachers of today just go on repeating things in a rigmarole fashion, annoy the students with constant questions, and repeat the same things over and over again. They do not try to find out what the students' natural inclinations are so that the students are forced to pretend to like their studies, nor do they try to bring out the best in their talents." 2. "I have devoted special pains to learn, with some degree of numerical accuracy, how far the reading in our schools is an exercise of the mind in thinking and feeling, and how far it is a barren action of the organs of speech upon the atmosphere. . . . The result is, that more than eleven-twelfths of all the children in the reading classes in our schools do not understand the meaning of the words they read; that they do not master the sense of the reading lessons, and that the ideas and feelings intended by the author to be conveyed to, and excited in, the reader's mind, still rest in the author's intention, never having yet reached the place of their destination." 3. "When we were mere boys, boys had to do a little work in school. They were not coaxed; they were hammered. Spelling, writing, and arithmetic were not electives; and you had to learn. In these more fortunate times, elementary education has become in many places a sort of vaudeville show. The child must be kept amused and learn what he pleases. Many sage teachers scorn the old-fashioned rudiments; and it seems to be regarded as between a misfortune and a crime for a child to learn to read and spell by the old methods. ... As a result of all the improvements, there is a race of gifted pupils, more or less ignorant of the once prized elements of ordinary education." 