and how James Oglethorpe made Georgia a refuge for debtors --- all are   
stories that are too well known to need repetition.                      
From trading posts to royal provinces. Although English coloniza-        
tion began in the efforts of commercial companies to make money by       
trading with the Indians, the settlers soon turned to agriculture and    
found in the products of the soil both the means of their own subsistence
and a surplus that enabled them to carry on trade with Europe. As the    
population and wealth of the colonies increased, they became more self-  
sufficient and less dependent upon the trading companies and propri-     
etors who had sponsored them. At the same time, however, they be-        
came more dependent upon the British government. As time wore on,        
most of the commercial companies and the proprietors lost their Ameri-   
can grants. The colonies they had established were taken over by the     
king and were ruled as royal provinces.                                  
The increase in colonial population. Unlike the French colonies to       
the north and the Spanish to the south, the English settlements along    
the Atlantic seacoast of North America increased rapidly in population.  
Growth resulted from a high birth rate among the colonists and the con-  
tinual stream of immigration from Europe. Although many persons          
migrated from Europe to America in order to find more religious and      
political freedom, far larger numbers came in the hope of bettering their
economic condition.                                                      
"Land free . . . labor scarce.” The population of England in the         
seventeenth century was about five million. The country could scarcely   
be called overpopulated, though many contemporary writers seemed to      
think that it was, for they spoke of idle and mischievous crowds and of  
the unemployed that flocked to the cities, and they complained of taxes  
to take care of the poor. The real causes of distress among the masses   
seem to have been not overpopulation but an uneven distribution of       
wealth, and the economic disturbances which usually accompany such       
important changes as England was experiencing in the sixteenth and       
seventeenth centuries. Whatever the causes, writers of pamphlets and     
books and those who drafted petitions to the king for charters repeat-   
edly pointed out the advantage of the colonies as the place to take care 
of the “swarms of idle persons,” rid England of its beggars, reduce the  
cost of maintaining prisons and jails, and lessen the poor tax. The same 
writers who told how advantageous colonization would be to England       
also described the richness and bounty of the New World. John Win-       
throp, who became one of the leaders of the migration to the New'        
World, wrote: “All towns complain of the burthen of their poore . . .    
and yet suffer a whole continent ... to lie waste without any im-        
provement.” A coin of 1647 bears this inscription: “In Virginia land     
free and labor scarce; in England land scarce and labor plenty7.” Thus   
the lure of free land and the hope of economic betterment were used      
to attract to the New World the landless, the poor, and the unfortunate. 
The colonial population. 1. Large families. The population of the       
colonies in 1690 was a little more than two hundred thousand; in 1760   
not much more than one and a half million. The first United States      
census of 1790 revealed a total population of nearly four million. The  
bulk of the population at the time of the American Revolution consisted 
of second- and third-generation Americans. The infant death rate was    
high, but families were large ---eight, ten, and twelve children being  
rather common. Men and women married early and reared large fami-       
lies, for children were of value in the hard work of the farm and home. 
2. Indentured servants. Many farmers and planters, anxious for la-      
borers, were willing to pay the cost of the voyage of the immigrants    
who would agree to work for them for a period of years. The laborers    
who accepted these terms were known as “indentured servants.” The       
terms of indenture varied, but were generally harsh. When the period    
of service was over, the indentured laborer became free. Sometimes      
he received a grant of land and became an independent farmer.           
3. Debtors and criminals. The prisons of England were also a            
source of immigrants to the New World. For numerous offenders,          
transportation to America was frequently offered as a substitute for a  
term of years in an English jail. Many were political and religious of- 
fenders; some were debtors; some were jailed for petty offenses; some   
were hardened criminals. These “criminals,” like the voluntary immi-    
grants, were assigned to masters for a term of years, usually seven, and
then given their liberty'.                                              
4. Negro slavery. Very important was the spread of another form         
                                  [HI                                   
 C II A P T E R                                         T II R E E            
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
rnri/ie transplanting of English institutions. The colonization of             
I 'America meant the spread into a savage land of European modes               
1 of living, languages, ideals of life. In the Spanish and Portu-              
guese colonies it meant a mingling with the natives, forming sometimes,        
as in Mexico and Brazil, a settlement practically native in appearance.        
In the English colonies, however, this was not the case, for wherever          
the English settled, they crowded the red men back into the interior.          
As a result, English civilization, as it spread into the American wilder-      
ness. remained predominantly English. The English language, law,               
customs, institutions, and ideals, modified by a new environment and           
influenced by other European peoples, were the foundations upon                
which the life and culture of the people of the United States were based.      
America as a nation of immigrants. The United States has been                  
called a “melting pot,” a term used to describe the fact that the people       
of different nations and races have found a haven in the United States,        
and have become one in purpose and ideals with those who preceded              
them. This mingling of races began even in colonial times, for there           
were many non-English elements in the colonial population.                     
The Scotch-Irish. The term “Scotch-Irish” refers to the descendants            
of those people who settled in the northern part of Ireland (Ulster) in        
the seventeenth century. Some of them were English but the larger              
number came from Scotland. Nearly all of them were of the Presbyte-            
rian faith. Discouraged by restrictive laws, the Scotch-Irish early in the     
eighteenth century began to migrate in large numbers to the English            
colonies in .America. Coming after colonization had been going on for          
nearly a century, they were attracted to the frontier by cheap land. In        
Virginia and the Carolinas, Scotch-Irish pioneers were among the first         
to settle in the foothills of the eastern Appalachians. They soon be-          
came known for their democratic frontier spirit, which acted as a check        
upon the aristocratic spirit that was beginning to flourish in the coastal     
settlements.                                                                   
 The Germans. The disastrous Thirty Years' War (1618-48), which              
 brought ruin to the thrifty peasants of central Europe, was one of the      
                                                                             
 chief reasons why so many Germans migrated to America during the            
 colonial period. Lured by the attractive advertising of Penn’s agents       
 in Europe, the largest number settled in Pennsylvania. About one third      
 of Pennsylvania’s population at the time of the Revolution was German.      
 Thousands of Germans also went to New York and to the frontier sec-         
 tions of Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas.                             
 The French, Swiss, Dutch, and others. When the French Hugue-                
 nots (Protestants) lost out in their struggle to secure control of France,  
 thousands of them became exiles in the New World. They settled              
 chiefly in South Carolina and in the seacoast towns of the Northern col-    
 onies. From the German-speaking cantons of Switzerland many set-            
 tlers came to Pennsylvania and to North Carolina. Welsh, Scotch Pres-       
 byterians, and Irish Catholics also came in large numbers, many of them     
 seeking religious freedom in the Middle and Southern colonies. Jews         
 were present in nearly every seacoast city, although English law denied     
 them the right of legal residence in any British possession. There were     
 Swedes and Dutch who founded New Sweden and New Netherland.                 
 These non-English groups made up probably more than a third of              
 the total population of the colonies. Although they were absorbed by        
 the English, their presence is a factor in explaining the American Reso-    
 lution, for it was much easier for them to revolt than it was for those     
 of English descent.                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
Social classes. The merchant, the banker, the sea captain, the law-           
yer, the landed proprietor, and the planter constituted a colonial aristoc-   
racy --- of wealth, position, and influence. Closely identified with them     
in social position were the governing officials, both those elected by the    
colonists and those appointed by the king. Pastors of the various             
churches also held a position of influence, especially in New England.        
Scattered throughout the coastal settlements were numbers of small            
farmers, small tradesmen, ami a few mechanics. These occupied an in-          
ferior position both socially and politically. Still lower in tire social     
scale were the indentured servants, and, of course, the slaves. Roughly,      
then, there were three social classes: (a) the aristocracy --- merchants,     
planters, clergymen, landed proprietors, government officials, lawyers,       
bankers; (b) the great middle class ---small fanners, artisans; (c) a         
servile group --- indentured servants and slaves.                             
The effect of the frontier on class distinction. Back of the coastal          
regions was the great hinterland occupied by small farmers. This was          
too recently developed at the time of the Revolution for great social dis-    
tinctions to have appeared. Here, as always in frontier communities,          
Colonial patriots and loyalists. In general the privileged people in       
the colonies, who formed a kind of American aristocracy of officeholders   
and hereditary wealth, went over to the king’s support. At first they      
were called “Tories” and later “loyalists.” In a total population of about 
two and a half million, it is estimated that about a third were actively   
on the king’s side, while large numbers were indifferent. Along some       
parts of the Atlantic coast the population was so evenly divided that      
the Revolution was in effect a civil war. In New York, Pennsylvania,       
South Carolina, and Georgia, modern research seems to indicate that        
the loyalists were clearly in the majority. But, generally speaking, the   
loyalists were unorganized. The “radicals,” however, were organized        
and kept up a bombardment of effective propaganda. Gradually,              
more and more people supported them, or at least refrained from op-        
posing the drift toward independence.                                      
1. The underprivileged. Two groups of people were generally in-            
clined to support the patriot cause: first, tire people of the back coun-  
try, occupying the settlements between the older established districts     
along the coast and the frontier; and second, the great majority of small  
tradesmen, small mechanics, and farmers. Overburdened with taxes           
and frequently in debt to merchants and landowners, these groups did       
not enjoy active participation in the colonial governments. They hoped     
that the Revolution would bring more political and economic freedom.       
2. The wealthy merchants. For the merchants of the North, the              
decision to support the loyalists or the patriots was a difficult one. They
feared lest independence would rob them of their trade or set up a radi-   
cal order that would weaken their economic and social position. Yet        
many of them were won over to the cause of independence because            
they suffered severely under the trade restrictions imposed by England.    
They also realized that opposition to independence would probably          
mean the loss of their property, imprisonment, or exile.                   
3. The plantation owners. It was equally difficult for the wealthy         
planters of the tidewater South to come to a decision. Many remained       
loyal. On the other hand, large numbers, especially in Virginia and        
South Carolina, threw in their lot with the patriot cause. Their deci-     
sion was partly influenced by the desire to occupy the western lands       
from which they had been barred by the Proclamation of 1763. Fur-          
thermore, many planters were indebted to English businessmen. Their        
total debt was estimated to be about £2,000,000. Many planters saw         
in independence a temporary escape from these burdensome obliga-           
tions. During the war many planters paid off their British debts with      
the depreciated paper currency of the colonies.                            
4. The frontiersmen. Frontier settlers were unanimous and enthu-           
siastic in their support of independence. During the quarter century       
preceding the Revolution, thousands of Scotch-Irish frontiersmen, with     
a considerable number of their English and German neighbors of cen-        
 tral Virginia, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina, passed through the         
 mountain barrier which had long delayed settlement, and occupied            
 the valleys of the Ohio, the Cumberland, and the Tennessee rivers.          
 James Harrod, James Robertson, John Sevier, and the great frontiers-        
 man, Daniel Boone, were among the leaders of the settlers to this           
 southern frontier region. After the peace with France, 1763, land spec-     
 ulators saw their opportunity and secured grants of land beyond the         
 mountains from the colonial authorities. Tire Proclamation of 1763, by      
 which the royal government took over the supervision of the Indian          
 country and land grants west of the mountains, interfered with land         
 speculators, fur traders, and pioneers. In the Southwest, particularly,     
 the Revolutionary War became a war for land and the freedom of west-        
 ward migration.                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
The olive branch and the sword. Tire Second Continental Con-                  
gress, which met in May, 1775, three weeks after Lexington and Con-           
cord, was confronted with a situation which it could not ignore --- the       
people of Massachusetts were in arms against the king’s troops. Many          
delegates, putting the olive branch foremost, urged Congress to try           
once more a loyal petition to the king. But to many others the time           
for negotiation had passed. To them it was high time to put the sword         
foremost --- to send men and supplies to the camps about Boston. A            
few even urged that the colonies should declare for independence.             
Congress adopted a middle course. Both the olive branch and the               
sword were held aloft. John Dickinson was directed to prepare a peti-         
tion to the king (some called it the “olive-branch petition”). At the         
same time, Congress decided to do on a large scale what the provincial        
congresses and the town and county committees were doing within               
their smaller fields. The Congress readopted the “Association” of the         
First Congress, urged the several colonies to prepare for their defense,      
and organized a continental army. Upon the suggestion of John Adams,          
the Congress chose Colonel George Washington as commander in chief.           
Government during the Revolution. Relying upon tire support of                
public opinion, the Second Continental Congress gradually assumed             
the functions of a central government for all the colonies. Because of        
the necessities of the situation, this bold but nonlegal exercise of sover-   
eign power was tolerated. In the performance of its various tasks             
Congress was obliged to appeal to the several colonial congresses and         
the local committees to supply men, money, and materials.                     
Bunker Hill, June 17,1775. Congress adopted as its own the army               
of New Englanders encamped in a semicircle around Boston. Since               
the nineteenth of April the militia of the various New England colonies       
-separate armies, in a sense --- had been engaging the British regulars       
of tlie unwritten constitution. Under the power to tax and to borrow      
money, Congress has established a national banking system and has         
                                                                          
stimulated industry' by means of a protective tariff. Under the power     
to regulate foreign and interstate commerce. Congress has regulated       
immigration and created commissions to regulate railroads, trade prac-    
tices, and the sale of securities. Under the power to establish post      
offices and post roads. Congress has undertaken to subsidize railroads,   
steamship lines, and airways, to prevent fraud, and to exercise a certain 
censorship over literature.                                               
States’ rights. Those who advocate a narrow and strict interpreta-        
tion of the “elastic clause” are said to be advocates of states’ rights.  
Those who are in sympathy with a broad interpretation of this clause      
are said to be advocates of a strong national government. Through         
the decisions of the Supreme Court the conflicts constantly arising over  
the sphere of action of the nation and of the states are adjusted.        
Changing economic conditions, especially pronounced in recent years,      
have given rise to a demand for the still greater extension of the powers 
of the national government. It is argued, for example, that problems      
of labor, education, roads, health, social security, corporate organiza-  
tion, and the control of industry are not limited by state boundaries.    
It is claimed that these problems cannot be adequately handled by the     
individual states, acting independently, but that they demand a uni-      
form program which the federal government alone can furnish. Tire         
division of powers Ire tween nation and state, therefore, is an item of   
great importance in understanding the way the United States under-        
takes to solve complex economic and social problems.                      
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                           
The second important characteristic of the federal government is           
the threefold separation of government activities among the executive,     
the legislature, and the judiciary. Each of these three necessary          
branches of government is in some respects dependent on the other,         
and yet in certain respects they are independent. Each “cheeks and         
balances” the other.                                                       
Parliamentary supremacy vs. separation of powers. In England die           
legislature is supreme. There the prime minister and his cabinet are       
really an executive committee of Parhament. They are responsible to        
it, and charged with the obligation of carrying out its wishes. The        
prime minister and his cabinet are unable to act widiout the approval      
of a majority of Parliament. In the United States the President has a      
fixed term of office of four years, and hence his continuance in office    
does not depend on legislative approval. In England, furthermore,          
there is no national judiciary with the power to declare laws of Parlia-   
* dams’s unhappy presidency. In the last two chapters we have            
/\ noted some of the obstacles which John Adams encountered              
-J. B after he became President in 1797. He was barely elected against   
a very strong opposition party, which continued to obstruct his policies.
His foremost political adversary, Thomas Jefferson, held the office of   
Vice-President. He was harassed by diplomatic troubles with France.      
In addition to all these handicaps, he lacked the united support of his  
own party. Hamilton exercised less influence over Adams than he had      
over Washington, for Adams was notably independent, even stubborn,       
at times. So Hamilton and Adams were frequently at odds, thus tend-      
ing to split the Federalist party.                                       
The Alien and Sedition Laws, 1798. While the Federalists were            
thus divided and uncertain in their leadership, they were frightened by  
the criticism directed against them by the Republicans. In 1798, dur-    
ing the near-war with France, they passed a series of laws which helped  
prepare the way for their own downfall. These laws are commonly          
known as the Alien and Sedition Laws. They were really four in num-      
ber: (1) a Naturalization Act, lengthening the term of residence re-     
quired for citizenship from five to fourteen years. This law, it was     
hoped, would make it impossible for the Republicans to increase their    
voting power with the new immigrants, who for the most part were sym-    
pathetic with Republican ideals. (2) An Alien Act empowered the          
President to deport any foreigner whom he considered dangerous to        
the peace. (3) An Alien Enemies Act, which never went into effect        
because it was to apply only to war conditions, empowered the Presi-     
dent to deport subjects of any power with whom the United States         
might be at war. (4) The Sedition Act, the worst of the laws, was aimed  
directly at the critical Republicans. It provided for the punishment of  
“those who wrote, printed, or uttered any false, scandalous, and mali-   
cious statements against the government of the United States or either   
House of Congress of the United States, or the President of the United   
States.” This law was a clear violation of the First Amendment to the    
Constitution, which guarantees freedom of speech and press. Ten Re-      
publican editors and printers were tried and convicted under the Sedi-   
tion Act. Matthew Lyons of Vermont accused the President of “un-         
                                  [162]                                  
Federalist criticism. The Federalist party took particular exception     
to the part of the Louisiana treaty which promised inhabitants of the    
new territory that they would be admitted to the Union. “They must re-   
main,’’ the Federalists said, “in the condition of colonies.” They began 
to ask whether new territory could be admitted without the consent of    
every state. The opposition came chiefly from New England. Some          
were concerned about the migration of laborers from the shops and        
farms of the East; others were alarmed because the new territories       
would be opened to slavery. The Federalists feared that the unchecked    
extension of slavery by the admission of slave-holding communities like  
New Orleans would establish a permanent and powerfid planter class.      
It was, of course, impossible to foresee at the time that a large immi-  
gration from Europe to the northeastern states would more than balance   
the advantages the Southern planters enjoyed. Federalist fears were      
regarded by their opponents as sectional jealousy. Against the Feder-    
alists it was argued that if the new territories were kept permanently as
colonies, the country would be drifting away from the great ideals of the
Revolution and the Ordinance of 1787.                                    
Federalist scheming. Senator Timothy Pickering, formerly Secre-          
tary of State, turned to projects of secession. At the head of a Federal-
ist faction which had lost faith in Hamilton’s leadership, he proposed to
establish a northern confederacy composed of New England and New         
York. If Aaron Burr, the Vice-President, were elected governor of New    
York in 1804, the conspirators, of whom Burr was one, proposed to pro-   
claim their separation from the United States and leave the other states 
to their own devices. In the election in New York Hamilton opposed       
Burr with such success that the latter failed of election. With the de-  
feat of Burr, Pickering’s secession conspiracy broke down. To have liis  
revenge Burr challenged Hamilton to a duel, and at Weehawken, on         
July 11, 1804, Hamilton fell, mortally wounded.                          
Burr’s scheming with Pickering and his duel with Hamilton thor-          
oughly discredited him with the Republicans. In 1805 and 1806 he en-     
gaged in a conspiracy with some discontented Westerners. Just what       
Burr hoped to accomplish is not definitely known; it is suggested that he
sought either to set up an independent state on the Mississippi or to    
engage in an expedition against Mexico. Rumors were spread around        
to the effect that he was engaged in a plot to break up the Union. Jef-  
ferson ordered his arrest. Burr was tried for treason and acquitted.     
The re-election of Jefferson, 1804. Events seemed to combine in fa-      
vor of Jefferson and the Republicans. The beginning of internal im-      
                                  [178]                                  
1816; Mississippi, 1817; Illinois, 1818; Alabama, 1819; Maine (separat-     
ing from Massachusetts), 1820; and Missouri, 1821. In thirty years the      
Union had grown from thirteen to twenty-four states.                        
The march westward. Many of the Western settlers were immi-                 
grants from Europe --- a stream of free labor which increased rapidly       
after the War of 1812. But the bulk of the Western pioneers came            
from the older communities. Hard times, resulting from the embargo,         
released large numbers of laborers who sought economic freedom by           
moving westward. The planter of the South had been facing ruin for          
years, owing largely to the exhaustion of the soil. As cotton came into     
greater demand, the planter migrated to the southwestern cotton belt,       
a region which slowly but surely took financial and political control       
away from the old seaboard South.                                           
The government’s land policy. The westward movement was has-                
tened both by the successful outcome of the Indian campaigns incident       
to the War of 1812 and by the government’s liberal land policy. Origi-      
nally the government, in urgent need of funds, sold the Western lands in    
large tracts to land companies. The law of 1796 provided for the sale       
of tracts of 6-10 acres at $2.00 per acre. This plan called for an invest-  
ment beyond the resources of the average frontiersman, and gave rise        
to the speculator and land jobber. In 1800 Congress provided for the        
sale of a half-section --- 320 acres --- at $2.00 an acre, with payments ex-
tended over a period of four years. In 1820, yielding to popular de-        
mand, Congress permitted the purchase of 80 acres at $1.25 an acre.         
The rush to the West was so great that frequently pioneers settled          
on the land, cleared it, built a cabin, and began cultivation even before   
the lands had been surveyed or offered for sale. The “squatters” --- as     
these unlawful first settlers were called --- complained when the govern-   
ment undertook to offer their land for sale. Often they banded together     
to prevent anyone from bidding more than a certain price when the land      
was put up for auction. The Western influence was sufficiently strong       
to compel Congress to enact the Pre-emption Law of 1841, whereby            
squatters could secure a title to 160 acres by settling on the land, culti- 
vating it, and paying for it over a number of years. But even this con-     
cession did not satisfy these settlers. The land-hungry did not rest un-    
til Congress in 1862 passed the Homestead Act, which permitted the          
head of a family to secure title to a quarter-section of land (160 acres)   
by establishing a residence and cultivating the land for a Deriod of five   
years (pages 322, 3-19).                                                    
The coming of the steamboat and the railroad. The great need of             
the West was for improved transportation. In 1807 Robert Fulton’s           
steamboat, the Clermont, made a successful tr ial trip from New York to     
Albany, a distance of one hundred fifty miles, in thirty-two hours. Since   
the Clermont was a commercial success. Fulton frequently gets the           
credit for inventing the steamboat, although John Fitch, John Stevens,      
 So profitable was cotton culture that the South was content to export it       
 to England or the textile mills of New England rather than engage in           
 manufacturing cotton itself. Cotton culture, so the South came to be-          
 lieve, demanded slaves, and the South became the defender of the in-           
 stitution of slavery. As the Southerners moved west the question of the        
 extension of slavery into the West became acute; thus slavery became           
 interwoven with the problem of westward expansion. After 1840 the              
 institution of slavery thrust itself into national politics as a vital and ab- 
 sorbing issue. Like the West, the South was eager to see the territory         
 of the United States expand. But expansion raised the question of              
 slavery, and on that point the West was unwilling to follow the South.         
 The demands of the South. The Southern plantation owner thought                
 that it was economical to buy the manufactured goods he needed. lie            
 became dependent, therefore, upon the other sections and upon Europe           
 for his supplies. Because the South realized that the tar iff increased the    
 prices it had to pay for commodities, it opposed the protective tariff.        
 Like the West, it disapproved of the second Bank of the United States          
 and the conservative banking policies advocated by the Northeast. Un-          
 like the West, it did not favor internal improvements, nor did it desire       
 to see the national government increase its powers. Because of its eco-        
 nomic system the South became an ardent advocate of states’ rights and,        
 therefore, of strict construction of the Constitution.                         
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
The rise of manufacturing. While the West and South were devel-                  
oping sectional economic interests, a similar process was going on in            
the Northeast. There, as we have seen, manufacturing took root. The              
value of cotton manufactures increased from $4,834,000 in 182(5 to               
$46,350,000 in 1840; woolen manufactures increased in value from                 
$4,413,000 in 1820 to $20,696,000 in 1840. Twenty thousand tons of               
iron were manufactured in 1820 and 286,000 tons in 1840.                         
The industrialization of the Northeast was stimulated (1) by the                 
opening up of better agricultural land in the West; (2) by the presence          
of an abundance of raw materials; (3) by a cheap source of power in              
the rapid streams and waterfalls of New England, and at a later date in          
the coal fields of the Appalachians; (4) by the inventive genius of the          
people; and (5) by additions to the labor supply by immigrants from              
Europe. The first center of manufacturing was the New England states,            
especially Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. From this               
section industrialization spread to eastern New York, New Jersey, and            
Pennsylvania, and later to Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois.                          
The new problems created by industrialization. The development                   
of manufacturing and the rise of the factory system in the United States         
1-^quality of opportunity. Alexis de Tocqueville, a Frenchman fa-         
mous for his keen powers of observation, visited the United States        
_14in 1831. On his return to France he wrote a book about what he         
saw, Democracy in America. Nothing struck him “more forcibly than         
the general equality of conditions among the people.” Except for a        
few planters in the South and a few successful merchants of the coastal   
cities of the North, there were no people of wealth and few whose prop-   
erty had not been won through their own labor and self-denial.            
The population in 1840. The census of 1840 reported a population          
of 17,000,000. Of this number more than a fourth, 4,800,000, were em-     
ployed in some form of manual labor, largely in agriculture. One per-     
son in every seven was a slave, and slaves were mainly occupied as farm   
laborers. The number of slaves had increased since the first census in    
1790 more than threefold, but the white population more than fourfold.    
Between 1830 and 1840 immigration from Europe was increased six-          
fold; most immigrants remained in the cities on the Atlantic coast, but   
after 1840 many immigrants moved to the West. (See map, page 381.)        
The growth of cities. The canal packets and the river steamboats          
brought large regions in the interior within reach of Eastern markets.    
The cities were growing rapidly. New York in twenty years, from 1820      
to 1840. increased from 120,000 to 300,000. By 1840 it had more people    
than either Boston or Philadelphia. St. Louis, the center of several lines
of steamboats plying upon the Mississippi, the Ohio, and the Missouri     
rivers, was a thr iving inland city. Along with St. Louis, New Orleans,   
Cincinnati, and Pittsburgh had become great centers of Western trade.     
Chicago, however, was still a small village and had not yet started on    
its way toward becoming the great metropolis of the Midwest.              
Industrial centers, like Lowell and Fall River, introduced a new          
phase of American history. In 1820, for example, most textiles were       
made in private homes. By the time of the panic of 1837 the majority      
were factory made.                                                        
Improvements. Foreign observers noted that the whale-oil lamps            
on the city streets had been replaced by gas lights, and the well and     
The increase in the Northern population. The following table           
concerning the population of the United States in the decades be-      
fore I860 tells an interesting story:                                  
1840 17,069,453                                                        
1850  23,995,(XX)                                                      
1860  31,443,000                                                       
Within a twenty-year period the population had almost doubled. More    
than a million of the increase in population between 1840 and 1860 was 
the result of immigration. The Irish potato famine of 1845 and the rev-
olutionary disturbances of 1848 in central Europe, coupled with the    
boundless opportunities for cheap land and free enterprise, lured hun- 
dreds of thousands of Irish and Germans to the New World. The im-      
migrants established themselves in the growing factory towns of the    
North and on the farms of the Northwest; they did not go South, where  
they would have been compelled to compete with slave labor.            
The South noted jealously the growing numerical strength of the        
North. There seemed little doubt that, as time passed, Southern influ- 
ence in the councils of the nation was bound to be less and less. In   
1860 the South had a population of twelve and a half million, includ-  
ing about four million slaves. The population of the North was nine-   
teen million and increasing rapidly. For every white man of fighting   
age the South could give its armies, the North had three or four,      
j Economic conditions, North, South, and West. A larger population     
was not the only advantage of the North. The economic structure of     
the South was based, as we have seen, on the growing of cotton. Tire   
South did not grow' all its own food nor manufacture the articles it   
needed. It depended on imports from the North or Europe. The           
North, on the other hand, was more nearly self-sustaining. It enjoyed  
the benefits of varied economic activities: manufacturing, commerce,   
[arming, shipping. When the test of war came, the farms of the West    
and Northwest could supply the armies with food and supplies, and      
nanufacturing in the Northeast could be adapted to war needs.          
Railroad construction, 1850-60. The ten-year period from 1850 to       
1860 (save for the panic year of 1857) was one of bustling activity and
prosperity. Railroad construction went on apace. Prior to 1850 about     
ten thousand miles of track had been laid (pages 369---370). By 1860     
the railroad mileage of the country amounted to thirty thousand miles.   
Most of the railroad building in this period was in the North and North- 
west. The short railway lines of the earlier peri<xl began to be consoli-
dated into great trunk lines. The New York Central, the Baltimore and    
Ohio, the Pennsylvania, and the Erie connected the East with the West.   
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
Branch lines radiated in every direction from these trunk systems. Be-   
yond the Mississippi, railroads were in process of construction. Many    
railroads were built so rapidly in undeveloped regions that they did not 
have enough freight and passengers to transport. Consequently, they      
did not earn enough money to make ends meet. The panic of 1857 was       
partly due to the overexpansion of railroad facilities.                  
Community of economic interests, West and East. Before the com-          
ing of the railroads, the products of the West naturally moved toward    
the Gulf ports on their way to the markets of the world. New Orleans     
was the great commercial center of the Mississippi Valley. The rail-     
roads changed this, for goods began to move toward the Atlantic sea-                                      
board. Midwestern railroad cities had a remarkable growth and New                                         
Orleans declined in importance. The location of Chicago on the shores                                     
of Lake Michigan was destined to make it the great Midwestern me-                                         
tropolis. Slowly, Chicago began to outstrip St. Louis in population, al-                                  
though by I860 it had just passed the 100,000 mark. As the Western                                        
terminus of die railroads, Chicago became the center of the growing                                       
traffic on the Great Lakes and of the trade in grain and livestock.                                        
                                      Most of the new railroads connected the East with the West. The     
railroads carried the goods of the Eastern factories to the Western                                       
farmers, and also carried the products of the Western farms to the pop-                                   
ulous sections of the East, and to the Atlantic seaboard for shipment to                                  
Europe. Western grain had begun to rival cotton as America’s chief                                        
export. As American farm products were sent to Europe in ever-increas-                                    
ing quantities, the ties between East and West were strengthened.                                          
                                      The rapid growth of the West. The population of the West in-        
creased by more than four millions in the 1850's. California, Minne-                                      
sota, and Oregon were admitted as states, and territorial governments                                     
were established for Kansas (admitted as a state in 1861), Utah, New                                      
Mexico, Washington, Nebraska, Dakota, Nevada, and Colorado. The                                            
railroads were one cause of this development. Other causes were, of                                        
course, the great fertility' of the Western plains and the development of                                  
improved agricultural machinery. The most important of the new ag-                                         
ricultural machines was the McCormick reaper, originally patented in                                       
1834 but not perfected or produced in large quantities until the 1850’s.                                   
In grain growing the reaper worked a revolution as far-reaching as                                         
Whitney’s cotton gin. Cyrus McCormick had vision as well as con-                                           
fidence in the West when in 1847 he established his plant for the manu-                                    
facture of reapers at Chicago near the center of the grain belt of the                                     
nation (page 377).                                                                                         
' The growth of American manufactures. The output of American                                              
factories doubled in value from 1850 to 1860; in the earlier year the                                      
value of American manufactures was about one billion dollars --- a lit-                                    
 tie short of the value of agricultural products. One thing that helped                                    
 both the fanners of the West and the manufacturers in the East was the                                    
 great increase in immigration. To the factory owners of the thriving                                      
 Eastern cities the immigrant was a source of cheap labor.                                                 
 New inventions. However, a more important cause of the remark-                                            
 able output of American factories was the large number of new inven-                                      
 tions. The Patent Office, for example, issued nearly 6500 patents in                                      
 the decade of the forties, while in the decade of the fifties the number                                  
 ms more than 28,000. In 1844 Charles Goodyear discovered the proc-                                        
 es of vulcanizing rubber; in the same year Samuel F. B. Morse per-                                        
 , beted the telegraph. In 1846 Howe invented the sewing machine.                                          
 McKay developed a sewing machine for use in making shoes. In 1847                                         
The formation of the Republican party. Antislavery men of the                
Northwestern and Eastern states met the challenge of the Kansas-             
Nebraska Act by organizing a new party determined to exclude slavery         
from the territories of the United States. At first they called themselves   
anti-N'ebraska men and found recruits among Whigs, Democrats, and            
Free Soilers from the Northern states. It was at Ripon, Wisconsin, in        
February, 1854, while the Kansas-Nebraska Bill was under discussion,         
that the first suggestion for a new political organization was made. The     
idea spread rapidly, and the name Republican was applied to the group.       
On July 6, 1854, at Jackson, Michigan, the new Republican party for-         
mally began its long career. Similar conventions were held in Maine,         
Massachusetts, New York, and elsewhere. The new party succeeded              
in winning elections in Michigan in the fall of that year. By 1856 tire      
new party was strong enough to win 114 votes for its candidate, John C.      
Fremont, as against 174 for the successful candidate, James Buchanan.        
“Bleeding Kansas.” Another result of the Kansas-Nebraska Act was             
the straggle between proslavery and antislavery men for control of           
Kansas. Slaveowners from Missouri began to move into Kansas, and             
to offset this an Emigrant Aid Society was organized in New England          
to encourage antislavery settlers to settle in the territory. Riots, mas-    
sacres, and civil war between armed bands that supported one or the          
other side characterized what was aptly described as "bleeding Kan-          
sas.” Popular sovereignty did not succeed in Kansas. The news of             
events in Kansas, distorted to suit one’s purpose, helped greatly to solid-  
ify both North and South in their opposite stands on the issue of slavery.   
The Campaign of 1856. The Democrats met in convention while                  
passions were still hot from discussion of the bloody conflict in Kansas.    
Their platform upheld the principle of popular sovereignty as the            
Wv sound and safe solution of the slavery question.” In order to             
avoid the Kansas-Nebraska Act as an issue, they nominated James Bu-          
chanan, whose absence from the United States as minister to England          
had kept him free from an active part in the controversy. The Repub-         
lican party nominated as its first presidential candidate John C. Fre-       
mont, die “Pathfinder,” and adopted a platform which opposed slavery         
in the territories, but which tolerated it in the states where it already ex-
isted. A third party --- the Native American, or “Know Nothing,” party       
-was also in the field, with ex-President Fillmore as its nominee for        
the presidency. As the name indicates, the Native American party was         
alarmed by the increasing tide of immigration, and declared that             
"Americans must rule America” and that “only native-born Americans           
should be selected for all state, federal, and municipal offices.” The       
term “Know-Nothing” was quickly applied to the new party because in          
answers to questions regarding it, a member always answered “T know          
nothing.” In 1856 it attracted many supporters who hoped its policies        
would draw attention from the slavery struggle. Buchanan had an              
scythe and the cradle gave way almost completely to McCormick’s          
reaper in the cutting of grain in the West during the War between the    
States. McKay’s shoe-sewing machines displaced the village shoe-         
maker. Machinery supplied the place of the men called to serve in        
the army and each year yielded a greater output.                         
2. New resources and new industries. Only a nation with unusual          
resources can destroy wealth by military operations and replace the      
losses at once by the development of other forms of wealth elsewhere;    
yet this is what the North did during the War between the States. In     
western Pennsylvania, where oil had been discovered in 1859, the own-    
ers of oil wells and the lands on which they were located found fabulous 
wealth. In Pittsburgh, Cleveland, and Buffalo, oil refiners established  
a new industry and changed almost overnight the mode of lighting         
homes. With the opening of oil wells in the Middle West there followed   
a trail of booming cities and the growth of a “petroleum aristocracy.”   
3. Rapid settlement of the rich Western prairie lands. The great-        
est resource of the United States was tire untilled lands of the prairie 
West. The westward movement of the frontier continued its course in      
spite of the war. In May, 1862, in keeping with its platform pledge, the 
Republican majority in Congress passed the famous Homestead Act.         
By the terms of this act any citizen or any alien who expressed his in-  
tention of becoming a citizen could acquire a farm of 160 acres on pay-  
ment of a ten-dollar fee for registration of his title, provided he lived
on and cultivated the land for five years. Soldiers were allowed to      
deduct the period of their army service from the five-year period of oc- 
cupancy. It was the withdrawal of the Southern representatives from      
Congress which made it possible to pass this law, for they had long op-  
posed giving such encouragement to westward expansion. Under the         
liberal terms of this act the Western prairie land was quickly settled.  
To a large extent, the settlers came from the East; but, with the close  
of the war, hundreds of thousands of immigrants, lured by the promise    
of free land and quick riches, came from Europe (pages 371, 601-602).    
In the same year (July, 1862) Congress also passed the famous Mor-       
rill Act, giving lands to the several states and territories to help them
establish colleges. Each state was given 30,000 acres of land for every  
Congressional representative it had in 1860 or at the time of admission. 
The proceeds from the sale of the land were to be set aside to endow     
colleges which would teach “branches of learning related to agriculture  
and the mechanic arts.” In all about 13,000,000 acres of the public do-  
main were given to the states for the establishment of what have been    
called “land-grant” colleges. The effect of this act was to encourage    
the creation of state universities. The Morrill Act was of great value to
American agriculture; it also ranks with the Land Ordinance of 1785      
and the Northwest Ordinance as being among the most important            
laws of Congress for the encouragement of education.                     
                     ECONOMIC CHANCES INFLUENCE OUR HISTORY MORE                 
                                           THAN THE OUTCOME OF BATTLES          
| contrast. Eighty years ago the United States was predominantly                 
/1 an agricultural community. Most of its inhabitants lived on                   
Xi-farms and in small villages, dependent on foreign countries for               
the greater part of their manufactured articles and necessary capital.           
It was a relatively unimportant nation as far as world affairs were con-         
cerned. Today it is a world power. Instead of being dependent upon               
the rest of the world for manufactured products and for capital, the             
United States is dependent on the rest of the world for markets as an            
outlet for its surplus of manufactures, foodstuffs, and capital.                 
'Factors in the economic revolution. A peculiar thing about the de-              
velopment of the United States is the speed with which the transfor-             
mation took place. There are, of course, many factors which explain              
this quick transformation, but these four are probably the most impor-           
tant: (1) the rapid development of means of transportation, enabling             
men and goods to be moved everywhere throughout a broad continent;               
(2) the application of machinery to farming, which made it possible to           
utilize the fertility of the Great West; (3) the rapid increase in popula-       
tion, assisted by a liberal immigration policy and the willingness of            
foreigners to try their fortunes in this rich land of opportunity; and           
(4) the stability of the government, which made foreigners willing to            
lend the necessary capital for the development of our resources.                 
The very heart of our present economic order is the system of com-               
munications and transit. This includes highways, canals, waterways,              
jailways, telephone, telegraph, cable, radio, pipe lines, air lines, and the     
postal system. The transportation and communication system binds                 
and knits the whole country into an economic unit for the production             
and distribution of goods.                                                       
                                A NETWORK OF STEEL BINDS THE COUNTRY             
 The transcontinental railroad --- the wonder of the age. A little               
 more than a hundred years ago the steam locomotive began to play its            
 part in bringing about great economic changes. The beginning was                
 slow, but between 1830 and the opening of the War between the States            
cost of some of these improvements and the greed of some of the pro-       
moters, railroad rates were cut in two between 1850 and 1880.              
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                           
Favorable conditions for Western settlement. In 1865 the Great             
Plains west of the Mississippi were without railroads. But after the       
war, railroads influenced settlement in this region as in earlier times    
rivers had influenced settlement in the East. The places selected by       
the railways for stations became the centers from which the settlements    
spread. The division points of the railroads and other places which        
promised to become business centers took on the activity of "boom          
towns.”                                                                    
All conditions were favorable for the rapid occupation of the re-          
gion. No other part of the United States had ever had so complete a        
system of transportation at hand. Tire railway companies fostered the      
movement by special freight and passenger rates to settlers and tour-      
ists. Fuel, machinery, and materials for building were easily trans-       
ported by rail. Moneylenders from the East lent the settler capital in     
return for a mortgage on his farm.                                         
Furthermore, there was a large number of people ready to move              
westward. There were about two million veterans of the War between         
fte States whose old community ties had been broken. Many of them          
were attracted by’ the opportunities which the free homesteads and the     
boom town offered to them. The railroads, eager to obtain settlers to      
buv their land and to increase their volume of business, advertised ex-    
tensively. Steamship companies, too. by elaborate advertising cam-         
paigns throughout western Europe, lured new settlers to the West.          
Immigrants from Germany, the Scandinavian countries, and the Brit-         
ish Isles came in increasing numbers. So influential was the advertising   
of the railroad companies, the steamship lines, and the new states which   
wanted to increase in population, that one authority has suggested that    
the*desire to get cheap labor, to take in passenger fares, and to sell land
have probably brought more immigrants than the hard conditions of          
Europe, Asia, and Africa have sent.”                                       
The prewar frontier. When the War between the States began, the            
frontier extended almost in a straight line through eastern Nebraska       
and Kansas. It also included the eastern part of Texas. The Far West,      
I California, and Oregon had passed beyond the frontier stage, and so,     
I too, had the Mormon settlements in Utah. In order for the frontier to    
I be closed it was necessary that the mountain states and the Great Plains 
I be settled. Tire movement to occupy this unsettled area proceeded        
I eastward from the Pacific and westward from the Mississippi. In the      
I process we can discern what has been called the miners’ frontier, the    
I ranchers’ frontier, and the fanners’ frontier.                           
has been so broken into by isolated bodies of settlement that there can     
hardly be said to be a frontier line.”                                      
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
Throughout most of our history our ideals and institutions have been        
influenced by the existence of a frontier. The closing of the frontier      
meant that the American people had to adapt these ideals and institu-       
tions to a changed economic environment. Some of the new condi-             
tions may be briefly listed: 1. The closing of the frontier coincides with  
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
 the movement to conserve our natural resources and to restrict immi-        
 gration. 2. The closing of the frontier also coincides with a period of     
                                                                             
                                                                             
 expansion overseas. Searching for new frontiers, American capital over-     
 flowed into the Caribbean, South America, and Europe. 3. The clos-          
 ing of the frontier coincides with the rapid development of large urban     
 areas. A large proportion of our people were crowded into cities,           
 chained by the machine to factories, steel mills, and offices. 4. The       
 closing of the frontier meant that workers could no longer escape their     
 difficulties in the cities by going west and starting a homestead. This     
 led to a sharpening of the conflict between capital and labor, to the       
 problems of unemployment and insecurity, and to a demand for social         
 welfare legislation.                                                        
 Professor Turner and his critics. These are some of the ways in             
 which the frontier and its closing have affected American life. Re-         
 cently it has been argued that Professor Turner and his successors in       
                                   [3811                                     
 The factory had its feeble                                               
beginnings before the close of the eighteenth century'. During the War    
of 1812 and after, manufacturing secured help from tire federal govern-   
ment in the form of protective tariffs. But the existence of an expand-   
ing market, the presence of raw materials, and the practical inventive    
genius of the people were probably more powerful stimulants to the        
growth of American manufactures than the tariff.                          
The War between the States (pages 348-351) furnished a great               
stimulus, and American industry leaped forward. Within twenty years,       
from 1860 to 1880, the value of domestic manufactures more than dou-       
bled. Following 1880 the rate of advance was even greater; the prog-       
ress has continued until today the United States leads the nations of      
the world in the variety and value of its manufacturing output.            
Factors in the development of American manufacturing. Once the             
Industrial Revolution gained headway in the United States, it made         
rapid advances. No interstate tariff barriers hampered access to a         
large and growing market. A fairly adequate banking and credit sys-        
tem facilitated trade. The high tariffs set during the War between the     
States, which were continued in effect, kept out foreign competition.      
Nowhere else in the world was there such a market open to the pro-         
ducer. The population was increasing at the rate of one and a quarter      
million each year. The raw materials necessary for a remarkable man-       
ufacturing development --- cheap land, minerals of every kind, and fuel    
--- seemed inexhaustible. Every year saw new discoveries of sources of     
oil, gas, coal, iron ore, lead, copper. Immigrants and an increasing na-   
tive population supplied cheap labor. America lacked capital, but Eu-      
ropean investors lent money at moderate rates of interest.                 
Armies of labor. The economic revolution was much more than                
the substitution of machinery for manual labor on the farm and             
in the mill; it was more than the rise of tire great factory to take       
the place of the wayside craftsman’s shop. It also included tire unend-    
ing line of recruits who knocked at the doors of the great industrial or-  
ganizations, many of which counted their workmen by tens of thou-          
sands. Men and women and children did the shop or mill work and,           
by force of circumstance, changed their mode of living and their ways      
of thinking.                                                               
The labor supply came from many sources. (1) Many of the labor-            
ers came from farms. Regular hours, the opportunities for companion-       
ship, for varied amusements, and for intellectual improvement in the       
cities attracted a steady stream of farm laborers to the industrial cen-   
ters. (2) Many of the laborers were immigrants; between 1880 and           
1914, instead of moving to the West, immigrants crowded into the fac-      
tory cities. Employers maintained a powerful lobby to prevent the en-      
actment of laws that would check this source of cheap labor. On the        
other hand, American labor organizations began to demand the restric-      
tion of immigration (page 422). (3) The transfer of industries from        
the home to the factory and the ease with which machinery could be         
operated attracted into the wage-earning class women and children          
who formerly remained at home. Low wages paid to men made it nec-          
essary for women and children to add to the family income.                 
Reasons for the development of a labor movement. The growth of             
an organized labor movement was the result of economic changes, fear       
of the loss of work, and low wages. 1. Economic changes. The suc-          
cessful organization of large groups of laborers in the United States      
coincides with the disappearance of the frontier, the development of       
large industrial combinations, and the growth of cities. In earlier years  
the existence of free land furnished an outlet for the underpaid and dis-  
contented. With the coming of the Industrial Revolution and the con-       
gestion it created, there was no longer a satisfactory escape for the toil-
ing masses. The employers met some of their problems by forming            
pools, trusts, holding companies, and manufacturing associations. The      
laborers, too, organized. Individually, workers were at the mercy of       
their employers; collectively, they could successfully bargain with the  
masters of capital and the owners of jobs.                               
2. Fear of the loss of work. The new working conditions in industry      
separated the employers and the employees. More than likely the          
higher officials of the corporation seldom saw the workrooms and knew    
little if anything of the conditions under which the workmen lived.      
Hiring laborers was as impersonal as purchasing raw materials. When      
money could be saved by cutting down the number of workers, em-          
ployees were laid off or discharged as casually as the stopping of an    
unneeded piece of machinery.                                             
3. Since industry was organized to make a profit on the investment       
of capital, businessmen used every means to accomplish that purpose.     
None offered greater promise of immediate results than low wages.        
Cheap labor in the form of children, women, and immigrants provided      
opportunities for profits.                                               
              LABOR SEARCHES FOR AN EFFECTIVE ORGANIZATION               
Early labor unions. The unionization of workers was pretty well          
under way at the time of President Jackson. Then local organizations     
of skilled laborers achieved some success. But local craft unions could  
not achieve as much as combinations of unions on a national scale. To    
these larger combinations labor leaders directed their efforts after the 
War between the States. Many national unions imitated the Know-          
Nothing and the old Ku Klux Klan societies, taking on fantastic names,   
holding meetings in secret, with solemn ceremonies directed by officers  
with royal titles. Such, for example, were the Supreme Mechanical Or-    
der of the Sun, the Knights of St. Crispin, and the Noble Order of the   
Knights of Labor. There were also a few’ organizations of a more         
matter-of-fact type. One of these was the Brotherhood of Locomotive      
Engineers, which has continued to the present day.                       
The Knights of Labor (1869-86). The Knights of Labor was the             
first important attempt to organize workers on a national scale. 1. Or-  
ganization. It was founded in 1869 by Uriah S. Stephens, a Philadel-     
phia tailor, undbr whose leadership several local garment workers’       
unions in eastern cities expanded into a national union which included   
laborers of all kinds, skilled and unskilled, and even nonworkers. After 
the Knights of Labor dropped its secret features (1879) it rapidly grew  
in numbers.                                                              
2. Demands. Among the demands of labor at this time were the             
k Mowing: shorter hours, better pay, and better conditions of work;      
I workmen’s compensation; compulsory' school laws; abolition of child    
I labor; a graduated income tax; inheritance taxes; postal savings banks;
I government ownership of railroads, telephones, and telegraphs; the for-
I nation of producers’ and consumers’ co-operatives. These demands       
pitched battles have usually resulted when federal troops, the state       
militia, or the police have been used to break up a strike. At other       
times violence has resulted when corporations imported “strikebreak-       
ers” to end a strike. Strikes are a serious and important business.        
Evils in themselves, they are also symptoms of evils in our social and     
economic structure.                                                        
The achievements of organized labor. The achievements of organ-            
ized labor have been many. 1. Limitation of the hours of work. The         
eight-hour day became a reality, first in government work and then in      
practically all industries; recent legislation and practice has established
forty hours per week as the standard work week (pages 587-588).            
2. State laws. A number of laws have been passed by the various            
states for improving the conditions of labor --- limiting the hours of     
work of women and children, compelling tire installation in mine and       
factory of devices to protect tire safety and health of the worker, and    
requiring the employers to provide compensation to injured workers.        
The sweat-shop system has been attacked by a number of state laws;         
government employment agencies have been established; free public          
education and compulsory school attendance have become facts. Many         
states had child labor laws, and, even before the Social Security Act of   
1935 (pages 622-624). had adopted old-age and widows’ pensions, and        
had begun to adopt plans of unemployment insurance.                        
3. Federal legislation. The federal government has also enacted a          
series of laws of benefit to labor. In 1884 Congress created a Bureau of   
Labor Statistics. In 1913 the Department of Labor was created as a         
separate department. The following year the Clayton Antitrust Act          
(pages 530-531) extended certain benefits to labor. In 1915 the La         
Follette Seaman’s Act corrected the labor conditions prevailing on         
ocean-going vessels and on river and lake craft. In 1916, by threaten-     
ing to tie up the transportation system of the country, the railroad labor 
unions virtually forced Congress to pass the Adamson Act, which estab-     
lished a basic eight-hour day for railroad employees. Beginning in         
1921 Congress passed laws to restrict immigration, a great achieve-        
ment for organized labor. Some of labor’s greatest gains were won          
during the era of the New Deal and World War II (pages 583-588).           
4. Congressional attempts to limit child labor. By 1916 the move-          
ment to abolish child labor had achieved considerable success in many      
of the states. Manufacturers in states with the strong child labor laws    
argued that their competitors in states which had no such laws en-         
joyed cheaper production costs. Congress therefore attempted to limit      
child labor by a law (Keating-Owen Act) which excluded from in-            
terstate transportation all goods made in factories which employed         
persons under fourteen years of age. The Supreme Court in 1918             
(Hammer vs. Dagenhart) by a vote of five to four declared this law un-     
constitutional on the ground that it was a violation of the Tenth Amend-   
twentieth century to foment a feeling of ill will and discrimination     
toward the Negro, the Jew, and the Catholic. The fact that the move-     
                                                                         
                                                                         
ment was ridiculed by the bulk of the people and was comparatively       
short-lived gives some hope* that as time passes, much of the prejudice  
against the Negro and other racial groups will tend to disappear.        
However, there was a revival of Klan activities after World War II.      
The yellow race. Other racial problems have become acute during          
America's industrial transformation. The liberal immigration policy en-  
couraged large numbers of the yellow race to come to America. Their      
presence was tending to cause the same racial trouble in the Pacific     
coast states that the presence of the black race has caused elsewhere.   
To avoid another racial problem the government took steps in 1882 to     
check Chinese immigration and in 1907 brought Japanese immigration       
nearly to an end. Restrictions have been eased since World War 11.       
(See pages 604-607. For tire Indian problem, see pages 372-374.)         
Factors tending to cause a decline in racial prejudice. Every now        
and then America suffers outbreaks of racial and religious intolerance,  
such as the “Know-Nothing" movement of the 1850's, the American          
Protective Association movement of the 1890’s, the Ku Klux Klan move-    
ment of the 1920’s and mid-1940’s. These and other prejudice move-       
ments are directed against minority racial or religious groups. Part of  
the intolerance is caused by ignorance and stupid prejudices, and part   
of it is based upon the fear of economic competition. Unscrupulous       
leaders also see an opportunity to enrich themselves by organizing these 
societies. Agitators and vote-seeking politicians sometimes play upon    
racial sympathies and prejudices to further their own ends. Not only     
have the Negroes suffered from these unreasoned prejudices, but other    
groups as well---Jews, Catholics, and the various “minority" racial      
groups that make up the American people. In the past these waves of      
intolerance and prejudice have not enjoyed a very long life. The in-     
termingling of various racial groups in many sections of the country,    
particularly in our large cities, and the ever-widening influence of the 
puhlic schools have tended to emphasize the American ideals of tol-      
erance and equality. However, false notions of racial inequality, pop-   
ularized by the unscrupulous, and the economic competition for jobs      
have caused many to fear serious outbreaks of prejudice and discrimi-    
nation. Undoubtedly racial ami group intolerance is one of America’s     
most pressing social problems. Much more has to be done before Amer-     
icans may justly boast of their intelligence and their sense of justice. 
                                                                          
                                                                          
The lessened influence of home and church. The shortening of the          
work day, resulting in an increase of leisure time, the automobile, the   
movies, inventions which lighten the burden of housework, and the cm-     
and 76,000,000 in 1900. It was a period when immigrants flocked to our   
shores by tens of thousands, when our cities grew rapidly in size and    
number, when politics gave flagrant evidences of its ugliness in the cit-
ies, in the states, and in the nation. It was the period when the pros-  
trate South slowly recovered from the war and the “crime of reconstruc-  
tion.’’ when railroads spanned the continent, when big businessmen       
organized American industry, when the farm lands of the West began       
to yield rich harvests, and when national labor unions began to play an  
important part in American life.                                         
It was a period of great progress; it was also a period of unrest and    
discontent as the people struggled to adjust themselves to the great     
changes that were taking place. The people, then as now, formed many     
associations to champion the cause of various reforms. The country       
debated many issues; and some of them it still continues to debate.      
What is the best tariff policy? How shall we rid ourselves of political  
coemption? How shall we deal with “Big Business,” with monopoly          
prices, with the “unfair practices” of railroads? How shall we rid our-  
selves of panics and depressions and extend prosperity to all groups     
and all sections? How can we develop a banking and credit system         
that will serve the needs of all and yield special privileges to none?   
And there was then, as always, the political question: what part should  
government play in helping the people find the answers to these ques-    
tions?                                                                   
The rise of the West. As might be expected in a country as big and       
diverse as the United States, not all of these questions have been in the
forefront of popular interest at the same time. In the last third of the 
nineteenth century --- the period of the "emergence of modern America”   
-the outstanding political development was the revolt of the farmers     
of the West and South against the dominant influence of captains of in-  
dustry, railroad magnates, and banking overlords. The West grew rap-     
idly; with the help of laborsaving machinery the American fanners        
taxes. Harding’s administration concluded a separate peace with Ger-    
many, sponsored the Washington Conference on Naval Limitation and       
Far Eastern Affairs (pages 706-707), and in the domestic field initiated
budget reform, a high tariff, and the restriction of immigration.       
1. The national budget. Unbusinesslike methods had been fol-            
lowed by Congress in drawing up tax bills and in appropriating public   
funds. Several committees of Congress had a hand in the process and     
there was no co-ordination among them. The haphazard system of ap-      
propriations encouraged “logrolling” by the members of Congress, each   
of whom tried to secure for his own district elaborate post offices, ex-
pensive river and harbor improvements, and so on. The National          
Budget Act of 1921 created a Bureau of the Budget with a director at    
its head. It is the duty of the director to obtain estimates of future  
needs from the various heads of departments and to prepare the budget   
--- an estimate of receipts and expenditures for the ensuing year. The  
budget is then sent by the President to Congress, which has the power   
to disregard or change the various items. Charles G. Dawes was the      
first Director of the Budget and gave the new system a good start. The  
fact that Congress can disregard the budget is the essential weakness of
the plan; however, a vigorous President, if he so desires, can create a 
live public opinion which can do much to compel a ‘logrolling" Con-     
gress to toe the mark.                                                  
2. The Fordney-McCumber Tariff, 1922. The Harding administra-           
tion also undertook to revise the tariff. The result was the Fordney-   
McCumber Tariff, which raised the average level of duties to the high-  
est point yet reached in the nation’s history. The Fordney-McCumber     
Act contained one novel feature --- a “flexible” clause permitting the  
later years place it as high as 50 per cent. The percentage of farm        
tenancy differs in the different sections, being as low as 6 per cent in   
the New England states and as high as 63 per cent in the South Central     
states. This trend of the farm population from independent landowner       
to propertyless tenant is in itself a social fact of great importance.     
Agriculture and the machine age. Despite the decline in the num-           
ber of farms and farmers, America’s farm production did not decline.       
The reason for this was the continued mechanization of agriculture and     
the increasing use of scientific methods of farming. The combine, the      
tractor, the internal-combustion stationary engine, the com picker, the    
cotton sledder, the cream separator, and a hundred other kinds of ma-      
chines took the place of farm laborers. As an illustration, in 1920 there  
were about two hundred fifty thousand tractors in use on American          
farms; in 1930 there were about nine hundred thousand. Because of          
superior mechanical equipment the American farmer produces a larger        
crop per man than any other farmer in the world. At the same time          
crop production per acre has been lower in the United States than in       
many European countries, due to the fact that we have not felt any         
need to economize in the use of land. However, farm machinery is           
costly and its benefits can Ire secured onlv on large farms, or by a group 
of small farmers co-operating in its purchase and use. Scientific farm-    
ing and machine farming have tremendously increased output. They           
have not solved the farmer’s problems; they have aggravated them.          
As the farmer was bringing more land under cultivation, much of it         
poor land, and increasing his output through mechanization, he was         
losing his former world market. Canada, Argentina, Australia, and          
Russia competed increasingly with the American wheat grower; the           
British colonies, Japan, and China with our tobacco growers; and India     
and Egypt with our cotton growers. Moreover, the restriction of immi-      
gration and the decline in the rate of population growth prevented         
any large increase in the demand at home for agricultural products.        
Changes in the dietary habits of the people, as well as the substitution   
of tractors and automobiles for approximately ten million horses and       
mules, further limited the market for American fanners.                    
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
Farm co-operative associations. Apart from the “industrialization”          
of the farm, probably the most important development among Ameri-           
can fanners is the organization of co-operative enterprises of various      
I sorts. This movement is in itself a significant social development, be-   
| cause the American fanner is, by tradition, imbued with a spirit of in-   
I dependence, initiative, and self-reliance.                                
The success of the California Fruit Growers Exchange, organized in          
1895 to pack, grade, and market oranges and lemons, stimulated the          
               THE UNITED STATES IS A NATION OF IMMIGRANTS                
The present civilization of the Western Hemisphere is dominated           
by peoples of Old World origin. Ever since the days of Colum-             
bus, successive waves of immigration have poured into the New             
World. According to the first census (1790) the population of the         
country was a little less than four million. The census of 1950 gave the  
continental population of the United States as close to one hundred       
fifty million. Immigration contributed no small part to this stupendous   
growth.                                                                   
Causes of immigration. The causes of immigration have been many;          
but outstanding at all times has been the economic motive --- the desire  
for land ownership. Even when religious, political, and racial persecu-   
tions played their part in causing people to seek another place to live,  
the desire for economic improvement was usually present also.             
Colonial immigration. In the colonial period a number of different        
peoples of Europe settled on the Atlantic seaboard. There were, for       
example, French, Dutch, Swedish, German, Irish, and Scotch, although      
most of the settlers in what is now the United States were English.       
Since the English predominated, they determined the language, laws,       
and forms of government that became the basis of American life.           
The periods of immigration. There are about five great periods in         
the history of immigration to the United States: the first, from the close
of the Revolution to about 1825; the second, from 1825 to the War be-     
tween the States; the third, from the close of the War between the        
States to about 1890; the fourth, from 1890 to World War I; and the       
fifth, from World War I to the present.                                   
Immigration before the War between the States. In the first period        
a total of about three hundred thousand people came to this country,      
chiefly from the nations of northern and western Europe. In the sec-      
ond period there arrived about five million immigrants from the same      
countries. This migration included large groups of German and Irish       
immigrants, especially in the period between 1845 and 1855. The Irish     
potato famine of 1846 and 1847 and dissatisfaction with England’s eco-    
nomic and political policies toward Ireland sent hundreds of thousands    
of Irish to our shores. Within a period of about seven years more than    
a million and a half Irish came to the United States. Political troubles  
in Germany                              in                    1848 led hundreds of thousands of Germans to seek ref-  
uge in the United States.                                                                                            
                          The beginnings of opposition to the immigrant. During this period                           
the older settlers began to show signs of opposition toward the newer                                                 
ones. The immigrant has always been content --- at least for a few years                                              
after his coming --- to accept a lower standard of living than those al-                                              
ready here. The immigrants who furnished the bulk of the unskilled                                                    
labor of the country crowded the earlier inhabitants out of the lowly                                                 
and poorly paid jobs, and were later crowded out themselves by suc-                                                   
ceeding waves of immigrants. Labor began to oppose unrestricted im-                                                   
migration on the ground that immigrants tended to keep wages down                                                     
and to lower the American standard of living. Prejudice toward the                                                    
new immigrant also began to appear at this time. This prejudice was                                                   
based on differences in religions and on differences in nationality. Very                                             
frequently, however, it was really caused by fear that the immigrant                                                  
was taking jobs and economic opportunities away from the earlier im-                                                  
migrants. As early as the 1830’s secret societies were formed to pro-                                                 
test against the foreigner, and “native” Americans organized political                                                
movements to discriminate against him. One evidence of this feeling                                                   
was the Know-Nothing movement of the 1850’s; a more recent mani-                                                      
festation of it was the Ku Klux Klan movement of the 1920’s; more fre-                                                
quently local groups have organized to propagandize their pet preju-                                                  
dices against particular foreign groups. Despite these “nativist”                                                     
movements the general policy of the government toward the immigrant                                                   
was one of welcome. Americans took pride in America as the land of                                                    
opportunity, the haven for the oppressed.                                                                             
Immigration from 1860-90. The economic revolution after the War                                                       
between the States required large numbers of workers. Manufacturers                                                   
and the builders of railroads welcomed immigrants. The Western                                                        
states also encouraged immigration. Larger numbers than ever before                                                   
began to come to the land of opportunity. Tire chief source of immi-                                                  
grants during this period continued to be Germany and the British Isles;                                              
large numbers also came from the Scandinavian countries.                                                              
The “new” immigration, 1890-1914. As the decades of the 1880’s                                                        
dosed, it was noticeable that the origin of the immigrant stream shifted                                              
bom northern and western to southern and southeastern Europe. For                                                     
esample, in the early 1880’s about three fourths of the immigrants were                                               
from northwestern Europe. Some twenty years later, nearly three                                                       
' fourths came from Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Italy. Taking the cen-                                               
sus year of 1890 as an arbitrary date, it has become customary to refer                                               
to the immigration before that year as the “old” immigration and that                                                 
since 1890 as the “new" immigration.                                                                                  
Hie new immigration came when the industrial revolution was in                                                        
I full swing and the frontier had disappeared. These new immigrants                                                   
I found an America very different from that found by their predecessors.                                              
There was no longer good land to be had for little or nothing. Two      
thirds of the new immigrants were men of working age, almost a fourth   
of whom came to America intending to return to their families in the    
Old World after they had accumulated a little fortune.                  
Encouragement of immigration by business interests. The large cor-      
porations sent their agents to Europe to spread stories about great op- 
portunities that awaited the immigrant in America. They lured many      
would-be immigrants to the new world by offering them jobs. Steam-      
ship lines promoted immigration by means of alluring advertisements     
and salesmen who told such tales of American wealth that many im-       
migrants came to believe that American streets were paved with gold.    
The hard lot of the new immigrant. Many of the new immigrants           
were poor, unskilled, and illiterate. Leaving overcrowded, backward     
countries, they went directly to our industrial centers and accepted    
work at the bottom of the wage scale. They huddled together in hov-     
els and tenements under living conditions often worse than they had     
left.                                                                   
New immigrants in the factory and mining towns. The story of            
Lawrence, Massachusetts, is that of many a mill town of the East. In    
1848 the textile mills of Lawrence were doing a thriving business. The  
population was six thousand, and of this number two thirds were native  
Americans. The other third were Irish immigrants. In 1910 the popu-     
lation was eighty-five thousand. Of this number six sevenths were of    
foreign birth or of foreign parentage. Nearly one third of this group   
were new immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. The majority      
of the laborers in the textile mills were foreign-born. The same tend-  
ency was noticeable in other cities and other industries. In 1870 the   
coal miners of eastern Pennsylvania were either native Americans or     
immigrants from the British Isles and Germany; by 1910 most were        
Slavs or Italians. The development of a policy of selective immigration 
coincides with labor’s opposition and the coming of the “newer” im-     
migration.                                                              
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Differences between the old and new immigration. (1) The old            
immigration had come at a time when the country was growing and         
could absorb many new settlers. (2) The old immigration came in         
smaller numbers than the new. (3) Politicians more easily exploited     
the new immigrants to obtain their votes. (4) The old immigrants had    
come from nations with institutions, customs, and ideas similar to those
of the settlers already here; the new immigrants had customs that were  
different from .American ways. Thus it was claimed the “new" im-        
migrant could not be so easily assimilated, that is, molded to American 
ways of living.                                                         
The problem of Americanization. The new immigrants crowded to-            
gether with others of their own kind. Most of our great cities soon had   
areas known, for instance, as “Little Italy,” “Little Greece,” “Little Bo-
hemia.” Bewildered by their inability to speak our language, the immi-    
grants read foreign-language newspapers and went to foreign-language      
churches and theaters. The older people found it almost impossible to     
become Americanized. The public schools, however, did invaluable          
work, and the second generation of foreigners quickly adapted them-       
selves to the ideals and conditions of American life. Various organ-      
izations attempted to carry the work of Americanization to the adult      
foreigners, but the task was extremely difficult. The necessity for Amer- 
icanization was obvious when war broke out in 1914. The problem           
that resulted while America was a neutral was embarrassing enough; it     
became a serious matter when the United States entered the war. .Al-      
though most of the "hyphenated” Americans, as they were called, sup-      
ported the country of their adoption, some did so reluctantly and some    
were outspoken in their sympathy with America s enemies. This war-        
time experience was a factor which strengthened the movement for          
Americanization anil the demands of labor for the restriction of          
immigration.                                                              
Selective immigration. With the general immigration act of 1882           
Congress began the practice of selective immigration. This law sus-       
pended Chinese immigration, the only definitely restrictive law that      
Congress passed until 1921. But between 1882 and 1921 Congress            
passed a series of laws which excluded certain classes of immigrants.     
In general these laws excluded: (1) criminals, (2) the mentally dis-      
abled, (3) those afflicted with certain diseases, (4) those likely to be- 
come public charges, (5) anarchists and other radicals who advocated      
the overthrow of government by force, (6) contract laborers, that is,     
those who were contracted for by steamship companies or industrial        
corporations, (7) polygamists, (8) aliens not eligible for citizenship    
(this referred chiefly to all Asiatics), and (9) those “who cannot read   
the English language or some other language or dialect.” This literacy    
test was vetoed by Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson, but was finally passed    
over Wilson’s veto in 1917.                                               
Restrictive immigration. After World War I there was a rush of            
immigrants to the New World. Fearing that the problem of American-        
ization would get beyond control, and that serious disturbances might     
attend the addition of large numbers to our labor supply during a period  
of adjustment, Congress passed an immigration bill.                       
1. The law of 1921. This law --- the first to restrict immigration by     
numbers, or quotas --- specified that each nation woidd be allowed to     
send to the United States each year no more than 3 per cent of the num-   
ber of persons of that nation in the United States as shown by the cen-   
sus of 1910. The number expected to enter was about three hundred         
fifty thousand; but the law permitted so many exceptions that in 1924      
twice that number entered the country.                                     
2. Discrimination in favor of the old immigration. In 1924 Congress        
reduced the number of immigrants allowed to enter. Two per cent of         
the foreign “nationals” in the country, according to the census of 1890,   
were permitted to enter. On this basis the annual quota was about          
one hundred sixty-seven thousand. The 1890 census was used as a            
basis for the determination of quotas in order to cut down the propor-     
tion of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. One of the chief      
reasons for discriminating in favor of the peoples of northern and west-   
ern Europe was the popular, although false, notion, that the people of     
northern and western Europe are superior mentally and physically to        
the peoples of southern Europe. This theory of “Nordic supremacy,”         
although no reputable scientist sustains it, flatters the “Nordic.” Hitler 
and the Nazis gave some popularity to this idea.                           
The National Origins Plan, July, 1929. Tire 2 per cent feature of the      
law of 1924 was temporary. The permanent feature of the law is known       
as the “national origins plan.”                                            
1. Determination of quotas. The national origins plan of quota re-         
striction, which finally went into effect July 1, 1929, provides that the  
total immigration from “quota” countries in one year shall be limited      
to 150,000. “The annual quota for any one nationality shall be the num-    
ber which bears the same ratio to 150,000 as the number of inhabitants     
in continental United States in 1920 having that national origin bears     
to tire number of inhabitants in continental United States in 1920 of      
European origin.” The great difficulty in applying the principle was to    
determine the number of inhabitants in 1920 of the national origin of      
the group to be admitted. A special Quota Board was set up to deter-       
i mine this figure and the annual quota for each country. In filing its re-
[ port, the Quota Board observed that “the information available raises    
I grave doubts as to the value of these computations as the basis for tire 
| purpose intended.”                                                       
2. Other features of tire Quota Law. There are three other features        
■ of the law which need mention. First, the law specified that every       
I country should be allowed to send a minimum of one hundred immi-         
I grants per year, even though its quota figure fell below that amount.    
I Secondly, the law definitely excluded Asiatic immigrants. In the third   
I place, the Quota Law did not apply to the Western Hemisphere.            
j 3. Nonquota immigration from the Western Hemisphere. Since               
I 1929 nonquota immigration to the United States from countries of the     
■ Western Hemisphere has been as heavy in some years as the quota im-      
■migration from Europe. Thousands of laborers from Mexico have             
■ nossed the border into our Southwest. There they are welcomed by         
I fruit and beet-sugar growers and other employers of unskilled labor.     
■ Some have proposed that quotas be assigned to the countries of Latin     
America, but nothing has been done, partly because the depression         
acted as a bar to immigration and partly because employers objected to    
cutting off the supply of low-paid laborers.                              
The immigration of Asiatics. The way in which our immigration             
policy may influence our international friendships is best illustrated by 
the story of the exclusion of Asiatics. 1. Opposition to the Chinese.     
After the settlement of California in the middle of the last century large
numbers of Chinese migrated to the Pacific coast, where they worked       
as unskilled laborers. Many were imported to work on railroad con-        
struction. Gradually opposition to Chinese immigration developed, and     
in 1880 China, by treaty, recognized the right of the United States to    
“regulate, limit or suspend” the immigration of Chinese laborers. In      
1882 Congress suspended Chinese immigration for a ten-year period.        
This restriction was later renewed. In 1894, by another treaty, die en-   
try of Chinese laborers was prohibited for ten years, and in 1904 Con-    
gress continued the exclusion of the Chinese without any time limit       
During World War II (1943) this law was repealed and the Chinese          
placed under the provisions of the Quota Law.                             
2. The “gentlemen’s agreement” with Japan. Meanwhile, Japanese            
immigration began to grow in numbers. The Japanese, instead of en-        
gaging in manual tasks, obtained land and began to compete with           
American farmers. The presence of the Japanese became an issue in         
the politics of the Pacific states, particularly in California. Japanese  
children were for a short time excluded from the public schools. Jap-     
anese were not allowed to become landowners. The Pacific states even      
proposed to check immigration by state action. The Japanese govern-       
ment protested to the federal government, which could do nothing but      
inform die Japanese officials that it had no control over the school or   
land laws of states. The situation was tense. The whole problem was       
quiedy solved by the famous “gentlemen’s agreement” of 1907, by which     
Japan promised to refuse passports to Japanese laborers seeking admit-    
tance to the United States. The United States was content to let Japan    
control the migration of her own people.                                  
3. Abrogation of the gentlemen’s agreement. Although Japan lived          
up to her promise, congressmen from the Pacific coast, in the debate on   
the law of 1924, urged that the United States abrogate the gentlemen's    
agreement of 1907 and assume direct control over her own immigration      
policy. The protest of the Japanese ambassador and his statement that     
“grave consequences” might follow such an act stirred the nationalistic   
ardor of Congress, and die threat was answered by the insertion of a      
clause stating that “aliens ineligible to citizenship” could not be admit-
ted. In approving the law of 1924 Coolidge expressed regret that Con-     
gress had seen fit to abrogate the gentlemen’s agreement. This feature    
of the law of 1924 was a factor in weakening the friendly relations that  
Japan and the United States had maintained for some time.                 
Refugees and displaced persons. Conditions in Europe in the               
1930’s brought up the question of modifying our quota laws to admit       
a large number of political and religious refugees. Nothing was done,     
however, until after World War 11. when the problem of finding a          
haven for hundreds of thousands of displaced persons was particularly     
acute. In 1948 a law permitted the entry of 205,(XX) displaced parsons    
over a two-year period. Many leaders in both the Democratic and           
Kepublican parties were dissatisfied because the law clearly discrimi-    
nated against a large percentage of displaced persons. In 1950 the        
restrictions were removed and the number of displaced persons per-        
mitted entry was increased to 345,000.                                    
The McCarran-Walter Immigration Act of 1952. Congress enacted             
a new comprehensive immigration law in June 1952. Many had hoped          
that this law would do away with the peculiar provisions of the 1924      
law. But the law in substance retained the provisions of the earlier      
law on maximum immigration and the quota system. It thus con-             
tinued the discriminatory restrictions on immigration from eastern        
and southern Europe. The new law removed the outright ban against         
Asiatic and Pacific immigration but limited the immigration from this     
area to 2(XX). The law established a screening process in an effort to    
keep out “subversives and other undesirables.” Special powers were        
given to the Attorney General to deport immigrants who were mem-          
bers of the Communist party or Communist front organizations, even        
after they acquired United States citizenship. President Truman wrote     
a vigorous message vetoing the bill, claiming that it was discriminatory, 
unenlightened, and that it wotdd “ intensify the repressive and in-       
humane aspects of our immigration procedure.” But by a narrow             
margin Congress overrode the President’s veto and the McCarran-           
Walter Act became law.                                                    
                            Words and Phrases                             
Americanization, assimilation, contract labor, gentlemen's agreement, lit-
eracy test, national origins plan, "new” immigration, “Nordic supremacy,” 
■old” immigration, restrictive immigration, selective immigration         
                   Questions for Understanding the Text                   
1. What are the chief causes of the movement of peoples?                  
2. What economic interests have opposed and what interests have supported 
unrestricted immigration?                                                 
3. What is meant by the theory' of "Nordic supremacy"?                    
4. What has been the attitude of the United States toward Asiatic immigra-
l tion? Assuming that you had been a member of Congress in 1924, pre-     
pare a brief speech explaining your vote on the question of abrogating the
I gentlemen’s agreement with Japan. (If library facilities permit, compare
with speeches actually delivered by members of Congress.)                 
I 5. Account for the repeal of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1943. What    
 lias done much in the way of sanitation, road building, irrigation, and    
 education. After World War II several thousand Puerto Ricans mi-           
 grated to the United States, the great majority settling in New York City. 
 The government of Puerto Rico. For over half a century Puerto              
 Rico was an unincorporated territory; that is, all parts of the American   
 constitution did not apply to it. The main features of the Puerto Rican    
 government, as fixed by laws passed in 1900 and 1917, were as follows:     
 (1) The executive authority was vested in a governor appointed by the      
 President of the United States. (By a law of 1947, the Puerto Ricans       
 elected their own governor, but the President continued to appoint         
 some administrative and judicial officials.) (2) There was a two-house     
 legislature. The laws were subject to veto by the governor, but ii the     
 legislature overrode the veto, the law was submitted to the President      
 of the United States, who had absolute veto. (3) The citizens of           
 Puerto Rico were citizens of the United States. (4) Puerto Rico was        
 represented at Washington by a commissioner who had the courtesy           
 of the floor of the House of Representatives, but no vote. (5) Articles    
 of commerce exported to the United States were exempt from customs         
 duties, but were subject to revenue taxes just as if they had been         
 produced in the United States. However, the tax collected on Puerto        
 Rican products was turned over to the Puerto Rican treasury.               
 Under this regime some Puerto Ricans agitated for complete inde-           
 pendence, some for commonwealth status, and others for statehood, a        
 proposal endorsed by the Democratic platform of 1932. The great            
 majority of Puerto Ricans steadily advocated a greater voice in their      
 own government. Thus they were greatly pleased when President              
 Truman appointed a native Puerto Rican as governor and when Con-           
 gress gave them the power to elect their own governor. Puerto Rico         
 finally achieved “home rule” in 1952 when a constitution drafted by        
 Puerto Ricans and approved in a popular referendum by a vote of            
 375,(XX) to 83,(XX) was also approved by Congress. The new constitu-       
 tion gives Puerto Ricans complete control of their own government,         
 but at the same time links Puerto Rico to the United States as part of     
 its federal structure. The status of “The Commonwealth of Puerto           
 Rico,” as it is referred to in the constitution, might be described as     
 somewhat similar to that of a British commonwealth like Canada.            
 The Puerto Ricans celebrated their “home rule" independence on             
 July 4, 1952.                                                              
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
The acquisition of overseas territory like Puerto Rico and the Phil-         
ippines was only one evidence of the drift toward imperialism. Eco-          
nomic penetration or dollar diplomacy was the form of imperialism most       
 ica. Since the restriction of immigration to the United States many       
 Europeans and Orientals have migrated to South America.                   
 The great opportunities for wealth in Latin America have been con-        
 fined to a comparatively few rich landowners; the mass of the people      
 have remained in a semi-feudal state, working on large plantations or     
 in mines. However, in recent years social reforms have been put into      
 effect, and large sections of different Latin-American countries have     
 become more and more industrialized. All the countries of Latin Amer-     
 ica are republican in form, having constitutions modeled in many re-      
 spects after that of the United States. Frequent internal revolutions     
 and the rise to power of self-seeking dictators have created an impres-   
 sion of political instability. Not infrequently these revolutions have    
 been influenced by rivalries among foreign financial interests. In re-    
 cent years illiteracy has been greatly reduced and some revolutions       
 have inaugurated important social and economic reforms; in particular     
 they have weakened the economic power of foreigners.                      
 The effect of economic changes on the diplomacy of the Western            
 Hemisphere. As the United States is gradually lessening its exports of    
 raw materials, it is no longer so strong a competitor of Latin America    
 for the same world markets. The United States has been trying to find     
 in Latin America a market for its manufactured products, and to com-      
 pete successfully with other industrial nations in supplying manufac-     
 tures and capital to Latin America. There is also noticeable in Latin     
 America a trend toward industrialization. In these economic shifts        
 may be found the explanation for the changing attitude of the United      
 States toward Central and South America.                                  
 Among the 310,000,000 people of North and South America there             
 exist enormous possibilities for the development of a vast trading em-    
 pire which should bring peace and prosperity to all. Efforts have been    
 made to achieve this goal, but not infrequently the actions of the United 
 States, as the strongest nation, have caused ill will. The movement to    
 secure these mutual advantages, formerly known as Pan-Americanism,        
 is now known as Inter-American Co-operation.                              
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
The meaning of Inter-American Co-operation. Pan-Americanism,                
like many other similar terms, is an expression that may mean a num-        
ber of things. To some it has meant an attempt to exchange valuable         
information concerning markets and materials. To others it has meant        
simply the holding of periodical conferences to discuss problems pe-        
culiar to the Western Hemisphere. To still others Pan-Americanism           
has meant the leadership of the United States in the affairs of the West-   
ern Hemisphere. To some Latin-American statesmen it has meant the           
 copper, coal), lumber, furs, and fish. Agriculture is possible on approx-  
 imately 1,900,000 acres, but less than one third are actually under culti- 
                                                                            
 vation. The strategic value of Alaska and the Aleutian Islands as the      
 shortest route to Japan was clearly demonstrated during World War II.      
 2. Hawaii. The Hawaiian group of islands, situated a little more           
 than 2000 miles southwest of San Francisco, comprises a total area of      
 about 6400 square miles. The population of the eight inhabited is-         
 lands in 1950 was close to 500,000, only a small portion of which is na-   
 tive Hawaiian. About one fourth of the population are of Japanese ori-     
 gin; about one tenth are Filipinos. As a result of the United States       
 immigration laws no Japanese were admitted in recent years, but the        
 number of Filipino immigrants increased. The chief products of the         
 islands are sugar and pineapples. The great bulk of Hawaiian trade is      
 with the rest of the United States; about 90 per cent of Hawaii’s im-      
 ports come from the mainland, while 98 per cent of her exports go there.   
                                                                             
                                                                             
Population and races. The Philippine archipelago, situated some              
500 miles off the coast of China, consists of 7(MX) islands, most of them    
being mere bits of rock sticking out of the ocean. The entire archi-         
pelago is about 1100 miles in length and nearly 700 miles in width.          
The Philippines have in all a land area of about 115,000 square miles.       
The population --- more than 19.500,000 in 1950 --- is composed of a         
wide variety of races, illustrating every degree of civilization. A few      
of them at the time of American acquisition were little more than sav-       
ages; but under American occupation savage practices have been largely       
abandoned and the wilder tribes are approaching a state of semicivili-       
zation. There are about seven main branches of language with per-            
haps eighty-seven different dialects. Ninety per cent of the population      
are Filipinos. Most of them arc Christians, having been converted to         
Roman Catholicism by Spanish missionaries. Alxnit 400,000 inhabitants        
of the island of Mindanao arc Mohammedans --- called Moros by the            
Spaniards, after the Mohammedan Moors who once dominated Spain.              
Resources. It is almost impossible to exaggerate the importance of           
the islands as an agricultural producing center. Farming methods,            
however, still need considerable improvement, and only about one             
third of the available farm land is under cultivation. The chief prod-       
ucts are tobacco, sugar, hemp, and coconut oil. The islands also             
contain some minerals not as yet developed to any great extent. Gov-         
ernment experts have reported that the islands possess about two mil-        
lion acres suitable for the cultivation of rubber. About 70 per cent of      
the trade of the Philippines is with the United States.                      
The Philippine Commission. The government of the Philippines                 
has been one of our country’s most difficult tasks. Just before the          
Spanish-American War the Spaniards had crushed a Filipino revolt; at          
the time of the American conquest a number of the rebels expected the         
United States to assist them in achieving independence. When it be-           
came apparent that this was not the intention of the United States, a         
revolt led by Aguinaldo broke out against the Americans. It took the          
army some years to subdue the Filipinos. In 1901 the American mili-           
tary authorities surrendered control of the country to a civil body --- the   
Philippine Commission --- and William IT. Taft became the first gov-          
ernor. In 1907 the Filipinos were given a legislature, but the Com-           
mission, appointed by the President, continued to act as an upper house.      
The Jones Act. Under Wilson the Filipinos were given a larger                 
share in the government. In 1916 Congress passed tire Jones Act, which        
established the government of the Philippines until 1935. Both houses         
of the legislature were elected by the Filipinos themselves; that is, those   
Filipinos who owned property, or paid taxes, or could read and write.         
Tire chief executive was the governor general, appointed by the Pres-         
ident of the United States. He had the power to veto acts passed by           
the legislature; and if the legislature passed these bills over his veto,     
they had to be submitted to tire President for his approval. Neither          
the United States nor the Philippine Islands taxed imports from one an-       
 other. The Filipinos were never granted United States citizenship.          
The promise of independence. The Jones Act contained the follow-              
ing preamble: “It is, as it has always been, the purpose of the people of     
the United States to withdraw their sovereignty over the Philippine Is-       
lands and to recognize their independence as soon as a stable govern-         
ment can be established therein.”                                             
This promise encouraged many Filipinos to agitate for independ-               
ence. At times serious difficulties developed and various Presidents          
sent investigating commissions to study conditions and make recom-            
mendations. Each investigation produced administrative reforms and            
increased the opportunity of the Filipinos for self-government; but each      
reported against the granting of independence, largely on the ground          
that the Filipinos had not achieved a “stable political or economic           
system.”                                                                      
But beginning in 1929 new forces within America were beginning                
to work on the side of Philippine independence. (1) Possession of the         
islands had not materially increased our trade with China and the Far         
East. (2) The cost of administering, fortifying, and defending the is-        
lands was beyond all proportion to the value of the Filipino trade; “im-      
perialism” in the Philippines did not pay. (3) Military and naval             
experts questioned the ability of the United States to defend the Philip-     
pines successfully without weakening our defense of Hawaii, the Pa-           
cific coast, and the Canal Zone. (4) Migration of Filipinos to Califor-       
nia, like the Japanese migration of twenty years before, led to a demand      
for a restrictive policy. We could hardly shut out the Filipinos so long      
as the Philippines belonged to the United States. (5) American com-       
petitors of Filipino exports desired a tariff on Filipino products.       
Philippine independence. In January, 1933, Congress passed over           
President Hoover’s veto a complicated bill granting independence to       
the Philippines, after a ten-year trial period of self-government. Before 
becoming effective this bill had to be accepted by the Philippine legis-  
lature; but that body rejected it in the summer of 1933 because it gave   
the United States the right to keep certain military and naval bases in   
the islands. Early in 1934 President Franklin D. Roosevelt suggested      
that Congress eliminate from the original bill the offending clause. On   
March 24, 193-4, Congress passed the McDuffie-Tydings Act, carrying       
out the President’s suggestion, and on May 1, 1934, the Philippine leg-   
islature voted to accept the bill. Independence was to be proclaimed      
on July 4, 1946. During the intervening years (1) the United States       
was to keep control over finances and foreign affairs; (2) free trade be- 
tween the Philippines and the United States was to continue, except       
that the United States might impose its regular tariff duties on Filipino 
exports of sugar, coconut oil, and hemp iu excess of certain amounts;     
(3) Filipino migration to the United States was limited to an annual      
quota of fifty, but after 1946 the regular immigration laws would ap-     
ply; (4) beginning with 1941, the Philippines might impose gradually      
increasing export duties on goods exported to the United States; (5)      
the United States promised to enter into treaties with other nations to   
guarantee the neutrality' of the island.                                  
In accordance with the provisions of the law, a Philippine conven-        
tion drafted a new constitution. This was ratified in May, 1935. In       
September, Manuel Quezon was elected as the first president of the        
Philippine Commonwealth. A high commissioner was appointed to             
take charge of American interests in the islands. The new constitution    
contains a bill of rights, limits the president to one six-year term, and 
provides for a one-chamber legislature and a Supreme Court of eleven      
members, which has the power to declare laws unconstitutional by a        
two-thirds vote. There is also a provision for the compulsory arbitra-    
tion of disputes between labor and capital.                               
Having achieved this concession from the United States, many Fili-        
pinos were not so sure as formerly of their desire for complete inde-     
pendence. Thus, one of the Filipino commissioners suggested in the        
House of Representatives that independence be postponed, and Presi-       
dent Quezon declared that “the Philippines are not anxious to be cut      
| off completely from United States protectorship,” although in cam-      
paigning for office he had declared, “An independent Philippines must     
depend on herself for protection.” In May, 1942, the United States lost   
the Philippines to Japan; but after the reconquest of the islands in 1945,
I and shortly before his death. President Roosevelt assured the Filipinos 
I that they would be given their independence.                            
The United States and Japan. At the beginning of the twentieth           
century the United States looker! with favor upon the growing strength   
of Japan. It thought that Japan as a strong nation might be a factor     
in supporting the open door policy and in checking the piecemeal par-    
tition of China by European nations. When the Japanese attempted to      
oust the Russians from Northern China in 1904, most Americans ap-        
plauded. But Japan’s success in the war was so great that American       
sentiment shifted, and ever since then the United States has feared Ja-  
pan’s increasing power in the Far East. Japan also had grounds for       
suspicion of the United States. President Roosevelt actively intervened  
to bring the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-05 to a close (in a peace treaty 
signed at Portsmouth, New' Hampshire). During the negotiations           
Roosevelt urged Japan to be moderate in her demands upon Russia.         
Subsequently, many Japanese claimed that Roosevelt acted as he did in    
order to deprive Japan of the fruits of victory. Furthermore, Japan      
resented .American hostility to Japanese immigrants (page 606).          
World War I and conditions in the Far East. Japan used the op-           
portunity presented by World War I to insist that China agree to         
twenty-one demands. The net effect of these demands (1915) was to        
give Japan the dominant position in China and the Orient. Secretary      
of State Bryan sent a mild note of protest to Japan. China accepted      
Japan’s demands after they had been considerably modified. Two           
years later, by means of the Lansing-Ishii agreement (1917) the United   
States recognized that Japan had special interests in China, “particu-   
larly in the part to which her possessions are contiguous.” Many Chi-    
nese leaders began to feel that American friendship, as manifested by    
Hay’s diplomacy and the return of a portion of the Boxer indemnity,      
had become lukewarm. World War I strengthened the Japanese po-           
sition. The European powers were weakened by four years of conflict;     
Japan emerged stronger than ever. She received the German posses-        
sions in the Pacific north of the equator as a mandate from the League.  
She w’as also given control of Shantung, a Chinese peninsula which Ger-  
many had controlled.                                                     
The Far Eastern question and naval rivalry. The United States and        
Japan, in a better position than the other participants in World War I,  
started an extensive program of naval construction. England tried to     
compete. In an attempt to check this rivalry, President Harding in       
1920 issued a call for a conference at Washington to discuss Far East-   
ern affairs and the limitation of naval armaments. Since disturbed       
conditions in the Far East were the chief reasons for the naval construc-
tion, any agreement to limit navies depended upon the settlement of the  
problems of the Pacific.                                                 
At the time, the Washington Conference was enthusiastically hailed       
as a great step toward international co-operation and peace. In the      
light of subsequent events, however, the Washington Conference is        
not able to get Congressional approval of many of the measures he ad-  
vocated. Mr. Truman’s failures in Congress were attributed to a coali- 
tion of Republicans, Southern Democrats, and a few conservative Dem-   
ocrats from other regions. The President’s steady support of "civil    
rights legislation" (pages 811-813) alienated many Southern Demo-      
crats; still others in the South and elsewhere were opposed to what    
many critics of the Fair Deal began to describe as the “welfare state.”
A filibuster in the Senate by Southern Democrats effectively blocked   
Mr. Truman’s “civil rights program.” Enough Southern or conservative   
Democrats joined with Republicans to prevent the enactment of many     
other administration measures. The following items in the Fair Deal    
program were not carried out: repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act; crea-    
tion of valley authorities, similar to the T.V.A., for the Columbia and
Missouri rivers; admission of Alaska and Hawaii as states; approval    
of the St. Lawrence Seaway; passage of laws to provide federal aid to  
education, a universal military training program, an improved farm     
support program, and a national health insurance program. Congress     
also illustrated its independence of the President bv overriding his   
veto of a new immigration law (page 607) and of a law designed to      
curb Communist activities (pages 816-817).                             
In spite of these set-backs, however, the accomplishments of the       
Fair Deal were substantial. The minimum wage rate set by the Fair      
Labor Standards Act of 1938 at forty cents an hour was raised to sev-  
enty-five cents. Congress, at the urging of the President, corrected   
weaknesses in the Displaced Persons Act and doubled the number of      
persons to be admitted (page 607). Federal rent controls were re-      
tained in modified form; the Reciprocal Trade Agreements program       
was continued. Although the President's National Health Insurance      
program, characterized by the American Medical Association as "social- 
ized medicine.” went down to defeat. Congress did appropriate funds    
for hospital construction, medical research, and a National Science    
Foundation (page 624). Congress, by laws in 1949 and 1950, sub-        
sidized slum clearance and authorized a public housing program         
(page 624) as well as a loan and mortgage system to encourage private  
construction. One of the most notable achievements of the adminis-     
tration was the improvement and extension of the social security sys-  
tem (pages 623-624).                                                   
Throughout the four-year term to which Mr. Truman was elected,         
prosperity' was general. During the spring of 1950 a mild recession    
occurred, with the number of unemployed increasing slightly. The       
outbreak of the Korean war in June, 1950, put an end to the temporary  
recession. Government expenditures for war materials and the ex-       
pansion of defense industries stimulated prosperity' in the latter half
of 1950 and throughout 1951 and 1952. During this prosperous period,   
prices, taxes, and wages increased. Inflation became a real danger.    
President-elect Eisenhower selects his Cabinet. Mr. Eisenhower             
established a precedent by designating within a few weeks after his        
election the names of those to be appointed to the Cabinet and to a        
number of other important positions. All the Cabinet members were          
approved by the Senate and took office within a few days after Eisen-      
hower’s inauguration in January, 1953. One of the other appointments       
to receive early approval was that of Mrs. Oveta Culp Hobby of Texas       
as Federal Security Administrator. Mrs. Hobby became a member of           
the Cabinet in April, 1953, when Congress created the Department of        
Health, Education, and Welfare.                                            
The Eisenhower administration gets under way. President Eisen-             
hower undertook to prune the Truman budget, but refused to sponsor         
a reduction in personal income taxes until the federal budget was bal-     
anced. There was opposition to cuts in defense spending, particularly      
to proposals to reduce the amount set aside for the Air Force. Bv          
executive order the Truman loyalty review boards were discontinued.        
Congressional committees continued to expose Communist infiltration,       
and “McCarthyism” provoked sharp controversy. Rent and price con-          
trols were relaxed. Congress enacted a law giving the Gulf states and      
California privileges in off-shore or tidelands oil fields. Congress estab-
lished a Small Business Administration and provided for the admission,     
during the next three years, of 214,000 European refugees in addition      
to the fixed immigration quota. Congress delayed making any changes        
in the Taft-Hartley Law, the farm price-support program, and the           
Social Security program. In foreign affairs the most significant events    
were the death of Stalin, indications that Russia was inclined to be more  
conciliatory, the signing of a truce agreement in Korea, and the an-       
nouncement by Russia that the United States no longer had a monop-         
oly of the hydrogen bomb.                                                  
In summarizing his first six months in office President Eisenhower         
told the people, “The future, both immediate and distant, remains full     
of trial and hazard. The end of our staggering economic burden is not      
yet in sight. The end of the peril to peace is not clearly in view.”       
