Early colonial laws forbade any but men in the upper class to wear silver buttons, and any but their wives and daughters to wear silk dresses. Social rank was indicated in college catalogues, marriage certificates, and even on tombstones. By modern standards, therefore, life in the English colonies was undemocratic. It was, however, a "mobile" society—that is, one in which a man could move up or down according to his abilities or his lack of them. Indentured servants. At the bottom of the scale were "indentured servants," men who by contract were bound to serve a master for a number of years in return for nothing more than their keep, and often the cost of passage to America. When the contract expired, the servant was a free man able to sell his labor for what he Even in the self-sufficient economy of colonial life, each section produced some staple which it could export. Common to all of the sections were furs, for which there was a constant demand in European markets. Since labor was scarce, wages in the colonies were two or three times those in England. In some colonies an indentured servant received as much as fifty acres of land on achieving his freedom. So a man who started life in America practically a slave might end it an independent landowner. Shortly after 1660, thirteen of the twenty-eight members of the Virginia House of Burgesses were men who had originally come to the colony as indentured [i servants. Effects of the frontier. The frontier was a leveling force in colonial life. With land to be had almost for the asking, any energetic man could try to improve his lot by moving west. In the hard life on the edge of the wilderness a man was judged not by his ancestors but by his practical abilities and character. The violence of frontier life often brutalized men and women, but it promoted equality. Life on the frontier also made women more self-reliant. A visitor to the North Carolina-Virginia back country in 1710 gave this description of a frontierswoman: I ... she is a very civil woman and shows I nothing of ruggedness or Immodesty in her carriage, vett she will carry a gunn in the H woods and kill deer, turkeys, etc., shoot I down wild cattle, catch and tye hoggs, knock | down beeves with an axe and perform the most manfull exercises. Widespread prosperity. A remarkable feature of life in the English colonies was widespread prosperity. There were practically no paupers, beggars, or serfs. Organized crime was almost unknown except for occasional piracy on the high seas and banditry on the frontier. It was a society of mixed origins. At first most of the immigrants, except for the Dutch and the Negroes, came from England. From about the time of the founding of Pennsylvania in 1681, however, American prosperity began to attract people of other nationalities—Scots, Irishmen, French Huguenots, Swedes, and Germans. Just as there was no class of beggars at the bottom, there was no class of idle rich at the top. Even the wealthiest men, whether New England merchants, Hudson Valley patroons, or Virginia plantation owners, were seldom idle. Art and architecture. The lack of leisure in colonial America may be one reason why little attention was paid to the arts. Another reason was that many religious people regarded the visual arts as "vanity," and music or the theatre as immoral. In spite of handicaps, however, colonial craftsmen produced some work which is prized and imitated today. Artistic expression found its outlet in many objects of practical use—silver teapots and bowls, furniture, chests, andirons. While the sculptor generally found employment only in carving figures on tombstones, there was an increasing demand for portraits. People of means wanted to pass pictures of themselves and their families on to their deSectionalism water power, since many New England rivers had falls or rapids near the coast. There was an abundant supply of skilled labor. It took industry, ingenuity, and I thrift for farmers to gain a living from the I rocky fields of the region. The land could I not support the growing families. Thus many Yankees were ready to move to the I factory towns. By 1840 there were about 700 cotton mills and 500 woolen mills in New England, employing about 50,000 I laborers. There were also many small facI tones turning out such products as shoes, docks, and paper. All this was, however, just a beginning. There were in the region many more people engaged in farming than in manufacturing, and just as many still engaged in shipping. The North Atlantic states. In the North Atlantic states—Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New York—manufacturing took hold even more than in New England. The new transportation system opened western markets, and European immigration supplied much cheap labor. There were many textile factories in the area, although not as many as in the New England states. The region was the great center of the iron industry and of the manufacture of machinery. Effects of the industrial revolution. The beginning of the industrial revolution had several important effects. (1) Existing dties, such as New York and Philadelphia, grew rapidly; at power sites new cities apI peared, such as Lawrence, Lowell, and Manchester on the Merrimac River in Massachusetts. (2) There was a great demand for better transportation to carry food and raw materials to the cities and manufactured goods to markets. (3) The cities provided new markets for farm products. There appeared two new classes of people—the industrial capitalists and the industrial laborers, those who owned the factories and those who worked in them. The profits of the manufacturing and shipping of the Northeast were great. Much of the money went back into the businesses, but much of it also went into the banks in the larger cities. The bankers of Boston, Philadelphia, and New York in turn lent money and made investments all over the country'. Eastern bankers lent money to speculators in western lands, to companies building Mississippi River steamboats, and to cotton producers in Alabama. The British industrial revolution affected the South even more than New England, although in a different way. As British cotton mills produced cheaper and cheaper goods for a world wide market, they demanded more and more raw cotton, most of which came from the southern states. It was the cotton gin, invented by Eli Whitney in 1793, which made it possible to produce cotton cheaply in the South. In short-staple cotton, the only variety which could be widely grown, the fibers are so tightly fastened to the seeds that a hand laborer could get rid of the seeds in only one pound of cotton per day. Whitney's machine raised this amount to at least fifty pounds. Machine shop making interchangeable parts for guns, early in the nineteenth century. This production technique, which was started by Eli Whitney, greatly influenced American industry. As American population surged westward, the frontier line, separating settled lands from wilderness, had reached the Great Plains by 1840. Even bother to buy it, but simply "squatted" on whatever unoccupied acres they could find. "No poor man in the eastern states," wrote an Illinois settler, "who has feet and legs and can use them has any excuse for remaining where he is, a day or even an hour." The western settler. So settlers poured in. From the South came independent farmers and "poor whites" anxious to get away from slavery and the plantation system. From the northeastern states came farmers lured by tales of the almost unbelievable fertility of the western lands. Eventually Europe supplied a third stream of immigrants, who often landed at New York and traveled west by the Erie Canal. The typical citizen of the northwestern states lived on his own farm, which was cultivated by him and his family. On the very edge of the frontier he might live in an open-sided lean-to. Killing the trees by "girdling" (cutting the bark all around at the base) in order to let in the sun, he would plant a crop of com. He might also raise a few razor-back hogs which would be allowed to run practically wild in the woods. For the rest, he lived on game. In longer-settled regions the farmer would probably build a frame house. He would Sectionalism and the Mississippi River system were connected by a number of through routes (see map, p. 306). The railroad network had increased in mileage from 9,000 in 1850 to over 30,000. The new railroads cost what then seemed colossal sums. The Eric Railroad cost about 523,000,000 to build, half again as much as the United States paid for New Mexico and California. The railroad corporations thus became the first outstanding examples of "big business." The linking of Middle West and Northeast. The through lines from East to Middle West completed a development which the Erie Canal had begun: the conquest of the Appalachian Mountain barrier. Because of the Mississippi River system, the natural economic ties of the Middle West had at first been with the South. Now that artificial transportation linked Middle West and Northeast, the two sections drew together economically and politically. ''This fact," says the historian Arthur M. Schlesinger, "far more than abolitionist agitation, was to account for northern unity when southern guns boomed out against Fort Sumter in 1861." Until about 1820 immigrants to the United States were not numerous, averaging about 8,000 persons per year, but during the second quarter of the nineteenth century a great migration began from Europe to America. Between 1840 and 1860 an average of over 200,000 immigrants reached our shores yearly; by the latter date one out of every eight Americans was foreign-born. Reosons for flood of immigration. Most of the immigrants fled poverty or oppression, In England and Germany the industrial revolution put thousands of skilled workers out of jobs. Rather than go into factories, many of these preferred to leave home. In 1848-1849 there were unsuccessful revolutions in Europe, especially in the German states, followed by persecution of those believing in democracy. Many such German liberals fled to this country. In Scandinavia and the Netherlands there was too little soil to support rapidly growing populations. In Ireland, the greatest source of immigrants, the native population were denied home rule, and a wretched system of landholding kept them in poverty. The staple diet of Irish peasants was potatoes. When the potato crop was blighted in 1845, there was appalling suffering. It has been estimated that one millon out of eight died of starvation; in the next ten years another million came to America. Some immigrants actually came to this country against their will. The German city of Hamburg, for instance, found it cheaper to ship its paupers to the United States than to keep them in poorhouscs or in jail. Public and private relief agencies in Britain provided money for the unemployed to take passage to America rather than go into the dreaded "workhouses," where poverty was treated as though it were a crime. Most immigrants came here, however, in high hopes of a better life. European agents of railroad companies and steamship lines described America as a land where riches could be had almost for the asking. Recent immigrants sent letters home describing the high wages, cheap land, and bountiful diet over here. These "America letters" praised not only American prosperity, but American freedom and equality. Here, they said, were no class distinctions, no barons at the top and serfs at the bottom. Here no farmer had to tip his hat to the local squire. Here women were not expected to do heavy work in the fields, and workmen could leave their jobs if they liked. "If you wish to be happy and independent, then come here," wrote a German farmer from his new home in Missouri. The lot of immigrants. The lot of the new immigrant, however, was often hard.Once off the boat, he might become the prey of sharpers selling him a bogus railroad ticket, or a "farm" which later turned out to be under water. Immigrants often found native Americans prejudiced against them. Pious folk disapproved of the way German-Americans spent Sunday afternoons listening to band concerts. American laborers resented the Irish who were often so used to poverty that they could be hired for low wages. Employers were sometimes forced to put signs at factory gates, "No Irish need apply." Irishmen also faced religous prejudice so strong that it sometimes broke out in mob violence. Immigrants also met organized opposition from a nation-wide secret society, the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, founded in 1849. The members of this organ izaton were called "Know Nothings," because when asked about it they replied, "I know nothing." The Know Nothings tried to keep recent immigrants from political office; they also demanded that immigration be restricted and that the naturalization period be extended to twenty-one years. The natural tendency of immigrants facing prejudice and grappling with the insecurity of a new environment was to draw together and keep to their old culture. This was reflected in the appearance of foreign-language newspapers. In New York City alone in 1851 there were seven such papers, four German, one French, one Italian, and one Spanish. In spite of hardships, prejudice, and attempts to cling to their old ways, most immigrants adapted themselves rapidly to America. Jobs were abundant and land was cheap. Familiar with tyranny and want, the recent arrivals often appreciated American freedom and well-being more than did those whose ancestors had come over here generations earlier. Immigrants made many valuable contributions to the arts in America, to journalism, to education, and to invention. The children of foreign-born parents were quickly Americanized in the public schools, where they were taught English and learned to get along with children of different backgrounds than their own. The Clayton-Bulwer Treaty, 1850. The Mexican War gave the United States a new interest in the Caribbean region because of the need for better ways to California and Oregon than the long and hazardous trip across the Great Plains and the Rockies. There was renewed interest in a project which had been under discussion ever since the establishment of the Spanish colonies—an Isthmian canal to connect the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. In 1846 the United States made a treats' with New Granada (later Colombia) by which we gained the right to preserve "free transit" across the Isthmus of Panama. Diplomatic agents of the United States also tried to arrange treaties giving us the right to control canal routes through Nicaragua and Honduras. Meanwhile the British, with a view to getting control of canal routes, were trying to extend their influence along the entire Atlantic coast of Central America. Rival ambitions created such tension that in 1850 Great Britain sent a special agent, Sir Henry Bulwer, to Washington to try to arrange a compromise. The result of his visit was the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty whereby the United States and Great Britain agreed to support the building of an interocean canal which should not be fortified and which should be open to ships of all nations on equal terms. Manifest destiny to the south. After the Mexican War, the spirit of manifest destiny subsided in the North, but continued in the South. In 1848, De Bow's Review, a New Orleans financial journal, declared, "We have New Mexico and California. We will have old Mexico and Cuba!" The portion of the United States open to slave labor was far smaller than the area where it was banned either by antislaverv "Conscience" Whigs of the North. To fill the void, two new parties appeared—the American and the Republican. The American party, composed of Know Nothings plus some ex-Whigs, attempted to divert men's minds from the slavery issue by whipping up feeling against Immigrants. Its candidate in 1856 was exPresident Fillmore. Meanwhile, the Democrats followed the practice of dodging the slavery issue. To balance the fact that Southerners dominated the party, the presidential nomination went to a Northerner, James Buchanan, of Pennsylvania. Though polling a minority of the popular vote, the iDemocrats won the election with 174 electoral votes for Buchanan against 114 for f Fremont and 8 for Fillmore. The result of Ac election of 1856 was ominous in that the voting was clearly sectional. The Democrats swept the South, and the RcpubI lican vote was concentrated entirely in the North. The Dred Scott decision, 1857. In his inaugural address delivered in March, 1 1857, President Buchanan suggested that the question of slavery in the territories be settled by the Supreme Court. Immediately afterward the Court issued the momentous Dred Scott decision. Dred Scott was a slave taken by a former master from Missouri into territory closed to slavery by the Missouri Compromise, and then brought back to Missouri. For over ten pears Scott, with the financial support of bolitionists, sued for his freedom on the ground that residence in free territory relieved him from slavery. Seven of the nine justices were Democrats, and five were themers. Instead of settling the slavery dispute, the Dred Scott decision made it more bitter. If the decision stood, the Republican party might as well go out of existence, since its basic purpose—to keep slavery out of the territories—had been declared unconstitutional. Republicans therefore claimed that the decision was not binding, but was an obiter dictum (an opinion not called for by the circumstances of the case). The Dred Scott decision, said a Republican newspaper, earned no more weight than "the judgment of the majority of those congregated in any Washington bar-room." Southerners, on the other hand, called on the North to obey the decision. The question of slavery in the territories was now in almost hopeless confusion. The Dred Scott decision, supported in the South, was flatly opposed by the Republicans, dominant in the North. But what about the principle of popular sovereignty? Did the Dred Scott decision forbid the people of a territory to decide whether they wanted slavery? This was the most important issue in the Lincoln-Douglas debates of 1858. Douglas and Lincoln. Stephen A. Douglas and Abraham Lincoln were rival candidates for Senator from Illinois, Douglas having served in the Senate for twelve years. Known to his followers as "the Little Giant" because of his small stature and great force of character, Douglas had made. The lure of freedom and high wages drew an ever-increasing stream of immigrants to America from Europe. This woodcut shows Britain trying to hold back workers who wish to go to the United States. (Museum of fhe City of New York) (3) Abundant capital. The great profits to be obtained from manufacturing and transportation in the United States attracted investors. Much of the capital formerly invested in shipping was diverted to building factories and railroads. Billions of dollars came from abroad, especially from England. (4) A mobile labor supply. European capitalists often had difficulty recruiting labor for new industries because workingmen had been brought up to traditional occupations and hated to leave their home villages. In the United States, however, labor was more mobile. The American tradition was to "keep moving." Laborers came to new jobs in new cities the way pioneers moved into new lands. Furthermore, the flood of immigration continued; the newcomers, already uprooted from their homes and traditions, supplied much of the "floating" labor force needed for new industry. (5) Government policies favoring industry. The Constitution itself gave American industrialists a great advantage when it forbade the states to levy tariffs. This prohibition resulted in an immense home market. Compare this situation to that in western Europe, where in 1875 nearly twenty nations levied tariffs against each other's goods. In addition to the permanent advantage derived from the Constitution, American capitalists also got special favors from Congress. A high protective tariff encouraged "infant industries" and raised manufacturers' profits by keeping out foreign goods. Liberal immigration laws insured a supply of cheap labor. The federal government helped in the building of western railroads and sold public lands containing vast mineral wealth for a small proportion of their value. Many of the operations in this Napoleonic campaign to conquer an entire industry were completely unknown even to Rockefeller's competitors. Companies controlled by Standard Oil continued, for instance, to do business under their former names, with "dummy directors," who were sometimes mere office boys or stenographers. In 1882 forty companies were put under one management by a secret agreement known as the Standard Oil Trust. The controlling interest in the stock of the companies was turned over to nine trustees headed by Rockefeller. This trust arrangement offered such vast possibilities for profit that it was imitated in other industries; the very word "trust" became a term applied to any big, monopolistic business. Rockefeller, a devout churchgoer, never admitted that his actions in creating the Standard Oil Trust had been wrong. He pointed out that railroads granted rebates to nearly all big shippers, and that rebates were not illegal when he first used them to gain advantage over his rivals. When he bought out competitors, Rockefeller offered to pay them in either cash or Standard Oil stock, advising them to take the latter. Those who took his advice became rich. Part of his advantage over rivals stemmed from a passion for efficiency and hatred of waste. He continuously improved his product. He had few labor troubles because he paid his workmen well, tried to keep them on in times of depression, and was one of the first employers to pay old-age pensions. Like Carnegie, Rockefeller plowed much of his fortune back into society by gifts which totaled over half a billion dollars. In the new industrial age the city was "the mighty heart of the body politic, sending its streams of life to the very fingertips of the whole land." Between 1860 and 1900 American urban areas grew twice as fast as the total population. Chicago, doubling its population every ten years, changed from a frontier town of less than 100,000 to a vast metropolis approaching two million. New York became the second largest city in the world. The day dreaded by Thomas Jefferson, when Americans should abandon farming life and be "piled high up on one another in cities," was clearly on the way. Causes of urbanization. The growth of cities, called urbanization, was part of a world-wide movement caused by the industrial revolution. It had already gone so far in England that by 1900 four-fifths of the English people lived in cities and towns. By tremendously enlarging productive capacity, the industrial revolution increased the city's demands for markets and raw materials. Both demands were satisfied by improved transportation furnished by canals, railroads, and steamships. New cities appeared or older ones grew' rapidly near coal and iron deposits (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and Birmingham, Alabama), near sources of water power (Lowell and Lawrence, Massachusetts), at points of transshipment (Buffalo, New York, and New York City), and at railroad centers (Chicago, Illinois, and Omaha, Nebraska). Once established, cities followed a natural law of growth. New factories were built near railroad and docking facilities, banks, and an existing labor supply. Farm boys, bored with life in the country, headed for the city lights to make their fortunes. Immigrants lacking agricultural skill or without money to buy a farm could often find employment only in urban areas. Confused and insecure in a strange environment, the recent arrivals often preferred the big cities where there were colonies of people who spoke their native language and tried to preserve old-world customs. New technical problems. Urbanization created many technical and human probsheet-iron case and the iron windmill. Barbed wire made up for the lack of wooden fence rails. By all odds, the most important factor in promoting settlement was the railroad. "You may," wrote a spectator of the Dakota Boom of the early 1880's, "stand ankle deep in the short grass of uninhabited wilderness; next month a mixed train will glide over the waste and stop at some point where the railroad has decided to locate a town. Men, women, and children will jump out of the cars, and their chattels will tumble out after them. From that moment the building begins." Meanwhile improved agricultural machinery cut the cost of raising crops. The reaper, in general use by 1865, was followed by the mechanical binder which tied the grain into sheaves as fast as it was cut. By 1880 two men and a team could harvest and bind 20 acres of wheat a day. The steam-driven threshing machine also came into general use. Other machines speeded the production of com and hay. As a result of these inventions, a farmer could plant a ten to twenty times greater area. The industrial revolution in addition to solving technical problems by providing windmills, farm machinery, and railroads, caused the expansion of agriculture in another way: by creating great cities both in Europe and in America, it vastly increased the demand for food. The Homestead Act of 1862. In 1862 Congress passed the famous Homestead Act whereby the "head of a family," whether man or woman, could acquire a free 160-acre farm "for the purpose of actual settlement and cultivation." It was passed as a result of nearly half a century of agitation by western farmers and eastern laborers. The Homestead Act did not work out as planned. An immense amount of fraud in the operation of the law enabled speculators instead of actual settlers to get the land. Requirements that a would-be homesteader put up a home and More important than the Homestead Act in populating the western plains were windmills, which pumped the farmers' water from underground, and barbed wire, which enabled them to fence against the cattle of the ranches. (The Nebraska State Historical Society and Black Star) The Opening of the Great West cultivate the land were met by laying down a few logs as a "foundation," and scattering a few grains of corn. People became "heads of families" by temporarily I adopting neighbors' children. A more important reason for the ineffectiveness of the Homestead Act was that the most desirable land, near railroad lines, was usually controlled by the railroad companies themselves. "Selling" the West. The ineffectiveness of the Homestead Act provided Westerners with a grievance, but probably did not much retard settlement. Although railroads sometimes discouraged the acquisition of free land, they actively promoted the sale of their own. They did not charge high prices because they wanted settlers to get the land into production. Landgrant railroads had "Bureaus of Immigration" to persuade fanners to settle along their lines. They maintained offices in the principal European cities, and agents in eastern seaports to meet immigrants as they left the boat. Steamship companies and western states joined the railroads in promoting the West. Advertisements described the region as so healthy that it cured all known diseases. The industrious man could expect to become wealthy; an $8,000 investment, it was claimed, might soon result in a steady income of $11,000 per year. The women were not forgotten, and the West was pictured as a happy hunting ground for unmarried ladies. "When a daughter of the East is once beyond the Missouri," said one railroad advertisement, "she rarely recrosses it except on a bridal tour." The result of all this was a fantastic expansion of fanning. More land was occupied between 1870 and 1890 than during all the time from the first English settlement at Jamestown until 1870. The production of wheat, centering in Minnesota, the Dakotas, and Nebraska, quadrupled. Nor did all this growth take place at the frontier. In the previously occupied "com-hog" belt, extending from Ohio to Iowa, output increased as rapidly as in In the good years, the Great Plains produced fantastic quantities of wheat, and steam engines were coupled to the threshing machines to harvest the crops. This illustration, however, exaggerates the number of machines. (The Library of Congress) Protest Movements federal government itself provide them with cheaper credit. In 1881 the Atlantic Monthly published an article entitled "The Story of a Great Monopoly," by Henry D. Lloyd, telling how the Standard Oil Company had monopolized the oil refining business. It caused such a sensation that the magazine had to print three times as many copies as usual. Throughout the next decade, as it was revealed that industry after industry was in danger of being monopolized, demands for federal regulation came from many different groups—small businessmen, farmers, consumers, and workingmen. In the election of 1888 both parties promised action, and in 1890 Congress passed the Sherman Antitrust Act with only one dissenting vote. The Sherman Antitrust Act, 1890. The core of the Sherman Antitrust Act is contained in these words: "Every contract, combination in the form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce among the several states or with foreign nations, is hereby declared to be illegal. . . ." Violations of the act were punishable by fines or imprisonment. A private individual or company hurt by monopolistic practices of a rival might collect triple damages from the offender. For a number of reasons the Sherman Act was no more effective in preventing business consolidation than the Interstate Commerce Act in controlling railroad rates. It was not strictly enforced, and was so loosely worded that its meaning was doubtful. Did the act mean, for instance, that all mergers were unlawful, that all business transactions must be open to the public, that any contract whereby one company planned to take business from another was unlawful? Supreme Court action. Such decisions had to be left to the federal courts, which in the 1890's were probably more favorable to business interests than at any other time in our history. Just as the courts whittled down the powers of the Interstate Commerce Commission, they took the teeth out of the Sherman Act. In the E. C. Knight case of 1895 the Supreme Court ruled an almost complete monopoly of sugar refining as no violation of the Sherman Act, because sugar refining was manufacturing, and manufacturing was not interstate commerce. This decision, reducing the application of the law to transportation and telegraph companies, was followed by one of the greatest periods of business centralization in American history. In 1890 there had been 24 trusts with a total capitalization of 436 million dollars. In 1900, after the Sherman Antitrust Act had been in operation for ten years, there w'ere 183 great consolidations with a capitalization of over 3 billion dollars. In spite of initial failure, the Sherman Antitrust Act, like the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887, was a most important piece of legislation. From the first it tended to make businessmen more careful not to offend the public or antagonize competitors by unfair practices. Later, under a less conservative Supreme Court, with vigorous enforcement by the executive department, and with strengthening amendments, the law' was more effective. It became, and remains today, a "shotgun behind the door," helping to preserve free enterprise by discouraging monopoly. The War Between the States encouraged the revival of labor unions, which had dwindled because of the Panic of 1837. Workingmen needed higher wages to meet prices raised by wartime inflation and, w'ith a million men under arms, were in a strong position to demand them. In the years 1863 and 1864 the number of local unions rose from 79 to 270. There was also organization on a national scale. The Emergence of Modern America since a local union was often helpless in dealing with an industrial corporation doing business throughout the country. Between 1860 and 1870 national unions increased in number from 5 to 32. Difficulties facing the unions. In spite of rapid growth during the war and afterward, labor unions faced the following difficulties: (1)American labor was mobile and diverse. It was difficult to organize workingmen in this country because they would not "stay hitched," but moved from job to job. Young men, who in other countries might have become labor leaders, went into business for themselves or worked up into executive positions. The inflow of immigrants, averaging over a third of a million a year between 1870 and 1900, increased the difficulty of organizing unions. Ignorant of American wage scales and without resources, these newcomers often accepted low pay. A Contract Labor Law, passed by Congress in 1864, allowed employers to hire foreign laborers, bring them to this country, and keep them working for a year to repay passage. Variety in language, religion, and customs among the immigrants made it hard to weld them into an effective organization. To discourage unionization, some employers deliberately hired several different nationalities. (2)There was confusion of aims among labor leaders. Men who wanted to bring all workingmen together and promote widespread reforms were opposed by others who believed that unions should work only for the short-time benefit of workers in their particular craft or industry. A small but vocal group wanted to use the power of organized labor to overthrow the capitalist system and establish socialism (see pp. 418-419). Even more radical were anarchists who preached, "All property is theft; all government is tyranny," and tried to create class hatred by bornb-throwing and assassination. Although never composing more than a small fraction of the labor movement, socialists and anarchists aroused fear and dislike which was transferred to all workingmen's organizations. (3)Unions faced strong opposition from employers. Workers were often required to take an "iron-clad" oath that they would not join a union. If discharged for union activity, a man often could not get employment elsewhere because employers combined to keep "black lists" of all "troublemakers." Once black-listed, a laborer could get a job only by changing his residence, his trade, or his name. Once workers organized a plant, the employer could still fight back by a lockout (shutting the plant down) or by discharging union men and hiring in their place strikebreakers (also known as "scabs"). In any strike or lockout the odds favored the employer because he had the longer purse; few unions could afford to support their members through prolonged unemployment. (4)Public opinion was distrustful of labor unions. Laborers formed a minority group in America, and unions were an unfamiliar type of organization. Fixing wages and hours by collective bargaining between union representatives and employers seemed to violate the right of the individual to deal with the employer himself. Occasionally public opinion condemned employers when labor disputes resulted in violence. This happened during the Homestead lockout in 1892, when the Carnegie Steel Co. hired a private army of 300 Pinkerton detectives armed with repeating rifles. Generally, however, labor unions were held responsible when disorder occurred. This was partly because anarchists and extreme socialists were constantly predicting the day when the "toiling masses" would overthrow existing society. (5)Law enforcement agencies usually sided with the employers. Although employers suffered no penalties for lockouts and black lists, strikes or boycotts were judged "conspiracies in restraint of trade" for which labor leaders might be jailed or Protest Movements not, however, reduce either its dividends or the rents charged to workers living in the town of Pullman. The members of a delegation protesting the pay cuts were I discharged. Immediately most of the Pulli man workers struck, and Mr. Pullman I locked out the rest. Since some Pullman workers were members of the American Railway Union, I they called on it for help. Debs proposed that the dispute be referred to arbitration, but Mr. Pullman replied, "There is nothing to arbitrate." The American Railway i Union thereupon declared a boycott, in which union members refused to work on any train which included a Pullman car. Pullman had an ally, however, in the Railway Managers Association, made up of the heads of all twenty-four railroads running into Chicago. The managers insisted on running Pullman cars, even on trains which did not ordinarily include them. The result was that five days after the boycott began in late June, 100,000 railwaymen had quit work, and railway traffic west of Chicago was almost paralyzed. Debs warned his followers on no account to interfere with United States mails, and appealed to them to be "orderly and law-abiding." Although a few mail trains were held up, usually when combined with Pullman cars, there were very few disturbances. Labor and the injunction. The Pullman strike was defeated by the power of the federal government. Over the protests of the Mayor of Chicago and Governor of Illinois, who claimed they had matters in hand, President Cleveland sent federal troops to guard mail trains. Immediately i rioting broke out as angry mobs, sympathetic to the strikers, taunted the soldiers. Members of the American Railway Union kept out of trouble, but nevertheless received the blame. Even before the troops appeared, the federal government also took judicial action. On application of the Attorney General of the United States, a judge of the Chicago District Court issued an injunction (court order) forbidding interference with transportation in interstate commerce and any attempt to persuade railway workers to stay away from work. The judge justified his action on the ground that the strike was a conspiracy in restraint of trade and therefore a violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act. On refusing to obey, Debs was jailed for contempt of court. Deprived of his leadership, the Pullman strike collapsed and with it the American Railway Union. From this time on, labor unions demanded that the use of the injunction in labor disputes be abolished. Even outside labor circles there was strong feeling that the injunction putting Debs in jail was an unfair use of judicial power. The Springfield Republican, one of the most influential newspapers in the country, said, "If Debs has been violating the law, let him be indicted, tried by a jury, and punished. Let him not be made the victim of an untenable court order and deprived of his liberty entirely within the discretion of a judge." Gains of labor. Although labor unions lost more disputes than they won, and most workers remained entirely unorganized, workingmen made genuine gains during the latter nineteenth century. The deflation, which hurt the farmer, helped workingmen by lowering the cost of food. Improved technology produced better and cheaper goods. It has been estimated that real wages (what workingmen could actually buy with their money) doubled between 1830 and 1900, even though the average work day was reduced from 12 to 10 hours. Federal and state legislation reflected the political influence of labor. To keep imported labor from depressing wages, Congress passed the first laws restricting immigration. In 1882 Chinese laborers were excluded, and in 1885 it was forbidden to import workers under contract. The United States Becomes a World Power Although some of his more impulsive actions might not have led people to expect it, Roosevelt played an effective part in bringing about peace between Japan and Russia. (Culver Service) He induced Japan to give up claims for a money indemnity and Russia to agree to give up the southern half of the island of Sakhalin. By the Treaty of Portsmouth, Japan also took over Russian interests in southern Manchuria. In 1906 Roosevelt was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of his success in bringing the Russo-Japanese War to a close. Later difficulties with Japan. In spite of Roosevelt's previously pro-Japanese attitude and efforts to help Japan by arranging a peace, the Treaty of Portsmouth was followed by tension between the United States and Japan. When the President sided with Russia on the indemnity question, there were such serious anti-American riots in Tokyo that the United States embassy had to be guarded with troops. The ease of the Japanese victory caused fear in America and Europe that the white race was to be overwhelmed by the yellow race; this notion of the "yellow peril" was played up by the "yellow press." On the Pacific Coast feeling began to rise against Japanese immigration, resulting in discrimination against Japanese children in the public schools. This action was regarded in Japan as an insult. More significant than the tide of ill will, which soon subsided, was the fact that the recent war altered the balance of power in the Orient. Now it was no longer Russian expansion that was most to be feared, but Japanese. In a rather complicated series of maneuvers, Roosevelt attempted at the same time to soothe Japanese anger, satisfy Japanese ambition, save the Philippines from Japanese aggression, and show the Japanese that he was not afraid of them. Although the federal government had no power to force a city or state to change its education laws, the President persuaded the Californians to stop discriminating against Japanese school children. In turn, Japan agreed to halt emigration to America. This compromise, arranged in 1907, was known as the Gentlemen's Agreement. As regards the balance of power in the Far East, Roosevelt made a bargain which was partly embodied in the Root-Takahira Agreement of 1908. Both Japan and the United States promised to respect each other's possessions in the Pacific; both agreed to uphold the Open Door Policy in the Pacific. In return for these provisions favorable to the United States, we agreed to Japanese penetration of Korea, which w'as annexed in 1910. To impress Japan with American power, the President, in a truly Rooseveltian gesture, sent an American fleet to visit Tokyo in 1908. All sixteen battleships in the United States Navy were sent to the Pacific Coast, then to Tokyo, and then back to America by way of the Mediterranean. Roosevelt's successor, President Taft, was much interested in enlarging opportunities for American trade and investment in China. Finding that Japan and Russia were discriminating against American businessmen in Manchuria, Secretary of State The United States Becomes a World Power countries by abandoning "dollar diplomacy" and attempting to act on behalf of the Mexican people. The Panama tolls dispute. In a dispute with Great Britain over the question of tolls on ships passing through the Panama Canal, Wilson revealed his extraordinary command over Congress. In 1912, as the Canal approached completion. Congress passed a law exempting United States coastwise shipping from tolls. Great Britain protested this as a violation of the HayPauncefote Treaty which had guaranteed equal rates for ships of "all nations" (see p. 467). In 1914 Wilson appeared before Congress and in a very short message urged that the exemption for American ships be repealed. The President's principal argument was that in self-respect the United States should carry out treaty obligations to the letter. The President's action was apparently part of an arrangement whereby Great Britain agreed to withdraw support from Huerta if the United States would repeal the tolls exemption. Congress followed Wilson's advice, even though his opponents accused him of "cringing before the British throne." Other diplomatic policies. In minor matters, where the President did not personally intervene, the United States during Wilson's administration continued the policies of previous Republican administrations. In 1914 a treaty with Nicaragua gave the United States the right to lease lands necessary for a canal route, to oversee Nicaraguan finances, and to intervene to preserve order. When a bloody revolution broke out in Haiti in 1915, American troops landed and established a protectorate over the country similar to that which Roosevelt had instituted in Santo Domingo in 1904 (see p. 467). In 1917 the United States extended its naval control over the Caribbean area by purchasing from Denmark the strategically valuable Virgin Islands. The Wilson administration had to deal with Far Eastern problems similar to those which had confronted Roosevelt (see pp.469-471). There was continuing difficulty with Japan because of discrimination against Japanese immigrants on the Pacific Coast, and because of Japanese ambition to expand on the continent of Asia. On personal appeals from the President and Bryan, the state of California revised certain laws in order to reduce Japanese resentment. In 1915 Japan violated the Open Door Policy by presenting the Chinese government with an ultimatum called the Twenty-one Demands which were designed to make China a Japanese protectorate. The United States protested this action, but was unable' to prevent the Japanese from extending their power in the northern provinces of China. Although not a trained diplomat, Bryan was far from inactive as Secretary of State. Like Roosevelt (see pp. 471-472), he promoted arbitration agreements with other nations. These were called "cooling-off" treaties because the nations signing them agreed not to go to war for a year after a disputed point was referred to a committee of investigation. This would give time for popular excitement to die down, while diplomats worked out a peaceable solution. Bryan arranged twenty-one of these treaties. To its later regret, the German government was one of those refusing to make such an agreement. The blow from fate which Wilson dreaded fell in the summer of 1914 when the first general war in a century broke out in Europe. Although the United States did not at first seem involved, the terrible struggle across the Atlantic eventually created difficulties which overshadowed all other issues, domestic or foreign. 1. Why did Roosevelt decide to seek office again in 1912? Why did he not receive the Republican nomination? Who composed the Progressive party? What were its aims? Prosperity and Depression The Republican return to power in 1921 brought about a return to tariff protection. High duties on farm products and the spread of industry helped to attract southern and western support for the Fordney-McCumber Tariff. Federal finances. The First World War had raised the national debt from less than S10 per capita to over $200. The Harding and Coolidge administrations attempted to lower this burden by greater economy in government. In 1921 Congress created a Budget Bureau in the Treasury' Department to introduce more system into federal finances. Until this time, income and outgo had never been coordinated. The efforts of the Budget Bureau to introduce economies were especially supported by Coolidge, with whom thrift amounted to a passion. After the Washington Conference there was no immediate threat of war, and military expenditures were greatly lowered. At one time the War Department was hard put to it to find money for six light tanks. Andrew Mellon, Secretary of the Treasury from 1921 to 1932, believed that heavy taxes on excess profits, inheritances, and large incomes "penalized success" and discouraged the investment of capital in productive business enterprise. Congress at Mellon's insistence abolished the wartime excise and excess-profits taxes and reduced rates on incomes by nearly two-thirds. Nevertheless, so great was the prosperity of the United States, with resulting high tax collections, that the national debt was reduced by eight billions between 1921 and 1929. Immigration restriction. During the 1920's Congress for the first time restricted the number of immigrants who might enter the United States. Such restriction had been demanded by labor unions for half a century, but up to 1914 the only groups excluded were Orientals, anarchists, and incompetents such as idiots, criminals, and paupers. In the decade before the First World War, immigration averaged nearly a million a year. Until the 1880's most immigrants came from northern and western Europe, a region with a relatively high standard of living and a high rate of literacy. By 1914, however, over two-thirds of the immigrants came from southern and eastern Europe, regions where living standards were low'er and opportunities for education more limited. The "new' immigration" tended to concentrate in cities, where there wras the greatest chance for employment. They usually formed compact communities of the same national origin, so that every' great metropolis had a "little Italy," a "little Poland," a "little Greece," and so forth. This gave rise to the charge that the new immigation was difficult to Americanize. Congressional bills designed to reduce the new immigration by barring illiterates from the United States were vetoed by Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson. All three Presidents made the same point in their veto messages: that illiteracy usually does not reveal lack of character or intelligence but simply lack of opportunity. Finally a literacy test was voted bv Congress over Wilson's veto in 1917. During and after the World War feeling against "hyphenated-Americans" was stimulated by the anti-German hysteria, by the "red scare," and by a sinister "native American" organization, the Kn Klux Klan. When immigrants, to escape the hardships which the postwar situation imposed on them, started to pour into the United States, Congress took quick action. In 1920 Woodrow Wilson vetoed a bill to restrict immigration, but in 1921 Harding signed the Emergency Quota Act, which cut the number admitted from any country in a single year to 3 per cent of the number of that nationality residing in the United States in 1910. Three years later the Immigration Quota Law made restriction a permanent policy. This law of 1924 provided that after 1927 the total number of immigrants admitted to the United States per year was to be 150,000, their nationalities apportioned on the basis of the census of 1920. In spite of strong objection from President Coolidge, the 1924 law excluded Japanese entirely. The unfortunate result was to increase the effectiveness of anti-American propaganda put out by militarists in Japan. Death of President Harding. Those who had favored Harding's nomination in 1920 neither expected nor desired him to be a strong President. He fulfilled their expectations. With his massive head and fine presence, Harding "looked like a President," but lacked the intelligence, the knowledge, or the desire to direct policies. Had he carried out his expressed intention of surrounding himself with the "best minds," he might still have avoided failure. Some appointments were excellent, such as that of former President Taft as Chief Justice and future President Hoover as Secretary of Commerce. In the 1890's, as shown by the cartoon, immigrants were used as strikebreakers. It was therefore natural that labor unions demanded restriction. Immigrants tended to settle in little national communities in the big cities. (New York Public Library and The Jacob A. Riis Collection, Museum of the City of New York) 