, to cause others lobe elected whereby the Segeslative flowersuthedangersofinvasionfromwithoutandconoulsionseverForagners refusing topafs others to encourage their megrationing his afent FREMONT P. WIRTH- He has erected s multitude of New Offices and sont /nees, without the Consent of our legislaturesthe has 9Idion foreign to our constitution, and unacknowledged. byDIUnited 44 smg king Statesprotecting them yam cal from Runishment for anyto and pit infrument for abrotule usof our ur-ooverments Hisuspending our pum Sequeshere by declaring us out offer Protection and axaging Har agtime hansporting large Armes of foreign Merconause to complour ages. and totally unworthy the Head of accodized nationwoftherpundsandBusthenortofallthemalvesbythenif Indian lavages, whose known rule of warfare u Art anderat humble terms Uncreporated Potitions have benansomed.is.NorhaveWeborwantingortoanBetterreminded then to fAMERICAN BOOK COMPANY'to disavour these infurpations. would and"rus acquesce m the neafority, which denources m deparatIApicapable of Ansebitation, have returned to the People at large for their exercise, the StateDHehasendeavouredtopreventthe populationoftheredomforthat/purpovefither and causing the conditions ofnew Appropriations of dandsHe has dateProfessor of History, George Peabody College for Teachers, Nashville, TennesseeTalleher forme of Officers tohangs our people andcat out their fulstanceHe has keptstedto under the military independent of and superint the Civel RowerHehasalaws giving his afent to their acts of pretended Segeslation For quartering large (Hurdiwhe they should commit onthe Inhabelants ofthese States - Formath-Forhts of Treat by Jury -anughtungEDITIONle into thesetaking awsy our bhanter aboteshing our most valuablelaties,anddeclaringthemselvesinvestedalkhowntolegislateforusonallcaseswhatsoandusThe has plundered our seas. ravaged our boasts bunt one towns. and destroyed/ofdeath divolation and tyramy, abrudy begun with circumstances offrumtty 8vHehasconstained-ourfellowCitizonstakenhaptiveonthehighdeastobeararmLondsHehasexciteddomesticinfurractionsamongstwand"hasundervouredtohusstigurhed destruction of all ages foxces and conditionsInmayfingeoftherOppriftioninjuryPiencewhosecharacterwthusmarkedbyoveryadwhichmaydeforea,NethanWehavewarmedthemfromtimeto noneofattemptsbytheirEquilaturetointendanWhat here Whish ahropled bother maturiustive Dallasandtauti our connections and acrespondence Chicago they too have been deaf to thereace ofqustice aNew York . CincinnatiSan Franciscoto and hold them as we hold the rest ofmankind. Enemus in War, P Peace FriendsCopyright O 1958 byAMERICAN BOOK COMPANYjunns UNIVEKSITYEDUCATIONLIBRARYTENNESSEEWirth, United States History, Revised Edition. Manufactured in the United States of America. All rights reserved No part of thisbook protected by the copyrights hereon may be reproduced in any form without written permission of the publisher. Certainportions copyright O 1957, 1955, 1954, 1952, 1950, 1949, 1948 by American Book Company. Credit for illustrations is due to thefollowing.Forcoverillustration, Ewing Galloway, For the color section: George Caleb Bingham, Stump Speaking, courtesy TheBoatman's National Bank of St. Louis, Three Lions; Newsstand, Student Council, Lee Ames: Protestant Service, Three Lions:Roman Catholic Mass, Egon Egone from Shostal; Jewish Rabbi, Mark Greene from Studio; High School Glee Club, E.J.Cyr,Surveyor, Louis J. Matacia, Jr., Sales Girls, Frank A. Muth, Operating Room, Lisa Robineau, Shoemaker, L. Willinger,andGirlat Microphone, Robert Buchbinder, all from Shostal; George Caleb Bingham, County Election, courtesy City Art Museum,St.Louis,Mo., Three Lions; Modern Polling Place, British Soldiers Forcing Entry, Colonial Judge, Patrolman Serving Writ, andModern Courtroom, Jon Nielsen; Steel Plant, courtesy Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation; Newsboy, Syl Labrot from Shostal;Woman Executive, Lee Ames: Bricklayer, William F. Noe from Shostal; Detail of Samuel F. B. Morse, The Old House of Representa-tites, in the collection of The Corcoran Gallery of Art. Francis G. Mayer; Gilbert Stuart, President James Monroe, courtesy AmheratCollege, Three Lions: Supreme Court Building, Washington, D. C., Berkley Ball from Shostal; Schoolroom, c. 1830, artistunknown,courtesy Addison Gallery of American Art, Phillips Andover Academy, Francis G. Mayer; Winslow Homer, Snap the Whip, courtesyMetropolitan Museum of Art, Three Lions: Modern Public School, Fanta from Cushing: University of Michigan, Shostal: CountryStore,BobTowers from FPG: Rural Sawmill, E. L. Schnellbacher from FPG: Farm Buildings, Clifford Matteson from Shostal;Grease Plant, Pittsburgh, Pa., courtesy Standard Oil Co. (N. J.); Statue of Liberty, Julius Fanta from Shostal; Technical Aid toIndia, courtesy Ford Foundation; Nurse and Arabian Patient, Russ Rosene from Shostal; Dr. Frank Laubach in India, "Each OneTeach One": Labor-Management Conference, Teacher-Student Counselling, and Architect-Workma Conference, LeeAmes:O. E. Berninghaus, W estbound Wagon Train on the Salt Lake Trail, courtesy August A. Busch, Jr. Collection, St. Louis,Mo.,ThreeLions: Raft on River, courtesy Indiana University Library, Francis G. Mayer; H. M. T. Powell, Studebaker in His Wagon TireShop, courtesy Mr. & Mrs. Edwin Grabhorn, Francis G. Mayer; Minuteman, Concord, Mass., Edward Evans from Shostal; ThomasBirch, Constitution and Guerriere, courtesy U. S. Naval Academy Museum, Francis G. Mayer; President Woodrow Wilson, RobertDoremus; Navy Landing, World War II, Art Griffin from FPG: Colonial House-raising, Nineteenth Century Family, and ModernFamily Council, Robert Doremus; 4-H Club, Thomas E. Benner from Shostal: Research Laboratory, courtesy Lederle Laboratories:Engineering Layout Room, Maria La Yacona, Rural Postman, L. Willinger, and County Agent in Grain Field, S. Glanzer fromShostal; Firefighter, J. Mechling from FPG; Meat Inspector, L. Willinger from Shostal.18202224262830EP3129272523211917PEABODY JOURNAL OF EDUCATION

CONTENTSUNIT ONEAmerica Arises in a New WorldII The Story of America Begins Centuries Ago3II The Settlement of the New World19III Life in Colonial America33IV The Rise of American Institutions47UNIT TWORevolutionand the Founding of a New Nation .57V Desire for Self-Government Leads to Independence -59VI The War for American Independence77VII The Critical Period in American History91VIII The Constitutional Convention Offers a Solution103viiviiiCONTENTSUNIT THREEThe Foundationof the American Political System. 117IX The Beginning of American Nationality119X A New Century Brings Jeffersonian Democracy137XI America Fights for Freedom of the Seas149XII Isolation and Nationalism Influence Our PoliticalSystem163XIII American Life, 1800-1865185UNIT FOURThe Nation Divided and Reunited . 205XIV The Slavery Controversy Divides the Nation207XV The War Between the North and the South229XVI The Nation Is Reunited253CONTENTSixUNIT FIVEThe Makingof Modern America, 1865-1900265XVII The Rise of Big Business267XVIII Labor During the Age of Big Business293XIX The Settlement of the Great West305XX The American Farmer in an Age of Transition317UNIT SIXThe Developmentof the AmericanPolitical System (1865-1900)331XXI Party Battles in Modern America333XXII Party Issues in Modern America363XXIII A New Foreign Policy for Modern America381XXIV Life in America, 1865-1900403xCONTENTSUNIT SEVEN-Industrializationin the Twentieth Century421XXV Twentieth Century Industry423XXVI Transportation in the Machine Age441XXVII Organized Labor in the Machine Age457UNIT EIGHTThe United Statesa Twentieth Century World Power . 475XXVIII The Emergence of a New World Power477XXIX The United States and World War I499XXX Return to Isolationism515XXXI The United States in the Global War529XXXII The Global War Continues555CONTENTSxiUNIT NINEThe American Political Systemin the Twentieth Century575XXXIII An Era of Liberalism and Reform577XXXIV Woodrow Wilson and the New Freedom599XXXV The Return to Conservatism615XXXVI Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal637UNIT TENThe State of the Nation659XXXVII American Industry in the Twentieth Century661XXXVIII Science Changes the World673XXXIX America Develops Culturally and Intellectually689XL Our Country, World Leader70730AMERICA ARISES IN A NEW WORLDSettlement of New Jersey. To thenamed Charleston was made on thesouth of New York, settlements wereAshley River. Ten years later it wasmade by the Dutch, Swedes, and Swissmoved to the peninsula between thein a small region now known as NewCooper and Ashley Rivers. In time itJersey. A group of Englishmen settledbecame the city of Charleston.at Elizabethtown, which became theOglethorpe settles Georgia.capital; and by 1702 this entire regionGeorgia, the last of the original thir-was united into one province and be-teen colonies, was settled in 1733.came a colony of England.James Edward Oglethorpe, a philan-Settlement of the Carolinas. Settle-thropist of great influence, made thement of North Carolina began in 1653settlement in an attempt to help worthywhen colonists from Virginia enteredmen who had been imprisoned forthe region north of the Roanoke Riverdebt. The penal system of England atand began what is known as the Albe-this time was exceedingly harsh.marle Settlement. The territoryPeople were put in prison sometimesknown as the Carolinas was granted byfor life because they owed small debts.King Charles II to some of his courtiers.Oglethorpe worked out a plan of set-One of the proprietors, Lord Shaftes-tling with the creditors of these menbury, together with the English philos-and then finding homes for them inopher, John Locke, drew up the Grandthe New World where they mightModel, an elaborate plan for themake a fresh start. James Oglethorpegovernment of the colonists. It pro-brought 120 men, women, and chil-vided that the settlers be divided intodren to the New World, and earlyclasses, such as nobles, great land-in 1733 a settlement was made atowners, selectmen, and laborers. TheSavannah at the mouth of the Sa-Grand Model, however, proved avannah River. Later a settlement wasfailure, because land was so plentifulestablished at Augusta; and in 1743 ain America that the settlers could be-number of Germans, known as Salz-come independent and refused to re-burgers, came to Georgia and made amain in distinct classes.settlement at Ebenezer. The colonyIn 1660 a permanent settlementwas named Georgia for King George.MASTERY OF THE CHAPTER CONTENT1. Why were the English the most5. Explain the difference between Pil-successful of all the Old World nationsgrim and Puritan migrations to America.in establishing permanent settlements in6. Why did some settlers leave thethe New World?Massachusetts Bay Colony for neighboring2. Explain the purpose of the Britishfrontiers? Why did Roger Williams movecolonial trading companies. Tell aboutout of Massachusetts?some of the activities of the London and7. What was the first permanentPlymouth companies.settlement in Virginia? How long after-3. Where was the first permanentwards was Georgia colonized? What wassettlement in New England? By whomthe first settlement in America?and how was it established?8. What kind of hardships were under-4. Compare the circumstances undergone by the early colonists in Northwhich representative government wasAmerica? Were these sufferings endureddeveloped in Virginia and Massachusetts.voluntarily? If so, why?

132THE FOUNDATION OF THE AMERICAN POLITICAL SYSTEMThe Old Print ShopA scene during the Naval War of 1798. What nations fought in this undeclared war? How long did it last?These ships are frigates. What is a frigate?1798, was brought to an end partlyFrance led them to oppose the Feder-because the French general, Napoleon,alist program. A naturalization lawwas anxious to devote his entire energywas passed which made it more diffi-to the war in Europe, and becausecult for foreigners to become citizens,France really did not want war withand an Alien Act gave the Presidentthe United States. Napoleon gave usthe right to send out of the country anyassurances that France was willing toforeigners whom he considered danger-receive a minister from the Unitedous to our peace and safety. A Sedi-States and was ready to respect him astion Act prescribed severe punishmenta representative of a free nation.for persons who unlawfully conspiredOn September 30, 1800, a newfor the purpose of opposing any meas-treaty was signed with France by whichures of the government of the Unitedthe United States was released fromStates, and it forbade persons to "write,the old Alliance of 1778. In return, theprint, utter, or publish" any false,United States gave up its claims forscandalous, or malicious writing ordamages inflicted on our commerce aswritings against the government of thea result of the war.United States or against either house ofThe Alien and Sedition Laws.InCongress or the President of the Unitedthe difficult negotiations which ledStates, with intent to defame.to the XYZ Affair (see page 131), theThe Virginia and Kentucky Resolu-French became unpopular, and thetions. The Republicans bitterly de-Federalists then in power passed thenounced the Alien and Sedition Laws,Alien and Sedition Laws, designed to which they considered unjust andcurb liberalism and suppress any directed against some of their partypersons here whose sympathy for members. They felt, furthermore, thatTHE BEGINNING OF AMERICAN NATIONALITY133the Alien and Sedition Acts attemptedFederalists, and the Republicans suc-to abridge freedom of speech and press,ceeded in electing 76 of the 141 electors.and, above all, that they would inter-Each of the 76 Republican electorsfere with Republican prospects for po-cast his votes for both Jefferson andlitical success. Both Thomas JeffersonBurr, and therefore the election re-and James Madison prepared resolu-sulted in a tie. The Republicanstions in opposition to the odious laws.wanted Jefferson for President andJefferson's protest was introduced intoBurr for Vice-President; but thethe Kentuckylegislature by John Breck-Constitution provided that the per-enridge and became known as theson receiving the highest number ofKentucky Resolutions. Madison's : reso-votes should be President if he had alutions, which were similar to Jeffer-majority, and the second highest, Vice-son's in their statement of politicalPresident. In this case neither had atheory, were adopted by the Virginiamajority; therefore, the election wentlegislature. The Virginia Resolutionsto the House of Representatives, whereand the Kentucky Resolutions pointedeach state was entitled to one vote re-to the danger of a highly centralizedgardless of the number of representa-government which would interfere withtives. In the House, Jefferson receivedthe rights of the states and with thethe majority of the votes and thereforerights and liberties of the people.became President, and Burr becameThe political revolution of 1800. AsVice-President as the Republican Partythe next presidential election ap-had intended. This election demon-proached, the Republicans againstrated that a change in the electoralnominated Thomas Jefferson of Vir-procedure was advisable, and theginia and Aaron Burr of New York,Twelfth Amendment to the Constitu-while the Federalists nominated Johntion was adopted. This amendmentAdams of Massachusetts and Charles provided that distinct ballots should beCotesworth Pinckney of South Caro-cast for President and Vice-President,lina. Alexander Hamilton's failure tothus making it impossible for such asupport John Adams weakened thesituation as arose in 1800 to occur again.MASTERY OF THE CHAPTER CONTENT1. Why is the political organizationsince 1790? Name the men selected byby means of which people are governed ofWashington to fill the new cabinet posi-great importance to them?tions. How was each of these men well-2. Why can we feel justly proud of ourqualified for the appointment?national framework of government? What6. What were some vital matters whichtype of democracy is it?confronted George Washington as the first3. What are some important origins ofPresident of the United States? What ac-our democratic way of life?tion did he take toward solving them?4. Name two documents which are re-7. What provisions were made for thegarded as fundamental contributions toformation of a judiciary branch of theour individual freedom.Federal government? What is the mean-5. Describe the organization of Wash-ing of the term Federal?ington's Cabinet. To what extent has the8. What was the reason for the firstsize of the Executive Cabinet changedTariff Act? What opposition to this Tariff

CHAPTER XIIIAmerican Life, 1800-1865America in the early nineteenthhabited by people of many nations, incentury. Most of the early Americanspite of its predominant English strain.settlers came from the British Isles, andIn the early nineteenth century foreign-early American social life and customsers continued to come from other partswere therefore similar to those of theof Europe. No accurate immigrationEnglish. Throughout the early yearsfigures are available for the period be-America continued to be largely anfore 1820. Immigration in those earlyAnglo-Saxon country. Even in theyears was rarely greater than 10,000 aearly days, however, there were manyyear, and those who came were easilysettlers from other parts of Europe.assimilated by the population. Con-Among the non-English settlers wereditions in Europe were such as toFrench Huguenots, Germans, Swedes,encourage many foreigners of non-and a considerable number of Scotch-English stock to come to America inIrish who came to Pennsylvania andthe period after 1830.moved down the Shenandoah ValleyThe Irish immigration. During theto the Piedmont and mountain regions1830's large numbers of Irish came be-of the South. America from its verycause of overpopulation, famine, andbeginning, therefore, was a land in-political discontent in their own coun-185186 THE FOUNDATION OF THE AMERICAN POLITICAL SYSTEMtry. It is estimated that in the decade 1820 the number had more thanof the 1840's, 780,000 foreigners camedoubled to 9,632,403. In each succeed-to America, and the next ten yearsing decade it increased by about 33 perbrought 914,000 more. Many of thesecent, until, in 1860, it reached 31,-were of the Irish peasant class who500,000, of whom nearly half a millionwere accustomed to agricultural living;were Negroes. This large increase wasbut only a few settled on farms. Mostdue largely to growth of the nativeof them engaged in unskilled labor inpopulation, though immigration hadthe construction of canals and rail-added about 5,500,000.roads, or settled in towns and workedThe westward expansion of Amer-in the mills.ica. With such a large increase in pop-Coming of the Germans. Anotherulation came a rapid territorial growthgroup which came in large numbersof the United States, as the peoplewere, the Germans. They came aftermoved westward in search of cheap1830, following the unsuccessful politi-land. After the War of 1812 westwardcal revolutions in their native country.migration increased rapidly. ThereAn industrial revolution in Germanywere several important reasons forlikewise displaced many, who then be-this expansion: (1) the Indians hadcame anxious to leave their nativebeen defeated, and treaties with themcountry for America. Another series ofopened new lands for settlement;political revolutions in Germany about(2) following the War of 1812 a seri-1848 failed in its objectives, and manyous economic depression caused manyother Germans left their country. Itin the East to seek new opportunitiesis estimated that by 1860 the German-in the West; (3) the abundance ofborn population of the United Statesfertile land in the West attracted manyamounted to more than 1,250,000.farmers who were finding it more andAntiforeign feeling. Oppositiontomore difficult to make a living in theirthese foreigners because of the fear thatown communities in the East.they might compete with native-bornDuring this westward movement vastlabor soon appeared, and considerablenumbers of people moved across theantiforeign feeling developed in themountains. The center of population,1830's and 1840's.which in 1790 had been twenty milesIn 1847 a nativist party, usuallyeast of Baltimore, Maryland, hadknown as the "Know Nothing" partymoved by 1860 to a point twenty milesbecause of the secrecy of its members,south of Chillicothe, Ohio. By 1860was organized. Its chief aim was thenearly half of the people of the Unitedexclusion of foreigners from this coun-States lived west of the Appalachiantry. In the campaigns of 1852 and 1856Mountains.it advocated measures of exclusion, butThe rise of the New West. Theits strength in local and national poli-movement of population across thetics was inadequate to secure the adop-mountains pushed the American fron-tion of its policies.tier westward. Near the beginning ofIncrease in population. In 1790,the nineteenth century, the Ohio andwhen the first United States census wasthe Mississippi valleys had been ataken, the population of the Unitedfrontier region. By 1830 they had be-States was only about 4,000,000. By come settled areas. More than 2,000,-

JADITITO AMERICAN LIFE, 1800-1865LOMUOR an187Courtesy Museum of Modern Art, New YorkThe Quilting Bee. IF you study this scene closely you will see many interesting things. Notice the con-struction of the room, the decorations, the clothes, the children, the expressions and attitudes of the indi-viduals shown here. What is a quilting bee? Are they held today?000 people had moved into this re-the purchase-money The waggon hadgion. So great was this migration toa tilt, or cover, made of a sheet, or per-the West that an English traveler,haps a blanket. The family are seenMorris Birbeck, reported in 1817 thatbefore, behind, or within the vehicle,"Old America seems to be breakingaccording to the road or the weather,up, and moving westward." Birbeckor perhaps the spirits of the party.then described the migration throughA cart and single horse frequentlyPennsylvania into the new West. Heaffords the means of transfer, sometimeswrote, "We are seldom out of sight, asa horse and packsaddle. Often thewe travel on this grand track, towardsback of the poor pilgrim bears all histhe Ohio, of family groups, behind andeffects, and his wife follows, naked-before us.A small waggon (sofooted, bending under the hopes of thelight that you might almost carry it,family."yet strong enough to bear a good loadAnother observer of this same periodof bedding, utensils and provisions, andwas William Darby, an American ge-a swarm of young citizens, - and toographer, who in 1817 wrote in his Thesustain marvellous shocks in its passageImmigrant's Guide: "The stream of im-over these rocky heights) with twomigration moved southwest. The in-small horses; sometimes a cow or two,habitants of the New England statescomprises their all; excepting a littlemoved to Ohio; those of New York,store of hard-earned cash for the landNew Jersey and Pennsylvania, to Ohio,office of the district; where they mayIndiana, and Illinois; those of Mary-obtain a title for as many acres as they land and Virginia to Tennessee andpossess half-dollars, being one fourth ofMissouri; and those of the Carolinas224THE NATION DIVIDED AND REUNITEDA critical election. In the electionrights," and argued, as before, thatthat followed, Lincoln received 180the Union was merely a compact of theelectoral votes against 123 for all hisstates, that the states were sovereignopponents. He was legally and con-and could secede at any time. Theystitutionally elected. His popular vote,felt very strongly that there was nohowever, was only 40 per cent of theauthority under the Constitution tototal vote cast. Many people in theforce the states to remain within theSouth now felt that the institution ofUnion. President Lincoln accepted theslavery was in danger. They consid-theory that the Union was perpetualered Lincoln a "Black Republican"and that the Constitution was not awho was bent on the destruction ofcompact of sovereign states.slavery.The political argument concerningThe South secedes. The governor ofthe nature of the Union reached itsSouth Carolina had requested the legis-culmination with the secession of thelature to remain in session until theSouthern states. It was not the firstresults of the election were known.occasion that a section of the countryWhen the news of Lincoln's electionhad vigorously opposed the actions ofcame, the legislature called a state con-the Federal government. Kentuckyvention which passed the ordinance ofand Virginia had expressed their op-secession. Within six weeks after theposition to the Alien and Sedition Acts;secession of South Carolina, GeorgiaNew England had resented Jefferson'sand the five Gulf states also seceded.purchase of Louisiana and had alsoThe political controversy between therefused to give wholehearted supportNorth and the South had reached ato the government in the War of 1812;breaking point. Southern leaders feltand South Carolina had threatened tothat with the election of Lincoln theirwithdraw from the Union in 1832 overcause was lost, that the political balancethe tariff question. The secessionhad now shifted in favor of the North,movement in 1861 was, however, ofand that a government which wasgreater consequence, since it presentedhostile to their interests would be ina more direct challenge to the preserva-control. They now looked to "states'tion of the Union.MASTERY OF THE CHAPTER CONTENT1. Name three controversial topics4. Name several causes for sectionalismwhich had caused sectional differencesdisputes over slavery.of opinion in the United States before 1815.5. Trace the development of the insti-What were the reasons behind these opin-tution of slavery in America from 1563 toions? What reasons lay behind the slave1820.controversy? How long did this issue agi-6. Describe the antebellum South.tate the nation?7. Cite some early attempts in the2. Why had the institution of slaverySouth to restrict slavery. Why did somedeveloped so extensively in the South?of these fail?3. Contrast early labor conditions in8. What provision was written into thethe North with those in the South. Shownational Constitution on the matter ofclimatic and geographic influences.slavery?

THE RISE OF BIG BUSINESS275Brown BrothersThe first transcontinental railroad line is completed. Study the picture of the meeting of the two roads.Notice the type of engines, the workmen, and the costumes of the two men, probably officials of theroads, shaking hands in the center. Why was this an historic event of great portent?by Sacramento merchants, and themer was part of the ceremony. TheUnion Pacific by Chicago capitalists.blows were recorded in Eastern citConstruction proceeded through theby telegraph, and the Liberty Ewide open spaces with great difficultytolled again in Independence Hall.because the country was inhabited byThe completion of the transconti-hostile Indians and herds of roamingnental railroad marked an importantbuffaloes. The labor supply for themilestone in an era of unparalleled rail-Eastern company came chiefly fromroad construction. Enthusiasm for theIrish workers and war veterans whoconstruction of more railroads was un-were able to use the rifle as well as thebounded, and Congress made addi-pick and shovel. The Central Pacifictional land grants to other railroads,had the difficult task of building acrossincluding the Northern Pacific for athe Sierra Nevada Mountains. Most ofroad from Lake Superior to Pugetthe work on this road was done bySound; the Southern Pacific for a roadChinese coolies. The gigantic task wasfrom New Orleans to San Francisco;finally completed when the two com-and the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe,panies met at Promontory, Utah, northwhich was to run from Kansas south-of the Great Salt Lake. Here, onwestward to California. ThroughoutMay 10, 1869, elaborate ceremoniesthe years from 1862 to 1877 Congresswere held. The locomotives comingmade land grants of more than 155 mil-from opposite directions faced eachlion acres to railroad companies, or toother and the "wedding of the rails"states, which, in turn, granted them towas celebrated. The driving of athe railroads. Of these grants, moregolden spike with a silver-plated ham-than 131,000,000 acres were actually296THE MAKING OF MODERN AMERICA, 1865-1900The first hat factory in the UnitedStates was in Danbury, Connecticut,which still ranks first among citiesmanufacturing hats. This early fac-tory turned out eighteen hats aweek. What type of hat is shownhere? Compare this scene with theworkroom in a large factory today.Handywas still doubtful, the laws generallyDuring the period of rapid industrialfavored the employer, and the courtsgrowth from 1880 to 1900, 9,000,000were usually more sympathetic towardimmigrants came to this country inthe employer than the worker. Work-search of work and improved livingers were often forced to sign a pledgeconditions. Labor organizations, how-that they would not join a union. Inever, demanded immigration restric-later years this pledge was referred to astions to avoid the competition of thesethe "yellow dog contract."foreign immigrants who had a lowerThe effect of immigration on labor.standard of living and would work forWages were kept low because of thelow wages. In some of the Easternarrival of large groups of immigrantsfactory towns immigrants with largefrom foreign countries. The captainsfamilies remained unemployed andof industry in America subscribed towere anxious to accept work underthe laissez-faire policy and to individualany physical conditions and howeverenterprise. That did not prevent them,low the wages. According to a reporthowever, from seeking assistance fromfrom Holyoke, Massachusetts, in 1873,the government in the form of a high"There is one pitiful and miserabletariff to keep out foreign products andsight which we have seen night afterat the same time advocating liberal im-night in front of the fruit and vegetablemigration laws which would bring instands.It is a drove of poverty-foreign workers to compete with do-stricken children, often girls, clad onlymestic labor. In 1864 Congress passedin one or two ragged dirty garments,an alien contract immigration lawdown on their hands and knees in thewhich permitted contractors in thisgutters, greedily picking out of the mudcountry to import foreign workers andand dirt and eating the bits of spoiledbind them to work for a term to payand decayed fruit which had beentheir passage money,thrown away as worthless.Judg-

308THE MAKING OF MODERN AMERICA, 1865-1900 -B120noR / T / S H P o S 5 E $ S 1 0 N 5FT.CLATSOP/oto00(ASTORIA)Oof LEWISPORTLANDO,FT. WALLA WALLAofFORT MANDAN0REGoMICHIGAN-TERRITORY-sFORTMI S S 0 uRHALLT E R R I ToR4o!FT.LARAMIEGreatFORT BRIDGERSgit LakeSALT LAKE CITYOMAHASACRAMENTOILIQUSAN FRANCISCOFORT KEARNEYSANJOSEAEHALoarUNCEPATOPEKABENTS FORTTIPTONSSELLOWESMISSOURIsoLOS ANGELESSANTA FETARKANSASTERRITORYALBUQUE RQUE(SJ`OFORT SMITHSAN DIEGO)NsOVERLAND TRAILS TOoFORT YUMATHE FAR WESTMLEWIS AND CLARK 1804-530OREGON TRAILPEL PASOCALIFORNIA TRAILPettleMORMON TRAILSPANISH TRAILSANTA FE TRAILfill many pages. The appearance of1900 the number was close to 76,000,-Helen Hunt Jackson's book, A Century000. It is not surprising that many ofof Dishonor, led to strong humanitarianthese people went to the West. Duringprotests against the mistreatment of thethe last forty years of the nineteenthIndians and induced President Cleve-century about 14,000,000 immigrantsland to recommend appropriate legis-from foreign countries came to Amer-lation. In 1887 Congress passed theica. Their interest in America wasDawes Act, which provided for thestimulated by glowing reports of thisdivision of land among individual In-country circulated in Europe by thedians. Each head of a family was al-propaganda agencies of trans-Atlanticlotted 160 acres, and single adult per-steamship lines. Poor crops during thesons received 80 acres. Toward the'70's in some of the European wheat-close of the '80's, the education andgrowing regions likewise induced manyassimilation of the Indian became im-peasants to leave their native countriesportant.for America. European wars whichInfluence of immigration. Through-imposed compulsory military serviceout this period there was a tre-on most European men also encour-mendous increase in the population aged many to come to America. Im-of the United States as a whole. In migration was stimulated by the Fed-1870 there were about 38,500,000 eral government, which establishedpeople in the United States, and by a Bureau of Immigration and wel-THE SETTLEMENT OF THE GREAT WEST309WISCONSINlateMICHIGANYI DetroitLuke OntarioNEW YORKlow AChicagoLake ErieToledoClevelandPENNSYLVANTAINDIANAILLINOIS0H10=Pittsburgh3Philadelphisunelndianapolis-:PEEDDELWESTMD(LouisvilleVIRGINTAVIRGINIAKcRichmondeNorfolkNashvilleNORTH CAROLINARKANSASWESTWARD MOVEMENTOF THE CENTER OFPOPULATION OF THEMISSISSIPPIUNITED STATESALABAMAGEORGIAcomed foreign workers during thefrom many countries to this land ofperiod when industry was expanding.opportunity.Foreigners contributed hard labor toDuring the '70's and '80's mostthe building of our railroads, and manyof them came from the northernof them were employed in our newlyEuropean countries of Ireland, Ger-developed industrial plants. Some ofmany, Sweden, and Denmark. Bythe Western states maintained immi-the '90's they were coming from south-gration bureaus also, and employedern and eastern Europe. These newforeign agents to encourage migrationimmigrants included Poles, Finns,to this country. America was paintedRumanians, Czechs, Turks, Greeks,as a land of opportunity, where farm-and Italians. The high point for im-land could be obtained free and wheremigration in the nineteenth centurywages were high, where there was free-was 1882, when nearly 800,000 for-dom of religion and no artificial casteeigners landed on American shores.system. In America every man had anAs the type of immigrant changed,opportunity to rise according to histhe American attitude toward im-ability. Here also was freedom frommigration changed also. A few of thesemilitary service, and from all those oldimmigrants preached radical economicrestrictions which had kept many Euro-doctrines. Also, organized labor pro-peans on a low standard of living. Ittested against immigration because itis not surprising that foreigners cametended to keep wages down. Senti-

310THE MAKING OF MODERN AMERICA, 1865-1900HHike SALOON non LANDMATHOTH SLEEPING PALACELGDGING for SOOPERSONSCulverThe Main Street of the old frontier towns were often very busy places. Study this scene. Notice thefalse fronts on some of the buildings. Why were these built?ment continued to develop against un-great rush to California, gold was dis-restricted immigration, and in 1882 acovered in the Pikes Peak region ofbill was passed excluding Chinese la-Colorado, and both gold and silverborers for a period of ten years. Thiswere discovered near the western bor-was renewed in 1892 for another ten-der of Nevada in the fabulous Com-year period. In 1885 the entry of la-stock Lode. So rich was the Comstockborers under contract was prohibited.Lode that in the ten-year period fromIn 1891 an act was passed placing a tax1859 to 1869 it yielded $145,000,000 inof fifty cents on each immigrant, andsilver and gold, and by 1880, $360,-the same year the office of Superinten-000,000. Similar rushes of fortunedent of Immigration was created.hunters occurred in other widely scat-The mining frontier. The greatesttered areas of the West. Some of theattracting power of the West was thestrikes yielded rich returns, but many ofdiscovery in certain areas of rich min-the diggings proved to be of little value.eral deposits, gold and silver, offeringLarge numbers of the settlers ac-an opportunity for the fortunate to be-cepted disappointment and turned tocome rich. Consequently the first out-farming or cattle raising, while someposts in this large unsettled region weretrudged back to their former homes.established by miners. The discoveryThe mining frontier grew swiftly, butof rich mineral deposits in the Rockyit disappeared almost as fast. Into theMountains and the Sierra Nevadasregions surrounding the mining campsattracted waves of fortune hunters sim-poured all classes of people in search ofilar to those who had been attractedquick riches. The mining camps wereby the discovery of gold in Californiasoon scenes of lawlessness and bawdya few years earlier. Ten years after theconduct.386 DEVELOPMENT OF THE AMERICAN POLITICAL SYSTEMTHE CHINESE WALL" AROUNITED STAT OF THEThe title of this picture is "Throw-ing down the Ladder by WhichThey Rose." What does it mean?Notice the label on the ladder.Who has climbed over the wall?Culberable attention in the United States.laws of the United States rather thanCommodore Lawrence Kearny kept athose of China.squadron of American ships in ChineseChinese immigration. The first Chi-waters during the conflict. When, asnese to come to America were wel-a result of the war, Great Britain se-comed because they came at a timecured the use of several Chinese portswhen labor was scarce. Large numbersand other commercial concessions,came during the years immediatelyKearny asked the Chinese authoritiesfollowing the War between the Northto give American citizens the sameand the South and were employed incommercial privileges as those grantedbuilding the Western railroads. Theto the "most favored nation." TheBurlingame Treaty was negotiated inprinciple of the most favored nation1868, giving China the right to unre-was incorporated in a treaty in 1844,stricted immigration into the Unitedwhich was negotiated with China byStates. California received the great-Caleb Cushing, the first American com-est number of these Chinese immi-missioner to that country. The treatygrants. During the depression follow-also contained an "extraterritoriality''ing the panic of 1873 there was muchclause, which granted American citizensunemployment and the Chinese labor-in China who violated Chinese lawsers became unpopular, Chinese ex-the right to be tried according to theclusion was widely discussed, and inA NEW FOREIGN POLICY FOR MODERN AMERICA 3871882 Congress passed an exclusion actpersuaded President Adams to appointprohibiting Chinese immigration fordelegates to the conference. Opposi-ten years. China had agreed to thetion developed in the Senate, however,principle in a treaty which had beenand the delegates were delayed, await-signed two years earlier. This was fol-ing their confirmation. In the mean-lowed by a more restrictive law in 1892.time, the Pan-American Congress metThe legislation excluding Chinesein the summer of 1826 and finally ad-was the beginning of a new Ameri-journed without having accomplishedcan immigration policy. The Unitedany of its aims.States, in the years to come, wasJames G. Blaine and Latin America.gradyto cease being the land ofFor more than half a century followingoppo cunity for the oppressed of otherthe Panama Congress little effort waslands, as a stricter immigration policy made to develop closer co-operationwas adopted.between the American republics. InOrigin of Pan-Americanism.The1881, however, Secretary of Statepeople of the United States have for aJames G. Blaine acted to revive Unitedlong time had a profound interest inStates interest in the affairs of Latinthe welfare of our neighbors to theAmerica. His principal reason was anSouth. The early history of the Latineconomic one. The United States wasAmerican countries was similar to ourpurchasing raw materials from theown. The people of the United StatesLatin American countries, but theobtained their independence after aLatin Americans were buying most oflong struggle against British oppres-their manufactured goods from Eu-sion. They could understand why therope. Blaine wished to correct this un-people in Spanish American countriesfavorable balance of trade by establish-were dissatisfied with Spanish oppres-ing closer commercial relations withsion. They sympathized therefore withLatin America. He supported the cre-San Martín, the "Liberator of theation of an International AmericanSouth," as he struggled to free Argen-Conferencewhichwould promote peacetina, Chile, and Peru from Spanishand trade. President Arthur grantedrule, and with Simon Bolivar, the "Lib-permission to invite the Latin Ameri-erator of the North," as he freed Ven-can republics to such a conference.ezuela, Colombia, and Ecuador.Blaine issued the invitations, but heFollowing their liberation, Simonresigned as Secretary of State shortlyBolivar was interested in uniting theseafterwards for political reasons, andrepublics into a strong nation. In thishis successor called off the conference.he failed, but he continued in his effortsThe Pan-American Conference,to establish better relations between1889. Congress later issued anotherall the American republics, both northinvitation, and the first Pan-Americanand south.Conference assembled at WashingtonPan-American Congress, 1826.Inin 1889. Blaine was again Secretary of1826 Simon Bolivar issued a call for aState, and he served as the presidingmeeting in Panama of all the nationsofficer. The meeting failed to accom-of the Western Hemisphere to discussplish much toward improving com-their common problems. Secretary ofmercial relations or building machin-State Henry Clay was enthusiastic andery for arbitrating disputes. The one

404 DEVELOPMENT OF THE AMERICAN POLITICAL SYSTEMImmigration to the U. S.from Northern &tfrom the RestWestern Europeof the WorldANNUALAVERAGE1820-18801881-19101921-19301931-1940EACH UNIT REPRESENTS 50,000 IMMIGRANTSSince success was measured by the appearance of urban centers whichmoney one had acquired, the tastes ofcame as a direct result of the industrialthe American people were greatly af-age. The factory system brought to-fected; and the standards of architec-gether workers in central areas. Theture, interior decoration, dress, litera-development of rapid transportationture, and art suffered accordingly.made this possible. With the shiftSize and elaborateness became theof manufacturing from the home andstandard for judging both dwellingsandsmall shop to the centrally locatedfurniture. Overdecoration of homesfactory in the city, the rural areas de-replaced the dignified simplicity of theclined in both population and prestige,previous generation. The well-to-dofor cities offered many attractionsdesigned their homes to include coloredwhich the rural areas could notwindows, balconies, and cupolas, andafford. Eastern cities grew at a tre-bright wall paper, gaudy pictures, andmendous rate in the latter half of thebrilliant rugs were in style. Chairsnineteenth century. In 1860 New Yorkwere upholstered with deep red orand Brooklyn had a population of moregreen plush, and iron deer, dogs, andthan 1,000,000. By 1890 the num-other statuary adorned the lawns.ber of inhabitants exceeded 2,500,000.The rise of the city. An importantPhiladelphia had grown to more thanchange in American life in the latter1,000,000, and Boston and Baltimorehalf of the nineteenth century was thehad reached the half million mark.LIFE IN AMERICA, 1865-1900405Midwestern cities also grew rapidly.slums were soon reproduced in most ofDuring the eighties the population ofthe large American cities. Often theseChicago increased from half a millionnewcomers established local languageto more than 1,000,000, while the pop-schools of their own and refused to sendulation of Cleveland, Detroit, and Mil-their children to the public schools.waukee likewise greatly increased.For a time they seemed unwilling toIn the South, urbanization wasadopt the American way of life, partlyslower, though cities like New Orleans,because they were not accepted intoLouisville, Memphis, and BirminghamAmerican life.also grew in size. Birmingham, foundedOrganized labor refused at first toin 1871, became by 1890, with a popu-take foreigners into their ranks, butlation of 26,000, the center of ironfinally they began to recognize the skillfurnaces, foundries, and rolling mills inof many of these foreign-born workmen.the South.There was, however, continued opposi-Growth in population. During thetion against foreigners coming to thislatter half of the nineteenth century,country in too great numbers, andthe United States increased in popula-Congress in 1882 passed a law exclud-tion from 31,500,000 to 76,000,000.ing such undesirables as paupers, crim-This was due in part to the great in-inals, convicts, and the insane. In 1891flux of immigrants. Approximatelythe list of undesirables was enlarged,14,000,000 foreigners came to Americaand the recruitment of foreign laborduring this period. Many of these werewas declared illegal.attracted to cities, in contrast to theIn spite of the many foreigners whoearlier immigrants who had settled oncame during the latter part of the nine-farms.teenth century, native-born AmericansDuring the period of the eighties acontinued to dominate American life.great change took place in the char-During the last three decades of theacter of immigration. Before 1880nineteenth century native-born Amer-more than three fourths of the foreign-icans made up about 86 per cent of theers who came to our shores came fromtotal population.Northern and Western Europe andImproved standards of living. Inwere easily assimilated. However, inthe latter part of the nineteenth cen-the latter part of the nineteenth centurytury many products of industry im-the new arrivals came from Southernproved the American way of living.and Eastern Europe, principally Rus-Outstanding among these was the rail-sia, Austria, and Italy. Many of theseroad refrigerator car which made itlater immigrants were farmers andpossible to ship great quantities of milk,unskilled laborers who had been ac-butter, fresh meat, tropical fruits, andcustomed to a low standard of livingfresh vegetables throughout the coun-and were willing to accept lower wagestry. Among the inventions whichthan American workmen. They settledaided the housewife were the washingin the mining and industrial regionsmachine and the sewing machine. Theof the East, where they were forcedsewing machine was invented earlier,to live in compact communities andand by 1866 these machines were sellingwhere they held on to Old Worldat the rate of 1,000 a day. In thelanguages and customs. European meantime, heating stoves and cooking

482UNITED STATES A TWENTIETH CENTURY WORLD POWERtries. China used the money that thewas aimed primarily at the JapaneseUnited States had returned to educateand was regarded by them as an insult.selected Chinese students in AmericanA heated controversy developed andcolleges and universities.President Roosevelt was forced to stepRelations with Japan. At the samein and adjust the matter. San Franciscotime that the United States was de-agreed to rescind the order, but muchveloping into a Far Eastern power,of the bitterness of the Japanese towardJapan was expanding from her homethe United States remained.islands toward the continent of Asia.In settling the school controversy,As the two nations spread their influ-President Roosevelt promised Cali-ence, a growing conflict of interestsfornia restriction of Japanese immigra-developed. When John Hay first an-tion. An agreement was reached withnounced the Open Door policy, JapanJapan in 1907 by which Japanese la-agreed to it, since it did not then suitborers were not permitted to leaveher purposes to have China dismem-Japan for the States. This "gentle-bered. At that time she was opposedmen's agreement" remained in effectto Russian expansion into Manchuria.for almost two decades. It did not en-When the War between Russia andtirely prevent Japanese immigration,Japan broke out in 1904 the Americanhowever, and anti-Japanese feelingpublic was generally sympathetic tocontinued.Japan. A series of Japanese victories,The growing power of Japan in thehowever, caused public opinion in theFar East after the Russo-Japanese WarUnited States to become fearful ofwas a threat to the Open Door policy.Japan's new strength, and public senti-By 1907 there were many in the Unitedment shifted toward Russia. PresidentStates who believed that there was aTheodore Roosevelt was anxious tostrong possibility of war with Japan.maintain a balance of power amongPresident Roosevelt wished to avoidnations in the Far East, and he per-such a conflict. He sent the Americansuaded Russian and Japanese repre-fleet on a round-the-world cruise tosentatives to end the war. Delegatespublicize our strength on the sea, andfrom the two warring nations met withat the invitation of the Japanese gov-President Roosevelt at Portsmouth,ernment the fleet paid a visit to JapanNew Hampshire, in August, 1905, anden route. As a further move towardworked out a treaty of peace. Thepeaceful relations, the Root-Takahiraterms of the treaty disappointed theAgreement was concluded in Novem-Japanese, and they blamed Presidentber, 1908. The two powers agreed toRoosevelt for having ended the war.maintain the Open Door policy inFor his services in this dispute Presi-China, and they recognized "the statusdent Roosevelt was awarded the Nobelquo in the Pacific area."peace prize.Relations with Cuba. As a result ofFriction between Japan and thethe war with Spain, the United StatesUnited States increased when, in 1906,became the most important power inthe San Francisco Board of Educationthe Caribbean. Cuba had been prom-issued an order excluding Oriental stu-ised independence, but this could notdents from the schools attended bybe achieved without some delay. TheAmericans and Europeans. This actionUnited States set up a temporary mili-

THE UNITED STATES IN THE GLOBAL WAR549These residents of San Franciscoare preparing for an air raid. ARed Cross worker climbs a ladderthrough the smoke, to rescue anoccupant of the second floor of thebuilding. These air-raid drills weremade as realistic as possible. Whatair-raid precautionary measureswere taken in your communityduring the war?Acmerecord crops were produced. It was rubber, and other needed materials.thus possible to supply food, not onlyBlood banks were established, and in-to Americans, but also to the other na-dividuals willingly contributed pints oftions at war with the fascist powers.blood periodically for plasma to beOn the home front. The people atsent to the war fronts. Rationing,home went about their duties quietly,"blackouts," the elimination of vaca-in the hope that their contributionstions and unnecessary travel, bans onwould help bring the conflict to an end.racing and some other types of sportingAn Office of Civilian Defense was es-events, and many other inconveniencestablished to organize volunteer groupswere all willingly accepted by mostto serve as air-raid wardens, homeAmericans.guards, and the like. Except for neces-One of the most gratifying aspects ofsary full-time employees, the draftlife on the home front was the lack ofboards and rationing boards werehysteria and the absence of persecutionmade up of citizens in the local com-of foreigners, such as had occurred dur-munities who worked without pay.ing World War I. There were aboutThousands of people raised "victory5,000,000 people in the United Statesgardens" to help prevent food short-who were not citizens. They were re-ages. There were frequent campaignsquired to register according to the pro-to collect paper, used fats, tin cans, visions of the Alien Registration Act of550 UNITED STATES A TWENTIETH CENTURY WORLD POWER1940. Those of questionable loyaltyfrom among drafted men. The navywere investigated, and some were in-and the marines also provided a periodterned. Certain organizations, such asof basic training, followed by assign-the German-American Bund, werement to more specialized work. Offi-dissolved. But intolerance in mostcer candidates received instruction atinstances was avoided except towardtraining centers in many parts of theJapanese Americans in some sectionscountry.of the country. Americans may beOne of the most interesting featuresproud of the fact that they fought theof the American armed forces in Worldgreatest war in history and preservedWar II was the presence of women inthe spirit of liberty upon which their uniform. The army and navy nursingdemocracy had been founded.corps had existed previously, but theTraining a military force. The basiconly other women connected with thereason for the intense effort on the homeservices had been civilian employees.front was to develop and equip power-With the coming of World War II, pro-ful armed forces for service in everyvision was made for women to enlist inpart of the globe. Considerable head-the various branches of the armedway was made toward training a mili-forces so that they might take overtary force even before Pearl Harbormany of the noncombat jobs and re-because of the adoption of peace-timelieve qualified men for active combatconscription. When the nation wentduty. More than 200,000 women en-to war, draft quotas were raised and thelisted for such service. The army hadwhole program of military trainingits WACS, the navy its WAVES, thewas speeded up. From a total strengthcoast guard its SPARS, the marinesof less than 1,000,000 in 1941 hearmedtheir Women Marines, and the airservices grew to a mighty force ofservice pilots their WASPS.12,000,000 in 1945. During the courseThe battle of the Atlantic. Theof the war American troops were sta-United States spent the year 1942 vig-tioned in almost every foreign countryorously preparing for war and at theengaged in war, and on countless is-same time trying to stop the enemy'slands.advances, particularly in the PacificThe army adopted a basic trainingarea. By the end of the year prepa-course of thirteen weeks for most of itsrations had proceeded so rapidly thatnew men. After that period many wereAmerican forces were beginning tosent on to specialized training, andtake the offensive both in Africa andothers to officer candidate schools. Forin the southwestern Pacific.a large number, advanced training wasThroughout 1942 one of the impor-provided in the nation's colleges andtant battles of the war was fought atuniversities. The training of all troopsAmerica's very door. This was thewas continued for varying lengths ofbattle of the Atlantic. The Germanstime, both in this country and at basesinfested the Atlantic sea lanes withoverseas, before the men were assignedlarge numbers of submarines in theto active combat duty.hope of preventing American suppliesThe navy at first developed its forcefrom reaching the battlefronts in Eu-solely through volunteers. Late in 1942,rope and Africa. Submarines alsohowever, sailors began to be selectedpreyed on American shipping along

690THE STATE OF THE NATIONBlack StarDoctor George W. Hilliard, resident in surgery, is shown here conducting a surgical demonstration classat Meharry Medical College in Nashville, Tennessee. Meharry is one of the outstanding medical collegeswhich has trained many of the more than four thousand Negro physicians practicing in the United States.forms that were strictly American. Afor much of the urban population tonew architecture developed that re-live outside the city limits. This led toflected the spirit of the times and thethe development of metropolitan dis-demands of the machine.tricts, which are classified by theGrowth and concentration of popu-United States Census Bureau as areaslation. The expansion of industrycontaining at least one city with amade it possible for the United Statespopulation of 50,000 or more, togetherto support a growing population. Con-with any adjoining cities and townssequently, the number of Americanswhere there are at least 150 personsincreased from about 76,000,000 inper square mile. In 1950 there were1900 to more than 168,000,000 in168 such metropolitan districts in the1957 In 1900 two thirds of the Amer-United States, the combined popula-ican people lived in rural areas, thattion of which constituted almost oneis, on farms or in villages of less thanhalf of the people of the nation. The2,500 population. There they enjoyedlargest was the New York City- Newa quiet, simple life, often undisturbedJersey metropolitan area, which inby the activities of the thriving cities.1955 contained about 15,000,000 resi-By 1950, sixty-four per cent of ourdents.people lived in urban areas, that is, inRacial groups in the United States.towns and cities of more than 2,500.The demand of the factories for laborOver one fourth lived in the 106 citiesand the opportunities offered by awhich contained a population of 100, -prosperous America continued to000 or more. Modern developmentsdraw foreigners to the United Statesin transportation have made it possibleuntil such immigration was restricted.AMERICA DEVELOPS CULTURALLY AND INTELLECTUALLY 691Doctor George WashingtonCarver, scholar and scientist ofTuskegee Institute, became interna-tionally famous for his powers ofresearch. Why was he especiallyinterested in agricultural progress ?Harris G EwingEven though the passage of laws cur-mechanical industries. Morethantailed the coming of immigrants, the150,000 are skilled workmen or fore-foreign-born constituted in 1950 more men. Negroes have organized insur-than one fourteenth of our total popu-ance companies, banks, building andlation.loan associations, and mutual savingsThe largest national group amongsocieties. They are successfully opera-the foreign stock in the country todayting stores, restaurants, beauty parlors,is composed of German-Americans.barber shops, and other business es-The second largest national group istablishments.composed of Italian-Americans. OtherThe Negroes have made notablenational groups in our population thatprogress in the care of the health ofnumber a million or more are, in thetheir own people. There are moreorder of their numbers: Irish, Austri-than 4,000 Negro physicians, 2,000ans-Hungarians, Russians, English,dentists, and over 6,000 nurses in theSwedes, and Canadians.United States. Two outstanding NegroThe Negro's contribution to Ameri-medical schools are Howard Universitycan life. During the twentieth cen-Medical College in Washington, D. C.,tury notable progress has been madeand Meharry Medical College in Nash-by the Negro race in the United States.ville, Tennessee.More than a million Negroes areGreater educational opportunitiesemployed in the manufacturing andare provided for Negroes than ever be-,692THE STATE OF THE NATIONfore and as a result, literacy amongThe McCarran Act, passed overtheir people has grown from five perPresident Truman's veto, raised thecent in 1865 to over 85 per cent today.immigration quota. It gave preferenceMore than one hundred colleges into some skilled workers, parents of citi-America are devoted entirely to higherzens, etc., but was criticized for othereducation for Negroes. Respondingrestrictions.to these opportunities, the NegroesWomen in modern America. Inhave produced leaders in many linesthe nineteenth century the only pro-of work. More than 100 Negroes arefessions that were generally open tolisted in Who's Who in America.Inwomen were teaching and stenography.1954 the United States Supreme CourtAchievements in science and inventionruled against segregation in the publicgradually altered the old order of so-schools.ciety and in the process influenced theImmigration restriction. Restric-status of women. By the outbreak oftions on the number of immigrants whoWorld War I women were working incould enter the United States contin-stores, industries, and in such profes-ued to be made.sions as law and medicine. DuringRestriction began in 1907, when thethe war they were called on to replaceUnited States and Japan negotiatedmen in many industries.the "Gentlemen's Agreement," haltingThe invention of labor-saving de-the immigration of Japanese laborersvices such as the vacuum cleaner, theto America. The first importantwashing machine, and the electric iron,change in our immigration policy cameand the development of canned andin 1917. Congress in that year passedfrozen foods helped to release womena law over President Wilson's vetofrom long hours of drudgery in house-requiring that immigrants be able towork. New homes were built alongread and write. A more radical changesmaller lines, and large numbers ofin immigration policy was decided up-families moved into a new type of liv-on in 1921. Europe was badly dis-ing quarters, the apartment. This re-organized as a result of the war andlief from many household duties gavemany of the people were povertywomen greater opportunity to enterstricken. This caused Europeans tobusiness and engage in more socialmigrate to America in larger numbersactivities. In 1920 they obtained theand led Congress to enact the Emer-right to vote in national elections andgency Quota Act of 1921. A perma-thereafter became more closely asso-nent Quota Law was passed in 1924.ciated with politics. A few womenIt restricted immigration from Julybecame judges, governors of states, and1, 1924, to June 30, 1947, to two permembers of Congress.cent of the number of persons of aReading for information and recre-given nationality living in the Unitedation. Reading matter of all kindsStates in 1890. A new immigrationincreased by leaps and bounds. Bylaw passéd in 1929 increased the num-the middle of the twentieth centuryber of immigrants slightly to a quotamore than eleven thousand differentof 153,000 annually. These quotasbooks were published annually in thedid not apply to Canada, Mexico, andUnited States. At the same time manyCentral and South America.millions of pamphlets were published,



