The Alien and Sedition acts. Republican editors and writers, including many of foreign birth, heaped violent abuse upon the President anti Congress what they considered an unnecessary anti-French policy. For their part, the Federalists looked upon these foreign-horn writers as French spies, and upon many native Republican editors as their dupes and collaborators. They felt that national interest required Lite suppression of criticism in a period of national crisis. Accordingly, during the summer of 1798, the Federalist majorities in Congress enacted a series of laws designed to deal with the problem. A Naturalization Act increased from five to fourteen years the period of residence required for the acquisition of American citizenship by the naturalization process. Two laws armed the President with arbitrary [towers in dealing with aliens. In times of peace the purpose of the roads, canals, and railroads by which the difficulties presented by the Appalachian barrier were being reduced. Federal aid was given toward these internal improvements. The South, naturally. was opposed to any program which would weaken the relations between that section and the Northwest. Free Western lands. The demand for free Western land was strongest in the Northwest where population would grow rapidly if the conditions of settlement could he made to attract newcomers. Opinion in the Northeast on this issue was divided. Workers and those with little money endorsed it, as it would tend to drain off any surplus of labor and increase wages. It was opposed by employers who wanted no scarcity of labor and speculators in Western lands. The Southern planter was opposed to a policy of free lands because it would work to the political disadvantage of the South. The rapid growth of population in the territories of the Northwest which were closed to slavery would add immeasurably to the difficulties of maintaining a number of slave and free states in the Union Immigration restriction. Conditions in Europe in the middle of the nineteenth century greatly stimulated emigration to the United States. In addition to a free right of way through the public domain, each company was given giants of alternate sections of land extending twenty miles back from each side of its tracks. Further aid was given in the form of government bonds. Federal aid to agriculture. Another kind of legislation the South did not approve of had to do with free Western land. The withdrawal of Southern representatives from Congress made it possible for the federal government to provide free Western lands. In 1862 the Homestead Act enabled settlers to secure title to 160 acres of farm land merely by occupying and cultivating the land for five years and paying a registration fee of ten dollars. Federal aid to agriculture appeared in another form with the passage of the Morrill Act in 1862. Each state was granted thirty thousand acres of the public domain for each representative it had in Congress in I860 or at the time of its admission. Funds derived from the sale of these lands were to lie used to endow colleges providing instruction in agriculture and the mechanic arts. A total of more than twenty thousand square miles was thus donated to aid in the establishment of the so-called colleges. The Industrial Revolution, as you have read, began in England in the eighteenth century. In 1791 the first textile mill in America was built by Samuel Slater, an English mechanic. American manufacturing grew rapidly because the embargo of 1807 and the War of 1812 cut off foreign trade. Its growth was also aided by private and federal road construction, and by the building of canals. The invention of the steamboat and the locomotive increased the volume of transportation and lowered its cost. This helped the growth of the West as well as the development of industry. The iron ore and coal fields of Pennsylvania made possible a large-scale The steel industry was an important factor in the economic revolution in the United States. It provided the material needed for our expanding factories, mines, railroads, and farms. Its workers became an important part in the new industrial population, and its need for labor was an important factor in the stimulation of immigration. The oil industry. After Colonel Edwin L. Drake drilled the first successful oil well, western Pennsylvania became a hub of activity similar to that which followed the discovery of gold in California in 1848. New wells were drilled wherever there was any prospect at all of finding petroleum. The oil was shipped to refineries in Cleveland and Pittsburgh. The most valuable product was kerosene, which soon replaced candles and whale oil as a source of light. Other important products were lubricants for many kinds of machinery. Fierce competitive conditions marked the early years of this new industry. In 1860 a young Cleveland produce merchant, John D. Rockefeller, decided to try his hand in the petroleum business. Samuel Andrews had developed a new Ktmment bonds. The meeting of the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific, at Promontory Point. Utah, on May 10, 1869. was an occasion for a national celebration. Distinguished officials bound the last rails together with a spike of Nevada silver and another of California gold. The speeches marking the occasion were carried to the East by telegraph, later in the same year the Central Pacific extended its line westward to San Francisco Bay. An excursion train sponsored by the Boston Board of Trade in 1870 was the first to complete a transcontinental run. It made the trip from Boston to San Francisco in eight days. By 1869 Congress had chartered two other transcontinental lines. (States, eastern city dwellers rushed to the region west the Mississippi to benefit by the high prices then being paid for food grains. Some Easterners emigrated to the territories as a means of evading die draft. After the war, many Union veterans took advantage of the opportunities to acquire rich land at little cost. Eastern industrial workers who longed for the independent life of farmers were joined by thousands of immigrants arriving annually from Europe. Among those who came in from foreign countries were thousands of Scandinavians who settled in the area west of the upper Great Lakes, and many Germans who set up new homes in Wisconsin, Iowa, and Kansas. Lumbering and fishing. Two other industries contributed to the development of the West. One of these is the lumber industry. The growth d die industrial East and the settlement of the West placed increased demands on the timber resources of the nation. The pine and fir forests of Washington and Oregon and the redwood forests of California were tapped to meet shorter working day and to a growing interest in recreational pursuits. For most workers, to the dangers of technological unemployment was added that of loss of his job resulting from the operation of the business cycle. A period of good times seemed invariably to be followed by one of depression. During good times—when business was expanding—jobs were plentiful and wages were high. During depressions jobs were scarce, and the workers who held them had to be content with greatly reduced earnings. For many workers the wages earned during "good times" were not sufficiently high to enable them to save enough to tide them through the years of a depression. Two such depressions took place during the last half of the nineteenth century —the panic of 1873 and the panic of 1893. In the years following these panics, unemployment reached unusually high totals and the suffering among workers was severe. The passing of the Western frontier affected adversely the bargaining power of die industrial worker in the East. As long as free land was available, the factory' worker could threaten to move to the West if his conditions of employment were not improved. Sometimes even the direat to move had the desired result. The thousands who did take to the pioneer trail reduced to the extent the number of workers in the East and thus improved the bargaining position of those who remained as industrial workers. Immigrants and the labor supply. The numbers of those who took to the pioneer trail, however, were more than offset by the steady stream of immigrants from Europe. European workers were generally willing to accept wage scales which, judged by American standards, were much too low. The movement thus started continued with little interruption until the outbreak of the First World War. In the half century between I8fi-1 and 1914, over twenty-five million immigrants came to our shores. No other country in the history of the world has assimilated so large an alien element into its population in so brief a period. Although some of these immigrants were skilled laborers and professional workers, the overwhelming majority were unskilled. Their addition to the labor force available to American! Unions used other means besides direct negotiation to improve their bargaining position. They encouraged their members to buy only those products bearing the union label as an indication that they had been manufactured under union conditions. They worked to secure a union shop—that is. one in which all employees are included in union membership. They also sought, through political activity, to secure conditions under which their bargaining position would be improved. They urged placing restrictions upon immigration. The adoption of a ten-hour day or an eight-hour day for government employees would strengthen their hands in demanding a shorter working day in private industry. They were interested in expanding the public school system, both because they recognized the importance of education and because they wanted to reduce the number of teen-age workers available to employers. They worked for laws that would require employers to adopt safety devices and safety measures. They wanted to secure the enactment of legislation providing for workmen's compensation to victims of industrial accidents. Practical as well as humanitarian considerations were involved in the demand for legislation regulating the conditions of employment of women. They wanted to outlaw the abuses growing out of company towns and the sweatshop system. Above all else, they wanted legal protection for the right of workers to organize and to engage in activities designed to achieve what they considered legitimate ends. Some employers, opposed to the growth of unions in their plants, adopted the practice of requiring applicants to sign an agreement not to join a trade union. Organized labor called these agreements "yellowdog contracts." Some managers fired all workers who joined a union even though they had not signed such a contract. Employers banded together to establish "black lists." denying employment to persons suspected of acting as union organizers. At times detectives were employed to pose as workmen, join I the union, and then report to the I management the names of union I leaders and intended union activi ties. Some employers sought to break strikes by securing court orders or injunctions forbidding unions to continue their strikes or to engage in picketing or other activities usual ly accompanying strikes. It union leaders failed to comply with these orders, they were immediately jailed without trial for of court. Organized labor wanted both yellow-dog contracts and gowj eminent by injunction to be ouq lawed. The rise of national unions I You already know about the development of early unions. The Knights attained their greatest numerical strength following a successful railroad strike in 1885. Within two years the membership rose from 50,000 to over 700.000. Politically, the organization was active in securing the enactment of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882, and of another law in 1885 forbidding the importation of contract workers. The strength of the Knights declined rapidly during the late 1880's. Unsuccessful strikes on a number of railroad lines alienated public opinion. Skilled workers were dissatisfied with the inclusion of unskilled laborers in the same organization. Included in the unskilled were many radicals of both foreign and native extraction. Violence in industrial disputes, often at the behest of these radicals, tended to bring discredit upon the whole organization. During the 1870's a number of craft unions had continued to operate independently of the knights. In 1881 representatives of national, state, and local unions met at Terre Haute, Indiana, and laid plans for the formation of a new international federation of craft unions. In 1886 at another convention held in Columbus, Ohio, this new organization was named the American Federation of Labor. The American Federation of Labor (AFL) is a loose organization which exercises little influence on the policies of member unions. It ((insists of workers organized generally on a craft basis. Local era unions combine to form their nw state and national organization These national unions or their loc affiliates become the bargain! Burlingame Treaty had been up with China, giving of that country the right to live in the United States. Under this treaty large numbers of Chinese coolies were moving into California. Hayes was able to modify the Burlingame Treaty so that we secured the right to "regulate, limit, or suspend" the entry ol Chinese laborers. A Chinese Exclusion Act passed in 1882 excluded workers from China and denied American citizenship to all Chinese aliens. Another law passed in the same year denied admission to paupers, convicts, insane persons, and individuals likely to become public charges. Three years later the importation of contract laborers was forbidden. You saw earlier that the progress of the Industrial Revolution made workers and farmers feel that they were not receiving a just reward for their efforts. They turned to reform movements to overI come what they considered an alliance between government and business. You recall that Republicans held the presidency and a large number of the seats in Congress from I8(>1 until 1885. Having gained favor as an antislavery party, they easily retained it during the Reconstruction period. The three Republican Presidents of the period all were well known military men. from the industrialized state of Ohio. The spoils system was widely used in maintaining political power. A consequence of it was graft and political corruption. To correct this abuse, President Hayes applied the merit system in filling federal posts, widening the rift between the reform faction and the Stalwarts of the Republican party. The assassination of Garfield prompted Chester A. Arthur to hurry civil service reform. Farmers and debtors won a campaign to have federal greenbacks made redeemable in gold. By 1890 there were twice as many people ring in the United States as there d been at the outbreak of the are between the States. By 1930 their number had doubled once in. exceeding, by that date. 122,000. This great growth was due in part to natural increase—that is, to excess of births over deaths. It was discovered that insulin can provide relief to sufferers from diabetes. Dr. Walter Reed, an American army doctor, established that yellow fever was carried to human beings by the female of a certain species of mosquito. The housefly also came to be recognized as a carrier of disease as well as an insect pest. Local and state authorities, as well as the United States Public Health Service, helped to wage an effective fight against disease. As a result of these developments, fewer children became the victims of infants' diseases, and more mothers survived childbirth. Life expectancy at birth increased from forty-nine years in 1901 to over sixty-seven years by 1950. Immigration as a factor in population growth. The need for more and more workers in America has served to draw people from other countries to our shores. The federal government had adopted a liberal immigration policy during the War between the States. Aliens could become eligible for the benefits of the Homestead Act by taking; out their first citizenship papers—that is, announcing their intention of becoming American citizens. The Con tract Labor Law permitted representatives of American employers to hire workers in their homelands and to arrange to pay for their passage to the New World. Steamship companies sought passengers for their westward trips across the Atlantic, and American railroads were seeking occupants for the liberal land grants they had received. Under these conditions the attractions of America were widely advertised in European countries. At the same time millions of Europeans had good reasons to Ire dissatisfied with conditions in their native lands. Economic opportunity in many countries was limited, both by a lack of necessary natural resources and by the power of either a landholding or an industrial United States. To those who recognized that they had little chance of improving their lot if they remained in Europe, the United Slates seemed a land of opportunity. Others tame to America to avoid forced military service. Still others wished to escape persecution due to their religion or position as members of submerged nationality groups within European empires. To these, America seemed a land of liberty. The attractions offered by liberty and opportunity acted like a magnet to draw Europeans to our shores. Smaller numbers from China and Japan were similarly attracted to the region bordering the Pacific. The accompanying table shows the numbers in which immigrants came. Each succeeding decade of that half-century witnessed a significant increase in the number arriving, regardless of conditions either in the United States or in other parts of the world. The annual average in the decade immediately preceding the outbreak the First World War was over .1 million. For the whole fifty-yea period, the annual average number of new arrivals was over hall a million. Germany, Norway, and Sweden.The social and cultural backgrounds from which they came made it relatively easy for them to adjust to the civilization that others from the same sources had built in die United States. Alter 1890, although immigration from the British Isles remained relatively high, that from Germany and the Scandinavian countries declined. The great growth in the number of new arrivals resulted instead from the immigration the peoples of the countries of southern and eastern Europe—Italy, Austria-Hungary, and Russia. It included large numbers of Czechs, Slovaks, Poles, LJkranians, Hungarians, Slovenians, and Croatian—submerged nationality groups in the Austro-Hungarian and Russian empires. So significant was this change that it has become customary to consider 1890 as a dividing date between an Old Immigration and a New Immigration. The New Immigration came from an entirely different cultural background. The people of whom it consisted had in their homeland little opportunity to become familiar with democratic procedures and democratic ideals. As members of persecuted minorities or of nations poor in natural resources, they were accustomed to low standards of living. Differences in language added to their difficulty in understanding their American neighbors and in making themselves understood. Their customs, too, seemed to set them apart from the rest of the American people. In order to solve some of these difficulties, immigrant groups adopted the practice of establishing "island'' communities in urban centers. Each industrial city came to have a Little Poland, a Little Italy, a Little Hungary. Mining towns would sometimes consist of people of one nationality. Because of the low pay the inhabitants of such communities received as unskilled workers, these nationality communities often reflected a lower standard of living as well as a different culture from that enjoyed by most native Americans. The language barrier also added to the difficulty' of bridging the gap of misunderstanding, as you have seen. Contributions made by immigrants. In spite of these conditions, the immigrant groups made significant contributions to America's economic and cultural growth They willingly accepted the most strenuous backbreaking work m mines, on railroads, and in factories at wage rates that few, if any, native Americans would consider satisfactory. As they became better acquainted with the ways of the New World, as their work skills improved, and as they acquired homes and businesses of their of their influence on American if increased. For years, two conflicting ideals had influenced public attitudes toward immigration. One of these was that America should be a land of opportunity offering hope to the oppressed and persecuted in other lands. This sentiment was aptly expressed in the following passage from the poem written by Emma Lazarus inscribed on the Statue of Liberty, a gift from the French people commemorating the hundredth anniversary of our independence: "Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free. The other ideal represented the desire to keep American institutions as they were. There was fear that uncontrolled numbers of immigrants arriving year after year would in time completely change the character of American civilization. Then, too, the low standards of living of many immigrant groups carried a threat to the efforts made by American workers to improve their economic position. Restriction of immigration. For many years the restriction of immigration was considered to be primarily a function of the states rather than of the federal government. State regulation, however, resulted in an ineffective hodgepodge. In 1875 the Supreme Court declared that the federal government had final authority in this field. The nay was thus opened for congressional action. The first federal legislation on the subject, beginning in 1882, was, for the most part, designed to exclude individuals whose personal characteristics caused them to Ire considered undesirable. A succession of acts denied admission to such persons as the insane, idiots, epileptics, and those afflicted with contagious disease; paupers or persons likely to become public charges; and convicted felons, anarchists, and polygamists. In 1917 Congress added illiteracy to the bases for personal exclusion. Applicants for admission had to be able to pass a simple reading test in either their own or some other language. An act passed in 1885 forbade the admission of contract workers, and as you know, opposition to Oriental immigration resulted in another type of restriction, one based upon nationality. The Exclusion Act of 1882 suspended Chinese immigration for ten years. 