The rapid peopling of the English colonies. Unlike the French colonies to the north and the Spanish colonies to the south, the English colonies along the Atlantic seaboard grew rapidly. Their growth was due partly to a high birth rate and partly to immigration. Why large families usual. During the colonial period and for a long time afterward, American families were large. Families of eight, ten, or twelve children were rather common. Parents could support numerous children because land was cheap, and a family could build its own house from lumber cut on its own land, grow its own food, and make its own clothing and nearly everything else it required. Children helped in the hard work of the home and the farm, and the more numerous they were, the more likely the family was to get ahead. The custom of early marriage also favored large families. It is true that many children died in infancy, but even so, the average family had more children than does the average family today. Why immigrants came. Some people came from Europe to America seeking religious and political freedom. Among those coming to escape persecution for their religion were Pilgrims, Puritans, Quakers, Huguenots (French Protestants), Catholics, and Jews. Some individuals came as officials, ministers of the gospel, or missionaries to the Indians, and others came for love of adventure. Far larger numbers came in the hope of making a better living. 'Flic custom of giving the newcomer fifty or one hundred acres of land attracted the poor working people and peasants of Europe. Here they could become independent; there it was practically impossible to reach that goal. Obstacles to immigration. Immigration to America was held back by the cost and dangers of the journey. At best the trip from Europe to America required six to eight weeks; if storms drove the ship from its course, the voyage might last three months. There were no regular lines of ships, no regular dates of sailing, and no laws to regulate fares or protect the safety and health of the passengers. The traveler, after making a bargain with the sea captain for passage, had to wait in port, possibly for several weeks, until the ship was ready to sail and winds were favorable. Meanwhile he was using up his money and the store of food he had bought for the journey. The ships were small and completely lacking in comfort. Sanitary arrangements were crude. The sick and the well-lived, slept, and ate in a crowded hold. The supply of fresh water, always very limited. Before 1700 nearly all ally settlers in the English colonies came from England. After 1700 many came from other countries. In this period the largest group of immigrants, next to the English, were the Scotch-lrish. They were among the best frontiersmen and Indian fighters in America and did more than any other group to push the frontier westward over the Appalachians, In addition to the Scotch-lrish there came to America a large number of Germans, many Scotch, Welsh, Irish, Dutch, and French Huguenots (Protestants), some Jews, and at least a few people from nearly every country in Europe. By the time of the Revolution these non-English settlers made up about one third of the total white population of the colonies. LEONARD CALVERT, brother of Lord Baltimore and first governor of Maryland. Maryland was founded in 1634. Both Catholics and Protestants were welcomed. In this painting, made by C. Y. Turner in 1902, Governor Calvert is buying land from the Indians. For several years the colonists had friendly relations with the Indians, but later the colony suffered severely from Indian wars. became dangerously low if the journey was prolonged by lack of wind or by stormy weather. Contagious diseases frequently broke out. It was not unusual for half or more of those on board to die from smallpox, measles, or dysentery. Young children, weak mothers, and the sick were almost sure to perish under the hardships of a long voyage. Another obstacle to immigration was religious intolerance. Most of the colonies tried to shut out Roman Catholics, Jews, and Quakers. Only in Pennsylvania and Rhode Island were newcomers of every' religious faith made welcome. Indentured servants. Many farmers and plantation owners were so eager for laborers that they were ready to pay the cost of the voyage for immigrants who would work for them a period of years. In exchange for passage to America adults had to serve from three to seven years; children, until they came of age. The contract between master and servant was known as an indenture; this gives us the phrase "indentured servant." The terms of the indenture were harsh, and the servant little better off than a slave. But when the time of servitude was up, he was free. Our Colonial Heritage WILLIAM PENN was the son of a wealthy English admiral. This portrait by an unknown painter shows him at the age of twenty-two, dressed as a knight. Soon after, lie joined the Quakers and became a missionary and reformer. Six times he teas thrown into prison for his beliefs. Later he founded a colony in America where Quakers and all others could enjoy religious political freedom. The constitution he drew up for his colony was so liberal that Thomas Jefferson called him "the greatest lawgiver the world has produced(Courtesy of Historical Society of Pennsylvania. Photo by Philip B. Wallace) He usually received a suit of clothes from his master. Often he received a small grant of land and managed to become an independent farmer. More often he became a wage earner. Most indentured servants came here of their own free will, gladly binding themselves to service for a term of years in order to reach America. Entire families often came in this way, each one becoming an indentured servant. Other individuals, both adults and children, were carried here against their will and forced to become servants. The streets of London and other seaports in the British Isles were full of kidnapers. They made a business of hustling their victims into ships bound for America. Upon arrival here the captain delivered his unwilling passengers to whoever would pay him most. Debtors and criminals. The prisons of England also furnished immigrants to the New World. To avoid the expense of keeping offenders in prison, the authorities frequently sentenced them to be transported to America. Some were in prison because of their religious or political ideas, many because of debts, others because of very minor offenses, a few because of serious crimes. Those sent to America had to serve masters in the colonies for a term of years, usually seven, and were then given their liberty. Some fifty thousand of them were brought to the American colonies. Negro slaves. Probably one half of all immigrants to the English colonies in America were either indentured servants or Negro slaves. Although Negro slaves were first brought here in 1619, they were less numerous than white indentured servants until after 1700. The colonists from Maryland southward gradually came to depend upon slave labor, especially on the large farms or plantations, as they came to be called. Throughout the 1700's the importation of slaves increased rapidly. Negro slavery existed in all of the colonics, but three fourths of the slaves were in Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina. South Carolina, and Georgia. Cheap Negro labor drove white labor from the plantations. As indentured servants gained their freedom, and as new immigrants arrived, they avoided the plantation regions. They settled in the northern colonies, or else pushed beyond the plantation area in the South, to make homes on the frontier. The expansion of the frontier. The coastal plain of eastern North America offered colonists wonderful natural riches. Here were fine harbors, navigable rivers, fertile valleys, abundant wild game, untouched forests, and unexcelled fisheries. By the time the American Revolution began, two and three fourths million people occupied the land east of the Appalachian Mountains, where now some sixty million live. Most of the settlers still lived close to the great bays and navigable streams. In only a few places had settlers moved beyond the first highlands. Yet free land and plentiful wild game beckoned the adventurous westward. They were pushing the frontier back. The westward movement from the Atlantic coast, across the Alleghenies, the Mississippi Valley, the Great Plains, the Rockies, to the Pacific, is the central theme of American history — "the most American thing in all America." To identify: Lord Baltimore, Huguenots, London Company, James Oglethorpe, William Penn, Scotch-Irish. To explain or define: charter, indenture, indentured servant, mission station, plantation, proprietor, royal colony, trading post. LEWIS AND CLARK at Three Forks, where three rivers (which they named the Jefferson, Madison, and Gallatin) unite to make, the Missouri. Sacajawea, the remarkable Indian woman who served as a guide for the expedition, is shown pointing the way. (From the painting by F. S. Paxson in the State Capitol, Helena, Montana) Dakota, where they spent the winter. The next spring thev found passes through the Rocky Mountains and followed the Columbia River to the Pacific coast. Their explorations gave the United States a claim to the Oregon country. Another expedition, led by Lieutenant Zebulon Pike, started out a few weeks after Lewis and Clark's expedition to trace the Mississippi and the Red rivers to their sources. Pike discovered the Royal Gorge of the Arkansas River and the mountain peak in Colorado which bears his name. Like Lewis and Clark, he brought back with him valuable observations of the climate, animal and plant life, and the Indian tribes in the region explored, and a remarkable tale of hardship and adventure. The re-election of Jefferson, 1804. Throughout his first term as President Jefferson grew in popularity. lie tried to please all sections; he promoted internal improvements; he protected trade from the Barbary pirates; his Secretary of the Treasury was managing the country's finances with remarkable skill, and the national debt was being steadily cut. He got Congress to encourage immigration by a liberal naturalization law. He promoted land settlement by purchasing land from the Indians and helping them move westward. He made the national government more democratic. Most pleasing of all, he bought from France a million square miles of fertile land. Englishman or an American. Moreover, American naturalization papers were not accepted by England, for she insisted that no one born under her flag could become a citizen of another country. The result was that thousands of sailors born in the United States or naturalized in our courts were taken by the British. France also practiced impressment and refused to recognize American naturalization papers. However, hardly any French citizens served on our ships, and France did not find it worth while to search for them. Popular anger against England was further increased when, in 1807, a British man-of-war, the Leopard, stopped an American frigate, the Chesapeake, a few miles out of Norfolk, Virginia, claiming that British deserters were aboard. When the American captain denied there were deserters and refused to allow a search, the Leopard fired three broadsides into the Chesapeake, wounding eighteen sailors and killing three. Officers of the Leopard then boarded the Chesapeake and took four so-called deserters. The act of firing on an American warship and taking off individuals by force was a serious matter. President Jefferson would have had the American people with him had he immediately asked Congress to declare war. "Never since the battle of Lexington," he wrote, "have I seen this country in such a state of exasperation." Jefferson's efforts to avoid war. Jefferson was determined to avoid war. Again and again he asked England to give up impressing men from our vessels. He ordered all British warships to remain outside American waters. He urged Congress to keep American goods, ships, and sailors at home. This would prevent incidents likely to lead to war. Also, the cutting off of American trade with both France and England might make these countries give up the practices to which we objected. Accordingly Congress passed the Embargo Act (December, 1807), which stopped all American trade with foreign ports. Effects of the embargo. The Embargo Act did not have the effect intended. Napoleon looked upon it as helpful to him. Since his navy was so weak that he could not keep American ships from sailing to British ports, he was glad to have the American government do this for him. Napoleon now claimed that any American ships which found their way into European harbors were not American but British ships in disguise. So he captured them. As for Great Britain, the embargo had no effect on her policy; she refused to move from the position she had taken. The embargo was disastrous to the United States. TIIE WHITMAN MISSION in the Walla Walla Valley. Dr. Marcus Whitman established the mission in 1836 after a long trip by wagon from the East. In 1847 he, his wife, and twelve others were killed by Indians at the mission. (Courtesy of Oregon Historical Society) Growth of population in the West. Between the first census in 1790 and that of 1830 the population of the United States grew from about four million to nearly thirteen million. In 1790 less than two hundred thousand American settlers lived west of the Appalachians, but by 1830 about one third of the entire population lived there. By 1850 half the population lived west of these mountains. Where the settlers came from. Nearly all of the early settlers in the West were native-born Americans. Some had been poor wage earners and day laborers back East, but most of them were farmers who went west in search of richer land. A great many were from Virginia and the Carolinas. After 1840 the stream of settlers included numerous immigrants from Europe, particularly from Germany. Easterners complain of the westward movement. When conservative Easterners realized that a great many industrious heads of families were going west, they complained of "plots to drain the East of its best blood." Pamphlets were distributed far and wide describing the hardships of frontier life and advising people not to go west. But nothing could stop the westward movement so long as there was good, cheap land to be had at the end of the journey. WEAVING ROOM in Slater's factory. The designs for these machines were drawn from memory by Samuel Slater, an English immigrant. (Bi-ttmann Archive) machinery did not stop manufacture at home and in small shops using hand methods. In 1820 two thirds of all the cloth produced in the United States was still made in the home. As late as the middle of the century a great deal of manufacturing was still carried on by hand methods. Why the factory system developed in the North. The factory system grew much faster in the North than in the other sections. Perhaps the most important reason was that Northerners had money to invest in factories — money they had made in commerce and banking. Other advantages of the North were abundant water power, a population with much mechanical and business ability, and a labor supply of farm girls and of immigrants from Europe. The first center of the factory system was New England, especially Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. From this section the system spread to eastern New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. Later it developed in Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. The growth of immigration. The early factory owners found their labor supply on near-by farms. The farmers' daughters were glad of a chance to earn money, and they were used to long hours and hard work. SHOEMAKER'S SHOP ABOUT 1830. At this period all shoe manufacturing was carried on by hand in little shops like this one. (Courtesy of Essex Institute, Salem) women and children was nor enough. Factory owners then began to encourage immigration from Europe. From 1790 to 1825 the number of immigrants was only about eight thousand a year. These easily found work. By 1830 the number of immigrants reached fifty thousand a year, and by 1840, one hundred thousand. Then famine in Ireland and a revolution in Germany sent a flood of newcomers to our shores. By 1850 three hundred thousand foreigners were coming each year. Most of them entered Northern ports and stayed in the North. They were usually uneducated and very poor. They had spent everything they had to get here, and they had to take any job they could find, regardless of poor wages and working conditions. New social problems due to industrialization. The factory system brought a number of new social problems. 1. The workman's loss of independence. As factories gradually took the place of small shops, the life of the workman was changed in many ways. The skills he had learned through years of experience were not needed in the factory; even a child could soon learn to run most machines. The workman could no longer look forward to being his nun boss; he could not start a factory of his own, for machinery IMMIGRANTS arriving in the United Slates from Europe. American factory owners and mine-owners were eager for additional workers; so the immigrants usually had no difficulty in finding jobs. ( Drawn by A, Berghaus for Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper, November 23,1878. Culver Service) CHILD WORKERS in a factory about 1810. Af this period, and for many years afterward, most factories hired young children. Children worked the same long hours as adults and received very small wages. 7. The labor movement develops. Until 1825 it was a crime in England for workers to organize and strike for higher wages. American judges followed the English practice and put many workers in jail for attempting to strike. There were a few workmen's societies in America, but they were powerless. After 1825 the labor movement finally got a start. Many trade unions were organized. In 1828 the trade unions of Philadelphia combined in a federation. Similar federations were soon formed in other cities. By 1834 a national federation of trade unions was established. Then, as now, labor unions struggled to improve wages, hours, and working conditions. In these matters they at first had little success. Strikes usually failed, for there were many immigrants who could fill the strikers' jobs. Besides, public opinion did not approve of strikes and in most cases took the side of the employer. Since strikes rarely succeeded, the labor organizations of this period put most of their efforts into getting better laws. Workingmen win the right to vote. Most of the new Western states permitted all white men to vote. The older states limited the vote to property owners. This caused such discontent among wage earners that in the i82o's and 1830's all the states except Rhode Island decided to let any white man vote, whether or not he owned property. From now on political parries had to pay more attention to the needs of the working class. The winning of the right of all men to vote was a big forward step for American labor. Labor organizations now worked to elect men friendly to labor. In 1828, for example, they joined with the farmers to elect Andrew Jackson President. They also asked for laws to improve the position of working men and women and to give them greater opportunity. They called for free public schools, equal rights for women, free homesteads for W estern settlers, abolition of imprisonment for debt, abolition of slavery, laws establishing a ten-hour day, and other reforms. Labor wins some of its demands. The labor movement won some solid gains. The ten-hour day was established in several of the skilled trades. Cities and states adopted the ten-hour day for government workers, and in 1840 President Van Buren declared ten hours to be a legal workday on government construction jobs. In 1843 Massachusetts prohibited the employment of children under twelve for more than ten hours a day. The declared the Bank unconstitutional and dangerous to liberty. He was not blind to the need for a central bank, for he asked Congress to establish a new bank owned and controlled by the government. However, Congress did not think well of the idea. In 1832 the officers of the Bank asked Congress to renew the charter. It was the year of the presidential election, and they thought the President would not veto a bank bill for fear of angering the Northeastern commercial states, whose votes he needed for re-election. They did not understand Jackson. A bill to recharter the Bank passed both houses of Congress. The President vetoed it in a ringing message, declaring that the Bank was meddling in politics. The election of 1832. The presidential campaign was fought on the question of rechartering the Bank. Henry Clay, nominated by the National Republicans, supported the Bank. Jackson, renominated by the Democrats, thundered against the Bank and the "money power." Jackson won a sweeping victory. Jackson removes deposits from the Bank. The Bank had fought Jackson's re-election, and he took revenge. Although its charter would not run out until 1836, he ordered the gradual removal of government money. The Bank was crippled. Jackson's victory over it seemed to most people another proof that "Old Hickory" was on the side of the common man and against wealth and privilege. A period of speculation. The early and middle 1830's were years of unusual prosperity. Many people were moving west. Immigrants by the hundreds of thousands came here from Europe. The factory system grew rapidly. In the East railroad building went forward. Roads and canals were being built in all parts of the country. Sales of government land increased by leaps and bounds, and by 1836 a large surplus was in the treasury. Prices were going up. This led many people to buy land as a speculation (that is, in the hope of selling it soon at a higher price). Most of the speculators borrowed money to pay for their purchases. The state-chartered banks did nothing to discourage speculation and too much borrowing. Instead they encouraged both by issuing more and more paper money. Prices soared still higher. Becoming alarmed, Jackson tried to check the speculation in land and the issue of bank notes. He instructed the government land agents to take nothing but gold and silver in payment for public lands. Land sales fell off at once. The bright bubble of speculation was about to burst. More and more European immigrants were coming to the United States, and nearly all of them settled in the North. Some of them were highly skilled. Because they were free and not slaves, they cost their employers nothing but their wages. Many a small businessman who could not possibly have bought a slave could afford to hire a free laborer. While the North grew rapidly in population and wealth, the South lagged behind. One reason for this was the differences in the labor supply of the two sections. The South could not attract white laborers because of its cheap black labor. It lacked money to start industries because nearly all its wealth was in slaves. Southerners realized that their section was less prosperous than the North. For this many of them blamed the North. The following paragraph, written by an Alabama newspaperman in 1851, shows the way Southerners often felt about Northern wealth and Northern leadership: A RAILROAD STATION AND TRAIN in the 1860's. The scene is Stratford. Connecticut. Note the big smokestack on the wood-burning locomotive. (From the painting by Edward L. Henry, 1867. Courtesy of Metropolitan Museum of Art) sunk in 1859 at Titusville, Pennsylvania. Before the war's end western Pennsylvania was dotted w ith hundreds of derricks, and oil refining was becoming an important business. Expansion continues after the scar. For several years after the war, industry continued its rapid growth. Thousands of businessmen who had made fortunes from army contracts invested their wealth in new factories. Hundreds of thousands of immigrants poured into the country each year, supplying plenty' of workers, who also became customers for manufactured products. The West was filling up, creating a demand for farm machinery, manufactures of all kinds, and more railroads. The five years after Appomattox saw more rails laid, more lumber sawed, more houses built, more coal, iron, silver, and copper mined, more flour milled, and more cotton cloth woven than any previous five years in the nation's history. European critics thought that the return of a million Union soldiers to civilian life in 1865 would cause hard rimes. They were mistaken. The Union soldiers had little trouble finding jobs. Many went into the factories, oil fields, and mines, or into railroading. Others claimed a free homestead in the West and settled down to farm. The triumph of industrialism. The rapid growth of manufacturing and trade led to a rapid growth of cities. In 1860 only one American in six lived in a place having 10,000 or more people, but by 1900 one in three did so. The cities drew many of their people from the farms. It became the custom for most of the farmers' sons and daughters to go to the city to earn their living. If a farmer had poor land, all his boys and girls were likely to leave home for the city. In this period thousands of farms in the Northeast were given up. Soon nothing remained of them but cellar holes surrounded by clumps of lilac and syringa, tumble-down buildings, scrubby orchards, and pastures growing up into forest. In hilly parts of New England whole villages were gradually abandoned. The cities also attracted millions of immigrants from Europe. Between 1860 and 1900 over fourteen million foreigners came to the United States, most of them settling in factory and mining towns in the Northeast. Until about 1880 the great bulk of the immigrants came from northwestern Europe, mainly from the British Isles and Germany. These immigrants were much like the people already living here and quickly fitted into our ways. After 1880 we began to receive many immigrants from eastern and southern Europe, especially from Italy, Hungary, and Russia. These people took much longer to learn our language and our customs. By 1890 three fourths of the immigrants entering the United States were from eastern and southern Europe. Soon our big seaport cities had whole sections known by such names as "Little Italy," "Little Hungary," or "Little Bohemia," where the newcomers settled to be near their own countrymen. The modern city was made possible by new methods of communication, transportation, sanitation, lighting, and fire protection. Improvements in con mm mention. New methods of communication helped businessmen to reach more customers. As businesses grew bigger, the cities grew bigger also. CHINESE WORKERS in a California cigar factory. In the 18ti0's and 1870's thousands of Chinese immigrants were brought to this country by corporations seeking cheap labor. In some occupations on the Pacific coast white workers were entirely replaced by Chinese. The labor unions demanded that the Chinese be kept out of the United States. Bv 1900 twelve states limited the number of hours per day or per week that women might be employed. Four states prohibited the employment of women at night. Twenty states prohibited the employment of young children at night, although some of the laws now seem very timid. For instance, one state went no further than forbidding the employment at night of girls under twelve years of age. The real evil of child labor had scarcely been touched, for in 1900 one in every five children between the ages of ten and fifteen was a wage earner. Labor demands curbs on immigration. By 1880 nearly a third of a million immigrants came here every year. Within a few years the figure rose to nearly a million. The United States, it was thought, had room for all who wished to come. Steamship companies sent agents all over Europe to persuade people to come to America. Western railroad companies, with land to sell, did the same thing. Large corporations made contracts with laborers who wished to come to America. The corporation paid the laborer's fare, and the laborer promised to work for the corporation for a certain period of time. Unskilled Chinese laborers by the tens of thousands were brought in under contract to build railroads in the West. Labor leaders saw that their efforts to raise wages and improve working conditions would not get far so long as the country was flooded with poor immigrants eager to take any job. The labor unions demanded that the Chinese be shut out, and in 188z Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act.* Next labor unions called on Congress to stop the practice of bringing in laborers under contract. Congress did so in 1885. Still the flood of immigrants increased. Labor then asked that immigrants unable to read and write be shut out. Many employers were against any such restriction. Some liberals opposed it because they wanted America to continue to be a refuge for the ill-treated. Labor did not have its way until 1917, when Congress passed a law requiring immigrants to be able to read or write in some language. Labor conditions in 1900. At the turn of the century wages and hours were little better than in 1865. According to the census of 1900 two thirds of the male workers received less than $ 12.50 a week. Only the most highly skilled workers earned as much as $ 18.00 a week. Of course prices were much lower than they are now. Beef sold for 17 cents a pound, pork for 14 cents, eggs for 21 cents a dozen. A good pair of shoes cost $2.00, and a good suit cost $20.00. Low as these prices seem, most American workers found that their wages would barely support even a small family. Since the war between North and South the wealth of the nation had increased wonderfully. Yet it was concentrated in a small number of hands. By 1900, 1 per cent of the people owned more than the other 99 per cent put together. However, a large part of the wealth owned by the fortunate 1 per cent was invested in factories, machinery, mines, railroads, steamboats, and other business property. This investment made mass production possible. It would gradually bring about shorter hours of labor and enable the people to enjoy more comforts. A period of nationalism. The strong nationalism of the years following the war was commonly expressed in such slogans as "America first," and "One hundred per cent Americanism." It caused the United States to remain outside the League of Nations and the World Court. It led to the passage of strict immigration laws, which closed the doors to most European and all Asiatic labor. Nationalism also showed itself in dislike of foreigners and of anyone who criticized the American way of life. After the Bolshevik revolution in Russia (October. 1917), men of wealth everywhere feared the spread of Communism. The next year Congress passed an Alien Act under which foreigners could be deported for their opinions. In carrying out this Act the Department of Justice rounded up thousands of aliens thought to have radical ideas and deported them without the benefit of a regular trial. The Act was repealed in 1921. In 1921 Congress limited the number of immigrants to be admitted annually from any one country. 1'he Immigration Act of 1924 carried this policy further by reducing the total number of immigrants to be admitted to 164,667. In 1927 this number teas set at 150,000. After 1930 the Immigration Service let in very few immigrants. ods of change, were thought to be dangerous radicals. Progressives and pacifists were looked on with suspicion and sometimes had difficulty in securing a public hall for their meetings. Most of the states passed laws intended to force people to be loyal to the American political and economic system. In some states teachers were required to take an oath to uphold American institutions. A new Ku Klux Klan sprang up to fight so-called "un-American" ideas. It was directed mainlv against Catholics, Jews, foreigners, and Negroes. Adopting the disguise and the methods of the Klan of Reconstruction days (see pages 331-332), it spread terror over a large part of America. Where the Klan was strong, newspapers and politicians feared to lift their voices against it, and business and professional men had to join or lose their customers and clients. At its peak in 1925 the Klan had over five million members. Tn 1928 it helped defeat the Democratic candidate for President, Alfred E. Smith, mainly because he was a Catholic. The Klan expressed a kind of national feeling ill-suited to a land of liberty. The Agricultural Adjustment Act of May, 1933, provided benefit payments to those who cut their production of certain crops — cotton, corn, hogs, rice, tobacco, and others in which there was a large surplus. The farmers co-operated well; by 1934 more than forty million acres of farm land had been taken out of cultivation. Farm prices rose; in addition the farmers received several hundred million dollars from the government. In 1836 the Supreme Court set aside the Agricultural Adjustment Act. Congress then passed a second and better farm-relief law — the Soil Conservation Act of 1936. This provided that the government would pay farmers to use part of their lands for "soil-conserving crops," such as clover and alfalfa. These crops enrich the soil; they also have a soil-binding effect which prevents loss of the valuable topsoil by washing, gullying, and dust storms. By 1940 nearly six million farmers had joined in this program and were receiving benefit payments averaging more than a hundred dollars each. Farm income was more than double what it had been in 1932. But not until World War II did farmers have as much buying power as they had had in the five years before World War I. The New Deal took a number of steps to provide farmers with cheap credit. A Farm Mortgage Relief Act helped farm owners avoid the foreclosure of their farms. A Farm Security Administration was set up to make small loans to needy tenant farmers for the purchase of equipment and work animals. A Farm Tenancy Act provided money to help thousands of tenant farmers buy farms. On the whole, Congress showed little interest in the tragic situation of the millions of sharecroppers, subsistence farmers — that is, farmers with nothing to sell, producing only for their own families — and migratory farm laborers, who move from place to place in search of work. Roosevelt tried to awaken the nation to the needs of these groups of forgotten men, but did not get very far. 2. Labor. Before the New Deal, labor legislation had been left to the states. The states were not very successful in regulating labor conditions, since industries could move from places with strict labor laws to others where labor was less protected. The New Dealers favored federal laws to regulate wages and hours and to protect workers in their right to form unions for the purpose of bargaining with their employers. The National Recovery Act of 1933 attempted, among other things, to spread work, shorten hours, raise wages, and end child labor. (1) to end the naval armaments race, and (2) to find a way to keep peace in the Far East. (Sec pages 561-562.) The Conference also produced the Four-Power Treaty and the Nine-Power Treatv. The alliance between Great Britain and Japan was replaced by the Four-Power Treaty. This bound Japan, Britain, France, and the United States to respect one another's possessions in the Pacific and to consult together if these possessions were threatened by any other power. In the Nine-Power Treaty the same four powers and five others (Belgium, Portugal, Italy, and China) agreed not to interfere with China's independence and to maintain the Open Door in China. The signers did not agree to defend China's independence by force; they merely agreed not to attack it. China's request that the powers give up extraterritoriality and other special privileges within her borders was not granted. Exclusion of Japanese immigrants creates new ill will. The Washington Conference resulted in somewhat better feeling between the United States and Japan. The naval race was stopped. The United States agreed that Japan should be the strongest naval power in the Far East. (Sec page 562.) Japan promised to uphold the Open Door. Some two years later, when Tokyo was destroyed by an earthquake, Americans quickly raised a large relief fund. For a little while there w'as real friendliness between the two nations. However, new friction was soon to develop over the immigration question. Following the Russo-Japanese War, thousands of Japanese settled in California. The Californians demanded that Japanese immigrants be excluded. (Chinese laborers had been excluded since 1882.) Not wishing to hurt the pride of a sensitive nation. President Theodore Roosevelt did not want Congress to pass an act to prevent Japanese immigrants from entering the United States. Instead, he got the Japanese government in 1908 to make a "gentlemen's agreement" not to give passports to laborers wishing to come to the mainland of the United States. Japan observed the agreement faithfully. Yet when the Immigration Act of 1924 was passed, Congress, against the advice of President Coolidge and Secretary of State Hughes, insisted on excluding all members of the Mongolian race, Japanese as well as Chinese. The proud Japanese people regarded this as an insult. They thought Congress should have given Japan an immigration quota, as was done for other nations. Japan's quota would have been only a hundred immigrants a year. By shutting them out completely, w'e aroused the lasting resentment of the Japanese people. 