We are a nation of immigrants. Except for the American Indians, all of us have come here from abroad or are descended from those who did. Congress Has Power to Regulate Immigration. Under international law, all sovereign states may regulate the crossing of their borders. The Supreme Court has held that this sovereign power, although not expressed in the Constitution, is an exclusive power of Congress. In addition to this international source for the power to regulate immigration, C ongress may lean on its expressed power to regulate foreign commerce — people being classed as commerce. The Immigration and Naturalization Service administers the laws regarding the entry and naturalization of aliens. The basic law today is the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952. Of course, other acts contain sections relating to aliens — for example, the Internal Security (McCarran) Act of I95° — and those provisions are also enforced by the Service. Through the first hundred years of our national history, immigration was generally encouraged. There were vast and uninhabited stretches of the frontier West to be filled. But, bv the 1880's, the open frontier was becoming a thing of the past. Beginning with the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882,- Congress began to clamp down on immigration. Many groups were excluded in the next several years. They included the feeble- minded, anarchists, paupers, and other people of undesirable characteristics. The flood of immigration continued, running over 1,000,000 a year in the first years of this century. In 1921. Congress began limiting immigration on the basis of national origin as well as on personal grounds. Finally, the National Origins Act of 1929 set the basic pattern for the present system of control. IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITEO STATES Total Immigrants Admitted to Europe United States Department of Justice, Immigration and Naturalization Service to alien ineligible for citizenship may enter the United States, except for temporary purposes. All aliens who are allowed to enter to remain and to become citizens come in as quota or nonquota immigrants. Many nonimmigrants are admitted each year, for temporary stays. Undesirable Aliens Banned. The host of undesirables now takes up five pages in the United States Code. It includes the feebleminded, the insane, epileptics, chronic alcoholics, drug addicts, vagrants, beggars, stowaways, paupers, tuberculars and car- _rs ot other contagious diseases, criminals, immoral persons, polygamists, adults unable to read anv language, those who advocate the overthrow of our government. members or former members of communist or fascist parties. Despite the fusion of various groups after 1882, the number of immigrants continued to rise. So after World War I, Congress began placing restrictions on mere numbers. Each country outside the Western Hemisphere has been assigned a quota — the number of immigrants that may be admitted from that country each year. Quotas are al- loted to each country in the same proportion to which the different nationalities contributed to the population of the United States as of the 1920 census. The grand total of all quota immigrants admitted each year is now limited to the total of 154,657. An immigrant's nationality for determining under which nation s quota lie enters is determined by his place of birth rather than by his residence. Thus one born in Germany but entering the United States from Great Britain is admitted under the German quota. The Immigration and Nationality Act eliminated the entire Oriental exclusion policy and extended the quota system to all parts of the Far East, as well as the rest of the world. Under this system Great Britain naturally has the largest quota, 65,361; Germany is second with 25,814, other quotas ranging on down to the minimum 100 for such countries as India and Ethiopia. Nonquota Immigrants. In addition to the 154,657 quota immigrants, thousands of others enter the United States each year outside the quota restrictions. No quota restrictions are placed on persons born in the Western Hemisphere; but they must meet the personal standards required of an immigrant. Other nonquota immigrants include alien wives or husbands of American citizens, resident aliens returning from a brief visit to their native countries, ministers who intend to preach their religion in this country, and the alien children of Arneriei citizens. Bean Congress sometimes relaxes the bar for certain groups or persons, was done for " war brides " after World War II. The Displaced per sons Act of 1948 and 1950 allowed the admission of 415,744 refugees from war-torn Europe. Congress authorized the admission of another 214.000 persons mostly iron-curtain refugees; and over 32,000 refugees from revolt-torn Hungary were admitted in 1957. Nonimmigrants. Each year thousands of aliens come to the United States as nonimmigrants — that is. for temporary purposes. Students, tourists, businessmen, and newspapermen from other countries are examples. Aliens in the United States. About 800.000 aliens now live in the United States: some 200.000 immigrants and nonimmigrants come here each year. In nearly all respects these people enjoy the same great civil liberties that citizens do. In many States certain professions (such as law, medicine, and dentistry) are closed to them, and in some States they cannot own such weapons as own property is very severely restricted, and many defense industries will not employ aliens. A few States deny them unemployment compensation. But, generally, thev mav attend the public schools, make contracts, use the courts, own property, enter most businesses — In short, do most of the things any citizen mav do. Of course, they cannot vote or hold most public offices, but they must pay taxes, when an alien becomes a citizen, he gains all of the rights and assumes all of the responsibilities of that cherished status. How Immigrants Enter the United States. Every alien immigrant seeking to enter the United States must go before an American consul and obtain from him a visa establishing his apparent right to enter. Working at busy international ports, the port receptionist must fre- quentlv act as interpreter in welcoming nervous immigrants. Among her duties is seeing that aliens documents arc arranged in proper order. ter the United States, subject to a further examination at the port of entry. Consuls deny visas to aliens who are legally inadmissible to the United States. Some few immigrants are turned back on arrival at our " ports of entry ' by immigration officials. A steamship line which knowingly or carelessly brings an alien who is not admissible is required to return the alien to the port where be boarded the ship. An alien from Brazil once was rejected for insanity. Brazil would not take him back because he was not a citizen of Brazil. The ship carried him back and forth for years, until his condition improved. Deportation. A citizen cannot be deported. But an alien may be forced to leave for a variety of reasons. II- legal entry is the most common cause. Aliens who enter with falsified passports or sneak in by plane or ship or at night are usually persons of low moral code. Having entered illegally, they are considered a menace and are deported. In times like these, immigration and other federal officers are especially concerned with foreign agents who may slip in. "Wetbacks," Mexicans who wade or walk across the border, present a peculiar problem. Many are attracted by higher farm wages here, and they must be rounded up periodically — sometimes hundreds of miles from the border. It is not at all uncommon for many of the very same wetbacks to be deported several times in the same month. Any alien who commits a crime involving moral turpitude, or violates narcotics laws, or commits practically any other felony (not a minor crime) may be deported. Lately, the Justice Department has been moving against many alien gamblers and racketeers in order to deport them. Finally, any alien may be deported who teaches or advocates the forcible overthrow of the Government of the United States, or who belongs to an organization which does, the communist party, for example. We have no use for those who would come here to enjoy our liberties while working at the same time to overthrow those liberties. The Alien Record a Good q Through the years, the record of alien population has been quite large. According to FBI records, for example, the crime rate for aliens ' well below that for citizens. Because those who are admitted must meet the high standards set by law, they man times become among the very best of our citizens. Naturalization of Aliens. One of the functions of the Immigration and Naturalization Service is to keen records of immigration and to see that those who desire citizenship may be naturalized according to law. 1 Three Ways of Becoming Citizens. All persons born in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. Inhabitants of acquired territory are usually naturalized en masse. Congress determines who shall become naturalized and provides for the naturalization of individuals by the judicial process described below. Who May Become. Naturalized. The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 wiped out the ban against naturalization of most Orientals. Any person who comes as a legal immigrant is now eligible to become a naturalized. Children born abroad to United States' citizens who have once resided in the Lni States are natural-born American citizen5- Children born abroad, one of whose paren s is a citizen, must live in United State> *err* 1 tory for at least five years between ages i4 and 28 or lose their citizenship. New citizens take the oath of allegiance at ceremonies held in a Washington hotel as part of the final session of the 15th Annual National Conference on Citizenship. Naturalization has long been the fulfillment of the dreams of countless immigrants. The naturalization of both parents naturalizes the children under sixteen if living in the United States. The naturalization of husband or wife does not automatically naturalize the other. One may become naturalized in a United States alien woman became an American citizen by marriage to an American citizen; and an American woman lost her citizenship by marriage to an alien. An American woman who thus lost her citizenship can regain it as soon as the naturalization examiner satisfies the judge that she was once a natural-born citizen of the United States. Any person horn in the United States who lost his or her United States citizenship by naturalization in a foreign country but was readmitted to the United States for permanent residence prior to March 3, 1931, and is eligible to citizenship, may become naturalized in the United States in as short a period as six months. Aliens in the armed forces mav also be naturalized in as quickly as six months. District Court or he may be naturalized in any State or territorial court of record having jurisdiction of cases in which any amount of money can be in controversy. Filing Declaration of Intention. Although he is not required to file one. an alien at least 18 years of age may file a declaration of intention to become an American citizen with the clerk of one of the above courts. This declaration contains facts for identification, and an intention to renounce all allegiance to any foreign state and to become a United States citizen. Filing Petition. After five years' residence in the United States (or three years if the alien is married to an American citizen), including six months in the State, the applicant files his petition for citizenship with the clerk. He states that he is not opposed to organized government, that he is not a polygamist, and that he renounces his allegiance to his former country. Witnesses. When the petition is filed, two American citizens must testify to the clerk of the court that they have known the petitioner to have resided continuously in the United States during the last five years, to have been of good moral character and to be attached to the principles of the Constitution of the United States. If part of the five years has been spent in another country, the petitioner might file depositions from other witnesses to cover that period. Examination. Formerly the judge conducted the examination. United States District Judge may point a naturalization examiner. The examiner questions the applicant and witnesses. He learns whether an an applicant speaks English, has a reasonable knowledge of the Constitution and Government, and fulfills all other requirements for citizenship. He then reports what he finds, with recommendations, to the District Judge The examiner may also perform this service for State judges. Granting Citizenship. In not less than thirty days after filing the petition the applicant goes before the judge. The judge may ask a few questions or he may ask many. When he is satisfied that the applicant meets the standards the law requires, he administers the oath of allegiance. The new citizen will then be given his certificate of citizenship signed by the judge. Loss of Citizenship. Despite the popular impression, a person cannot lose his citizenship upon being convicted of an ordinary federal or State crime. Some of the privileges of citizenship, especially the right to vote, are often denied felons. Under no circumstances may a State deny one his American citizenship. Under federal law, the only crimes for which citizenship may be lost are the following: treason, attempting of conspiring with others to overthrow the government by force, bearing arms against the United States, or fleeing from the United States in order to evade the draft in time of war. Expatriation. A native-born citizen may be expatriated (voluntarily or involuntarily lose citizenship) by committing the crimes listed above, also by (1)taking an oath of allegiance to a foreign state. (2)formally renouncing United States citizenship, (3) serving in the armed forces of or holding any governmental post under a foreign state, (4 )voting in a foreign election, or (3) if a child, bv the naturalization of a parent to a foreign state. Denaturalization. For the same reasons for which a na- tive-born citizen may be expatriated We maintain a huge defense force to (1) protect us against foreign attack and (2) to discourage attacks. Serving in the nation's defense is one of the citizen's major responsibilities. Defense is a national function, though the States may keep militias. Congress, with its " war powers." and the President, as Commander-in-Chief, control the armed forces. The Department of Defense is headed by the Secretary of Defense. He is assisted by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Armed Forces Policy Council. The Department includes the three noncabinet departments of Army. Navy, and Air Force. The armed forces carry out the orders of the President and protect and defend the nation. The Army is especially responsible for operations on land, the Navy (including the Marines) on the seas, and the Air Force over both land and sea. Selective Service drafts eligible youths for military service. Many favor and many oppose UMT. The Atomic Energy Commission controls the development of atomic energy in this country. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration and Council direct most federal aeronautical and space research and exploration. The Justice Department, headed by die Attorney-General, investigates and prosecutes federal crimes, advises the Government on legal matters, and administers the federal courts and prisons. It also administers the immigration and naturalization laws. 