Indentured servants and slaves. Slowly but steadily the settlers pushed inland, and the frontier yielded to the pioneer. Bacon leads a frontier rebellion. In fact, by 1676 frontier settlements were so far removed from the coast that the coastal inhabitants were inclined to show little interest in the problems of the pioneer. In this year a serious rebellion was led by a frontier planter, Nathaniel Bacon, in protest against a government which failed to protect them from the Indians and to consider their needs. Bacon died at the height of his success, and his cause collapsed. In time, however, most of the abuses of which Bacon and his followers had complained were corrected. The rebellion is important in our history because it showed the unwillingness of frontier settlers to submit to a corrupt government which took no notice of their problems. The New England Colonies Are Firmly Settled New England makes a slow start. The London Company did not make much profit from the Jamestown colony, but at least it was more successful than its rival to the north, the Plymouth Company. The Plymouth group tried to plant a settlement at the mouth of the Kennebec River in Early plantation house what is now Maine, and then gave it up as a bad job. Reorganized as the Council for New England in 1620, the company was granted the right to colonize and govern the territory between the fortieth and forty- eighth parallels. Under the new charter, the energetic Sir Ferdinando Gorges and Captain John Mason set up new colonies in what are now Maine and New Hampshire. They met with little success. Two groups of pioneers, however, did succeed in planting permanent settlements at Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay. The Pilgrims settle Plymouth. The group which settled Plymouth, the Pilgrims, lived at first in the little village of Scrooby in eastern England. They were nearly all Separatists who had been persecuted for their religious beliefs. "Some were taken and [clapped] in prison," wrote William Bradford, the historian of the Pilgrims. "Others had their houses beset and watched night and day . . . ; and the most were fain to fly and leave their houses and habitations, and the means of their livelihood." The migration of the Pilgrims began when they left England to find refuge in Holland. But Holland didn't suit them as a permanent home. The customs, language, and occupations there were too different from their own. They were afraid, too, that their children would grow up more like Dutchmen than Englishmen. The Pilgrims became interested in reports of the New World, for here was a land where they could live and worship as they wished. But they needed money to move so far away. To obtain it, a company was formed. The settlers bought as many shares in the company as they could afford, but most of the shares were sold to a group of London businessmen. All profits from the settlement for the first seven years were to be divided among the shareholders. That meant, of course, that most of the early profits would be sent to London. About 100 people, including 35 Pilgrims from both Holland and England, set sail from Plymouth, England, across the Atlantic in the tiny May flower. They were bound for the shores of what is now Virginia, where they had a grant of land from the London Company, but storms blew them off their course. Finally they landed far to the north on the bleak shores of Cape Cod Bay in December of 1620. The Pilgrims made friends with some of the neighboring Indians and soon laid the foundations of a small community, which they called Plymouth. The first winter was a bitter time. Still, though half of the settlers died from sickness, the survivors were by no means ready to give up when spring came. The Mayflower Compact is written. From the start, the Pilgrims were faced with serious problems. At first they didn't even have a legal right to make their home in Plymouth, which was outside the boundaries of the London Company. Nor had any definite plans been made for governing the settlement. Before landing, therefore, the Pilgrims drew up the Mayflower Compact, part of which is quoted at the opening of this chapter. In this famous paper, they pledged their allegiance to the king and agreed to pass and obey such laws as the good of the colony demanded. The Mayflower Compact did not actually provide a plan of government, but it contained the basic idea of American democracy — the idea that government depended for its authority upon the will of the people. Plymouth progresses slowly. Beyond contributing the Mayflower Compact and the example of their courage, the settlers at Plymouth did not greatly influence the growth of the country. The soil around Plymouth was not fertile, and the debts owed to the London merchants proved a handicap to the progress of the colony. Few new settlers were attracted because of the strict religious views of the Pilgrims. Also, the colony failed to get a charter from the king, and therefore could not set up a recognized government. In 1691 Plymouth was joined to the Puritan colony, founded nearby on Massachusetts Bay. Puritans decide to emigrate. In 1628 a group of prominent Puritans were given permission to settle within the territory belonging to the Council for New England. Under the name of the Massachusetts Bay Company, these Puritans secured a royal charter which granted them a strip of land extending from three miles north of the source of the Merrimack River to three miles south of the Charles River. The charter also gave the company the right to dispose of its lands and to govern its colonists. Since the charter neglected to fix the office of the company in England, the leaders migrated to the New World, took the charter along, and set up an independent, self- governing colony. Unlike the Pilgrims of Plymouth, the Puritans migrated in fairly large numbers. During the period from 1629 to 1640, when Charles I ruled without Parliament, the Puritans in England were severely persecuted. They felt they had little chance of winning acceptance of their beliefs by the colonies people were enthusiastic about what could be made out of this great new America. But just what kind of people had carved out a new life in the English colonies? What kind of houses did -they live in, and what kind of churches did they attend? IIow did they make their livings? How were they governed? What did they read, how did they get along together, and what did they do in the way of entertainment and fun? By answering questions like these, this chapter pictures the way of life that the colonists grew to cherish. The development of colonial civilization is discussed under the following major points: Living Conditions Vary Among the Colonists Colonists come from many lands. The settlers along the Atlantic coast came from many places and had many different backgrounds. Although the English far outnumbered any other single group, other nationalities were well represented. Next to the English in numbers were the Scotch- Irish and Germans, who eagerly turned to the New World to escape religious persecution and economic hardship. The hardy Scotch-Irish — people originally from Scotland who had lived for a while in Ireland — settled chiefly along the frontier of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas. The Germans not only pushed into the back country but made their homes in large numbers in the more settled parts of Pennsylvania. In addition there were in the colonies French, Scotch, Irish, Welsh, Swiss, Dutch, and Swedes. "From this promiscuous breed," observed a French settler,, "that race now called Americans have arisen." The colonies actually were a product not only of English effort hut of Old World expansion. Colonial population increases. After a slow start, population in the English colonies grew swiftly, partly because of immigration and partly because the colonists often had large families. Benjamin Franklin, for example, was one of a family of seventeen children. Families of fifteen, or even twenty children were not unusual, but the death rate was likewise very high. Large families were an advantage, because every member could contribute to the family's support. In general, the population was scattered rather thinly along the Atlantic seaboard. Just before the American Revolution there were almost 3 million people in the colonies, but only one tenth of them lived in towns. Philadelphia had nearly 25,000 people. Boston and New York were close behind with about 20,000, and Charleston was fourth with only about 10,000. Cities and towns did not then have the conveniences which later made them very different from farm sections. As centers of wealth and progress, however, the cities exerted a great influence upon the development of learning and the fine arts. Social classes develop. When the settlers came to America, they left behind them the sharp class distinctions of Europe, where a man's position in life was based largely upon the family into which he had been born. But as community life developed in the colonies, certain distinct groups emerged. A corporation was permitted by law to i sell shares of stock (certificates of ownership to the general public, and to use the money gained by the sale to carry on its business.2 By this means, men who wanted to start new industries could get together much larger amounts of capital than any one, or a few of them, might have been able to manage alone. With this capital, they built larger factories, put in more expensive machinery, bought greater amounts draw materials, and developed wider mar- for the goods they produced. The profits from the business were then split up among the stockholders, according to the number of shares of stock owned by each. Investors who owned a large number of shares of stock became increasingly wealthy. The story of the growing nation and the movements for reform will be told in three parts: 1. The population of the country increases. 2. Some northerners crusade against slavery. 3. Reformers try to improve American life. 1 The Population of the Country Increases Important population changes occur. One of the important social developments taking place in the United States during the first half of the 1800's was the rapid growth in population. (See chart, page 242.) By 1840 the inhabitants of the United States numbered 17 million people, and in the next 20 years the total in the states and territories increased to nearly 3111 million. The western areas grew faster than the other parts of the country; by the middle of the century, almost half the population lived west of the Alleghenies. Another important trend was the growth of larger centers of population. In 1840, for instance, there were 44 communities with a population of 8000 or more, making up one twelfth of the country's total population. Twenty years later there were over three times as many cities and towns of that size or larger, making up about a sixth of the total population. By 1860 more than a million people lived in the combined areas of New York City and Brooklyn, New York. Immigration increases. A large part of this population increase was caused by waves of immigration to American shores. From the beginning, of course, the United States had been a nation of immigrants. The flow had started during the colonial period, as English, Scotch, Irish, Scotch- Irish, Germans, Swedes, Dutch, and others came in search of homes, freedom, and fortunes in the New World. After the new republic was formed, new waves of immigration occurred: for example, during the ten-year period from 1821 to 1831, about 150,000 immigrants arrived. From 1841 to 1851 the total immigration figure was nearly Ui million, and from 1851 to 1861 it rose to more than 2J4 million. Many immigrants come from Ireland and Germany. Most of the immigrants in the first half of the 1800's came from the British Isles and northern and western Europe. In the years between 1820 and 1850 the greatest number of immigrants came from Ireland. Many Irishmen emigrated to America because they were unhappy under British rule. Then in 1845 Ireland's potato crop failed, and a severe famine swept the country. During the next ] few years, hundreds of thousands of Irish- I men were literally starved into leaving their I native land. To them America was the I land of promise. Nearly all the Irish settled in the East, especially in the cities. The next largest group of immigrants to 1 America during these years were the Germans. Many Germans came because of 1 poor crops and hard times at home. Others 1 left their country' because of persecutions I after the failure of a revolutionary uprising I in Germany near the mid-century. Most I of the German immigrants turned to the soil, and at least half of them pushed their way across the mountains to the rich west- 1 ern farm lands. Conditions in America also influenced the flow of immigrants. Immigration always rose during prosperous times and fell off during bad times. Except for the depression years following the Panic of 1837, the years from 1820 to 18.50 were generally prosperous. Immigrants meet hostility. As more and more people came from abroad, some native-born Americans raised a storm of protest. Most of the newcomers from across the ocean became laborers, farmers, or mechanics and were willing to work long hours for low wages. Employers were more than willing to hire them. Immigrants who New Salem, Illinois, became a frontier community like thousands of others when pioneers were pushing westward toward the Mississippi River. Most traces of such communities have vanished, but New Salem has been restored and is visited by many people each year because it was here that Abraham Lincoln grew to manhood. Simple scenes like these were everyday sights to thousands of American citizens only 100 years ago. In crude homes like these the frontier settlers made themselves as comfortable as they could, winter and summer. The addition at the left was a shop used for making barrels and other wooden articles. Log construction of houses and other buildings throughout the wooded frontier is shown in this detail. This building served as a general store in Lincoln's day. Settled in the cities were likely to make their homes in wretched tenements and shanties, because they could afford nothing better. Since low wage scales tend to lower the standards of living, native-born workers resented the threat to their own higher standards of living. Opponents of the Democratic Party also were disturbed because so many of the new Americans added voting strength to Democratic political machines, such as the Tammany Hall machine in New York City. Some religious groups also objected to the newcomers because many of the immigrants, particularly among the Irish and Germans, were Roman Catholics. Protestants were alarmed by the increase of Catholic churches, convents, and parochial schools. In the early 1850's the scattered groups which opposed the immigrants formed semi-secret political organization whi called itself the American Party, asked about the name and purpose of party, its members replied: "I know noth- ing." Soon the party came to be called the "Know-Nothing" Party. CHECK-UP Why did the population of the United Stoles increase rapidly in the second quarter of Ike nineteenth century? 1.What evidences were there that our population was rapidly increasing? 2.Why did the Irish migrate to America? the Germans? Where did these two nationalities tend to settle? 3.Why were some Americans hostile to the immigrants? How did they show their hostility? The growth of population in the United States from 1790 to 1960 is shown in charts on this page, on page 423, and on page 584. About how large was the population in 1820? About how great was the increase from 1790 to 1820? What was the approximate population in 1860? Was the rate of increase more rapid before or after 1820? What was happening by 1860 to the proportion of people living in urban places? Immigration was an important reason for the rise of our population from 1820 to 1860. About how many million immigrants arrived during this time? Why did so many come from Ireland and Germany? Some Northerners Crusade Against Slavery Most immigrants were attracted to the North and West rather than to the South. There was little manufacturing in at this time, largely because the interest in this area was making of cotton. Mechanics and other factory workers, therefore, had little to look southward. Few immigrants, therefore, were attracted to the slave states, and the South gradually lost ground in population in comparison with the North and West. The South develops social groups. Slavery also helped to create more distinct social classes in the South than were to be found in other parts of the country. In 1860 the aristocracy at the top of the social ladder included about 6000 great planters and their families, out of a total southern white population of about 6 million. Then there were the well-to-do townsmen, the small independent farmers, and mechanics and tradesmen, which together made up the middle class. Still lower were the "poor whites" of the sand hills, the pine barrens, and the secluded mountain regions. Living in isolation on poor land and lacking opportunities for education, the "poor whites" endured poverty and hardship. At the bottom of the social scale were the slaves, who were believed to be absolutely necessary But had lost importance. An increase in immigration brings many changes. Extremes of wealth and poverty develop in America. Social problems demand consideration. An Increase in Immigration Brings Many Changes Immigrants come for many reasons. Nations in Europe were partly respon- for the migrations. A few persons still leaving the lands of their birth due to religious persecution. There was political unrest; some men came to country to escape army service in Tan wars. More immigrants arrive in good times. The number of immigrants arriving in a single year depended upon economic conditions in America as well As in Europe. With the growth of American industry, some manufacturers attempted to recruit laborers abroad. There was much work to be done in this country, and there were not enough workers to do it. Factories had to be built, forests cut down, railroads constructed. Immigrants were more than welcome, particularly those who were willing to work for low wages and to live with few comforts and no luxuries. In hard times fewer immigrants came. During the depression which followed our Panic of 1873, for example, the number decreased until in 1878 less than 140,000 foreign-born came into this country. This total was the smallest since 1862. But with the return of good times the flood of newcomers grew until in 1882 the number was nearly 800,000 a year. Northern Europe sends the most immigrants. In the period following the War Between the States, as before the war, a larger number of new arrivals to this country came from the British Isles than from any other part of Europe. More came from Germany, however, than from any other single country. During the '70's and '80's there was a marked increase in the group from Norway, Sweden, and Denmark, most of them hard-working farmers, who found homes in Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and the Dakotas. Large numbers of people continued to come from Ireland, though the totals never equaled those resulting from famine during the '40's and the '50's. By the early 1890's there was already a noticeable rise in the rate of immigration from southern and eastern Europe — Italy, Russia, Poland, and the Balkan countries. This increase in the number of southern and eastern Europeans was only the beginning of a mighty wave that reached a peak in the early 1900's (see pages 586 and 587). Immigrants are blamed for social evils. Beginning in the 1870's there were objections raised in this country against the immigrants. Patriotic societies began to protest the admission of so many foreign elements to the "melting pot." They urged restriction of immigration to America. The foreign-born were blamed for the increase in crime in their sections of the great cities. If the newcomers were at fault, it was owing in part to their ignorance of American laws and ways of life, in part to the fact that bad housing and poverty often lead to crime. Labor and industry favor restriction. Organized labor was a second group that favored restrictions on immigration. Its leaders were afraid that an unlimited number of people coming to these shores would mean ever-lower wages and that immigrants would furnish a constant supply of strike-breakers. Captains of industry made up a third group which began to want limits put on the number of newcomers. They had once favored free immigration because it gave them cheap labor. Now they began to blame the foreign-born for increasing labor unrest and growing violence in strikes. Foreigners were labeled "radicals." "The ranks of anarchy and riots number no Americans," stated Chauncey M. Depew in 1887. "The leaders boldly proclaim that they come here not to enjoy the blessings of our liberty and to sustain our institutions but to destroy our government, cut our throats, and divide our property." The Chinese are excluded. The first important attempt to restrict immigration affected the Chinese. In 1868 the United States had drawn up the Burlingame < Treaty with China. This agreements allowed special privileges to Americans o China and gave Chinese citizens the right to travel and live in the United States While tile first transcontinental railroad was being constructed (page 864), the Chinese were welcomed to this counter because they provided cheap labor. By 1879, however, American labor complained that it could not compete with the Chinese] coolies who worked for starvation and lived under conditions that Americans! would not endure. Because of such protests, President Hayes succeeded in modifying the Burlingame Treaty so that the United States had the right to "regulate, limit," suspend" the entry of Chinese laborers. When even more drastic measures than this were demanded, a law was passed in 1882 which excluded Chinese laborers for 2 period of ten years and denied American citizenship to all Chinese nationals. 1892 the period was extended for another ten years. This restriction continued in force until World War II. During this time only students and certain specified classes of Chinese were admitted to the United States. Special groups are barred. In 1882, another law was passed which reflected the tightening immigration policy of the United States. Objectionable persons like paupers, convicts, and the insane were forbidden to land on our shores, and the steamship companies were required to return to their homelands those who were not admitted, Three years later (1885) the door was closed to aliens who arrived under contract to work for an American employer. Restrictions were extended in 1891 to exclude those suffering from contagious and loathsome diseases. Then a bill requiring al new arrivals to prove their ability to read and write was passed by Congress, but 1 was vetoed by President Cleveland. Cleveland insisted that it was better to "admit i hundred thousand immigrants who, though unable to read and write, seek among us a home and opportunity to work, than to admit one of those unruly agitators. Many more immigrants came to America from 1881 to 1890 than came from 1871 to 1880. Can you explain why? Why did immigration decline after 1890? Compare this chart with the one on page 243. What new reasons for immigration appeared after the War Between the States? The slow growth of such states is evidence of two facts: (1) they did not attract large numbers of immigrants; (2) some of their people moved to industrial centers and to areas where fertile land was cheap and plentiful. Some of the agricultural states of the Middle West, especially those not far removed from frontier conditions. More people came to America between 1901 and 1910 than at any other time. Why? What caused the sharp drop in immigration after 1930? Immigration from southern Europe increases. In the years just before 1900 a noticeable change began to take place in the stream of immigrants to the United States. You will recall (page 419) that up to about 1890 most of our immigrants had been coming from northern Europe — Great Britain, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries. But now the stream shifted to southern and eastern Europe. It was made up of Boles, Italians, Slovaks, Rumanians, Czechs, Jews, and Greeks, whose backgrounds made it more difficult for them than for the northern Europeans to adjust to American life. Cheap, fertile land was no longer available after the passing of the frontier, and most of the new immigrants flocked to industrial job in large cities. They accepted work it low pay. Within the cities they collected into little national groups, clinging to the language and customs of the countries from which they had come. Native-born Americans were suspicious of the immigrant/ strange customs. Jacob Riis as early a 1890 described New York as composed an Irish West Side, a German East Side. "Little Italy," a Chinatown, and that were mostly Russian, Polish, or Greek. Under these conditions the process (fl Americanization became more difficult 1 Immigration reaches a peak. In the ten years of our century' immigration reached an all-time high with a total of ii million, and was responsible for more the half the total increase in population of those days the invitation inscribed on the Statue of Liberty could be taken literal. Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe fast. Japanese laborers who wanted to enter the United States. An immigration act in 1907 denied admission to all Japanese who did not possess proper passports. This law was interpreted to exclude Japanese who came from island possessions of the United States or from any country other than Japan. Although Japan observed the terms of the Gentlemen's Agreement, the Pacific Coast states continued to make restrictions on the Japanese. California denied Chinese and Japanese the right to buy farms or to lease them for more than three years (1913). Other states followed California's example. Japan found it difficult to understand the powers of the states with which the federal government could not interfere. The United States was accused of not keeping its part of the bargain. The Japanese were well aware that immigrants of European background were being given privileges that were denied to Asiatics. They considered these restrictions an insult to their national honor. Nonetheless, it is important to note that 1910 the number of foreign-born in proportion to the total population remained at about one seventh, The Japanese are restricted. You have in Chapter 22 that in the latter half Of the 1800's there was a loud outcry in of restriction of immigration. This tide gained strength after 1900. Early In the century people began to protest the number of Japanese along the Pacific coast. In 1906 the Japanese became lant at a decree of the San Francisco 1 board which barred children of these parentage from the public.Because of the strong anti-Japanese sentiment, however, Roosevelt arranged an understanding with Japan known As the "Gentlemen's Agreement" (1907). The sons and daughters of many lands have come to live in America. Once here, after a period of adjustment, they have added their skills and customs to those of other Americans. This is one reason why the United States has become a great power. Charles Steinmetz, son of German-Polish parents, came to America in 1889. He gained fame for research in electricity. Immigration is further restricted. In spite of restrictions against Asiatics and a few others, immigration continued at an average of nearly a million persons a year until World War I broke out. In 1917 an important change in our immigration policy took place. Over President Wilsons veto Congress passed an act which barred illiterates, vagrants, chronic alcoholics, persons believing in the violent overthrow of government, and other undesirable groups. After World War I ended, immigration increased to a total of 800,000 in 1921. Alarmed because of the widespread unemployment in the United States, Congress passed the Emergency Quota Act (1921). Under this act the number of immigrants from each European country was limited to three per cent of the number from that country residing in the United States in 1910. This temporary bill was replaced in 1924 by the Lodge-Johnson Act. Quotas are established. For each foreign country the act of 1924 provided a quota of immigrants (the limited number of immigrants which would be admitted from that country). The quota of European immigrants of any nationality to be admitted each year was to be two per cent of the number of persons from that nation living in the United States in 1890. Basing the quota on the figures for 1890 meant favoring northwestern Europe. Certain groups — students, for example, or wives and children of resident American citizens — were not subject to quota restrictions. Neither were citizens of Canada, Mexico, and the independent republics of Central and South America. Immigrants barred from citizenship, including Japanese, were totally excluded. Total immigration is limited. After 1929 the total number of quota immigrants was limited to about 150,000 a year. At that time each European country was given a quota based upon the percentage of the people of that national origin in the American population in 1920. During the depression of the 1930's immigration dropped far below quota limits, partly because many people who in normal times would have found employment were rejected on the grounds that they were 'likely to become public charges." From 1931 to 1945, with the single exception of 1939, less than one third of the quota was filled each year. After World War II many people urged that the immigration laws be modified They felt that this country should admit more people who had lost their homes and their means of making a living during the great struggle. Congress therefore passed legislation to admit a limited number of displaced persons. Moreover, new quotas were set up for several countries. Between 1945 and 1957 more than 2,500,000 immigrants came to the United States. How have United States immigration policies changed? Louis Brandeis, liberal member of the Supreme Court, was one of many Jews who have made lasting contributions to American life. in the steel mills. Foreign-born plowed the prairie lands, felled the forest giants, mixed and poured the concrete for the skyscrapers. They mined the iron ore and the silver, and drove the spikes in the heavy railroad ties. Immigrants become leaders in many fields. The foreign-born have also contributed leadership in politics, business, and the arts. Some of the famous immigrants who have left a lasting impression on American life are Carl Scliurz and John P. Altgeld (both born in Germany) in politics, Joseph Pulitzer (Hungary) and Jacob Riis (Denmark) in journalism, James J. Hill (Canada) in business, Samuel Gompers (England) in labor organization, Alexander Bell (Scotland) in invention. Augustus Saint-Gaudens, perhaps the outstanding American sculptor, was born in Ireland. The great majority of first-rank American musicians, including the directors of practically all our great symphony orchestras, have been immigrants. Immigrants have settled in many parts of the country. On nearly every part of the country the immigrants have left an indelible stamp. We are all immigrants or their descended. The word immigrant is sometimes in an uncomplimentary way by those ancestors arrived in this country. By years ago. Immigrants and Their Descendants Make Valuable Contributions controlled this vast region. Spanish contributed many words to our language. The Negro population changes. There is one group of "descendants of immigrants" that is different from the others in the fact that many of their ancestors came here from a foreign land unwillingly and were sold into slavery. In 1790 about 15 per cent of the population of the United States was classified as Negro. By 19.50 the percentage had decreased to 10, not because the Negroes have decreased in number but because of the more rapid increase of white population brought about by immigration. Formerly the Negro population was concentrated in the South, and most of the southern Negroes were employed on farms. During World War I, however, when jobs were plentiful, millions of Negroes went north and west, in search of better opportunities. By 1940 eleven of our large cities had more than 100,000 Negroes each. In 1950, about two thirds of the Negro population was living in cities, while about a fifth, almost entirely in the South, lived on farms. Negroes have continued to move to northern cities. Negroes make great progress. Following the War Between the States and for j many years thereafter, Negroes were handicapped by a lack of economic opportunities. They had to overcome great obstacles, but by the 1940's there was evidence that their economic position was improving. More and more Negroes were employed in professions and in business. Amateur and professional sports were increasingly open to them, and in 1947 Jackie Bohinson be- I came the first Negro major league baseball player. Joe Louis, the heavyweight lighter, and Jesse Owens, the runner, have been acclaimed as all-American athletes. In no field has the Negro made more progress than in education. In 1865 a large majority of Negroes were illiterate. By 1880, however, 30 per cent were classed as literate; by 1950, 89 per cent. Between 1900 and 1950 the number of students enrolled in Negro colleges advanced from 2600 to 75,000. Booker T. Washington, founder of the Tuskegee Institute in Ala- I bama, favored vocational education for I Negroes, and this was also stressed at I George Washington Carver, botanist and chemist, studied and taught better farming methods which have aided southern agriculture. For example, may he found customs and even a little of the language of the Germans who settled there before the Revolutionary War. The descendants of these settlers are still sometimes called "Pennsyl- vania Germans" or "Pennsylvania Dutch." A later German migration sent colonists to the Middle West in the mid 1800's; cities like Milwaukee and St. Louis have profited from the love of these Germans for freedom and their interest in democratic government. Certain communities in the northern Middle West have been enriched by the inflow of thrifty, hard-working Scandinavians, many of whom have become prosperous farmers and dairymen. Many cities, particularly industrial ones, have become the homes of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. French influence is very strong in Louisiana, where French, in addition to English, continues to be spoken. French law has had a distinct influence on the legislation of that state, and French customs and cooking attract many visitors to Louisiana every year. A wide use of the Spanish language persists in certain states of the Southwest, where historic mission buildings, Spanish architecture, and many customs survive to remind us that Spain. Senate stated that the United States no intention of departing from its tra- lal policy of staying aloof from en- ing alliances and from participation le affairs of other nations. An immigration law brings further trouble. The immigration law of 1924 had serious effects upon our relations with Japan. Since 1907 Japanese immigration to the United States had been restricted under the Gentlemens Agreement, but there had been no legal restrictions as such. Nevertheless, the Japanese population in the western states continued to grow. Several of them passed anti-Japanese laws, and demanded complete exclusion of the Japanese. In the immigration law of 1924, over the objections of President Coolidge and Secretary of State Hughes, Congress declared that "aliens not Japan is angered. Japan was bitter over this discrimination. Her officials called attention to "grave consequences" which would result because the law would endanger the friendly relations between the two countries. In spite of this "veiled threat," Congress passed the bill by large majorities. President Coolidge signed the bill after stating that if the provision calling for Japanese exclusion had stood by itself, he would have vetoed it. Japan placed on record a "solemn protest" against the clause which put her people in a position less favorable than that of any Europeans. The day that the law went into effect was observed in Japan as a day of national humiliation. It was not exclusion that they resented; exclusion might have been accomplished in various ways. But racial discrimination could never be forgiven by the proud Japanese. The militarists in Japan (those who favored a warlike policy) also held the United States responsible for checking Japan's imperialistic aims in China. Many Japanese felt that their country had sufficient excuse for closing the Open Door in the Far East permanently, by force if necessary. Why did Japanese imperialism threaten the Open Door policy? 1.How did Japan strengthen its position during World War I? What territories were acquired? Why did the United States object to Japan's Twenty-one Demands on China? 2.What agreements concerning the Far East were reached at the Washington Conference? 3.Why did the United States Immigration Act of 1924 anger Japan? Japan takes advantage of civil war in China. The march of events in China during the 1920's again played into the hands of the Japanese militarists. The Manchu dynasty in China had been overthrown in 1911 and a republic established. Beginning in 1923, a new nationalist government in China (called the Kuomintang) tried to build China into a modern state. The Kuomintang was first headed by Dr. Sun Yat-sen and later by Chiang Kai-shek. It was not long before the nationalist government clashed with Japanese interests in Manchuria. In 1928 a militarist government in Japan notified both the nationalist government in Nanking and a rival government in Peking that it would not allow the civil war to spread into Manchuria and Mongolia. In Japan the army and navy were responsible, not to the civil government, but directly to the Emperor. The militarists were therefore able to carry out a "positive policy" in China, leaving the civil government to protest its peaceful intentions and its desire to carry out its international obligations. It was the Japanese army and navy that now' took over in Manchuria and proceeded to carry out a policy which challenged the League of Nations, the nine-power treat)-, the four-power treaty, and the Pact of Paris. Japan takes advantage of world conditions. World conditions at the time also favored Japan's policy of aggression. Beginning at the end of 1929, depression gradually enveloped Europe and America. The whole economic structure seemed about to collapse, leaving the leading powers with too many problems at home to permit them to carry' out a vigorous policy in the Far East. At the same time, the League of Nations was too weak to deal effectively with a crisis in China. In the Post-War Problems Challenge the Truman Administration Harry S. Truman succeeds President Roosevelt. Born in the small Missouri town of Lamar, Harry S. Truman received his early education in Independence, Missouri. A veteran of World War I, he had experience both as a farmer and as a retail merchant before going into politics. He then served in the elective offices of county judge and presiding judge of Jackson County, Missouri. In 1934 and again in 1940 he was elected to the United States Senate. Truman won praise for his efficiency and fearlessness as chairman of a Senate committee inquiring into the spending of funds for national defense. When Franklin D. Roosevelt was nominated for a fourth term (1944), it seemed advisable to choose a Vice-Presidential candidate from the Middle West, and Truman received the Democratic nomination. Upon Roosevelt's death, Truman entered the Presidency in a spirit of courage and humility. His enthusiasm and sincerity helped to make up for lack of experience. Victory brings problems of demobilization and reconversion. The new President assumed the heavy responsibilities of his office with final victory still to be won and with plans for world peace still in their infancy. He went ahead with preparations for the San Francisco conference to organize the United Nations (page 715). Then, as the defeat of the Axis powers became assured, the Truman administration faced a new set of problems. Although it was evident that sizable military forces would be required to occupy Japan, Germany, and Italy after hostilities ended, there was strong public pressure to demobilize our military forces. As a result, discharges were speeded up even before the war with Japan ended. A G.I. Bill of Rights, enacted by Congress in 1944, provided many benefits for the discharged soldiers. These benefits included muster- ing-out pay, hospitalization, loans for the purchase of homes, farms, or businesses, and broad educational benefits. With the close of World War II, industry faced the problem of shifting from wartime to peacetime conditions. Under the guidance of the Office of Mobilization and Reconversion this was accomplished as effectively and painlessly as could be expected. Wages and prices, however, continued to rise. The Republicans challenge Democratic control. In the field of politics, it soon became evident that control by the Democrats was not to go unchallenged. As the mid-term elections of 1946 approached, divisions within the Democratic Part)' became more pronounced and President Truman's popularity declined. In the election the Republicans won control of both the House and the Senate. For the next hvo years the President was forced to deal with a hostile Congress. The new Congress makes important decisions in foreign affairs. The record of the newly elected Republican Congress was of special importance, since it became the chief issue in the election of 1948. Actually, this Congress accomplished much in foreign affairs. It approved the Truman Doctrine for aid to Greece and Turkey (page 719) and the European Recovery Program. It united all branches of the armed forces of the United States under a Secretary of Defense, and passed a compromise draft measure to build up the nation's military strength in peacetime. It passed legislation permitting a limited number of displaced persons to enter this country. In addition, the Senate ratified peace treaties with Italy, Hungary, Rumania, and Bulgaria. Important domestic legislation is passed. The Eightieth Congress also dealt with several important domestic problems. One piece of legislation was the bitterly debated Taft-Hartley Labor Relations Act (page 529). Another measure, providing for a tax reduction of 4.8 billion dollars, was passed, like the Taft-Hartley Act, over a strong presidential veto. Still another act of Congress provided a new order of presidential succession. A constitutional amendment limiting future President. A tax increase to help meet the increased expenses. It strengthened the draft law and extended it to 1955. On the home front, Congress raised Social Security old age benefits and pay for the armed forces. Over a strong presidential veto it passed (1952) the McCarran Immigration Act, which preserved the quota system but tightened the curbs on immigration in order to keep out subversives. What problems challenged the Truman administration in the years following World War II? 1.How did the Truman administration deal with the problems of (a) demobilization, (b) prices, wages, and controls, and (c) labor disputes? 2.What did the Eightieth Congress accomplish? Why was it criticized? What new parties took part in the 1948 election? Why was President Truman's victory a personal triumph? 3.Why did relations with Russia become strained in the post-war years? What developments took place in Korea? 4.How did the United States strengthen the free world's defenses against aggression? 5.What was the "Fair Deal" and why was it opposed? What did the Eighty-first and Eighty-second Congresses accomplish? President Eisenhower Assumes Leadership of the Nation Candidates are nominated for the election of 1952. The approaching national election of 1952 aroused great public interest. Senator Robert A. Taft, Republican, and Senator Estes Kefauver, Democrat, entered actively into the contest for delegates to the national conventions. Each of these men came to his party's convention with more delegates than any other candidates. In those states where presidential preferential primaries were held, however. Republican voters displayed marked preference for General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower. At the Republican convention early in July, there occurred a dramatic struggle over contested southern delegates, in which the Eisenhower forces outmaneuvered the Taft supporters. As a result Eisenhower was nominated on the first ballot. Senator Richard M. Nixon of California was chosen by acclamation as his running mate. Under the Twenty-second Amendment, President Truman was eligible to run for another term, but at the end of March he announced that he would not be a candidate. Democratic attention thereupon turned to Adlai E. Stevenson, the Governor of Illinois. At the Democratic convention, Governor Stevenson was nominated on the third ballot, with Senator John Sparkman of Alabama as candidate for Vice-President. The Republicans win the election. Convinced that they had a winning ticket, the Republicans carried on an energetic campaign. The Democrats responded with equal vigor. Roth Eisenhower and Stevenson made whirlwind trips, each delivering more than 200 speeches, many of them nationally televised. The Democrats pressed the issue of prosperity; the Republicans attacked the Administration's record, and, in particular, its Korean policy. President Truman, in defense of the Democratic record, participated actively in the latter part of the campaign. Near its end General Eisenhower came out with the telling statement, "I shall go to Korea and try to end the war." On election day more than Gila million voters, representing 63 per cent of the adult population, went to the polls. General Eisenhower received a plurality of more than 6/i million. The electoral vote was 442 for the Republican ticket to 89 for the Democrats. The Republicans even invaded the Solid South, winning the electoral votes of Florida, Texas, and Virginia. But the Republicans won control of the Eighty-third Congress by the narrowest of margins — 48 to 47 in the Senate with one independent, Wayne Morse of Oregon, and 221 to 213 in the House of Representatives. nomic and military aid to the Arab states. Congress, however, was economy- minded, and the President's peacetime budget of 71.8 billions ran into outspoken opposition. Cuts were made all along the line, and under pressure the President lowered his request for foreign aid from 4.4 billion dollars to 3.9 billion. The President met Congressional resistance by pointing out the fact that the mutual security program provided for' collective defense of the free world. The alternative, he said, would be a "fortress America" in which an increasing share of our resources and manpower would be used to guard our own frontiers. Congress reluctantly authorized 3.4 billion dollars for foreign aid. Congress enacts important measures. Legislation passed hv Congress in 1957 enabled the United States to join in the International Atomic Energy Agency, thus furthering the President's atoms-for-peace program. An immigration measure was approved, easing restrictions somewhat and allowing the admission of about 60,000 persons. Congress also passed and the President signed a bill intended to uphold the right of Negroes to vote. The civil rights law, passed after lengthy discussion, was modified considerably from the original version recommended by the President. It created a bi-partisan Civil Rights Commission, (2) provided for a new Assistant Attorney General for civil rights, (3) gave the government power to obtain court orders against interference with the right to vote, and (4) provided for a jury trial in certain contempt-of-court cases. Soviet Russia's Sputniks arouse Congress. In January, 1958, the Eighty-fifth Congress met for its second session in an atmosphere of urgency. In October, Russia had launched its first Sputnik, a man-made satellite, into space. A month later it sent into orbit Sputnik II, a missile weighing more than a thousand pounds, and reaching an altitude of more than a thousand miles. (The United States launched its first successful satellite late in January, 1958.) Russia appeared to he ahead of the United States in the development of the longest- range missiles, and new measures were "Atlas," an intercontinental missile of the U.S. Air Force, roars aloft on a test flight from Cape Canaveral, Florida. One of these new weapons of the space age, fitted with radio research equipment, was put into orbit 925 miles above the earth's surface. needed to step up our defenses. Congress responded by appropriating some 40 billion dollars for defense, actually more than the President had requested. Congress also authorized the President to reorganize the Defense Department, and created the National Aeronautics and Space Agency for the exploration of outer space. In addition, federal aid was extended to the states to encourage education in science, mathematics, and languages. Congress resists depression. Congress also took measures to check the downward trend of business activity which had begun in 1957. Except for the repeal of the 3 per cent tax on freight shipments, the President and Congressional leaders resisted a widespread demand for tax reduction. But public works construction and federally aided housing and highway programs were speeded up. Funds were also advanced to states to enable them to continue unemployment pay to jobless people who had used up their benefit rights. 