A decision for peace. Had Adams been a different kind of man, he could have become a hero overnight by taking his country into war. Many Federalists, in fact, were demanding such a course. Adams, though, had decided to throw away the possibility of a war president's popularity for himself by negotiating peace with France. If he had taken the easy road to war, many Republicans would have joined in support of it, because anti-French feeling ran high among them, too. Besides, war might have insured victory at the polls in 1800 for the Federalists. The negotiations with France proved to be successful, and Adams in pressing them vigorously sacrificed the people's acclaim and a second term as President. Years later he wrote: "I will defend my missions to France, as long as I have an eye to direct my hand, or a finger to hold my pen. ... I desire no other inscription over my gravestone than: 'Here lies John Adams, who took upon himself the responsibility of peace with France in the year 1800.' " Nonetheless, for this brave and selfless act Adams earned only the contempt of his fellow Federalists. Name-Calling at Home The Republicans, who should have been grateful for Adams' peaceful foreign policy, were not At the height of the war frenzy in 1798, the Federalist Congress had passed some laws which were aimed directly at the growing power of the Republicans. Adams was blamed for these laws because he had signed them. The laws had grown out of the bad feeling which existed between the two parties. The Federalists had become used to picturing Republicans as traitors taking their orders from the French government. Federalists feared democracy as a government by the passions of the multitude, or . . . according to the vices and ambition of their leaders." They shuddered in horror at the slogan of the French Revolution—"Liberty, Equality, Fraternity." As one of them said, "We do not wish to divide our property with idlers, nor daily tremble at the guillotine." Federalists believed that a Republican triumph in the next national election would be a victory of evil over good. How could they prevent it? they asked in terror. The first step was Naturalization Act of 1798, which would increase from five to fourteen years the time required for an immigrant to become an American citizen- Immigrants tended to settle in the middle, rather than in the Federalists' stronghold of New England, and were inclined to support the Republicans. Thus, by this measure, it would become harder for the Republicans to recruit new members and votes. The Alien and Sedition Acts. The second step followed logically from the first. A number of immigrants were leaders in the Republican party —men like Albert Gallatin of Pennsylvania, who had been born in Switzerland, and Jefferson's friend from France, E. I. Du Pont. In June, 1798, Congress passed an Alien Act which authorized the President to order out of the United States all foreigners regarded as dangerous to the public peace and safety or suspected of "treasonable or secret" intentions. With this powerful law, the Federalists could strike at key Republicans on a moment's notice. The most controversial of the laws, however, was the Sedition Act, passed in July. It made it a high misdemeanor, severely punishable by fine and imprisonment, for citizens or aliens to combine unlawfully to oppose the execution of laws or to aid or attempt "any insurrection, riot, unlawful assembly or combination." This act also provided for the punishment of persons convicted of publishing "any false, scandalous and malicious writing" discrediting the President, Congress, or the national government. The Sedition Act was carefully designed to stifle anyone who said the Republicans could direct the federal government better than the Federalists. Said one Republican, "What an excellent harmonizer of parties the sedition bill will be; they must all sing to the same tune." The irony was that this act, which protected President Adams and other federal officeholders from the criticism of the Republicans, was not used to protect Jefferson, the Republican Vice- President, from the Federalists! They slandered Jefferson, picturing him as seeking "the utter subversion of our Government, the introduction of French fraternity, and the Slavery of the American people." It is to Adams' great credit that, although he supported the passage of these laws, he never approved the use of them for party purposes. Jefferson remained patient. He was convinced that "the reign of witches" would soon come to an end. Jefferson and Madison to the fore. Meanwhile, as we have seen, war with France did not come, and the crisis passed. But the Alien and Sedition Laws remained. Jefferson believed that if the Federalists should succeed in smashing the Republicans, the United States government would become a tyranny in which the Senate and President would be elected for life. He and Madison came to the conclusion that the states should have the right to decide whether or not laws were constitutional. The two men believed that the Sedition Law was clearly unconstitutional, because it violated the First Amendment, which protects freedom of speech, press, assembly, and petition. They thought that to leave it unchallenged was, in effect, to say the Constitution was a dead letter. Virginia and Kentucky resolutions. Stirred to wrath, late in 1798 Madison and Jefferson wrote the Virginia and Kentucky resolutions, which were adopted by the legislatures of the two states. The resolutions pronounced the Alien and Sedition Laws unconstitutional. Liberty would end, they reminded their hearers, if no protection existed against "the passions and the powers of a majority of Congress." What could that protection be? The answer was plain: the right of the states to declare null and void any federal law which they thought violated the Constitution. The states, Madison and Jefferson maintained, "have the right and are in duty bound to interpose [step in] for arresting the progress of the evil." These resolutions were not so much designed to present a new idea of government as to prevent the abuse of power by the federal government. Yet, in later years, the champions of state rights accepted the principle set down by Jefferson and Madison. This was that the states had the right to judge when the Constitution was violated by an act of Congress. The election of 1800. The results of the Alien and Sedition Acts were to make Jefferson more popular than ever with workingmen, farmers, and frontiersmen, who by 1800 had a variety of reasons for being Republican anyway. The Federalists in 1800 nominated John Adams, and C. C. Pinckney of South Carolina. In Holyoke, Massachusetts, large-scale textile manufacturing had appeared by the middle of the century. Holyoke and factory towns like it grew by leaps and bounds. They drew their working force largely from the ranks of immigrants who began to arrive in America from Ireland after a disastrous potato-crop failure there in 1846. Since it was the usual practice to labor from sunup to sundown, the workers were forced to live close to the factories. As families crowded into dwellings that were conveniently located, their living conditions became more and more wretched. One visitor reported in 18.54: "I stopped at one of the shanties to sell some sugar. First, the man and woman came out of the door, then six children came out, then six boarders came out, then a cow came out, and then a sow and ten pigs came out, all from the same door." Often the manufacturers were absentee owners of their plants, who did not know the circumstances in which their labor force lived and worked. If they did know, they usually felt helpless to remedy the evils because they were engaged in fierce 'dog-eat-dog" competition with rival businessmen. Child labor. The factory was "home" to thousands of pasty-faced, undernourished, rickety children who, on the average, could expect to live to be no more than twenty years of age. Many of them worked from the time they were very young. Often a child was carried to his machine in the morning fast asleep in the arms of his father or his mother. Unwashed and inadequately fed and clothed, he knew no school and little childhood laughter. In the forties and fifties, the New England states began to require that children attend school at least three months out of every year. In 1842 Massachusetts limited to ten hours per day the working time for children under twelve. But since an inspector relied on the word of the parent as to the age of the child, even this mild law was usually broken in practice. The growth of manufacturing. Despite serious problems, the industrialization of New England increased each year. More and more capital was being invested in manufacturing; more and more people were dependent on it for their living. Factories were scarring the green countryside and making it black and smoky, but their spokesmen were becoming the voice of New England. Workers—including children—of Lowell, Massachusetts, at "bell time," as the end of the workday was called. So many people came to work in the mills that Lowell was one of the fifteen largest cities in the United States in 1 840. Drawing by Winslow Honttv tn Harper's Weekly, 1868. Courtesy Library of Congress You Know the Basic Facts? I What effects of the railroad did Thoreau observe? 2. Name the parts of the North, the states in each, and tell what tie bound them. 3 Account for the strongly national viewpoint of New Englanders. 4. Tell when and why New England farming declined. 5. Describe the working conditions which developed in New England factories. 6. What steps did Massachusetts take which limited child labor? When were they taken? The Middle Atlantic States Cultivate Crops and Trade The middle Atlantic states, like New England, presented distinguishing characteristics. Whereas New England was "off in a corner," the middle Atlantic states were in touch directly with all the other parts of the country. Consisting of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, this region bordered on the Atlantic Ocean, the St. Lawrence River, the Great Lakes, and the valley of the Ohio. Resources: Natural and Human In several ways, the middle Atlantic states were favored by nature. The land is more fertile than New England's. Mineral deposits are far more abundant. Mountains and rivers are more advantageously situated for carrying on internal commerce. Access to the West is easier. Population growth. Between 1830 and 1850 the population of these middle states grew from three and a half million to not quite six million. Almost a million of these people were of foreign birth. Among the native-born inhabitants, large numbers were of Scotch-Irish and German descent. From colonial days on, this section had been attracting settlers of non-English origin. The great cities. The growing population enlarged the cities of the section, which became the nerve centers of trade and transportation. Whereas New York had about 215,000 people in 1830, twenty years later it had nearly 620,000. During the same period the populations of Philadelphia and Baltimore more than doubled. Each of these metropolitan centers stood like a powerful giant alertly guarding a passageway into the West. Each had its own tributary back country which it considered to be its ready-made market. Each depended on Europe for its labor force and at least in part for the goods which flowed in a torrent through its trade channels and kept it prosperous. The Role of Immigration Immigration made these cities cosmopolitan rather than narrow in outlook, looking to the future rather than longing for the past. Herman Melville, the New Yorker who wrote the immortal Moby Dick, foresaw the importance of the newcomers from abroad. "We are not," he wrote, "a narrow tribe of men . . . whose blood has been debased in the attempt to ennoble it, by maintaining an exclusive succession among ourselves. No: our blood is as the flood of the Amazon, made up of a thousand noble currents all pouring into our one. We are not a nation so much as a world." Sources and quantity. The flood of immigrants, which was somewhat short of 600,000 in the 1830's, rose to approximately 2,500,000 in the 1850's. Principally the people came from western and northern Europe. Between 1850 and 1860 about one and a third million came from the British Isles and slightly less than a million from Germany. The middle Atlantic states led the rest of the Union in immigrants received, and their population swelled accordingly. To be sure, many thousands of young Irish men and women settled in New England. In fact, in 1854, of 32,000 children born in Massachusetts, only 16,470 were of American parentage. Theodore Parker, a Massachusetts clergyman, thought, "Boston is a young Dublin." But immigration did not enlarge the popula- lation in New England as much as that in the middle Atlantic states. These figures tell the story: from 1820 to I860, of the 5,400,000 immigrants who came to this land, more than two-thirds entered by way of the port of New York. New Orleans, which ranked second as a port of entry, was far down, with 555,000. Boston received only 380,000. Opposition to the foreign born. The immigration that struck the Atlantic coast like a tidal wave created irritations in addition to benefits. The immigrants were often resented as foreigners. They were condemned, too, because they sometimes needed financial assistance after they landed. In the seven years from 1847 to 1854 alone, 617,000 immigrants were aided in New York City by charity amounting to $2,250,000. Many Americans insisted that European countries were sending us their paupers and criminals. Philip Hone, onetime mayor of New York, wrote in his diary: "All Europe is coming across the ocean; all that part at least who cannot make a living at home; and what shall we do with them? strength in a combined effort with earlier They increase our taxes, eat our bread, and encumber our streets, and not one in twenty is competent to keep himself." Contributions of the newcomers. This anti- immigrant feeling was not universal. Many citizens could see that immigrants, especially those with families, became valuable consumers as soon as they landed. The new arrivals thereby greatly expanded the American home market for goods of all kinds. It was recognized, too, that the immigrants brought capital with them. It was usually a small sum per person, but even if the average was only $40, the tide of the 1850's meant that $100,000,000 in new capital helped to enrich America. Also, were able to sell surplus wheat to other sections. Until 1850 more sheep were raised here than in any other section of the nation. Both jsjew York and Pennsylvania were producing great quantities of cattle until the eve of the Civil War. The dairy products—milk, butter, cheese—produced in New York in 1850 were double the amount of those of Ohio, which ranked as second-largest producer in the Union. Mining and heavy industry. Yet even by 1850 it was clear that mining and heavy industry would soon transform the section. In New York and New Jersey, mining was insignificant; but Pennsylvania led all the states of the country in coal extraction. Pennsylvania in 1850 was producing half of the nation's pig iron. Sixty percent of the wrought iron of the country was manufactured in these three states. While New England introduced modern factory organization in the textile industry, the middle Atlantic states created the modern diversified corporation for producing iron. The Cam- bria Iron Works of Johnstown, Pennsylvania, by 1850 covered about 25,000 acres and had its own supplies of limestone, coal, clay, and ore. Its furnaces could produce 800 tons of pig iron per week. We were not yet in the steel age, but the availability of coal and its nearness to iron ore made Pennsylvania ideally suited to lead the way to the new era. International commerce. The middle Atlantic states dominated the country's foreign commerce by 1850. At the beginning of the 1840's, New York's total merchant-marine tonnage and foreign-ship arrivals surpassed Boston's for the first time and were never thereafter challenged. This woodcut, "The Lure of American Wages," was published in 1855. The building called Castle Garden, shown at the upper left, was the reception center at New York City for immigrants of the time. Courtesy Museum of the City of New York The Homestead Act, passed in 1862, also played an important part in the growth of prosperity. It encouraged western settlement, which, in turn, created a demand for farm—to say nothing of railroad—equipment. The Effect on People The development of large-scale industry greatly changed the lives of most Americans. Riches came to some, disaster to others. Cities grew both in size and in number, bringing new advantages and new problems. New millionaires. Fortunes were made not only by those who had invested in the new industrial enterprises but also by the hundreds of men who shared in government contracts for military supplies. A newspaper reported during the war that there were already in New York alone "several hundred men worth $1,000,000 and some worth $20,000,000 while twenty years back there had not been five men in the whole United States worth as much as $5,000,000 and not twenty worth over $1,000,000." The plight of the little businessman. The small businessman was finding it difficult to compete with his larger rival. He lacked the funds for expanding his factory or for purchasing new machinery to make his plant more efficient. He usually did not have the political influence used by his bigger competitors to secure profitable government contracts. Besides, they were able to undersell him and drive him out of business. He seemed to be waging a constantly losing battle against them. Up the ladder of success. But there was opportunity in this generation of industrial expansion for some of the most humble to climb to great riches. Cornelius Vanderbilt was the son of a struggling ferryboat worker. Andrew Carnegie, an immigrant, began his career as a bobbin boy in a cotton factory, earning $1.20 per week. Jay Gould started his business life as a blacksmith's helper. Furthermore, the standard of living was improving for everybody, and the diligent man could hope for a better tomorrow. Said the son of an Irish immigrant, who rose to prominence as a lawyer in New York: "In worn-out, king- ridden Europe men must stay where they are born. But in America a man is accounted a failure, and certainly ought to be, who has risen above his father's station in life." New hands from Europe. These were encouraging sentiments for the people on the other of the Atlantic to hear. By 1880 about seven million people out of 0Ur total population of 50,000,000 were foreign born. Most of these newcomers were from Eng. land, Ireland, and Germany, although southern Europe was beginning to be represented, too. Urbanization. The crowding together of people in the vicinity of factories in the northern cities inevitably brought slums and black smoke and other miseries to many. On the other hand, it was accompanied also by concentrated wealth, which made possible the establishment of better schools and newspapers and the building of museums, libraries, theaters, opera houses, and art galleries. In short, the increasing density of population permitted the cultivation of a more exciting life of the mind than ever before in cities like Philadelphia, Boston, Baltimore, Chicago, and particularly New York. These urban centers now set the pace for the rest of the country. By the end of the century, we had become "a nation of cities." Whereas in 1850 only 3,500,000 out of a total population of 23,000,000 lived in communities with populations averaging over 2500, by 1900 a total of 30,000,000 out of 76,000,000 did. Inventors were soon filling special urban needs. For communicating faster and oftener, there was Alexander Graham Bell's telephone, which first appeared in 1876. To provide better illumination, there was Thomas A. Edison's incandescent electric light, which was first successfully demonstrated in 1879. Although the effects of these inventions were felt throughout the world in a few years, the immediate result was a quickening of American city life. It became gayer and more alluring—and more exhausting. In the South, industry and consequently urbanization developed more slowly. Nevertheless, in 1880 Alabama produced 347,000 tons of iron, and there were 500,000 cotton spindles in Georgia. Ten Largest Cities in the United States Population figures are approximate and include suburbs. New addition to list. and North and South Carolina. The phrase "the new South" was coined to describe the transformation of the section from its former exclusive reliance on the raising of staple crops. Thus, conditions in post-Civil War America were ripe for the development of large-scale industry. Now that the Union had been saved, manufacturers could count on a national market. New demands for comforts, coming from the cities, especially, created new products. There was enough capital for investment, and enough labor to supply the factories. The government had shown an intention to provide helpful legislation. What the United States now required was an adequate means of distributing the country's finished goods. The obvious answer was more railroads. The Supreme Court upheld the company's view, and the individual members of the union had to pay the heavy damages provided for in the law. Radical Movements: the I.W.W. A small fraction of the labor force tried to bring about revolutionary changes in American life. The most important of these extreme radical* were the Industrial Workers of the World, usually known as the "I.W.W." or "wobblies."10 This organization, which was formed in 1905, rejected alike craft unionism and the "go-slow" policies of the AF of L. The I.W.W. opposed political activity but advocated industrial strife leading to the destruction of the American system of enterprise. Its method was to rely on the boycott; on sabotage, that is, the malicious destruction of the employer's property; and on strikes. Although the I.W.W.'s membership on the eve of the First World War was probably less than 100,000, its appeal was strong among lumbering men, migratory farm laborers, western miners, and others whose conditions of work were bound A Rising Tide of Foreigners Businessmen often blamed the immigrants who flocked here after the Civil War for the appearance in the United States of anarchistic and socialistic ideas. Labor leaders, on the other hand, complained that immigrants not only worked more cheaply than Americans but served gladly as strikebreakers. These were harsh, unfair judgments of people whose strength and numbers were indispensable in the growth of American industry. So-called "New Immigration" After 1880, as industrialization increased in northern Europe, immigration from that region to this country declined markedly. A wave of newcomers now began to enter the United States from southern and eastern Europe—Italians, Slovaks, Hungarians, Romanians, Serbs, Russians, 10 The origin of this nickname is not clear. Some have said that it comes from Chinese laborers' attempts to pronounce "I.W.W." as "I wobbly, wobbly." Critics of the movement amused themselves by saying the letters stood for "I won't work." Alarms Labor Leaders Greeks, Poles. This so-called "new immigration" was usually contrasted with the so-called "old immigration"—from England, Ireland, Scotland, Germany, and Scandinavia. Opponents of unrestricted immigration considered the eastern Europeans to be clannish, too inclined to remain in the large cities, and generally undesirable. But if they had read pre-Civil War newspapers and magazines, they would have seen that the same things were being said about the so-called "old immigration" when it was first arriving! Numbers. Actually there was only one thing new about the immigration—aside, of course, from its source: it was more numerous than ever in the past. Between 1880 and 1900 six million came to America, and by 1914 about twelve million more. In one peak year alone—1882—about 800,000 immigrants arrived. In the earlier immigration of the 1840's and 1850's, when thousands left their homes in Europe (particularly Ireland and Germany, because of crop failures, famine, and political persecution), a peak of 400,000 had been reached only once. Many Americans were frankly alarmed at the size of this mass of humanity. Could so many foreigners become Americanized? Or were they going to undermine the nation? They were often misunderstood. Understanding the ways of the newcomers. One must remember, first of all, that the immigrants contributed to their adopted country at least as much as they received. They were consumers as soon as they stepped ashore, and their brawn and talents notably enriched American life. Second, if they read newspapers written in a foreign language it was a sign of their becoming Americanized, not of their clannishness. In the old country they probably had not read a newspaper at all! Third, if they flocked to the cities rather than to farms, Americans in these years were doing the same; opportunity was greater there. Fourth, if they lived more cheaply than the people who had been born here, it usually was because they were under pressure to scrimp and save in order to bring their families over as soon as possible. Fifth, in unskilled jobs, it is true, they may have been willing to work more cheaply than Americans. Yet they quickly discovered that wages have to be determined by the cost of living —which was no different for the immigrant than for the native. Sixth, although various brands of socialism and anarchism had been introduced by immigrants from Germany, Italy, and Russia, the large majority of the newly arrived were conservatives. Restriction. Resentment against the newcomers from eastern Europe was sometimes intense. But attempts to restrict immigration were directed mainly against Asians. A Chinese Exclusion Act was passed in 1882 as the result of demands from the Pacific-coast states. A gentleman's agreement with Japan was concluded in 1907, which kept out Japanese laborers without formal Congressional action. Yet, in general, the American policy until the First World War was "Come, all who will." The Door to Opportunity Despite labor's difficulties and sorrows between 1865 and 1914, its leaders never lost hope that tomorrow would be better. Their optimism was well founded: wages were advancing, and the workday was being shortened. This land offered a rising standard of living even to those who, in Jefferson's phrase, "worked at a bench." Industrialization, for all the evils it brought, opened wide and promising horizons for factory workers—as well as for factory owners. Europeans and Americans alike knew that the words of Emma Lazarus inscribed on the Statue of Liberty, dedicated in 1886, were not empty ones: . . . Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden door! Do You Know the Basic Facts? 1. Why did businessmen and labor leaders often criticize immigrants after the Civil War? 2. How did immigration change after 1880? 3. How were the immigrants misunderstood? 4. What restrictions were made? They were chiefly against whom? 1.Look at the population table on page 703 in die Appendix. In what decade of the nineteenth century did the urban population in the United States increase approximately 100 percent? What were the percents of increase by decades in the fifty years that followed? Note the rate of population increase of the ten largest cities in these decades (see "Cities" in the Index to locate the charts giving this information). 2.In what part of the nineteenth century did large-scale industry begin to develop? 3.Turn to the table in the Appendix showing immigration to the United States by decades, 1821-1950. In what decades in the nineteenth century did the number of immigrants show the greatest increases? The first decrease in immigration came at the end of which decade? 4.When did labor begin to organize on a nationwide scale? In what decades was labor trouble especially serious? 5.To what extent did increasing urbanization, the growth of large-scale industry, the mounting rate of immigration, and the nationwide organization of labor (together with accompanying labor trouble) parallel each other in time? 6.What association or relationship can you see between the first two? Between the first, second, and third? Can you see a cause-and- effect relationship between any of the four? Why must one be careful not to assume that because events or movements take place about the same time, they must be related to each other or one must be the cause of the other? red-hot, threatening to blow up; and then they are surprised that we don't accept it with the same attitude of pretty, decorous enthusiasm with which they received it, way back in the 'eighties." Young people took pride in being rebellious. Often callously disregarding traditional moral behavior, they enjoyed the nickname "flaming youth." Emphasis on recreation. Third, leisure—the sweetest fruit of the Industrial Revolution—was changing our national outlook. Hard work had once been the greatest of American virtues; in the twenties leisure was also becoming a goal of life for millions. Vacations were playing an important part in people's plans for their private lives. The working day was growing significantly shorter, with the eight-hour day becoming the aim of the labor movement. "Take it easy," were the words friends now commonly used when they said good-by to each other. In this kind of atmosphere, recreation loomed larger and larger. It was no longer incidental to a hard day in office or factory; for many, it had become, in thought if not yet in duration, the most important part of the day. A stepped-up pace. Fourth, the development of tabloid newspapers1 and of the radio made it possible to arouse keen national excitement over a particular aspect of life and then abruptly switch it to something else. This no doubt helped to create the impression that the pace of American fife was speeding up and that every year it was faster than the previous year. Jazz music, which captured the fancy of Americans in the 1920's, was an excellent symbol of this new spirit. Jazz was usually played in a more excited tempo than traditional melodies, and its beat was decidedly unconventional. A mask for problems. Fifth, there seemed to be a sense that darker times might lie ahead. The world war had provided a glimpse into what the 1 The tabloids are generally smaller in size and shape than ordinary newspapers. They specialize in carrying photographs— often of a sensational kind. Farmers lost much of their isolation from national life after the development ot radio. This farmer of 1920 is listening to a crystal set—an early kind of radio. There was a feeling of having to enjoy oneself before it was too late. Americans seemed also to be afraid to carry the world responsibility that had now fallen to them. Many seemed to be behaving like Peter Pan, "the boy who would not grow up." Beneath the revelry and joyfulness there lurked problems that Americans were trying to avoid. Closing the Gates to Immigrants A notable development of the twenties was the movement to restrict immigration—a reversal of our traditional policy. Actually, the interest in closing the door had long been active. For a number of reasons, restriction now became popular among Americans. Some explanations. First of all, large-scale unemployment occurred after the war. Immigrants who had come from eastern Europe in a steady torrent before 1914 appeared to be displacing native Americans or earlier arrivals from their jobs. Second, when the reaction against the war set in, it was easy for us to blame foreigners for our miscarried crusade to "make the world safe for democracy"—and to turn against them. Third, it was easy to look upon foreigners as dangerous radicals in the period after 1918, when eastern Europe was threatened by the tide of Russian bolshevism—later communism. These changes in Europe brought suspicion of spies, which in turn produced fears—as one man put it of "bewhiskered, ranting, howling, mentally- warped, law-defying aliens." Fourth, because many of the immigrants were Jewish or Catholic, it was convenient to turn hidden anti-Semitism and anti-Catholicism into anti-foreignism, which was nor so embarrassing to express. Fifth, because the immigrants usually became urban dwellers and strengthened the cities culturally and economically, rural communities were often resentful. Their people sometimes took the lead in the growing movement to bring to an end unrestricted immigration. Furthermore, the hatreds caused by the military hostilities themselves, the declining birth rate among the older American families, and the widespread belief that "the whole world was preparing co move to the United States" combined to arouse strong determination to keep new immigrants out. A literacy test. A notable, indirect attempt to strike at the immigrant was made by a proposal that a literacy test—calling for an ability to read and write a language—be demanded of all those seeking to enter our country. Such a bill had been vetoed by Taft in 1913 and by Wilson in 1915 and again in 1917. But Congress passed the bill over Wilson's second veto. Quota acts. It was plain that the enactment of additional anti-immigrant legislation was only a matter of time. In 1921 Congress passed the Emergency Quota Act, which restricted the admission of foreigners to 3 percent of the number of each nationality living here in 1910. Many Americans considered this law to be unsatisfactory because the year chosen for determining the size of the quotas was one that came after the arrival of millions of eastern Europeans. Continuing to believe that the immigrants from northern and western Europe were more desirable, they brought about a change through a new law. By the Immigration Quota Act of 1924, 1890 became the base year. The ratio was reduced from 3 percent to 2 percent. As soon as possible, the people living here in 1920, descended from immigrants from the various countries, were to be counted. The 2-percent quotas were then to be based on those figures. In 1927 all immigration was reduced to 150,000 annually. To be sure, there were some, like ex-President Charles W. Eliot of Harvard, who defended unrestricted immigration wholeheartedly and asked bravely: "Is this generation to be frightened out of this noble policy by any industrial, racial, political, or religious bogies?" But for the time being, at least, the ride was running hard against his way of thinking. The Fear of Radicals By the end of 1919, events occurring abroad were convincing many Americans that the world as they knew it was fast disappearing and that they were in deadly danger. German Communists for a few days were able to hold the city of Berlin; Communists ruled Hungary for five months; there was serious unrest in Italy; and in India, nationalists were making new' problems for the British. Here at home it did not relax American nerves to learn that a well-known anti-Communist had received in the mail a bornb which exploded. 