Many of them also earned a livelihood from the pine forests, which supplied them with lumber and naval stores—tar, pitch, rosin, turpentine-products all needed by England's Royal Navy and the growing fleet of English merchant ships. The southern section, South Carolina, proved more attractive to settlers from overseas. Through the seaport of Charles Town (later shortened to Charleston), settlers of many different faiths from many different nations passed on their way to new homes in the New World. There were Anglicans and other religious groups from England; Scots in considerable numbers; French Huguenots, who were Protestants fleeing persecution in France; Germans; emigrants from the West Indies; and, as the years passed, growing numbers of Negro slaves. Many of the settlers managed to build large and prosperous rice plantations on the rich coastal lowlands. Others gained a livelihood from the production of naval stores and, on the frontier itself, from the fur trade. During the early years the colonists waged a continuing struggle for a larger voice in the government. Finally, in 1729, the proprietors sold their rights to the king, and North and South Carolina became royal colonies with representative assemblies. Georgia is founded. In 1732, three years after North and South Carolina became royal colonies, the king granted The British government was pleased to see a colony started so close to Spanish Florida, for it would serve as a "buffer state" protecting the settled areas farther north in the event of Spanish attack. But the compelling motive for starting the colony of Georgia had nothing to do with politics or business. Georgia, was born out of the love of man for his I fellow men. It was started by a group of prominent Englishmen to provide a place in which unfortunate English I debtors could make a new start in life. James Oglethorpe, the leader of the group of founders, arrived in Georgia in 1733 with the first group of debtors. They settled at Savannah, each man receiving 50 acres of land free and clear. Slavery and the sale of rum were not to I be allowed in the colony. Oglethorpe and the other trustees also tried to recruit other settlers, offering liberal grants of land to all who immigrated to the colony. During the next few years a small number of immigrants arrived, among them several groups of New Englanders, a number of Germans, and some Scots. In 1752 the trustees, as required by their charter, turned Georgia over to the king as a royal colony. The effort to settle Georgia was not a fruitless one. Because of Oglethorpe and his fellow trustees several thousand Englishmen were saved from debtor's prison and given a fresh start in life. And later, of course, Georgia became an active and prosperous state. The Southern Colonies in the 1750s. By the 1750fe the Southern Colonies— Maryland, Virginia, North and South Carolina, and Georgia—had all developed their own special ways of living. In 1707 the separate countries of England and Scotland were united into a single country which is properly called Great Britain. In common usage throughout the colonial period, however, the words "England" and "English" are often used to mean "Great Britain" and "British." By 1743, Savannah, Georgia, was well started. From his tent (center), Oglethorpe directed the construction of streets and buildings. Stairs and a crane were ready for arriving passengers and cargo. At the left were a guardhouse and the start of a palisade. land, Virginia, and North Carolina covered the rich tidewater lands near the ocean, and extended farther inland on the Atlantic coastal plains. Farther south the luxurious homes of wealthy rice planters were scattered over the coastal lowlands. There were no large towns in the South at this time except Charleston with a population of 10,000 and Baltimore with 5000. A distinguishing characteristic of the Southern Colonies was slavery. The plantations, whether growing tobacco or rice, required large numbers of workmen. With plenty of land available to them on the frontier, free men would not work for wages on the plantations. As a result, the planters began to rely more and more upon slaves. If slaves could have been used profitably on the farms of the Middle Colonies or on the much smaller farms of New England, no doubt slavery would have become established there as well as in the South. In colonial times few people anywhere objected to slavery as such. Slavery was either profitable or unprofitable. In the Southern Colonies it was profitable, and slaves were used in ever-increasing numbers. Although the planters set the pattern of southern life, most southern people lived in the back country—the inland areas that lay "back" from the seacoast. These people— pioneers and small farmers—lived much like pioneers in New England and the Middle Colonies. 1.What were the motives for the settlement of (a) Maryland, (b) the Carolinas, and (c) Georgia? 2.Why can it be said that the life of southern planters was unique? 3.Show how the New England Colonies, the Middle Colonies, and the Southern Colonies differed from one another geographically, economically, and socially. identify: tidewater river, cash crop, French Huguenots; Lord Baltimore, Locke, Oglethorpe. Along the water front. Reaching the water, we continue along Dock Street, which parallels the Delaware River. The noise of hammers and saws attracts our attention, and we see a shipyard with the skeleton of a small vessel rising from the ways. Next to it, from a tiny sloop, a group of fishermen are heaving their clay's catch upon the planks of the wharf. Beyond, its masts reaching toward the sky, lies the English ship we have come to see. Approaching its mooring place, we find ourselves in the midst of hustle and confusion. Men with boxes and bales on their shoulders are pushing their way toward the nearby warehouse. At one side a knot of colonists surrounds a sailor, plying him with questions, eager for the latest news from the Old World. And on the deck, looking bewildered and unhappy, are the indentured servants, or redemptioners. The wealthy colonists, easily distinguished by their dress and self-assurance, pass among the servants, their eyes open for a good bargain. Now and then a sale is made, and we watch the owner and his new servant leave the ship, the one in front leading the way, the other following with his belongings in a sack over his shoulder. English ways of life. As we retrace our steps into the town, it would be easy to think that we are walking the streets of an English city. Passing the open door of a merchants "counting house," we see clerks on tall stools painstakingly recording business transactions in their ledgers. Across the street is a tavern. In front of the tavern are a row of hitching posts and a hollow log to serve as a watering trough for horses. We have not seen the town hall nor the jail with its pillory and stocks nor the several churches that we know are an important part of the city. But we have seen enough to learn that life in the colonial towns is in many ways similar to life in English towns. The people dress and talk like Englishmen. The houses and public buildings look like English houses and public buildings. There are the same social divisions that we could see in any English town. The American "melting pot." But in some ways the colonial towns are different from the towns of England. Even though some people may want to do so, they cannot carry all the Old World ways to the New World. For one thing, people from many different nations are learning to live together in colonial America. The colonial towns, as well as the frontier and the farming areas, are "melting pots." The section of Philadelphia known as Germantown is filled with settlers from far-off Germany. On the streets we pass men and women from Ireland and Scotland, many of them on their way to frontier lands of the west. And if we listen carefully, we hear the accents of people from France, Switzerland, Sweden, and many other European countries. The "melting pot" of colonial America is also producing a new American vocabulary. English travelers who visit the colonies hear words they never hear in England. The colonists are speaking what Samuel Johnson, the famous English dictionary maker, in 1756 called the "American dialect." The new American vocabulary has borrowed many words from other languages. From the Indians it has borrowed skunk, hickory, squash, raccoon, canoe, toboggan, moccasin, tomahawk and wigwam. From the Dutch it has borrowed cruller, stoop, waffle, scow, boss, and cookie. From the French it has borrowed bureau, gopher, chowder, bogus, portage, and prairie. And the colonists have invented many new words, among them bullfrog, eggplant snowplow, cold snap, trail, popcorn, shingle, and backlog. Building the towns. The colonists are also trying to solve in their own way problems faced by all townspeople. They are trying to solve problems of water supply, sewage, sanitation, health, and police and fire protection. They are learning to work together, to cooperate, in an effort to solve these problems. In Philadelphia, Benjamin Franklin is one of the leaders, keeping up a steady stream of articles about these problems in his newspaper, the Pennsylvania Gazette. Largely because of his efforts, Philadelphia is one of the first cities in the world to have paved streets, street lights, police and fire departments, and a public library. To be sure, Europeans are also working for these same improvements in their cities. But the colonists take special pride in the cities that they have built with their own hands. Opportunity for all. The greatest difference between English and American towns can be summed up in the word "opportunity." There is plenty of work for everyone in Philadelphia, New York, Boston, or in any of the other colonial towns. No one need remain a servant for very long. And if the town itself does not seem to offer enough opportunity, there is always the chance to move west. Many do move west. They stay in the town only long enough to save a little money; then they are off over the roads that lead to a new way of life. SECTION SURVEY 1.What were the chief occupations of the townspeople in the colonies? 2.Describe five ways in which wealthy townspeople imitated the life of the well - to-do in England. 3.Show how an "American dialect" grew out of the American melting pot. 4.Explain the fact that the greatest difference between English and American towns was "opportunity". Cotton Mather Citizens of Boston shuddered when they recalled the terrible summer and fall of 1721. An epidemic of smallpox had struck the city. By the time it had run its course, more than half of the 10,000 inhabitants had been stricken, more than 800 had died, and hundreds of others had been disfigured. Physicians knew of no way to fight this dread disease. They could only quarantine the patient—and hope for the best. The Reverend Cotton Mather, one of the most learned men in the colonies, was not content merely to hope. He had heard about a method of fighting smallpox from an African slave. Later, in his wide reading, he had come across a report that Turkish doctors had controlled the disease by a method known as inoculation. This consisted of taking matter from the blisters of a sufferer and inserting it into the skin of a healthy person. The healthy person contracted the disease, of course, but as a mild case, and after he recovered, he was forever immune. Such, at least, was the theory. But it had never been tried in America. Only one Boston physician, Dr. Zabdiel Boylston, was willing to try the new method— and did. The other physicians, and many townspeople, called Mather and Boylston "murderers." But when the epidemic was over, the record showed that inoculation, dangerous though it was, had been effective. For the next 80 years, until Dr. Edward Jenner of England discovered how to prevent smallpox by vaccination, inoculation was widely used throughout the colonies and Western Europe. Weakness of organized labor. Although the American labor movement was beginning to take root, it was not yet strong enough to win many of the things that the wage earners demanded. There were several reasons for the weakness of the American labor movement in these early years of its history. In the first place, many wage earners had not yet become aware that they were a new and growing group in the economic life of the nation and that they had interests in common. This feeling was partly the result of tradition. From the earliest days of settlement, most Americans had been farmers, and the early factories and mills drew most of their labor supply from the farms. The Americans' strong spirit of independence, of individualism, made it difficult for labor organizations to draw workers into unions. Wage earners continued to think of themselves as individuals who could look after their own interests. They were reluctant to follow the rules laid down by a union. In the second place, cheap land was always available. This cheap land did not actually attract many dissatisfied workers, who preferred town to country life, but it did draw westward thousands of farmers who might otherwise have turned to the cities for employment. In the third place, until 1842, labor unions were nowhere recognized by law. In that year Chief Justice Lemuel Shaw of the Supreme Court of Massachusetts handed down a decision recognizing the legal right of labor unions to exist in Massachusetts. This decision set a precedent, but wage earners had to struggle in one state after another for the right to organize, and the struggle was a long one. In the fourth place, the depression of 1837 threw thousands of men out of work. These unemployed workers could not afford to pay union dues and had to grasp at any job in desperation, regardless of what it paid. This situation helped to slow down the advance of the labor movement. Finally, immigrants began to come to the United States in large numbers during the 1830s as you will see. Many of these immigrants were willing to work for low wages. Immigration, therefore, forced down the wages of many native- born American workers and almost brought the labor movement to a halt. This remarkable picture of 1847 shows crowds of immigrants debarking at New York City. They were fleeing famine in Ireland, and seeking a new life in America. At the left is a Chinese junk, thought to have been the first Chinese vessel to visit the eastern United States. 1.Who supplied the labor in the factories during the early 1800's? 2.(a)Compare the working conditions in Great Britain with those in the United States at that time, (b) Why did conditions differ in the two countries? 3.(a)What were the reasons for the formation of early labor unions? (b) List the demands of these workers' organizations. 4.Give five reasons why these early attempts at unionization were only partially successful. Rising immigration adds to the country's population. Between 1790 and 1830 the population of the United States more than tripled, increasing, as you have seen, from about 4,000,000 to nearly 13,000,000. Nearly all of this growth was the result of births in the United States itself. During these years fewer than 400,000 immigrants entered the country. Immigration grows. In the 1830s however, the small stream of immigration swelled to a great flood. From 1830 to 1840, more than half a million immigrants poured into the United States (see chart, page 824). Forty-four per cent came from Ireland, 30 per cent from Germany, 15 per cent from Great Britain, and the remainder from various other countries of Europe. Between 1840and 1850, a million and a half immigrants arrived in the United States, 49 per cent of them from Ireland. Irish immigrants. The Irish came in search of relief from terrible conditions in their homeland. In Ireland during these years, many of the people worked as tenants on the estates of landlords who lived in England. The landlords did little or nothing to improve the conditions of their tenants, who barely managed to make a living. And then, in 1846, a terrible famine struck Ireland. Thousands died during the "Potato Famine," as it was called. Other thousands fled to America. The people who fled Ireland were attracted to the United States, rather than elsewhere, for several reasons. They avoided Canada because they shared the dislike of the British Empire that was common at that time among native- born Americans. They liked what they heard about American democracy. They were thrilled at the reports of plenty in the United States. Moreover, American contractors encouraged them to come and work on the roads, canals, and railroads, and manufacturers attracted them into the new mills and factories. Hardships of immigration. The immigrants endured hardships almost beyond belief in their efforts to reach the United States. The following news item that appeared in the Edinburgh Reviewoi July 1854 gives a glimpse of the sufferings of the people who crossed the Atlantic as immigrants in those days: "Liverpool was crowded with emigrants, and ships could not be found to do the work. The poor creatures were packed in dense masses in ill-ventilated and unsea worthy vessels, under charge of improper masters, and the natural result followed. Pestilence [disease] chased the fugitive to complete the work of famine. Fifteen thousand out of nine, ty thousand emigrants ... in British bottoms [ships] in 1847 died on the passage or soon after arrival. The American vessels, owing to a stringent passenger law, were better managed; but the hospitals of New York and Boston were nevertheless crowded with patients from Irish estates. .." Poor, unable to move to the western lands, many of the Irish immigrants who came in this period settled in the slums of the growing cities. Large groups of Irish people found homes in cities like New York, Boston, Albany, Baltimore, St. Louis, Cincinnati, and New Orleans. Many of the men went to work as unskilled laborers on the roads, canals, and railroads. Many of the women took jobs in the factories, displacing the native-born American wage earners. German immigrants. Although people from many countries came to America during these years, the Germans formed the second largest group, outnumbered only by the Irish. Between 1845 and 1860 more than 1300,000 Germans landed in the United States. Many Germans came because, after 1815, Europe (and Germany in particular) was controlled by rulers who were opposed to democracy. Thousands of Germans who took part in revolutions that broke out in 1830 and 1848 fled when the revolutions failed. Other Germans came to earn a better living. Naturally, in seeking freedom from political persecution and economic hardship, they turned to the United States, the land of free men and cheap farms. Most of the German immigrants settled on land in the Middle Western states— Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Wisconsin, Iowa, and Missouri. Able, thrifty farmers, they built prosperous farms on the fertile soil. Many also moved to the cities, and by the 1860fe formed a substantial proportion of such communities as Buffalo, Detroit, Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago, and St. Louis. Immigrants resented. Most of the immigrants quickly became American cit- zens. Because many had come to the United States in search of political freedom, they helped to strengthen political democracy. Because they were eager to work, they contributed to the wealth of the growing nation. But in spite of these contributions, the immigrants were resented by many native-born Americans, who were afraid that large numbers of "foreigners" would change the older ways of living in America. Some Germans, for instance, aroused suspicion. They organized their own clubs, gathered in social halls to talk and sing, established their own churches and schools, published their own newspapers, and continued to use their own language. Native-born Americans viewed all these activities with grave misgivings. But it was the Irish who became the chief target of American resentment. Like many newcomers to a strange land, they wished to settle near their acquaintances from the Old Country. As a result, clusters of Irish people kept growing in the cities. Many of them dressed for a time as they had in Ireland. Their accent was strange to other Americans. Because they were different, older settlers at first looked upon them with suspicion. Suspicion of this kind, of course, has been the fate of every large immigrant group. Feeling against the immigrants often led to friction and violence. Riots broke out in several cities. Feeling ran higher and higher as the number of immigrants increased. In 1845 a national organization of native-born Americans was started. A year later, this society was reorganized as a secret order called the Supreme Order of the Star- Spangled Banner or the Sons of the Sires of 76. Members solemnly pledged themselves to oppose foreigners and to support only American-born Protestants for public office. When asked about the society, a member would answer, "I know nothing." Because of such answers the organization came to be known as the Know-Nothing Party. During the early 1850s the Know- Nothing Party, officially called by now the American Party, was very strong in American political life. In the election of 1854, for example, it polled one fourth of the total vote of New York and two fifths of Pennsylvania's vote. In Massachusetts it elected every state officer and nearly the entire legislature. In Baltimore the Know-Nothings organized the "Plug-Uglies," so-called because they attended the polls carrying carpenter's awls to "plug" voters who did not give a secret password. However, the election of 1854 was the high tide of the movement. In the national convention of the Know-Nothing Party in 1855, southern and northern members split over the question of slavery, and the Know-Nothing Party gradually lost its strength. Changing ways of life. From the 1830s to the 1860s older Americans were bewildered and upset as they saw familiar, traditional ways of life replaced by new and unfamiliar ways. The older Americans did not usually realize that it was machines, factories, and an urban, or city, life that were chiefly responsible for the revolution that was taking place. The foreigner was only one of many new elements in the changing pattern of American society. But like minorities in other times and other places, the immigrant became a scapegoat upon whom many native- born Americans heaped the blame for all their troubles, real and imaginary. SECTION SURVEY 1.From which countries did most of the immigrants come between 1830and 1850? 2.(a) What conditions led the Irish to emigrate to the United States? (b) Where did they settle? 3.(a) Why did the Germans come to this country? (b) Where did they settle? 4.Explain the reasons for resentment against the immigrants. 5.(a) What was the aim of the Know- Nothing Party? (b) Give your opinion of this party. In an effort to prevent the passage of Union troops and to avoid further bloodshed, Maryland authorities burned the railroad bridges connecting Baltimore with Philadelphia and Harrisburg. But Lincoln, determined to hold Maryland in the Union, sent Federal troops into the state and arrested the leading Confederate sympathizers. Anti- southern leaders then rose to power, and Maryland remained in the Union. The other border states—Delaware, Kentucky, and Missouri—also decided to join the Union cause. Delaware never hesitated. At first Kentucky refused to obey Lincoln's call for volunteers and tried to remain neutral. But when the Confederate army invaded Kentucky in September, the state declared for the Union. The government of Missouri was in the hands of southern sympathizers. After several battles had been fought, however, the state officially lined up with the North. "The North" included the Pacific coast states of California and Oregon. After West Virginia had joined the Union in 1863, there was a total of twenty-four states fighting on the northern side. In every state, especially in the border states, families were torn apart as some members enlisted with the Confederacy, others with the Union. Three of Mrs. Lincoln's brothers fought and died for the South. Robert E. leefenephew commanded Union naval forces on the James River in Virginia while his famous uncle was fighting Union forces not many miles away. Caleb Huse, a northerner, was the South's ablest representative in Europe; Senator Robert J. Walker, a former southerner, was the North's ablest European representative. The division within families and the breakup of lifelong friendships were some of the tragic results of the war. Northern advantages. The North had overwhelming material advantages in the War Between the States. It was greatly superior to the South in population, in manufacturing, agricultural and natural resources, in finances, and in transportation facilities. Northern strength had recently been increased by the admission of three new states to the Union—Minnesota (1858), Oregon (1859) and Kansas (1861). The population of the twenty-four northern, western, and border states totaled 22,000,000. To this total may be added about 800,000 immigrants who entered the United States during the war years. About 400,000 foreign-born men served in the Union armies. The varied economic resources of the North—industrial, commercial, financial, agricultural—gave the North an enormous advantage over the predominantly agricultural South. When the war began, the North had 92 per cent of the nation's industries and almost all of the known supplies of coal, iron, copper, and other metals. The North also owned most of the nation's gold, which could be used to buy war materials abroad, whereas the Confederate wealth was largely in land and slaves. The transportation facilities of the North were also far superior to those of the South. Most of the railroad lines in the country were located in the North and the Middle West. This made it possible for the North to move men and supplies around almost at will, and to transport food from the midwestern farm lands to workers in the eastern cities and to the armed forces in the field. Moreover, with control of the navy and a large part of the merchant marine, the North was able to carry on trade with nations overseas. This map provides an overview of the major campaigns of the War Between the States, and shows the main points of Union strategy. The circled numbers indicate the areas in which fighting occurred. In the pages that follow, you will learn more about each of these campaigns. The discussion of each campaign is accompanied by a detailed map that bears a number corresponding to one of the numbers on this map. As you read the text that follows and cumine each numbered map, look frequently at the map above so that you will understand the sequence of the war and the relationship of each campaign to the over-all Union strategy. On the map above and on the detailed maps. Union states appear in a lighter shade. Confederate states in darker. On all of the detailed maps, red symbols stand for Union forces, Mack symbols for Confederate forces. The following symbols are used: in general, as it became larger and more impersonal, it became harder and harder for individual workers or small groups of workers to "bargain" with their employers over wage rates and working conditions. Company towns. Workers in so-called "company towns" labored under the greatest disadvantages. There were mining districts in Pennsylvania and West Virginia and textile-mill regions in the South where the companies owned whole towns—all the houses, stores, and other buildings. The companies employed the teachers and the doctors. The local magistrates and the policemen owed their jobs to the company. In these towns no worker dared to protest the rent he paid for his company-owned house or the prices he paid in the company-owned store. Frequently, the worker received part of his wages, not in cash, but in credit at the company store. Effects of mechanization. The use of power-driven machines in factories also created new problems for wage earners. Often the new machinery could do the work of several wage earners. Indeed, the new machine might produce much more than the displaced wage earners. Thus, the installation of new machines in a plant often threw workers out of jobs. This form of unemployment is known as technological unemployment- Of course, the new machines often created new and different jobs because workers were needed to build and repair the machines. Further, the higher output of the machines increased the nationwide production of goods, and thereby created jobs of many kinds. But it is also true that displaced workers often found it difficult to get new jobs or had to learn new skills. Machines were also physically dangerous. Until about 1910 little was done to safeguard workers from accidents. Devices for preventing accidents were almost unknown. When an accident occurred, the worker himself was usually blamed. If he were disabled, he received no compensation to pay for doctors and hospitalization. If a worker were killed, his family was usually left without income, for employers did not insure lives of wage earners. That industry hazards were a problem of primary importance is evident from the fact that between 1900 and 1910, for example I per cent of all employed workers in ty United States were killed or injured annually as a result of industrial accidental Effect of the railroads. The development of a complex and vast network railroads also affected the industrial worker, particularly in the decades immediately following the War Between! the States. Before the development of the railroad network, manufacturers! tended to sell their products only h| nearby market areas, without competition from other areas. With the completion of the railroads, however, a manufacturer could sell his products anywhere in the country, provided that his prices were as low as those elsewhere. This creation of a competitive national market for goods also created a competitive national market for labor. For example, if cotton goods were being made cheaper in southern mills because of lower wage rates, then New England manufacturers of cotton goods were inclined to reduce their wage rates in order to compete with the lower- priced output of the southern mills. The business cycle. Like other citizens, workers were greatly influenced by what economists call the business cycle. This means the expansion of industry during periods of prosperity and the recurring contraction during periods of depression. Businessmen and government officials had not yet learned what they now know about cushioning the effects of depression. Workers lived in constant dread of being laid off or of having their wages sharply reduced whenever business conditions took a downturn. Even when business was good, unemployment was a harsh reality that brought hunger and misery to a large percentage of industrial workers. Precisely how many workers were unemployed at any given time we do not know, for labor statistics of the late 1800's were not very accurate. We do know, however, that between 1870 and 1900 hundreds of thousands of jobless men walked the streets in search of work. One authority estimates that in 1889, a fairly typical year, 19 per cent of the workers in the fields of manufacturing and transportation were jobless. Effects of the closed frontier. As long is the frontier remained open, farmers on worn-out eastern land could choose between migration to the frontier or migration to the city. Many did choose to continue farming and moved to the West. After about 1900, however, there was less and less opportunity for eastern farmers to find good cheap western land. As the shoe pinched worse and worse, farmers in the East turned increasingly to the cities for work. Thus they helped to swell the population of the cities and tended to drive down the wages of the industrial worker. In this respect the labor market was like any other market. An oversupply of workers tended to push wages down. Low wages and long hours. During the last quarter of the 180% wage earners complained with increasing bitterness about the low wages they were paid. There were, as you have seen, a number of reasons why wages tended to be low: the increasing power of employers over employees; the creation of a competitive national labor market; depressions; and the flooding of the labor market by new workers. Wage earners also complained about the long hours they were required to work. After 1865 an 11-hour day was common in American industry. By the 1880fe the textile workers of Massachusetts were exceptional in enjoying a 10- hour day. In many places textile workers toiled from 12 to 14 hours daily at their looms and spindles. From 1900to 1920 the hours of work began to be shortened. The average working hours in factories decreased from 57 per week in 1909 to 50 per week in 1919. But even as late as this, the 12- hour day prevailed in the steel industry, for example. It was indeed a new and rapidly changing world with which the American wage earner had to wrestle in the closing years of the 180C% The problems wage earners faced were complex problems, and neither the workers nor the owners of the industries nor the people in general had any ready answers. And, as you will see, the immigrants who entered the country during this period searching for new opportunities encountered those same problems and others. SECTION SURVEY 1.Compare relations between owners and workers in the small, privately owned mills and the huge, corporation-owned factories. 2.Why were the workers alarmed at the introduction of new power-driven machines? 3.How did each of the following affect the worker: (a) railroads, (b) business cycle, and (c) end of the frontier? 4.(a) What were two of the most common complaints of workers in the 188%and 1890's? (b) Why has fear of unemployment always been a major complaint of wage earners? Mounting immigration, despite problems, adds strength to the nation The immigrant played an essential part in the amazing industrial development of the United States from 1865 to 1900. lie came in the first place as a worker seeking larger opportunities than he could hope for in the Old World. As a worker and as a new citizen he stayed and helped to build "modern" America. In his efforts to find a place for himself in his new homeland and in the industrial age, the immigrant did not always meet with sympathy and understanding. Instead, in the last part of the 180% the newcomer was often greeted with distrust and suspicion. The problem of numbers. Part of the difficulty was the overwhelming number of immigrants who poured into the country during these years. During the 29 years from 1870 to 1899, a total of more than 11,000,000 men, women, and children entered the country. The changing character of immigration. The changing character of immigration, as well as the swelling tide, alarmed many Americans. Down to the early 1880fe the largest number of immigrants came from northwestern Europe —from Great Britain, Ireland, Scandinavia, Germany, and the Netherlands. But after 1890 an increasingly large number came from southern and eastern Europe and from the Near East. The languages, customs, and ways of living of these immigrants were quite different from those of immigrants from northwestern Europe. Effect of immigration on labor. The great numbers of immigrants had an enormous influence on American life. Although some of the newcomers settled on farms, the great majority to the densely crowded slum areas of the cities. Mere they competed with established residents for housing, thereby driving up rents and real estate prices Most immediate of all, however, was their effect upon American Workers They competed with American wage earners for jobs, thereby driving down the existing scale of wages. To be sure, immigrants helped to stimulate the economy they creating new demands for factory and farm products. But the average wage earner was more disturbed by the job competition of the immigrants than he was impressed with the stimulating effects of large-scale immigration Tension on the Pacific coast. Chinese workers on the Pacific coast, particularly in California, were the first victims of the rising feeling against all immigrants. In1868 the United States had drawn up the Burlingame Treaty with China. This treaty gave the Chinese the right to immigrate to the United States. For a number of years, Chinese laborers had been welcome additions to the labor supply. They had furnished the backbone of the construction gangs that built the western section of the first transcontinental railroad The Chinese are excluded. Ill feeling, already running high, was fanned into violence by crowds of unemployed workmen who gathered on street corners and sand lots. The "sand lotters" began to mutter, and presently fell upon the unfortunate Chinese, killing some, burning the property of others. In co-operation with distressed farmers in California, the workingmen had enough strength to influence the writing of a new state constitution in 1879. California's new constitution prohibited Chinese from owning property or taking part in certain occupations. The opponents of Chinese immigration were also influential enough to get the national Congress to adopt an "exclusion bill" in 1879.The 1879 bill prohibited all but a few Chinese from settling the United States in any year, because this bill violated the Burliname Treaty of 1868 it was vetoed by Resident Hayes. But under pressure the Chinese government agreed to raise no objections if the United States wished regulate immigration, and in 1882Congress enacted a new Chinese Exclusion Act which, with several extensions, continued in effect until World War II. The Chinese Exclusion Act for- lade the immigration of Chinese laborers and denied American citizenship to Chinese born in China. Only students and a few other groups of Chinese could enter the United States. Other immigration restrictions. The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 was the first of a long series of restrictions on immigration, enacted mainly because of pressure from worker groups. The second was the repeal in 1885 of the Contract Labor Law. The Contract Labor Law had been adopted by Congress in 1864, when booming wartime industries were desperate for workers. The law permitted American employers to recruit laborers in Europe. Under the law it was legal for employers to have workmen abroad sign contracts agreeing to come to the United States to work for a specified employer for specified wages for a specified period of time. It was illegal for the workers to leave the job while the contract was in force. American workers objected to the law on the grounds that (1) it came dangerously close to setting up a slave-labor system and (2) it subjected American workers to the unfair competition of cheap foreign labor. With the repeal of the Contract Labor Law behind them, American wage earners brought pressure upon Congress to pass other restrictive measures. One bill that kept coming up for thirty years would have forbidden entry to any immigrant who could not read and write. Congress actually did pass this legislation on several occasions, but each time the President then in office vetoed the bill. In 1917, however. Congress passed a "literacy test" bill over President Woodrow Wlson's veto, and the door to immigration was shut a little further. The role of the immigrants. From 1865to 1900, the restrictions placed on immigration were relatively minor. And without the more than 11,000,000 immigrants who poured into the United States between 1870 and 1900, America's industrial progress would have moved at a much slower tempo. Immigrant muscles as well as brains helped to transform the United States from a predominantly agricultural country into a giant industrial power. The life of the farmer, like the lives of other Americans, was being transformed during the years between 1900 and 1920. Growing demand for farm produce. One of the most significant developments in the opening years was the startling growth of the urban population. Between 1900and 1920 the urban population increased by about 24,000,000, the rural population by only about 6,000,000. Between 1900 and 1920 urban dwellers increased from about 40 per cent of the total population to more than 50 per cent. Whereas in 1900 there were only 832 communities of 2500to5000 persons, by 1920 the number had jumped to 1255, and many of the larger cities had doubled, tripled, and quadrupled in size. The swelling urban population came in part from the nation's farms as farm youths in growing numbers left home to seek their fortunes in the cities. But it came in much larger part from the more than 14,000,000 immigrants who poured into the United States between 1900and1920. Regardless of the source, however, the growing urban population meant more mouths to feed and a growing demand for farm products. Rising prices and more money. The rapidly growing demand for farm products enabled the farmer to charge higher prices. Indeed, between 1900and 1920 farm prices increased threefold. "Cheaper" money, as well as the increased demand for farm products, helped to raise prices. In spite of the fact that the Republicans had firmly planted the financial system on the gold standard, new discoveries of gold in the Klondike region of Canada, and in Alaska, in 1897, and the invention of more efficient methods of extracting gold from ore greatly increased the supply of the precious metal. As the supply of gold increased, the value of gold fell. And as the value of gold fell—making money "cheaper"— the prices of all other products rose. Moreover, the value of farm lands increased, rising on the average fourfold between 1900 and 1920. As a result many farmers were able to sell their surplus acreage for a handsome profit and either retire or buy new farm machines Laborsaving machines. Although laborsaving machines were being used in growing numbers even before the War Between the States, the real Agricultural Revolution—from hand tools to power-driven machines—came after 1900. According to the census records, in 1870 the total value of all farm implements and machinery in the United States amounted to $271,000,000. By 1900 the figure had risen to $750,000,-000; by 1910to $1265,000,000; by 1920 to $3,595,000,000 Whereas in 1900 farmers were still carting their produce to market in wagons, by 1920 they were using trucks in rapidly growing numbers. Census figures show that in 1910 farmers spent $32000,000 for motor vehicles; in 1920. $392000,000. Even more revealing as a measure of the machine age was the use of tractors. In 1910 there were only 1000 tractors on American farms; by 1920 there were 246,000. Gasoline and electricity—these new sources of power were revolutionizing rural as well as urban life in the opening years of the twentieth century. Power- driven machinery—pumps, saws, plows, harrows, seeders, harvesters, milking machines, trucks, and tractors -began to lift the burden of labor from the farmer and made it much toil. A laboratory worker of the Bureau of Plant Industry (about 1905) is shown helping in the research that has aided American farming. The growth of scientific agriculture. Growth of scientific knowledge, as well is power-driven machinery, helped to revolutionize farming. Chemists discovered new secrets of the soil, enabling farmers to check soil exhaustion and replenish worn-out land with new and i heap fertilizers and better methods of cultivation. Biologists improved the life span and the productivity of livestock, plants, grains, and fruits. Bacteriologists discovered ways to check blights, and diseases in both the plant and the animal worlds. Divided additional money for the employment of "county extension agents" who were to travel among the farmers of each county carrying to them "useful and practical information on subjects relating to agriculture and home economics." The Smith-Hughes Act of 1917 provided money for the support of vocational education in the public schools, including education in agriculture, industries, trade, home economics, and the training of teachers. Farmers become businessmen. By the opening years of the 1900^ the farmer had become an important part of the nation's industrial economy. To be sure, on thousands of small farms tucked away in mountain valleys and in areas remote from railroads and paved highways, farm families lived much as their forefathers had lived a hundred years earlier. But these more or less self-sufficient farms were exceptions. Many scientists devoted their lives to the study of agricultural problems. They began to develop new grains and fruits resistant to disease and better adapted to varying climatic conditions. One of their most important discoveries was that of vitamins. federal aid to farmers. Much of the new research and experimentation was tarried on by the federal government or m state institutions created with the aid of federal grants. As you have seen page 397),in 1862 a Republican Con- cress adopted three measures of great importance for farmers: (1) it enacted the Homestead Act, granting farmers free land; (2) it passed the Morrill Act, granting land to the states for the establishment of so-called "land grant" colleges of agriculture and mechanical arts, thus launching the United States upon a vast program of agricultural and industrial education; and (3) it created the Department of Agriculture. In later years the federal government greatly expanded this program of aid to formers. The Hatch Act of 1887, for example, provided money for agricultural experiment stations and farms in each state. The Smith-Lever Act of 1914 pro- mg a new co-operative world order, dedicated to international peace and justice. In the ISBft about 60 nations belonged to the League, which was bringing an important new ingredient into international affairs: the organized moral judgment of a majority of the nations of the world. The Senate rejects the League. Early in July 1919 President Wilson returned confidently from Paris to ask the Senate to approve the Treaty of Versailles, and thereby to bring the United States into the League. The Senate shattered his high hopes by rejecting the treaty. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts, chairman of the important Committee on Foreign Relations, and other Republican Senators were annoyed that Wilson had not invited any of them to participate in the peace negotiations at Versailles. They pointed out that a problem as important as the creation of a world organization should have been considered by Republicans as well as by Democrats. But opposition to the League was based on more than such partisan considerations. Many Americans thought that the Treaty of Versailles was unjust, and they were unwilling to have the United States join a League which pledged its members to carry out the provisions of the treaty. Others were afraid that Great Britain, supported by the votes of its five self-governing dominions might control the League. But the greatest opposition to the League of Nations arose out of a general postwar reaction against American involvement in the affairs of Europe. Many Americans who were influenced by this reaction pointed with alarm to Article Ten of the League Covenant, which pledged each member to guarantee the existing political boundaries of the other members. Those who opposed the League of Nations for this reason argued that such a pledge might involve the United States in war. Canada, Newfoundland, South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand. Wilson refuses to compromise spite the opposition to the League Nations in the Senate and through, I the country, the Senate might have voted for it if President Wilson LI been willing to accept certain, But Wilson refused to compromise He traveled across the country making speeches in defense of the League, till his health broke in the fall of 191 He then hoped for a Democratic victory in the Presidential election of 1920 demonstrate that the public support, his cause. But the Republican landslide of that year and the election of President Harding (page 646) indicated to the American people preferred to forget all about the League of Nations and world problems in general. They pa no heed to Wilson when he warm "Arrangements of the present cannot stand a generation unless there are guaranteed by the united forces of the civilized world." The rise of Japanese, Italian, and German expansionism in the 1930s prove: Wilson's words to have been prophet: But by that time, as you will see, the League, without the United States as a member, had become too weak to take actions which might have prevented the outbreak of World War II. The United States keeps out Europe's people and goods The United States' refusal to join the League of Nations was based in part upon a desire to avoid becoming unlived again in Europe's troubles and quarrels. But this impulse to cut off ties with the Old World led much further than the rejection of the League. The United States also tried, with miserable success, to keep out the people and products of Europe and Asia. The immigration and tariff laws passed during this period were the most restrictive in American history and were bitterly resented by Europeans and Japanese. European resentment was aroused even further by America's (forts to collect the money that it had to its European allies during and immediately after the war. Closing the gates to immigration. During the 1920k the United States re-versed one of its oldest traditions by 1 sing its gates to immigration almost completely. Earlier, it is true, the United States had excluded Chinese and most other Asiatic by specific laws. And, m 1907, President Theodore Roosevelt had negotiated a "Gentlemen's Agreement" with Japan, by which the Japanese agreed to forbid the emigration of laborers to the United States. With these exceptions, however, the historic role of the United States as a haven of refuge and a land of opportune for immigrants had never been seriously questioned by most Americans before the war. Indeed, during the decade before World War I, more Europeans settled in the United States than in any previous ten-year period. Reasons for closing the gates. Why lid a nation of immigrants and descendants of immigrants suddenly decide its doors to newcomers? One reason was the general anti-European feeling that swept over America after the car. But certain groups in the population had special reasons of their own. Organized labor, for example, argued that new immigrants were willing to work for lower wages and thus pulled down the standard of living of American workingmen. Industrialists who had formerly favored immigration as a source of cheap, plentiful unskilled labor no longer needed masses of unskilled workers, for by 1920 the railroads had been built and the basic industries such as steel were well developed. Finally, there were many established Americans who felt that the newer immigrants, mainly from eastern and southern Europe, did not easily become "Americanized." These Americans thought that it was harmful to the country to admit settlers whose languages and customs were so different from those of older inhabitants. The immigration laws. Responding to all of these arguments, Congress passed three laws in the 1920k that progressively restricted immigration from Europe. The Emergency Quota Act of 1921 introduced a quota system which limited the number of Europeans and others who could be admitted to 3 per cent of the total number of persons of their nationality residing in the United States in the year 1910. The 1921 act also set a total yearly limit of about 350,0 immigrants. In 1924 an even more severe law was passed which reduced the annual quota from 3 to 2 per cent, and changed the base year from 1910to 1890. This change in the base year discriminated against Italian, Austrian, Russian, and other eastern and southern Europeans because people of those nationalities had immigrated to the United States mainly after 1890. Some exceptions were made to the quota restrictions for students, the wives and children of resident American citizens, and immigrants from Canada and the Latin- American countries. But immigrants who were barred from American citizenship for any reason were excluded under the law of 1924. Finally, the National Origins Act of 1929 shifted the base year of immigrant- but counterbalanced this more liberal provision by reducing to 150,000 the total number of immigrants to be admitted during any one year. Effects of the quota system. The new immigration policies aroused a great deal of bitterness, especially among those eastern and southern European nationalities that were discriminated against under the quota system. The Japanese were also aroused because the immigration act of 1924 ended the Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907, which Japan had faithfully observed, and closed the doors completely to Japanese immigrants. America's new immigration policies also affected economic and political conditions in Europe. In former years many Europeans who were out of work or discontented could migrate to the United States. But now, with America's gates closed, there was no place for them to go. Many of these discontented people, as you will see, turned in desperation to demagogues such as Mussolini and Hitler who promised to solve their problems by setting up dictatorships. The war of tariffs. While closing its doors to immigrants, the United States was also, like other nations, raising tariff barriers to keep out foreign products. As you have seen, the Fordney-Mc- Cumber Tariff of 1922 increased the import duties on hundreds of items. About eight years later, the Hawley-Smoot Tariff of 1930 lifted tariff rates to the highest level in American history. America's high tariff policy proved a cruel blow to many countries in Latin America and in Europe. The prosperity of the countries affected depended in large part upon the sale of products to the United States. When America's high tariffs deprived them of their best markets, their economic situation became desperate. Factories closed, men were thrown out of work, and the surplus of farm products mounted steadily, borne countries struck back or raisin their own tariff barriers against American goods. And so the high tariffs that Congress hoped would aid America industry helped in the end to deprive many American businessmen and farmers of the foreign markets they badly, needed. Thus the ink was hardly dry on the peace treaties before the nations of the world were engaged in another was a trade war fought with tariffs. War debts and high tariffs. American high tariff policy created still another problem. How were European countries to pay their war debts to the United States if they could not sell their goods in this country? The war had changed Americas relation to Europe from debtor to creditor Before the war American businessmen had borrowed money from European' to finance new industries. Indeed, Amerces amazing industrial development between 1865 and 1914 would have been impossible had it not been for the investment of European capital. During the period of American neutrality, however, before the United States entered the war in 1917, Europeans began to sell their American stocks and bonds in order to buy war goods. And, as the war progressed, the American government lent huge sums to the warring countries. As a result, by 1918, nearly all the European countries owed money to the United States. The total amounted to about 10 billion dollars. The American government granted reduced interest rates to the debtor nations and arranged for repayment of the loans over a long period of years. Yet despite the generous terms, the bankrupt European countries emerged from the war with no clear idea as to how they could repay their debts. President Wilson reminded the American Congress of one possible solution to Europe's problems when in 1921 he declared, "If we wish to have Europe settle her debts, we must be prepared to buy from her." But this solution became impossible when the United States adopted a high-tariff policy. War debts and reparations. The only other solution open to the European Allies was to collect war damages, or reparations, from Germany, and to use this money to repay their war debts to the United States. In 1921 a Reparations Commission fixed the total of German reparations at 33 billion dollars. Unfortunately for the victorious European countries, Germany was in the midst of severe economic troubles, and was in no position to pay such a huge sum. In an effort to secure the money, Germany borrowed heavily from bankers in the United States and in Europe. As the election of 1932 drew near, the cartoonist Edmund Duffy pictured Republicans trying to hold the tariff wall against Democratic onslaught. But there was a limit to the amount that the German government could borrow, and, as the years passed, it became increasingly clear that the reparations would have to be reduced. They were reduced twice—once in 1924 and again in 1929. In spite of this relief, however, German/s economic situation grew steadily worse. By 1930 it looked as though the Germans could make no further reparations payments. War debts create ill feeling. Faced with this situation, the debtor countries notified the United States that they could no longer meet their payments on the war debts. After all, they argued, they had contributed far more to victory in blood and sacrifice than had America and it would be only fair of the United States to cancel all war debts. The American government, supported by the majority of Americans, refused to admit such a claim. It insisted that the war debts to the United States and German reparation payments to the Allies were two entirely separate matters. Americans pointed out that some of the loans—perhaps as much as a third of the total amount—had, in fact, been made after the armistice. Americans also reminded the European countries that they were not too poor to spend large sums for armaments. The arguments pro and con were thrown overboard in 1931 when the debtors, with the exception of Finland, refused to make even a token payment. President Hoover then declared a year s resting period, or moratorium, on the payment of war debts. But since Germany did not make any further reparation payments, the whole question of war debts was left permanently unsolved. In the end, most of the war debts and most of Germanys reparations remained unpaid. But America's unsuccessful attempt to collect the war debts increased Europe's resentment against the United States. And the European victors' attempt to collect reparations from Germany, though equally unsuccessful, created a feeling of bitterness among the German people, which, as you will see, contributed to the rise of Adolf Hitler and of Nazismo and the Nazi Party in the early 1930k They came from many to work in the growing cities and to build a new way of life in the rapidly expanding nation. Whereas in 1790 there were only about 4 million people, by 1960 there were about 180 million. In earlier times, immigration accounted for much of the increase; today, a sharp rise in life expectancy helps to swell the population. 