The prosperity of the American merchant marine. The 1850's saw the United States merchant marine more prosperous than ever before or since. In 1849 Great Britain repealed her Navigation Laws which had given special protection to British ships trading within her empire. The United States, however, continued to allow only its own ships to carry cargoes between American ports. Competing on even terms with British ships in British ports while enjoying an advantage in their own, American ships increased in total tonnage from 943,000 tons in 1846 to 2,226,000 tons in 1857. For a few years vessels flying the Stars and Stripes carried more goods than those flying the Union Jack. The greatest American triumph at sea was the clipper ship, which enjoyed its brief heyday between about 1845 and 1860. The clippers were specialized ships, built to carry cargoes of high value and small volume. Characterized by very sharp bows, an immense spread of sail, and great length in relation to their beam, they were the fastest ocean-going sailing vessels ever built. The clipper Lightning once sailed over 500 miles in twenty-four hours. During the 1850's there was continuous excitement among seamen throughout the world as the American clippers broke all records for long ocean voyages. The great clippers were among the wonders of their day. Their names reflect their beauty and the pride of their builders—Sovereign of the Seas, Sea Witch, Flying Cloud, Shooting Star, Westward Ho, Morning Light, Queen of the Pacific, Young America, and Great Republic. Alarmed by the superiority of American sailing ships, the British concentrated on the development of steamships. Between 1850 and 1860 the proportion of ocean freight carried in steam vessels went from 14 to 28 per cent, and most of this increase was British. By 1860 American shipyards were closing down for want of orders. The peak of inland navigation. During this decade inland navigation reached its peak. The Erie Canal had so much traffic that it had to be widened and deepened. The Great Lakes had gained importance as a water route, and 6,000 ships sailed from Chicago in a single year. Above all, this was the great period of the Mississippi River traffic. Mark Twain's Life on the Mississippi and Huckleberry Finn bear witness to the romance of the great river at this time. In reminiscences of his boyhood in Illinois Francis Grier- son wrote as follows: There were days when I sat for hours on this bluff (above the river); the supreme moments came with the passing of boats, such as the War Eagle, the City of Louisiana, or the Post Boy. . . . When a boat made the return journey down stream it put the last touch of enchantment to the face of the waters. It filled me with visions of distant worlds as it skimmed the smooth surface, the smoke from the chimneys leaving a long, scattered trail, the white steam puffing out of the 'scape-pipes in rhythmic movements, the paddle wheels throwing out thick showers as the beautiful apparition sped like a dream southward. Other fines began operation almost simultaneously. Railroads did not, however, become an important means of transportation immediately. Naturally there was opposition from canal and river men. A typical canal man's speech contained this passage: Canals, sir, are God's own highway, operating on the soft bosom of the fluid that comes straight from nature. The railroad ... is the Devil's own invention, compounded of fire, smoke, and dirt, spreading its infernal poison throughout the fair countryside. It will set fire to houses along its slimy tracks. ... It will leave the land despoiled, ruined, a desert where only sable buzzards shall wing their loathsome way. Railroads were opposed on the ground that such frightful speeds as fifteen, twenty, and even thirty miles an hour were against nature and contrary to the will of God. The early railroads were handicapped by numerous practical problems. It was difficult, for instance, to devise suitable rails—rails which would neither spread under the weight of a train, nor bend and come up through the floor of the car. A train was hard to stop: if the brake worked on the engine, the cars piled into it; if the cars were braked first, they dragged back so hard they broke the couplings. Almost everything one takes for granted on railroads—brakes, couplings, headlights, effective lubrication of the wheels, and safe bridges—had to be worked out by painful trial and error. Furthermore, railroads were extremely expensive to build and maintain. The Panic of 1837, caused partly by over-expansion in canal and turnpike building, made both state governments and private investors wary of sinking money into a new form of transportation. Railroad expansion, 1850-7860. By 1850 many of the technical problems of railroading had been met, and an era of great expansion began. Before 1853 it was impossible to make a continuous journey of as much as 500 miles on any American railroad. By 1860 the Atlantic seaboard and the Mississippi River system were connected by a number of through routes (pp. 402 D and F). The railroad network had increased in mileage from 9,000 in 1850 to over 30,000. The new railroads cost what then seemed colossal sums. The Erie Railroad cost about $23,000,000 to build, half again as much as the United States paid for New Mexico and California. The railroad corporations thus became the first outstanding examples of "big business." The through fines from East to Middle West completed a development which the Erie Canal had begun: the conquest of the Appalachian Mountain barrier. Because of the Mississippi River system, the natural economic ties of the Middle West had at first been with the South. Now that S> artificial transportation finked Middle West and Northeast, the two sections drew together economically and politically. "This fact," says the historian Arthur M. Schlesinger, "far more than abolitionist agitation, was to account for northern unity when southern guns boomed out against Fort Sumter in 1861." Until about 1820 immigrants to the United States were not numerous, averaging about 8,000 persons per year, but during the second quarter of the nineteenth century a great migration began from Europe to America. Between 1840 and 1860 an average of over 200,000 immigrants reached our shores yearly; by the latter date one out of every eight Americans was foreign-born. Reasons for flood of immigration. Most of the immigrants fled poverty or oppression. In England and Germany the industrial revolution put thousands of skilled workers out of jobs. Rather than go into factories, many of these preferred to leave home. In 1848-1849 there were unsuccessful revolutions in Europe, especially in the German states, followed by persecution of those believing in democracy. Many such German liberals fled to this country. In Scandinavia and the Netherlands there was too little soil to support rapidly growing populations. In Ireland, the greatest source of immigrants, the native population were denied home rule, and a wretched system of landholding kept them in poverty. The staple diet of Irish peasants was potatoes. When the potato crop was blighted in 1845, there was appalling suffering. It has been estimated that one million out of eight died of starvation; in the next ten years another million came to America. Some immigrants actually came to this country against their will. The German city of Hamburg, for instance, found it cheaper to ship its paupers to the United States than to keep them in poorhouses or in jail. Public and private relief agencies in Britain provided money for the unemployed to take passage to America rather than go into the dreaded "workhouses," where poverty was treated as though it were a crime. Most immigrants came here, however, in high hopes of a better life. European agents of railroad companies and steamship lines described America as a land where riches could be had almost for the asking. Recent immigrants sent letters home describing the high wages, cheap land, and bountiful diet over here. These "America letters" praised not only American prosperity, but American freedom and equality. Here, they said, were no class distinctions. Here no farmer had to tip his hat to the local squire. Here women were not expected to do heavy work in the fields, and workmen could leave their jobs if they liked. "If you wish to be happy and independent, then come here," wrote a German farmer from his new home in Missouri. The lot of immigrants. The lot of the new immigrant, however, was often hard. Once off the boat, he might become the prey of sharpers sell- The busy water traffic on the Great Lakes in 1836 (below) moved east from Detroit to the Erie Canal, New York, and Europe. Immigrants often found native Americans prejudiced against them. Pious folk disapproved of the way German- Americans spent Sunday afternoons listening to band concerts. American laborers resented the Irish who were often so used to poverty that they could be hired for low wages. Employers were sometimes forced to put signs at factory gates, "No Irish need apply." Irishmen also faced religious prejudice so strong that it sometimes broke out in mob violence. Immigrants also met organized opposition from a nation-wide secret society, the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, founded in 1849. The members of this organization were called "Know Nothings," because when asked about it they replied, "I know nothing." The Know Nothings tried to keep recent immigrants from political office; they also demanded that immigration be restricted and that the naturalization period be extended to twenty-one years. The natural tendency of immigrants facing prejudice and grappling with the insecurity of a new environment was to draw together and keep to their old culture. This was reflected in the appearance of foreign-language newspapers. In New York City alone in 1851 there were seven such papers, four German, one French, one Italian, and one Spanish. In spite of hardships, prejudice, and attempts to cling to their old ways, most immigrants adapted themselves rapidly to America. Jobs were abundant and land was cheap. Familiar with tyranny and want, the recent arrivals often appreciated American freedom and well-being more than did those whose ancestors had come over here generations earlier. Immigrants made many valuable contributions to the arts in America, to journalism, to education, and to invention. The children of foreign-born parents were quickly Americanized in the public schools, where they were taught English and learned to get along with children of different backgrounds and upbringing from their own. The Clayton-Bulwer Treaty, 1850. The Mexican War gave the United States a new interest in the Caribbean region because of the need for better ways to California and Oregon than the long and hazardous trip across the Great Plains and the Rockies. There was renewed interest in a project which had been under discussion ever since the establishment of the Spanish colonies— an Isthmian canal to connect the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. In 1846 the United States made a treaty with New Granada (later Colombia) by which we gained the right to preserve "free transit" across the Isthmus of Panama. Diplomatic agents of the United States also tried to arrange treaties giving us the right to control canal routes through Nicaragua and Honduras. Meanwhile the British, with a view to getting control of canal routes, were trying to extend their influence along the entire Atlantic coast of Central America. Rival ambitions created such tension that in 1850 Great Britain sent a special agent. Sir Henry Bulwer, to Washington to try to arrange a compromise. The result of his visit was the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty whereby the United States and Great Britain agreed to support the building of an interocean canal which should not be fortified and which should be open to ships of all nations on equal terms. Manifest destiny to the south. After the Mexican War, the spirit of manifest destiny subsided in the North, but continued in the South. In 1848, De Bow's Review, a New Orleans financial journal, declared, "We have New Mexico and California. We will have old Mexico and Cuba!" The portion of the United States open to slave labor was far smaller than the area where it was banned either by law or by geography. Many Southerners thought the only way to keep the sectional balance even was for the United States to expand southward. Some prominent northern Democrats sympathized with this point of view. Pierce, a New Hampshire man, declared in his inaugural address in 1853 that he would not be restrained "by any timid forebodings of evil from expansion." He immediately offered $130,- 000,000 for Cuba. When Spain refused to sell, three American diplomats drew up a statement known as the Ostend Manifesto which declared that if Spain would not sell Cuba, the United States should take it by force. Published in 1854, this disgraceful document caused such protest that the Secretary of State repudiated it, and the effort to buy Cuba was abandoned. Other efforts to gain territory southward were made by "filibusterers"—armed adventurers who tried to seize areas which might later be annexed to the United States. Prominent Southerners gave aid to Narcisco Lopez, who three times attempted a landing in Cuba, and to William Walker, who for a brief time made himself dictator of Nicaragua. All attempts to expand slave territory were doomed to failure because of northern opposition. The only addition to the territory of the United States during the 1850's was the Gadsden Purchase. This tract of desert land, acquired from Mexico in 1853 for $10,000,000, gave the United States control over the lowest route across the Rockies (map, pp. 312-313). The opening of China. For centuries the prospect of trade with China had stirred men's imagination. China produced commodities with a ready sale in the West, and its "300,000,000 customers" were the largest untapped market in the world. United States trade with China had been increasing ever since the late eighteenth century, and by 1850 American clippers carried most of the tea exported from China to Europe. American missionaries had followed our traders; 88 of the 150 Protestant missionaries in China in 1851 were from this country. Commercial relations with, China were hedged about with difficulties. Proud of their ancient civilization, the Chinese regarded foreigners as barbarians with whom they wished to have little contact. Trade with the West was allowed through only one port, Canton. There were constant difficulties because of the inefficiency of Chinese officials, Western insistence on breaking Chinese laws against the import of opium, and conflicting ideas of law and etiquette. In 1839- 1842 Great Britain fought the First Opium War with China. When the British won, they forced the Chinese to cede Hong Kong and allow British merchants various privileges such as "extraterritoriality" (the right to be free of the operation of Chinese law). Later the British, assisted by other European nations, forced China to grant special privileges to Christian missionaries, to set aside sixteen "treaty ports" administered by Westerners, and to allow Chinese rivers to be patrolled by European gunboats. The United States participated in these privileges. In 1844 we sent to China a very able diplomat, Caleb Cushing, with four warships. Without firing a shot, Cushing persuaded the Chinese to grant generous trading arrangements. Since the United States was not interested, as were other nations, in annexing outlying provinces of China, the Chinese were rather less unfriendly to this country than to other nations. The first Chinese diplomatic mission to Europe included an American, Anson Burlingame, who had won Chinese admiration for fair dealing. Perry's expeditions to Japan, 1853-1854. Japan, the island kingdom, was even harder to penetrate than China. It was said to be as impossible to penetrate the country as to send a balloon to Mars. In 1853, however, a small United States fleet under Commodore Matthew C. Perry appeared in Tokyo Harbor. Perry stayed only ten days, but left a message for the Japanese government, urging it to open its ports to trade. Next year he appeared with more warships, all guns stripped for action. Perry used no actual violence. Instead he brought elaborate presents for the ruler of Japan, including a miniature telegraph and steam railroad. By this mixture of courtesy with the threat of force the Japanese were at last persuaded to carry on relations with the rest of the world. Railroad building. By 1900 the railroad mileage of the United States was greater than that of all the nations of Europe. Technical improvements made trains capable of carrying bulky products long distances cheaply, thus widening both the businessman's sources of raw materials and his markets. (3)Abundant capital. The great profits to be obtained from manufacturing and transportation in the United States attracted investors. Much of the capital formerly invested in shipping was diverted to building factories and railroads. Billions of dollars came from abroad, especially from England. (4)A mobile labor supply. European capitalists often had difficulty recruiting labor for new industries because workingmen had been brought up to traditional occupations and hated to leave their home villages. In the United States, however, labor was more mobile. The American tradition was to "keep moving." Laborers came to new jobs in new cities the way pioneers moved into new lands. Furthermore, the flood of immigration continued; the newcomers, already uprooted from their homes and traditions, supplied much of the "floating" labor force needed for new industry. (5) Government policies favoring industry. The Constitution itself gave American industrialists a great advantage when it forbade the states to levy tariffs. This prohibition resulted in an immense home market. Compare this situation The lure of freedom and high wages drew an ever-increasing stream of immigrants to America from Europe. This woodcut shows Britain trying to hold back workers who wish to go to the United States. In addition to the permanent advantage derived from the Constitution, American capitalists also got special favors from Congress. A high protective tariff encouraged "infant industries" and raised manufacturers' profits by keeping out foreign goods. Liberal immigration laws insured a supply of cheap labor. The federal government helped in the building of western railroads and sold public lands containing vast mineral wealth for a small proportion of their value. (6) American attitudes. Whereas in Europe it was often difficult to throw off tradition, "in the new America . . . no accepted patterns had been handed down from father to son." Both industrialist and laborer were free to try new techniques. American industrialists were often optimistic to the verge of recklessness when it came to enlarging plants and scrapping old machinery for new. While European capitalists often retired from business when they had made enough money to try to buy their way into the upper classes, American capitalists, regarding money-making as a laudable end in itself, generally had no other ambition than to remain "captains of in- dustry." At the other end of the scale Europe was plagued by an almost hereditary class of paupers who, with little hope of ever rising out of poverty, lacked initiative. In the United States, on the other hand, even the poorest laborers had a feeling that hard work would be rewarded, if not by wealth for themselves, at least by more opportunities for their children. Rise in the standard of living. The result of the great increase in American production, mostly for the home market, was a rise in the standard of living. Such goods as clothing, kitchenware, and furniture were produced more abundantly and far more cheaply than ever before. Wages, not high by today's standards, were nevertheless usually enough to provide a family with clothing, shoes, lodging, and adequate food. Swift & Company Refrigerator cars made possible the distribution of fresh meat on a nation-wide scale. The result was the meat-packing industry, a big business which made efficient use of every part of an animal. Along with the rapid industrial expansion of the United States came an immense increase in the size of the business units. By 1900 several major industries were dominated by gigantic concerns which owned scores of plants, sold products all over the country, and had hundreds of millions of dollars behind them. Legitimate advantages of big business. The growth of big business was a natural development. Big companies could take full advantage of the nation-wide markets opened up by the railroads. They lowered costs and improved their product by installing the newest processes. They paid high salaries to obtain the best business brains. They produced more efficiently by combining processes formerly carried on by different companies and by making use of byproducts formerly wasted. All this was shown dramatically by the development of large-scale meat packing. Formerly fresh meat was slaughtered locally, and every town had at least one slaughterhouse. When, however, the refrigerator car made it possible to ship fresh meat long distances, there appeared gigantic concerns such as Swift and Armour selling their products all over the country. The big meat packers made such efficient use of byproducts that they were often able to sell the meat for less than they paid for the animal and still make profits out of the rest of the carcass. The Russians in turn had designs on Korea. This clash of interests led to the Russo-Japanese War in 1904. In this contest American opinion was at first overwhelmingly pro-Japanese. The czarist government was unpopular here because of its tyranny and persecution of subject peoples. We regarded the Japanese with an almost paternal air because of Commodore Perry's exploits (see p. 323), and we admired their rapid Westernization. Roosevelt himself thought a Japanese victory would keep the balance of power in the Orient. "Japan," he wrote his son, "is playing our game." To the astonishment of the world, Japan won overwhelming victories over Russia both on land and sea. By the summer of 1905 both countries were ready to make peace, Japan because she was nearing the end of her resources, Russia because of an outbreak of revolution at home. Neither country wished to approach the other directly, but the Japanese secretly asked Roosevelt if he would serve as go-between. After consulting the czar, Roosevelt formally offered to help the warring nations make peace. They accepted the President's proposals, and sent diplomats to a peace conference which met at Portsmouth, New Hampshire, in August, 1905. Roosevelt, as he expressed it, had brought the horses to water, but was not sure he could make them drink. Although not present at the peace table, the President indirectly affected the negotiations by persuading the powers to withdraw extreme demands. He induced Japan to give up claims for a money indemnity and Russia to agree to give up the southern half of the island of Sakhalin. By the Treaty of Portsmouth, Japan also took over Russian interests in southern Manchuria. In 1906 Roosevelt was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of his success in bringing the Russo-Japanese War to a close. Later difficulties with Japan. In spite of Roosevelt's previously pro-Japanese attitude and efforts to help Japan by arranging a peace, the Treaty of Portsmouth was followed by tension between the United States and Japan. When the President sided with Russia on the indemnity question, there were such serious anti-American riots in Tokyo that the United States embassy had to be guarded with troops. The ease of the Japanese victory caused fear in America and Europe that the white race was to be overwhelmed by the yellow race; this notion of the "yellow peril" was played up by the "yellow press." On the Pacific Coast feeling began to rise against Japanese immigration, resulting in discrimination against Japanese children in the public schools. This action was regarded in Japan as an insult. More significant than the tide of ill will, which soon subsided, was the fact that the recent war altered the balance of power in the Orient. Now it was no longer Russian expansion that was most to be feared, but Japanese. In a rather complicated series of maneuvers, Roosevelt attempted at the same time to soothe Japanese anger, satisfy Japanese ambition, save the Philippines from Japanese aggression, and show the Japanese that he was not afraid of them. Although the federal government had no power to force a city or state to change its education laws, the President persuaded the Californians to stop discriminating against Japanese school children. In turn, Japan agreed to halt emigration to America. This compromise, arranged in 1907, was known as the Gentlemen's Agreement. As regards the balance of power in the Far East, Roosevelt made a bargain which was partly embodied in the Root-Takahira Agreement of 1908. Both Japan and the United States promised to respect each other's possessions in the Pacific; both agreed to uphold the Open Door Policy in the Pacific. In return for these provisions favorable to the United States, we agreed to Japanese penetration of Korea, which was annexed in 1910. To impress Japan with American power, the President, in a truly Rooseveltian gesture, sent an American fleet to visit Tokyo in 1908. All sixteen battleships in the United States Navy were sent to the Pacific Coast, then to Tokyo, and then back to America by way of the Mediterranean. Roosevelt's successor. President Taft, was much interested in enlarging opportunities for American trade and investment in China. Finding that Japan and Russia were discriminating against American businessmen in Manchuria, Secretary of State Philander C. Knox proposed that Manchurian railroads be put under international control. Russia and Japan, recent enemies, joined forces to reject this idea completely. Knox's action was criticized by Roosevelt in a letter to Taft which revealed the basic weakness of our situation in the Far East. Tariff protection returned with the Republicans in 1921. High duties on farm products and spreading industry attracted southern and western support for the Fordney-McCumber Tariff. Prosperity and Depression had never been coordinated. The efforts of the Budget Bureau to introduce economies were especially supported by Coolidge, with whom thrift amounted to a passion. After the Washington Conference there was no immediate threat of war, and military expenditures were greatly lowered. At one time the War Department was hard put to it to find money for six light tanks. Andrew Mellon, Secretary of the Treasury from 1921 to 1932, believed that heavy taxes on excess profits, inheritances, and large incomes "penalized success" and discouraged the investment of capital in productive business enterprise. Congress at Mellon's insistence abolished the wartime excise and excess-profits taxes and reduced rates on incomes by nearly two-thirds. Nevertheless, so great was the prosperity of the United States, with resulting high tax collections, that the national debt was reduced by eight billions between 1921 and 1929. Immigration restriction. During the 1920's Congress for the first time restricted the number areas. Agriculturalists themselves supported the Fordney-McCumber Tariff because it placed high duties on food products. During the war the United States had seized German patents, especially in the fields of optical glass and of immigrants who might enter the United chemical products. "Infant industries" based on States. Such restriction had been demanded by these patents demanded special protection. The labor unions for half a century, but up to 1914 return to protection was also part of the general the only groups excluded were Orientals, anarch- retreat to isolationism. The Fordney-McCumber ists, and incompetents such as idiots, criminals, Act was designed to be "flexible"; it therefore and paupers. In the decade before the First set up a Tariff Commission to study costs of production here and abroad. On recommendation of the Tariff Commission the President might raise or lower duties up to 50 per cent. In practice, this meant that rates tended to go still higher. Federal finances. The First World War had raised the national debt from less than $10 per capita to over $200. The Harding and Coolidge administrations attempted to lower this burden by greater economy in government. In 1921 Congress created a Budget Bureau in the Treasury Department to introduce more system into federal finances. Until this time, income and outgo World War, immigration averaged nearly a million a year. Until the 1880's most immigrants came from northern and western Europe, a region with a relatively high standard of living and a high rate of literacy. By 1914, however, over two-thirds of the immigrants came from southern and eastern Europe, regions where, living standards were lower and opportunities for education more limited. The "new immigration" tended to concentrate in cities, where there was the greatest chance for employment. They usually formed compact communities of the same national origin, so that every great metropolis had a "little Italy," a "little Poland," a "little Greece," and so forth. This in turn gave rise to the charge that the newcomers were difficult to Americanize. Congressional bills designed to reduce the new immigration by barring illiterates from the United States were vetoed by Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson. All three Presidents made the same point in their veto messages: that illiteracy usually does not reveal lack of character or intelligence but simply lack of opportunity. Finally a literacy test was voted by Congress over Wilson's veto in 1917. During and after the World War feeling against "hyphenated-Americans" was stimulated by the anti-German hysteria, by the "red scare," and by a sinister "native American" organization, the Ku Klux Klan. When immigrants, to escape the hardships which the postwar situation imposed on them, started to pour into the United States, Congress took quick action. In 1920 Woodrow Wilson vetoed a bill to restrict immigration, but in 1921 Harding signed the Emergency Quota Act, which cut the number admitted from any country in a single year to 3 per cent of the number of that nationality residing in the United States in 1910. Three years later the Immigration Quota Law made restriction a permanent policy. This law of 1924 temporarily reduced the quota still further, setting it at 2 per cent of those resident in this country in 1890. It also provided that after 1927 the total number of immigrants admitted to the United States per year was to be 150,000, their nationalities apportioned on the basis of the census of 1920. In spite of strong objection from President Coolidge, the like a President," but lacked the intelligence, the knowledge, or the desire to direct policies. Had he carried out his expressed intention of surrounding himself with the "best minds," he might still have avoided failure. Some appointments were excellent, such as that of former President Taft as Chief Justice and future President Hoover as Secretary of Commerce. But too many jobs went to incompetent or dishonest personal friends. Corruption was even more widespread and on a larger scale than under Grant. The head of the Veterans Bureau, for instance, arranged fraudulent contracts which cost the taxpayers an estimated 200 million dollars. The Secretary of the Interior eventually went to prison for secretly leasing to private interests oil lands reserved for the navy at Elk Hills, California, and Teapot Dome, Wyoming, in return for bribes totaling over $300,000. When Harding began to learn what was going on, he complained privately that he had been betrayed. In the summer of 1923 he suddenly died in San Francisco on his return from a trip to Alaska. Calvin Coolidge, conservative. When awakened from sleep to hear that Harding's death had made his President, Vice-President Coolidge was at his childhood home in Vermont. He took the oath of office, administered by his father, in the flickering light of a kerosene lamp. This homely scene typified the relation of the new President to his time. Coolidge had many of the virtues associated with rural, small-town America. He was intensely conservative, cautious, and given to few words. Death of President Harding. Those who had favored Harding's nomination in 1920 neither expected nor desired him to be a strong President. He fulfilled their expectations. With his massive head and fine presence, Harding "looked virtues of honesty, thrift, and hard work. The new President's philosophy of government was simple: economy and laissez faire. He acted on the principle that whatever business, especially big business, wanted was good for the country. Although the 1920's was a period of rapid concentration of wealth, the antitrust laws were not effectively enforced. 