In recent years excellent pamphlets, dealing with topics of live current interest and well adapted to the capacities of high school pupils, have been published by various organizations. Some of these organizations are as follows: American Association for the United Nations, 45 East 65th Street, New York City; Foreign Policy Association, 22 East 38th Street, New York City'; Public Affairs Committee, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, New York City; United Nations Information Office, 610 Fifth Avenue, New York City; World Citizens Association, 86 East Randolph Street, Chicago. The federal government publishes a large number of pamphlets, articles, and reports which are of great value to the history teacher. A list of these publications and their prices can be obtained by writing to the Superintendent of Public Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C. Of special value to teacher and pupil in keeping abreast of current developments and current literature are The American Observer, Washington, D. C.; Scholastic (both especially adapted to high school students); The New York Times Book Review; and Readers ' Guide to Periodical Literature. The teacher who is a member of the National Council for the Social Studies has in Social Education and its other publications an indispensable mine of information on new books, new materials, and new methods. From trading posts to royal provinces. Although English colonization began in the efforts of commercial companies to make money by trading with the Indians, the settlers soon turned to agriculture and found in the products of the soil both the means of their own subsistence and a surplus that enabled them to carry on trade with Europe. As the population and wealth of the colonies increased, they became more self- sufficient and less dependent upon the trading companies and proprietors who had sponsored them. At the same time, however, they became more dependent upon the British government. As time wore on, most of the commercial companies and the proprietors lost their American grants. The colonies they had established were taken over by the king and were ruled as royal provinces. The increase in colonial population. Unlike the French colonies to the north and the Spanish to the south, the English settlements along the Atlantic seacoast of North America increased rapidly in population. Growth resulted from a high birth rate among the colonists and the continual stream of immigration from Europe. Although many persons migrated from Europe to America in order to find more religious and political freedom, far larger numbers came in the hope of bettering their economic condition. "Land free . . . labor scarce. " The population of England in the seventeenth century was about five million. The country could scarcely be called overpopulated, though many contemporary writers seemed to think that it was, for they spoke of idle and mischievous crowds and of the unemployed that flocked to the cities, and they complained of taxes to take care of the poor. The real causes of distress among the masses seem to have been not overpopulation but an uneven distribution of wealth, and the economic disturbances which usually accompany such important changes as England was experiencing in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Whatever the causes, writers of pamphlets and books and those who drafted petitions to the king for charters repeatedly pointed out the advantage of the colonies as the place to take care of the "swarms of idle persons," rid England of its beggars, reduce the cost of maintaining prisons and jails, and lessen the poor tax. The same writers who told how advantageous colonization would be to England also described the richness and bounty of the New World. John Winthrop, who became one of the leaders of the migration to the New World, wrote: "All towns complain of the burthen of their poore . . . and yet suffer a whole continent ...to lie waste without any improvement." A coin of 1647 bears this inscription: "In Virginia land free and labor scarce; in England land scarce and labor plenty." Thus the lure of free land and the hope of economic betterment were used to attract to the New World the landless, the poor, and the unfortunate. The outstanding forces conditioning economic activity during the colonial period (1607-1776) were (1) the abundance of land and natural resources and (2) the scarcity of labor. Ninety-seven out of a hundred of the English colonists obtained a living from the land. It was a rude kind of fanning. The tools of the farmer were the plow and the harrow, the axe, the spade, the hoe, the fork, and the flail — crude, homemade implements. Not every farmer could afford horses; hand labor or oxen were used for much of the heavy work. Land was so cheap that it was not necessary to use great care in its cultivation. The colonial population. 1. Large families. The population of the colonies in 1690 was a little more than two hundred thousand; in 1760 not much more than one and a half million. The first United States census of 1790 revealed a total population of nearly four million. The bulk of the population at the time of the American Revolution consisted of second- and third-generation Americans. The infant death rate was high, but families were large — eight, ten, and twelve children being rather common. Men and women married early and reared large families, for children were of value in the hard work of the farm and home. 2.Indentured servants. Many farmers and planters, anxious for laborers, were willing to pay the cost of the voyage of the immigrants who would agree to work for them for a period of years. The laborers who accepted these terms were known as "indentured servants." The terms of indenture varied, but were generally harsh. When the period of service was over, the indentured laborer became free. Sometimes he received a grant of land and became an independent farmer. 3.Debtors and criminals. The prisons of England were also a source of immigrants to the New World. For numerous offenders, transportation to America was frequently offered as a substitute for a term of years in an English jail. Many were political and religious offenders; some were debtors; some were jailed for petty offenses; some were hardened criminals. These "criminals," like the voluntary immigrants, were assigned to masters for a term of years, usually seven, and then given their liberty. 4.Negro slavery. Very important was the spread of another form. 5. What is meant by the statement that laws interfering with trade and industry meant much more to the colonist than any abstract discussion of the principles of representation? Questions for Further Study and Discussion 1. How did geographic conditions affect colonial economic life? 2.Look up the subject, "favorable balance of trade," in a text on economics. Prepare a brief argument for or against the proposition: Nations should seek to maintain a favorable balance of trade. Investigate and report on the question whether the United States today seeks to maintain a favorable balance of trade. 3.Should governments attempt to control trade and industry? Compare present-day legislation concerning business and labor with colonial laws both as to extent and fundamental purposes. 4.Investigate and report on the patroon system in New York, and the system of "quitrents" in the various colonies. The transplanting of English institutions. The colonization of America meant the spread into a savage land of European modes of living, languages, ideals of life. In the Spanish and Portuguese colonies it meant a mingling with the natives, forming sometimes, as in Mexico and Brazil, a settlement practically native in appearance. In the English colonies, however, this was not the case, for wherever the English settled, they crowded the red men back into the interior. As a result, English civilization, as it spread into the American wilderness, remained predominantly English. The English language, law, customs, institutions, and ideals, modified by a new environment and influenced by other European peoples, were the foundations upon which the life and culture of the people of the United States were based. America as a nation of immigrants. The United States has been called a "melting pot," a term used to describe the fact that the people of different nations and races have found a haven in the United States, and have become one in purpose and ideals with those who preceded them. This mingling of races began even in colonial times, for there were many non-English elements in the colonial population. The Scotch-Irish. The term "Scotch-Irish" refers to the descendants of those people who settled in the northern part of Ireland (Ulster) in the seventeenth century. Some of them were English but the larger number came from Scotland. Nearly all of them were of the Presbyterian faith. Discouraged by restrictive laws, the Scotch-Irish early in the eighteenth century began to migrate in large numbers to the English colonies in America. Coming after colonization had been going on for nearly a century, they were attracted to the frontier by cheap land. In Virginia and the Carolinas, Scotch-Irish pioneers were among the first to settle in the foothills of the eastern Appalachians. They soon became known for their democratic frontier spirit, which acted as a check upon the aristocratic spirit that was beginning to flourish in the coastal settlements. The Germans. The disastrous Thirty Years' War (1618-48), which brought ruin to the thrifty peasants of central Europe, was one of the chief reasons why so many Germans migrated to America dining the colonial period. Lured by the attractive advertising of Penn's agents in Europe, the largest number settled in Pennsylvania. About one third of Pennsylvania's population at the tune of the Revolution was German. Thousands of Germans also went to New York and to the frontier sections of Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas. The French, Swiss, Dutch, and others. When the French Huguenots (Protestants) lost out in their struggle to secure control of France, thousands of them became exiles in the New World. They settled chiefly in South Carolina and in the seacoast towns of the Northern colonies. From the German-speaking cantons of Switzerland many settlers came to Pennsylvania and to North Carolina. Welsh, Scotch Presbyterians, and Irish Catholics also came in large numbers, many of them seeking religious freedom in the Middle and Southern colonies. Jews were present in nearly every seacoast city, although English law denied them the right of legal residence in any British possession. There were Swedes and Dutch who founded New Sweden and New Netherland. These non-English groups made up probably more than a third of the total population of the colonies. Although they were absorbed by the English, their presence is a factor in explaining the American Revolution, for it was much easier for them to revolt than it was for those of English descent. Social classes. The merchant, the banker, the sea captain, the lawyer, the landed proprietor, and the planter constituted a colonial aristocracy — of wealth, position, and influence. Closely identified with them in social position were the governing officials, both those elected by the colonists and those appointed by the king. Pastors of the various churches also held a position of influence, especially in New England. Scattered throughout the coastal settlements were numbers of small farmers, small tradesmen, and a few mechanics. These occupied an inferior position both socially and politically. Still lower in the social scale were the indentured servants, and, of course, the slaves. Roughly, then, there were three social classes: (a) the aristocracy — merchants, planters, clergymen, landed proprietors, government officials, lawyers, bankers; (b) the great middle class —small farmers, artisans; (c) a servile group — indentured servants and slaves. The effect of the frontier on class distinction. Back of the coastal regions was the great hinterland occupied by small farmers. This was too recently developed at the time of the Revolution for great social distinctions to have appeared. Here, as always in frontier communities, there was a greater social equality because a greater economic equality prevailed. As the hinterland that was once a frontier became fully settled, social classes appeared. A newer frontier farther to the west was meanwhile moving through similar stages of development. Colonial homes. The houses of the colonists reflected the class differences. The early settlers had to be content with a one-room log cabin with a large stone fireplace, whose wood fire cooked the meals and furnished warmth. This type of home continued to be the usual type of frontier cabin for more than two hundred years. As time passed, the more prosperous families built clapboard frame houses. The furniture was homemade but substantial. Candles and the open fire supplied light. The merchants in the cities, the well-to-do farmers, and the Southern planters had substantial houses with imported furnishings from England — upholstered chairs, floor coverings, and fine linen. The beautiful homes of Washington at Mount Vernon, of the Byrd family at Westover, and of Jefferson at Monticello are examples of the homes of the well to do. But even these better homes had open fireplaces. Social life. Endurance and self-reliance were traits that frontier conditions in the New World stamped deep into Americans, characteristics that the westward-moving frontier tended to renew in each generation. Life, except for the few who achieved wealth, was hard and serious. For adults and even for children there was little time for amusement or recreation. Simple games of childhood, many of which are still played, absorbed much of the limited leisure. Adult recreation took the form of change of occupation rather than of sporting contests or entertainment. Hunting was both recreation and a source of livelihood. The loneliness of the frontier was relieved by the house-raising, husking, or harvesting bee. The town meeting and the county fair offered opportunities once a year for social intercourse and gaiety. Colonial amusements. Dancing was one of the most common and most enjoyed of the colonial amusements. This was hue even in New England, although church leaders there frowned on music and dancing. In the homes of the wealthy Southern planters elaborate balls were frequent; music and dancing were the common home entertainments. Horse racing was a favorite sport in the Southern colonies, and to some extent in the Middle and New England colonies. Fox hunting and cock fighting were also popular in the South, while colonists in the North indulged at times in bear baiting. Gambling, drinking, and smoking were the chief colonial "vices," thundered against by the clergy, especially in New England. Public lotteries, to raise funds to start a new industry or help some community damaged by fire or flood, were common. Colonial patriots and loyalists. In general the privileged people in the colonies, who formed a kind of American aristocracy of officeholders and hereditary wealth, went over to the king's support. At first they were called "Tories" and later "loyalists." In a total population of about two and a half million, it is estimated that about a third were actively on the king's side, while large numbers were indifferent. Along some parts of the Atlantic coast the population was so evenly divided that the Revolution was in effect a civil war. In New York, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Georgia, modem research seems to indicate that the loyalists were clearly in the majority. But, generally speaking, the loyalists were unorganized. The "radicals," however, were organized and kept up a bornbardment of effective propaganda. Gradually, more and more people supported them, or at least refrained from opposing the drift toward independence. The underprivileged. Two groups of people were generally inclined to support the patriot cause: first, the people of the back country, occupying the settlements between the older established districts along the coast and the frontier; and second, the great majority of small tradesmen, small mechanics, and farmers. Overburdened with taxes and frequently in debt to merchants and landowners, these groups did not enjoy active participation in the colonial governments. They hoped that the Revolution would bring more political and economic freedom. 2.The wealthy merchants. For the merchants of the North, the decision to support the loyalists or the patriots was a difficult one. They feared lest independence would rob them of their trade or set up a radical order that would weaken their economic and social position. Yet many of them were won over to the cause of independence because they suffered severely under the trade restrictions imposed by England. They also realized that opposition to independence would probably mean the loss of their property, imprisonment, or exile. 3.The plantation owners. It was equally difficult for the wealthy planters of the tidewater South to come to a decision. Many remained loyal. On the other hand, large numbers, especially in Virginia and South Carolina, threw in their lot with the patriot cause. Their decision was partly influenced by the desire to occupy the western lands from which they had been barred by the Proclamation of 1763. Furthermore, many planters were indebted to English businessmen. Their total debt was estimated to be about £2,000,000. Many planters saw in independence a temporary escape from these burdensome obligations. During the war many planters paid off their British debts with the depreciated paper currency of the colonies. 4.The frontiersmen. Frontier settlers were unanimous and enthusiastic in their support of independence. Dining the quarter century preceding the Revolution, thousands of Scotch-Irish frontiersmen, with a considerable number of their English and German neighbors of central Virginia, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina, passed through the mountain barrier which had long delayed settlement, and occupied the valleys of the Ohio, the Cumberland, and the Tennessee rivers. James Harrod, James Robertson, John Sevier, and the great frontiersman, Daniel Boone, were among the leaders of the settlers to this southern frontier region. After the peace with France, 1763, land speculators saw their opportunity and secured grants of land beyond the mountains from the colonial authorities. The Proclamation of 1763, by which the royal government took over the supervision of the Indian country and land grants west of the mountains, interfered with land speculators, fur traders, and pioneers. In the Southwest, particularly, the Revolutionary War became a war for land and the freedom of westward migration. The olive branch and the sword. The Second Continental Congress, which met in May, 1775, three weeks after Lexington and Concord, was confronted with a situation which it could not ignore — the people of Massachusetts were in arms against the king's troops. Many delegates, putting the olive branch foremost, urged Congress to try once more a loyal petition to the king. But to many others the time for negotiation had passed. To them it was high time to put the sword foremost — to send men and supplies to the camps about Boston. A few even urged that the colonies should declare for independence. Congress adopted a middle course. Both the olive branch and the sword were held aloft. John Dickinson was directed to prepare a petition to the king (some called it the "olive-branch petition"). At the same time, Congress decided to do on a large scale what the provincial congresses and the town and county committees were doing within their smaller fields. The Congress readopted the "Association" of the First Congress, urged the several colonies to prepare for their defense, and organized a continental army. Upon the suggestion of John Adams, the Congress chose Colonel George Washington as commander in chief. Government during the Revolution. Relying upon the support of public opinion, the Second Continental Congress gradually assumed the functions of a central government for all the colonies. Because of the necessities of the situation, this bold but non legal exercise of sovereign power was tolerated. In the performance of its various tasks Congress was obliged to appeal to the several colonial congresses and the local committees to supply men, money, and materials. Bunker Hill, June 17,1775. Congress adopted as its own the army of New Englanders encamped in a semicircle around Boston. Since the nineteenth of April the militia of the various New England colonies — separate armies, in a sense — had been engaging the British regulars of the unwritten constitution. Under the power to tax and to borrow money, Congress has established a national banking system and has stimulated industry by means of a protective tariff. Under the power to regulate foreign and interstate commerce, Congress has regulated immigration and created commissions to regulate railroads, trade practices, and the sale of securities. Under the power to establish post offices and post roads. Congress has undertaken to subsidize railroads, steamship lines, and airways, to prevent fraud, and to exercise a certain censorship over literature. States rights. Those who advocate a narrow and strict interpretation of the "elastic clause" are said to be advocates of states ' rights. Those who are in sympathy with a broad interpretation of this clause are said to be advocates of a strong national government. Through the decisions of the Supreme Court the conflicts constantly arising over the sphere of action of the nation and of the states are adjusted. Changing economic conditions, especially pronounced in recent years, have given rise to a demand for the still greater extension of the powers of the national government. It is argued, for example, that problems of labor, education, roads, health, social security, corporate organization, and the control of industry are not limited by state boundaries. It is claimed that these problems cannot be adequately handled by the individual states, acting independently, but that they demand a uniform program which the federal government alone can furnish. The division of powers between nation and state, therefore, is an item of great importance in understanding the way the United States undertakes to solve complex economic and social problems. The second important characteristic of the federal government is the threefold separation of government activities among the executive, the legislature, and the judiciary. Each of these three necessary branches of government is in some respects dependent on the other, and yet in certain respects they are independent. Each "checks and balances" the other. Parliamentary supremacy vs. separation of powers. In England the legislature is supreme. There the prime minister and his cabinet are really an executive committee of Parliament. They are responsible to it, and charged with the obligation of carrying out its wishes. The prime minister and his cabinet are unable to act without the approval of a majority of Parliament. In the United States the President has a fixed term of office of four years, and hence his continuance in office does not depend on legislative approval. In England, furthermore, there is no national judiciary with the power to declare laws of Parliament unconstitutional. In the United States the Constitution does not give supremacy to any one branch of the government. Checks on the President. The chief duties of the President are to execute the laws of Congress and to control foreign affairs. In exercising these functions tire President is in many respects independent of the legislature and the judiciary. Yet (1) most presidential appointments must be confirmed by the Senate, and (2) all treaties negotiated by the President must be ratified by a two-thirds vote of the Senate. (3) Furthermore, the President may be impeached by the House of Representatives and, if found guilty of the impeachment charge by the Senate, may be removed from office. (4) Finally, the actions of the executive are subject to review by the courts. Executive checks on the legislature. On the other hand, the President has some control over the legislature and the courts. The President may recommend the passage of laws to Congress, call Congress in special session, and veto bills passed by Congress. In practice a strong President, able to lead his party, can usually get the laws he wants. The sources of the President's powers are three: first, party loyalty; second, the opportunity to build up a favorable public opinion; and third, the distribution of executive favors and patronage by which the President can frequently compel favorable action on the laws he desires. Executive checks on the judiciary. The executive check on the judiciary is threefold. First, the President has the power to pardon those convicted of federal offenses; second, he may neglect to carry out the decrees of the court; third, he, with the approval of the Senate, has the power to appoint judges. By appointing judges holding certain beliefs, the President can often influence for some time to come the type of decision the court is likely to render (pages 590-591). Balance of powers between the two houses of Congress. A delicate balance is struck by the Constitution in the distribution of the powers of the two houses. The Senate has the following exclusive powers: (1)It ratifies treaties; (2)approves presidential appointments; (3) sits as a court of impeachment; and (4) elects the Vice-President in case the Electoral College fails to do so. The House of Representatives possesses the following exclusive powers: (1) It originates revenue bills; (2)has the power of impeachment; and (3) elects the President in case the Electoral College fails to make a choice. Otherwise the Senate and House are on an equal footing. The consent of both houses is necessary for all laws. Legislative checks on the President and the judiciary. The executive, as we have learned, may recommend legislation, and also may veto that which Congress may have passed. The judiciary, in its turn, can declare acts of Congress unconstitutional. The legislature may overcome the presidential veto by reconsidering the measure and passing it by a two- thirds vote. It can overcome the judicial veto only by Colorado which bears his name. Lieutenant Pike, like Lewis and Clark, brought back with him a remarkable tale of hardship and adventure. Federalist criticism. The Federalist party took particular exception to the part of the Louisiana treaty which promised inhabitants of the new territory that they would be admitted to the Union. "They must remain," the Federalists said, "in the condition of colonies." They began to ask whether new territory could be admitted without the consent of every state. The opposition came chiefly from New England. Some were concerned about the migration of laborers from the shops and farms of the East; others were alarmed because the new territories would be opened to slavery. The Federalists feared that the unchecked extension of slavery by the admission of slave-holding communities like New Orleans would establish a permanent and powerful planter class. It was, of course, impossible to foresee at the time that a large immigration from Europe to the northeastern states would more than balance the advantages the Southern planters enjoyed. Federalist fears were regarded by their opponents as sectional jealousy. Against the Federalists it was argued that if the new territories were kept permanently as colonies, the country would be drifting away from the great ideals of the Revolution and the Ordinance of 1787. Federalist scheming. Senator Timothy Pickering, formerly Secretary of State, turned to projects of secession. At the head of a Federalist faction which had lost faith in Hamilton's leadership, he proposed to establish a northern confederacy composed of New England and New York. If Aaron Burr, the Vice-President, were elected governor of New York in 1804, the conspirators, of whom Burr was one, proposed to proclaim their separation from the United States and leave the other states to their own devices. In the election in New York Hamilton opposed Burr with such success that the latter failed of election. With the defeat of Burr, Pickering's secession conspiracy broke down. To have his revenge Burr challenged Hamilton to a duel, and at Weehawken, on July 11, 1804, Hamilton fell, mortally wounded. Burr's scheming with Pickering and his duel with Hamilton thoroughly discredited him with the Republicans. In 1805 and 1806 he engaged in a conspiracy with some discontented Westerners. Just what Burr hoped to accomplish is not definitely known; it is suggested that he sought either to set up an independent state on the Mississippi or to engage in an expedition against Mexico. Rumors were spread around to the effect that he was engaged in a plot to break up the Union. Jefferson ordered his arrest. Burr was tried for treason and acquitted. The re-election of Jefferson, 1804. Events seemed to combine in favor of Jefferson and the Republicans. The beginning of internal improvements, the purchase of Louisiana, and Gallatin's businesslike management of federal finances were popular. The blunder of Pickering's group of Federalists and the death of Hamilton helped to turn the rank and file of voters into the Republican party. Moreover, there were signs of prosperity on every side. The exports of the United States nearly doubled in the four-year period from 1803 to 1807. The income of the United States government from tariff duties increased in the same years by one half. In the election of 1804 only two states, Connecticut and Delaware, gave their votes for the Federalist candidate, Charles Cotes- worth Pinckney. The President, who in 1800 had only eight electoral votes more than Adams, four years later won 162 out of the 176 electoral votes. In the Congressional elections two years later (1806), the Republicans elected nearly four fifths of the senators and five sixths of the representatives. The triumph of the philosopher-statesman from Monticello was complete. Words and Phrases Alien and Sedition Laws, Burr conspiracy, internal improvements, Lewis and Clark expedition, "midnightjudges,''National Road, Ohio Compact, "Revolution of 1800," right of deposit, toll road, Tripolitan War, turnpike, Twelfth Amendment, Virginia and Kentucky resolutions Questions for Understanding the Text I.What were tire Alien and Sedition Laws? How did they prove to he a boomerang to the Federalists? A. What were the Virginia and Kentucky resolutions? 3.Why has the election of 1800 been referred to as an agrarian triumph? 4.What were the accomplishments of the Federalists? 5.Why did the Republican party triumph over the Federalist party? 6.How did the program of the Republicans as announced in Jefferson's inaugural differ from the program of the Federalists? (See pages 164- 166; also Commager's Documents, No. 106.) 7.To what extent did Jefferson and the Republicans adhere to his program? 8.Was the Ohio Compact in keeping with Jefferson's earlier ideas of the relation of the nation and the states? 9.Describe the circumstances which prompted France to sell and the United States to buy the Louisiana territory. 10.What did Jefferson mean when he wrote that "the day France takes possession of New Orleans ... we must marry ourselves to the British fleet and nation"? II."The purchase of Louisiana meant that the Republicans were willing to embrace the hated doctrine of loose construction when it suited their purposes." What has the purchase of Louisiana got to do with loose or strict construction? How do you explain the Republicans' abandonment of their theory? 12. What were the reasons for westward migration in the early years of the nineteenth century? What problems did westward migration create both 1816; Mississippi, 1817; Illinois, 1818; Alabama, 1819; Maine (separating from Massachusetts), 1820; and Missouri, 1821. In thirty years the Union had grown from thirteen to twenty-four states. The march westward. Many of the Western settlers were immigrants from Europe — a stream of free labor which increased rapidly after the War of 1812. But the bulk of the Western pioneers came from the older communities. Hard times, resulting from the embargo, released large numbers of laborers who sought economic freedom by moving westward. The planter of the South had been facing ruin for years, owing largely to the exhaustion of the soil. As cotton came into greater demand, the planter migrated to the southwestern cotton belt, a region which slowly but surely took financial and political control away from the old seaboard South. The government's land policy. The westward movement was hastened both by the successful outcome of the Indian campaigns incident to the War of 1812 and by the government's liberal land policy. Originally the government, in urgent need of funds, sold the Western lands in large tracts to land companies. The law of 1796 provided for the sale of tracts of 640 acres at $2.00 per acre. This plan called for an investment beyond the resources of the average frontiersman, and gave rise to the speculator and land jobber. In 1800 Congress provided for the sale of a half-section — 320 acres — at $2.00 an acre, with payments extended over a period of four years. In 1820, yielding to popular demand, Congress permitted the purchase of 80 acres at $1.25 an acre. The rush to the West was so great that frequently pioneers settled on the land, cleared it, built a cabin, and began cultivation even before the lands had been surveyed or offered for sale. The "squatters" — as these unlawful first settlers were called — complained when the government undertook to offer their land for sale. Often they banded together to prevent anyone from bidding more than a certain price when the land was put up for auction. The Western influence was sufficiently strong to compel Congress to enact the Pre-emption Law of 1841, whereby squatters could secure a title to 160 acres by settling on the land, cultivating it, and paying for it over a number of years. But even this concession did not satisfy these settlers. The land-hungry did not rest until Congress in 1862 passed the Homestead Act, which permitted the head of a family to secure title to a quarter-section of land (160 acres) by establishing a residence and cultivating the land for a period of five years. The coming of the steamboat and the railroad. The great need of the West was for improved transportation. In 1807 Robert Fulton's steamboat, the Clermont, made a successful trial trip from New York to Albany, a distance of one hundred fifty miles, in thirty-two hours. Since the Clermont was a commercial success, Fulton frequently gets the credit for inventing the steamboat, although John Fitch, John Stevens. So profitable was cotton culture that the South was content to export it to England or the textile mills of New England rather than engage in manufacturing cotton itself. Cotton culture, so the South came to believe, demanded slaves, and the South became the defender of the institution of slavery. As the Southerners moved west the question of the extension of slavery into the West became acute; thus slavery became interwoven with the problem of westward expansion. After 1840 the institution of slavery thrust itself into national politics as a vital and absorbing issue. Like the West, the South was eager to see the territory of the United States expand. But expansion raised the question of slavery, and on that point the West was unwilling to follow the South. The demands of the South. The Southern plantation owner thought that it was economical to buy the manufactured goods he needed. He became dependent, therefore, upon the other sections and upon Europe for his supplies. Because the South realized that the tariff increased the prices it had to pay for commodities, it opposed the protective tariff. Like the West, it disapproved of the second Bank of the United States and the conservative banking policies advocated by the Northeast. Unlike the West, it did not favor internal improvements, nor did it desire to see the national government increase its powers. Because of its economic system the South became an ardent advocate of states' rights and, therefore, of strict construction of the Constitution. The rise of manufacturing. While the West and South were developing sectional economic interests, a similar process was going on in the Northeast. There, as we have seen, manufacturing took root. The value of cotton manufactures increased from $4,834,000 in 1820 to $46,350,000 in 1840; woolen manufactures increased in value from $4,413,000 in 1820 to $20,696,000 in 1840. Twenty thousand tons of iron were manufactured in 1820 and 286,000 tons in 1840. The industrialization of the Northeast was stimulated (1) by the opening up of better agricultural land in the West; (2) by the presence of an abundance of raw materials; (3) by a cheap source of power in the rapid streams and waterfalls of New England, and at a later date in the coal fields of the Appalachians; (4) by the inventive genius of the people; and (5) by additions to the labor supply by immigrants from Europe. The first center of manufacturing was the New England states, especially Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. From this section industrialization spread to eastern New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, and later to Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. The new problems created by industrialization. The development of manufacturing and the rise of the factory system in the United States brought in its wake all those problems that seem to accompany its introduction everywhere — rapidly growing cities, child labor, labor of women, unsatisfactory conditions of work. Wages were low, hours were long. In tune protest led to gradual reform. The protest usually came from the workers themselves, who had to struggle by means of unions and strikes to accomplish their ends. 1.The demand for social and political reform. The emergence of a laboring class in America in the 1820's and 1830's ranks with the growth of the West in helping to explain the transition from the old to the new America, from the old to the new democracy. The misery of the factory workers inspired the demand for reforms of various kinds — the extension of the suffrage, the demand for women's rights, temperance, free public schools, and the abolition of slavery. 2.The rise of local and national labor unions. Tire hours of work in the factories and shops followed the custom of the farm, where all worked from sunrise to sunset. Dissatisfaction with hours of work, wages, and working conditions caused many of the skilled workingmen to combine. The printers and shoemakers of New York and Philadelphia formed local trade societies soon after the Revolution. The tailors and others formed unions after the War of 1812. For some years these trade unions were local in character, each trade union having no association with other trades in the same locality, or with the same trade in other towns. Since five-sixths of the factory workers were girls, often mere children, early labor organizations did not extend to the factories. In 1828 the unions of Philadelphia federated, and similar trade associations were organized elsewhere. About 1835 there were one hundred fifty such societies in Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore. The largest number of the members were the workers in the building hades — carpenters, bricklayers, masons, plasterers, painters. Almost at the same time the workingmen of Philadelphia and New York formed workingmen's political parties and nominated their own candidates for the local offices. By 1834 a national federation of local trade unions — the National Trades Union — had been established and for a time it held national conventions. 3.The demand of the labor unions. The labor unions, then as now, struggled to improve conditions of work, hours of labor, and wages. Several labor newspapers were started. From one of them we can take the following list of demands as typical of what the workers were asking: First: the right of man to the soil: "Vote yourself a farm"; Second: Down with monopolies, especially the United States Bank; Third: Freedom of public lands; Fourth: Homesteads made inalienable; Fifth: Abolition of all laws for the collection of debts; Sixth: A general bankruptcy law; Seventh: A hen of the laborer upon his own work for his wages; Eighth: Abolition of imprisonment for debt; Ninth: Equal rights for women with men in all respects; Tenth: Abolition of chattel sectional leaders together. It was, however, but a truce before a great political battle. It was significant of the democratic unrest of the time that the people of the various sections were tired of being dictated to by the "Congressional caucus," which still continued the practice of naming the candidates of the various parties. As early as 1821 the state legislatures began to put forward their favorite sons as candidates for the presidency. In 1822 Tennessee nominated Jackson, and in 1823 Kentucky nominated Clay. The rivals in the Republican party came to an open break in the presidential campaign of 1824. Nevertheless, despite this open display of antagonism to the Congressional caucus and this "mandate" from the people, some members of Congress met in a caucus of this kind for the last time to nominate William H. Crawford. In Pennsylvania a state convention, an example of a new agency for selecting candidates, nominated Jackson for President and Calhoun for Vice- President. Adams was the favorite candidate of the entire Northeast, and was nominated by the state legislatures. The election of the President by the House of Representatives, 1824. The real contest was between Jackson and Adams. The combination of Jackson men and Calhoun men gave them an advantage which outweighed Adams's. Although Jackson received more popular votes than his rivals, he did not have a clear majority in the Electoral College, and consequently for the second time (there has not yet been a third) the election of the President went to the House of Representatives. When it becomes the duty of the House of Representatives to elect the President, the Constitution prescribes that the vote shall be taken by states, the representatives from each state having one vote. Furthermore, the House must choose one of the three men who received the highest number of votes in the Electoral College. This meant that the House was limited in its choice to Jackson with ninety-nine electoral votes, Adams with eighty-four, and Crawford with forty-one. Clay, who had received thirty-seven electoral votes, gave his support to Adams, and on the first ballot enough of the doubtful states voted for Adams to give him the necessary majority and the election. The end of the old Republican party. Adams appointed Clay his Secretary of State. This appointment was a worthy one, for Clay was the ablest man in public life who sympathized with the nationalism of Adams and who was ready to give up local interests for the national welfare. But the appointment lent color to the rumor, without any foundation in fact, that Clay had supported Adams in return for the appointment to the first place in the Cabinet. The followers of Jackson bitterly denounced this as a "corrupt bargain." Jackson, in defeat, became more interested in achieving the presidency than ever before. He immediately began a four-years' campaign for the presidency. The split within the Republican party was complete. The growth of cities. The canal packets and the river steamboats brought large regions in the interior within reach of Eastern markets. The cities were growing rapidly. New York in twenty years, from 1820 to 1840, increased from 120,000 to 300,000. By 1840 it had more people than either Boston or Philadelphia. St. Louis, the center of several lines of steamboats plying upon the Mississippi, the Ohio, and the Missouri rivers, was a thriving inland city. Along with St. Louis, New Orleans, Cincinnati, and Pittsburgh had become great centers of Western trade. Chicago, however, was still a small village and had not yet started on its way toward becoming the great metropolis of the Midwest. Industrial centers, like Lowell and Fall River, introduced a new phase of American history. In 1820, for example, most textiles were made in private homes. By the time of the panic of 1837 the majority were factory made. Improvements. Foreign observers noted that the whale-oil lamps on the city streets had been replaced by gas lights, and the well. The Yankee Peddler by Thomas W. Wood Courtesy Wood Art Gallery* Montpelier, Vermont The itinerant merchant, who carried his wares from village To village and farmhouse to farmhouse, was a common sight. From the Ladies' Home Journal, March, 1900. Courtesy Curtis Publishing Company Courtesy Gallery of Fine .Arts, Yale University. Whitney Collection of Sporting .Art The country store was traditionally a meeting place for hearing the news and debating public questions. The "general store is still found in rural districts. The famous race between Peytona and Fashion took place in New York in 1845. Horse racing, always popular in America, has become a large-scale industry. Within a twenty-year period the population had almost doubled. More than a million of the increase in population between 1840 and 1860 was the result of immigration. The Irish potato famine of 1845 and the revolutionary disturbances of 1848 in central Europe, coupled with the boundless opportunities for cheap land and free enterprise, lined hundreds of thousands of Irish and Germans to the New World. The immigrants established themselves in the growing factory towns of the North and on the farms of the Northwest; they did not go South, where they would have been compelled to compete with slave labor. The South noted jealously the growing numerical strength of the North. There seemed little doubt that, as time passed, Southern influence in the councils of the nation was bound to be less and less. In 1860 the South had a population of twelve and a half million, including about four million slaves. The population of the North was nineteen million and increasing rapidly. For every white man of fighting age the South could give its armies, the North had three or four. Economic conditions. North, South, and West. A larger population was not the only advantage of the North. The economic structure of the South was based, as we have seen, on the growing of cotton. The South did not grow all its own food nor manufacture the articles it needed. It depended on imports from the North or Europe. The North, on the other hand, was more nearly self-sustaining. It enjoyed the benefits of varied economic activities: manufacturing, commerce, fanning, shipping. When the test of war came, the farms of the West and Northwest could supply the annies with food and supplies, and manufacturing in the Northeast could be adapted to war needs. Railroad construction, 1850-60. The ten-year period from 1850 to 1860 was one of bustling activity and prosperity. Midwestern railroad cities had a remarkable growth and New Orleans declined in importance. The location of Chicago on the shores of Lake Michigan was destined to make it the great Midwestern metropolis. Slowly, Chicago began to outstrip St. Louis in population, although by 1860 it had just passed the 100,000 mark. As the Western terminus of the railroads, Chicago became the center of the growing traffic on the Great Lakes and of the trade in grain and livestock. Most of the new railroads connected the East with the West. The railroads carried the goods of the Eastern factories to the Western farmers, and also carried the products of the Western farms to the populous sections of the East, and to the Atlantic seaboard for shipment to Europe. Western grain had begun to rival cotton as America's chief export. As American farm products were sent to Europe in ever-increasing quantities, the ties between East and West were strengthened. The rapid growth of the West. The population of the West increased by more than four millions in the 1850's. California, Minnesota, and Oregon were admitted as states, and territorial governments were established for Kansas (admitted as a state in 1861), Utah, New Mexico, Washington, Nebraska, Dakota, Nevada, and Colorado. The railroads were one cause of this development. Other causes were, of course, the great fertility of the Western plains and the development of improved agricultural machinery. The most important of the new agricultural machines was the McCormick reaper, originally patented in 1834 but not perfected or produced in large quantities until the 1850's. In grain growing the reaper worked a revolution as far-reaching as Whitney's cotton gin. Cyrus McCormick had vision as well as confidence in the West when in 1847 he established his plant for the manufacture of reapers at Chicago near the center of the grain belt of the nation. The growth of American manufactures. The output of American factories doubled in value from 1850 to 1860; in the earlier year the value of American manufactures was about one billion dollars — a little short of the value of agricultural products. One thing that helped both the farmers of the West and the manufacturers in the East was the great increase in immigration. To the factory owners of the thriving Eastern cities the immigrant was a source of cheap labor. New inventions. However, a more important cause of the remarkable output of American factories was the large number of new inventions. The Patent Office, for example, issued nearly 6500 patents in the decade of the forties, while in the decade of the fifties the number was more than 28,000. In 1844 Charles Goodyear discovered the process of vulcanizing rubber; in the same year Samuel F. B. Morse perfected the telegraph. In 1846 Howe invented the sewing machine. McKay developed a sewing machine for use in making shoes. The motives of Douglas. It has been said that Douglas was eager to pose before the Southerners as their friend because he hoped to run for President. It has also been suggested that he honestly believed in the principle of popular sovereignty, and thought that its application was the only logical wav to remove the dread issue of slavery from politics. Whatever merit there may be in this explanation, strong economic and financial interests were back of the Kansas-Nebraska Act because the North saw the advantages of a transcontinental railroad and the expected settlement of the Nebraska Territory. The more settlers, the more business there would be for the railroad and for Chicago. "The most momentous measure passed by Congress. " The passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act angered the North and even the Northwest. Douglas reported that he "could travel from Boston to Chicago by the light of his burning effigies." Among the immediate consequences of the Act may be listed an increased interest in abolitionist propaganda, the final collapse of the Whig party, the formation of the present Republican party, and a bitter renewal of the old sectional rivalry. The formation of the Republican party. Antislavery men of the Northwestern and Eastern states met the challenge of the Kansas- Nebraska Act by organizing a new party determined to exclude slavery from the territories of the United States. At first they called themselves anti-Nebraska men and found recruits among Whigs, Democrats, and Free Soilers from the Northern states. It was at Ripon, Wisconsin, in February, 1854, while the Kansas-Nebraska Bill was under discussion, that the first suggestion for a new political organization was made. The idea spread rapidly, and the name Republican was applied to the group. On July 6, 1854, at Jackson, Michigan, the new Republican party formally began its long career. Similar conventions were held in Maine, Massachusetts, New York, and elsewhere. The new party succeeded in winning elections in Michigan in the fall of that year. By 1856 the new party was strong enough to win 114 votes for its candidate, John C. Fremont, as against 174 for the successful candidate, James Buchanan. "Bleeding Kansas. " Another result of the Kansas-Nebraska Act was the struggle between proslavery and antislavery men for control of Kansas. Slaveowners from Missouri began to move into Kansas, and to offset this an Emigrant Aid Society was organized in New England to encourage antislavery settlers to settle in the territory. Riots, massacres, and civil war between armed bands that supported one or the other side characterized what was aptly described as "bleeding Kansas." Popular sovereignty did not succeed in Kansas. The news of events in Kansas, distorted to suit one's purpose, helped greatly to solidify both North and South in their opposite stands on the issue of slavery. The Campaign of1856. The Democrats met in convention while passions were still hot from discussion of the bloody conflict in Kansas. Their platform upheld the principle of popular sovereignty as the "only sound and safe solution of the slavery question." In order to avoid the Kansas-Nebraska Act as an issue, they nominated James Buchanan, whose absence from the United States as minister to England had kept him free from an active part in the controversy. The Republican party nominated as its first presidential candidate John C. Fremont, the "Pathfinder," and adopted a platform which opposed slavery in the territories, but which tolerated it in the states where it already existed. A third party — the Native American, or "Know Nothing," party — was also in the field, with ex-President Fillmore as its nominee for the presidency. As the name indicates, the Native American party was alarmed by the increasing tide of immigration, and declared that "Americans must rule America" and that "only native-born Americans should be selected for all state, federal, and municipal offices." The term "Know-Nothing" was quickly applied to the new party because in answers to questions regarding it, a member always answered "I know nothing." In 1856 it attracted many supporters who hoped its policies would draw attention from the slavery struggle. Eventually, with improved machinery and more careful cultivation, agriculture in the South became more prosperous under free labor than it ever was under slave labor. Diversified farming. Under slavery, Southern agricultural staples were tobacco, rice, sugar, and, of course, cotton. They continued to be the staples after the war, but many farmers found their soil suitable for the growth of peanuts, fruits, and vegetables as well. In a few years, as a result of the use of refrigeration in freight cars and steamships, Southern farmers had access to the populous markets of the North. Furthermore, the South was not dependent upon other sections of the country for its foodstuffs as formerly. Diversification also tended to soften the hardships that might attend the failure of the cotton crop. Industrial transformation of the "new" South. 1. Use of natural resources. Under the slavery system the rich natural resources of the South were undeveloped. After the war a great change set in. In 1880 the mineral output of the Southern states yielded $10,000,000; twenty years later the yield was $100,000,000. Birmingham, Alabama, became the "Pittsburgh of the South." The timber resources of the South were also developed. In the early years of the twentieth century the lumber yield of the Southern states was greater than that from the great forests of the Northwest. 2. Large-scale manufacturing in the South. Manufacturing in the South kept pace with the development of its natural resources. The South has abundant water-power facilities, and since the raw material was at hand and labor was cheap and plentiful, cotton mills were built with astonishing rapidity. Northern capital assisted in the establishment of factory towns and villages. In 1860 the Southern cotton factories had about 300,000 spindles and 10,000 workers; by 1900 there were more than 4,000,000 spindles and nearly 100,000 workers. In the twentieth century the shift of the textile industry from the Northeast to the South went on apace. This movement has brought new problems both to the towns of the Northeast, which suffer by the transfer of labor and capital to other centers, and to the South, which has to adjust itself to the problems of an industrial civilization. Postwar conditions in the North. The North and West escaped most of the devastating effects of the war. The need for war supplies created a demand for products from Northern farms and factories; therefore boom times resulted. Increased prices brought profits to manufacturers and farmers. Surplus capital was used to expand and develop the resources of the nation. The returning Northern soldier found the farms, the railroads, the shops, and the mills better equipped with machinery and producing more than when he left them. 1. Increased use of machinery. The scarcity of farm labor and the demand for wheat and other farm products furnished an excellent opportunity for the manufacturers of the new farm machinery. The scythe and the cradle gave way almost completely to McCormick's reaper in the cutting of grain in the West during the War between the States. McKay's shoe-sewing machines displaced the village shoemaker. Machinery supplied the place of the men called to serve in the army and each year yielded a greater output. 2.New resources and new industries. Only a nation with unusual resources can destroy wealth by military operations and replace the losses at once by the development of other forms of wealth elsewhere; yet this is what the North did during the War between the States. In western Pennsylvania, where oil had been discovered in 1859, the owners of oil wells and the lands on which they were located found fabulous wealth. In Pittsburgh, Cleveland, and Buffalo, oil refiners established a new industry and changed almost overnight the mode of lighting homes. With the opening of oil wells in the Middle West there followed a trail of booming cities and the growth of a "petroleum aristocracy." 3.Rapid settlement of the rich Western prairie lands. The greatest resource of the United States was the unfilled lands of the prairie West. The westward movement of the frontier continued its course in spite of the war. In May, 1862, in keeping with its platform pledge, the Republican majority in Congress passed the famous Homestead Act. By the terms of this act any citizen or any alien who expressed his intention of becoming a citizen could acquire a farm of 160 acres on payment of a ten-dollar fee for registration of his title, provided he lived on and cultivated the land for five years. Soldiers were allowed to deduct the period of their army service from the five-year period of occupancy. It was the withdrawal of the Southern representatives from Congress which made it possible to pass this law, for they had long opposed giving such encouragement to westward expansion. Under the liberal terms of this act the Western prairie land was quickly settled. To a large extent, the settlers came from the East; but, with the close of the war, hundreds of thousands of immigrants, lured by the promise of free land and quick riches, came from Europe (pages 371, 601-602). In the same year (July, 1862) Congress also passed the famous Morrill Act, giving lands to the several states and territories to help them establish colleges. Each state was given 30,000 acres of land for every Congressional representative it had in 1860 or at the time of admission. The proceeds from the sale of the land were to be set aside to endow colleges which would teach "branches of learning related to agriculture and the mechanic arts." In all about 13,000,000 acres of the public domain were given to the states for the establishment of what have been called "land-grant" colleges. The effect of this act was to encourage the creation of state universities. The Morrill Act was of great value to American agriculture; it also ranks with the Land Ordinance of 1785 and the Northwest Ordinance as being among the most important laws of Congress for the encouragement of education. Last Chance Gulch (now the main street of the state capital, Helena) is shown above as it looked in 1864 at the time of tile Montana gold rush. The America we know today began to take shape in the quarter century after the close of the War between the States. In this period the West was rapidly settled. Railroads spanned the continent. Cities increased in number and in size. Industry developed rapidly and "Rig Business" evolved. Workingmen and farmers organized. Sectionalism and states rights gradually yielded to the demand for federal legislation to regulate many details of our national economic life. ECONOMIC CHANGES INFLUENCE OUR HISTORY MORE THAN THE OUTCOME OF BATTLES contrast. Eighty years ago the United States was predominantly an agricultural community. Most of its inhabitants lived on farms and in small villages, dependent on foreign countries for the greater part of their manufactured articles and necessary capital. It was a relatively unimportant nation as far as world affairs were concerned. Today it is a world power. Instead of being dependent upon the rest of the world for manufactured products and for capital, the United States is dependent on the rest of the world for markets as an outlet for its surplus of manufactures, foodstuffs, and capital. Factors in the economic revolution. A peculiar thing about the development of the United States is the speed with which the transformation took place. There are, of course, many factors which explain this quick transformation, but these four are probably the most important: (1) the rapid development of means of transportation, enabling men and goods to be moved everywhere throughout a broad continent; (2) the application of machinery to fanning, which made it possible to utilize the fertility of the Great West; (3) the rapid increase in population, assisted by a liberal immigration policy and the willingness of foreigners to try their fortunes in this rich land of opportunity; and (4) the stability of the government, which made foreigners willing to lend the necessary capital for die development of our resources. The very heart of our present economic order is the system of communications and transit. This includes highways, canals, waterways, railways, telephone, telegraph, cable, radio, pipe lines, air lines, and the postal system. The transportation and communication system binds and knits the whole country into an economic unit for the production and distribution of goods. The transcontinental railroad — the wonder of the age. A little more than a hundred years ago the steam locomotive began to play its part in bringing about great economic changes. When, in 1869, the Central Pacific and Union Pacific railroads joined near Ogden, Utah, the continent was for the first time crossed by rail from Atlantic to Pacific. The achievement seemed gigantic, and the builders national heroes. In Philadelphia the old Liberty Bell in Independence Hall was once more rung in celebration. By 1884 three other trunk lines — the Southern Pacific, the Northern Pacific, and the Sante Fe —joined the Pacific coast with the East and opened wide belts of fertile land for settlement. In five years, from 1868 to 1873, 28,000 miles of railroad were built, nearly as much as the total mileage that had been laid in the thirty years from 1830 to 1860. (Review page 350.) Federal aid to railroad building. The construction of a railroad was a long and costly process. Much money had to be invested and spent before the railroad could begin operating and paying dividends. To encourage investors and to speed up construction, the governments of the nation, states, and cities were generous in the matter of subsidies, loans, special concessions, and land grants. To help the Union Pacific the federal government offered from $16,000 to $48,000 for each mile built and gave, in addition, alternate sections of land along the route over a belt twenty miles wide. The federal government gave to railroad companies about 131,350,000 acres of land. Many of the states also made generous land grants. The panic of 1873, partly caused by the railroad boom, checked construction for a time, but by 1880 the country had 92,000 miles of railroad. The decade from 1880 to 1890 saw this fabulous total nearly doubled. In 1910 the railroad mileage of the country had reached 237,000 miles, which is more than the present mileage. No other country has so large a ratio of mileage to population as the United States. Constant improvements in railroad service. The construction of new railway lines was only a part of the change that took place in transportation. In 1866 there were twelve different gauges of track. Within a few years tracks were relaid to bring all to the standard gauge (4 feet, 814 inches) adopted by Congress for the Pacific Railroad. About the same time hard steel rails replaced soft iron ones, and heavier cars the first rude ones. Iron bridges replaced ferries. Through freight and passenger arrangements were introduced. In the passenger cars gas lamps and steam heat replaced oil lamps and wood-burning stoves. In 1872 the Westinghouse air brake came into use. Automatic car coupling was developed about the same time. Curves were straightened and steep grades over mountains were cut down. Legislatures compelled the adoption of many safety devices. Sleeping cars and dining cars became common on all main lines. In 1883 the adoption of the system of standard-time zones (Eastern, Central, Mountain, and Pacific ) made easier the long-distance operation of trains. In spite of the cost of some of these improvements and the greed of some of the promoters, railroad rates were cut in two between 1850 and 1880. Favorable conditions for Western settlement. In 1865 the Great Plains west of the Mississippi were without railroads. But after the war, railroads influenced settlement in this region as in earlier times rivers had influenced settlement in the East. The places selected by the railways for stations became the centers from which the settlements spread. The division points of the railroads and other places which promised to become business centers took on the activity of "boom towns." All conditions were favorable for the rapid occupation of the region. No other part of the United States had ever had so complete a system of transportation at hand. The railway companies fostered the movement by special freight and passenger rates to settlers and tourists. Fuel, machinery, and materials for building were easily transported by rail. Moneylenders from the East lent the settler capital in return for a mortgage on his farm. Furthermore, there was a large number of people ready to move westward. There were about two million veterans of the War between the States whose old community ties had been broken. Many of them were attracted by the opportunities which the free homesteads and the boom town offered to them. The railroads, eager to obtain settlers to buy their land and to increase their volume of business, advertised extensively. Steamship companies, too, by elaborate advertising campaigns throughout western Europe, lured new settlers to the West. Immigrants from Germany, the Scandinavian countries, and the British Isles came in increasing numbers. So influential was the advertising of the railroad companies, the steamship lines, and the new states which wanted to increase in population, that one authority has suggested that the "desire to get cheap labor, to take in passenger fares, and to sell land have probably brought more immigrants than the hard conditions of Europe, Asia, and Africa have sent." The prewar frontier. When the War between the States began, the frontier extended almost in a straight line through eastern Nebraska and Kansas. It also included the eastern part of Texas. The Far West, California, and Oregon had passed beyond the frontier stage, and so, too, had the Mormon settlements in Utah. In order for the frontier to be closed it was necessary that the mountain states and the Great Plains he settled. The movement to occupy this unsettled area proceeded eastward from the Pacific and westward from the Mississippi. In the process we can discern what has been called the miners' frontier, the ranchers' frontier, and the farmers' frontier. It became dependent upon the ability of other nations to buy its surplus. As farm surpluses continued, they depressed prices. Rural unrest became a characteristic of modem America. The farmer begged the government for help against low prices, high railroad rates, high interest rates, and speculation in the commodity exchanges. The end of cheap land. In 1889 President Harrison, acting under the authority of a law of Congress, lifted the ban on the settlement of Oklahoma lands within the limits of the Indian territory. On the day the territory was opened to homesteaders, April 22, 1889, a horde of land-hungry people assembled on the Kansas border. At noon, upon the blast of a bugle, on horseback and on foot, in every conceivable kind of vehicle, they rushed for the choice sites. At nightfall of the first day fifty thousand persons had begun the settlement of Oklahoma. In 1890 Oklahoma Territory was organized and started on its way to statehood. (The opening and development of Oklahoma is the setting of a splendid novel by Edna Ferber, Cimarron.) A few months later a portion of the Sioux Reservation was opened for settlement. Though the season was midwinter, the troops preserved order among the impatient home seekers and land speculators with difficulty. In this dramatic fashion the era of cheap lands came to an end. Utah was admitted as a state in 1896, Oklahoma in 1907, and Arizona and New Mexico, the last of the forty-eight states, in 1912. The beneficiaries of the Homestead law. If the settlement of this last frontier was a drama filled with deeds of romantic adventure, it had its unfortunate side as well. Greedy speculators were at hand; loan "sharks," cattle kings, railroads, mining companies, meat packers, and land grabbers were at times unscrupulous in the methods they used to acquire title to valuable soil and mine and timber resources. There were illegal entries on public land and fraudulent claims to title; there was tampering with officials, legislatures, and courts. In this way speculators and others defeated to a large extent the purpose of the Homestead law to give ownership of land in small tracts to settlers. Farm speculation and rural discontent accompanied, as in earlier times, the settlement of the last of our public domain. The end of an epoch. According to the Census Bureau the frontier was a region of more than two and less than six inhabitants per square mile. In reporting the 1890 census, the Census Bureau announced that there was no longer a line separating the frontier from the more thickly settled areas. It was with a quotation from this report that Professor Frederick J. Turner began his epoch-making address to the American Historical Association (July, 1893): "Up to and including 1880 the country had a frontier of settlement, but at present the unsettled area has been so broken into by isolated bodies of settlement that there can hardly be said to be a frontier line." Throughout most of our history our ideals and institutions have been influenced by the existence of a frontier. The closing of the frontier meant that the American people had to adapt these ideals and institutions to a changed economic environment. Some of the new conditions may be briefly listed: 1. The closing of the frontier coincides with the movement to conserve our natural resources and to restrict immigration. 2. The closing of the frontier also coincides with a period of expansion overseas. Searching for new frontiers, American capital overflowed into the Caribbean, South America, and Europe. 3. The closing of the frontier coincides with the rapid development of large urban areas. A large proportion of our people were crowded into cities, chained by the machine to factories, steel mills, and offices. 4. The closing of the frontier meant that workers could no longer escape their difficulties in the cities by going west and starting a homestead. This led to a sharpening of the conflict between capital and labor, to the problems of unemployment and insecurity, and to a demand for social welfare legislation. Professor Turner and his critics. These are some of the ways in which the frontier and its closing have affected American life. Recently it has been argued that Professor Turner and his successors in arly progress in manufacturing. For nearly a century the United States found its greatest wealth in the river and the ocean, the 1 forest, the farm, and the mine. Although manufacturing made rapid strides, for nearly a century the United States was engaged primarily in the production of raw materials. The factory had its feeble beginnings before the close of the eighteenth century. During the War of 1812 and after, manufacturing secured help from the federal government in the form of protective tariffs. But the existence of an expanding market, the presence of raw materials, and the practical inventive genius of the people were probably more powerful stimulants to the growth of American manufactures than the tariff. The War between the States (pages 348-351) furnished a great stimulus, and American industry leaped forward. Within twenty years, from 1860 to 1880, the value of domestic manufactures more than doubled. Following 1880 the rate of advance was even greater; the progress has continued until today the United States leads the nations of the world in the variety and value of its manufacturing output. Factors in the development of American manufacturing. Once the Industrial Revolution gained headway in the United States, it made rapid advances. No interstate tariff barriers hampered access to a large and growing market. A fairly adequate banking and credit system facilitated trade. The high tariffs set dining the War between the States, which were continued in effect, kept out foreign competition. Nowhere else in the world was there such a market open to the producer. The population was increasing at the rate of one and a quarter million each year. The raw materials necessary for a remarkable manufacturing development — cheap land, minerals of every kind, and fuel — seemed inexhaustible. Every year saw new discoveries of sources of oil, gas, coal, iron ore, lead, copper. Immigrants and an increasing native population supplied cheap labor. America lacked capital, but European investors lent money at moderate rates of interest. The economic revolution was much more than in the mill; it was more than the rise of the great factory to take the place of the wayside craftsman's shop. It also included the unending line of recruits who knocked at the doors of the great industrial organizations, many of which counted their workmen by tens of thousands. Men and women and children did the shop or mill work and, by force of circumstance, changed their mode of living and their ways of thinking. The labor supply came from many sources. (1) Many of the laborers came from farms. Regular horns, the opportunities for companionship, for varied amusements, and for intellectual improvement in the cities attracted a steady stream of farm laborers to the industrial centers. (2) Many of the laborers were immigrants; between 1880 and 1914, instead of moving to the West, immigrants crowded into the factory cities. Employers maintained a powerful lobby to prevent the enactment of laws that would check this source of cheap labor. On the other hand, American labor organizations began to demand the restriction of immigration (page 422). (3) The transfer of industries from the home to the factory and the ease with which machinery could be operated attracted into the wage-earning class women and children who formerly remained at home. Low wages paid to men made it necessary for women and children to add to the family income. Reasons for the development of a labor movement. The growth of an organized labor movement was the result of economic changes, fear of the loss of work, and low wages. 1. Economic changes. The successful organization of large groups of laborers in the United States coincides with the disappearance of the frontier, the development of large industrial combinations, and the growth of cities. In earlier years the existence of free land furnished an outlet for the underpaid and discontented. With the coming of the Industrial Revolution and the congestion it created, there was no longer a satisfactory escape for the toiling masses. The employers met some of their problems by forming pools, trusts, holding companies, and manufacturing associations. The laborers, too, organized. Individually, workers were at the mercy of their employers; collectively, they could successfully bargain with the masters of capital and the owners of jobs. 2.Fear of the loss of work. The new working conditions in industry separated the employers and the employees. More than likely the higher officials of the corporation seldom saw the workrooms and knew little if anything of the conditions under which the workmen lived. Hiring laborers was as impersonal as purchasing raw materials. When money could be saved by cutting down the number of workers, employees were laid off or discharged as casually as the stopping of an unneeded piece of machinery. 3.Since industry was organized to make a profit on the investment of capital, businessmen used every means to accomplish that purpose. None offered greater promise of immediate results than low wages. Cheap labor in the form of children, women, and immigrants provided opportunities for profits. Early labor unions. The unionization of workers was pretty well under way at the time of President Jackson. Then local organizations of skilled laborers achieved some success. But local craft unions could not achieve as much as combinations of unions on a national scale. To these larger combinations labor leaders directed their efforts after the War between the States. Many national unions imitated the Know- Nothing and the old Ku Klux Klan societies, taking on fantastic names, holding meetings in secret, with solemn ceremonies directed by officers with royal titles. Such, for example, were the Supreme Mechanical Order of the Sun, the Knights of St. Crispin, and the Noble Order of the Knights of Labor. There were also a few organizations of a more matter-of-fact type. One of these was the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, which has continued to the present day. The Knights of Labor (1869-86). The Knights of Labor was the first important attempt to organize workers on a national scale. 1. Organization. It was founded in 1869 by Uriah S. Stephens, a Philadelphia tailor, under whose leadership several local garment workers' unions in eastern cities expanded into a national union which included laborers of all kinds, skilled and unskilled, and even non-workers. After the Knights of Labor dropped its secret features (1879) it rapidly grew in numbers. 2. Demands. Among the demands of labor at this time were the following: shorter hours, better pay, and better conditions of work; workmen's compensation; compulsory school laws; abolition of child labor; a graduated income tax; inheritance taxes; postal savings banks; government ownership of railroads, telephones, and telegraphs; the formation of producers' and consumers' co-operatives. These demands pitched battles have usually resulted when federal troops, the state militia, or the police have been used to break up a strike. At other times violence has resulted when corporations imported "strikebreakers" to end a strike. Strikes are a serious and important business. Evils in themselves, they are also symptoms of evils in our social and economic structure. The achievements of organized labor. The achievements of organized labor have been many. 1. Limitation of the hours of work. The eight-hour day became a reality, first in government work and then in practically all industries; recent legislation and practice has established forty hours per week as the standard work week (pages 587-588). 2.State laws. A number of laws have been passed by the various states for improving the conditions of labor — limiting the hours of work of women and children, compelling the installation in mine and factory of devices to protect the safety and health of the worker, and requiring the employers to provide compensation to injured workers. The sweat-shop system has been attacked by a number of state laws; government employment agencies have been established; free public education and compulsory school attendance have become facts. Many states had child labor laws, and, even before the Social Security Act of 1935 (pages 622- 624), had adopted old-age and widows' pensions, and had begun to adopt plans of unemployment insurance. 3.Federal legislation. The federal government has also enacted a series of laws of benefit to labor. In 1884 Congress created a Bureau of Labor Statistics. In 1913 the Department of Labor was created as a separate department. The following year the Clayton Antitrust Act (pages 530-531) extended certain benefits to labor. In 1915 the La Follette Seaman's Act corrected tire labor conditions prevailing on ocean-going vessels and on river and lake craft. In 1916, by threatening to tie up the transportation system of the country, the railroad labor unions virtually forced Congress to pass the Adamson Act, which established a basic eight-hour day for railroad employees. Beginning in 1921 Congress passed laws to restrict immigration, a great achievement for organized labor. Some of labor's greatest gains were won during the era of the New Deal and World War II (pages 583-588). 4.Congressional attempts to limit child labor. By 1916 the movement to abolish child labor had achieved considerable success in many of the states. Manufacturers in states with the strong child labor laws argued that their competitors in states which had no such laws enjoyed cheaper production costs. Congress therefore attempted to limit child labor by a law (Keating-Owen Act) which excluded from interstate transportation all goods made in factories which employed persons under fourteen years of age. The Supreme Court in 1918 (Hammer vs. Dagenhart) by a vote of five to four declared this law unconstitutional on the ground that it was a violation of the Tenth Amendment. The educated Negro has of course become the spokesman of his race. The late Booker T. Washington and W. E. Du Bois have been outstanding. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, founded in 1909, and the Urban League, founded in 1911, are the chief agencies by which the Negro hopes to protect the interests of his race. The Negro is justly proud of the achievements of many individual members of his race — such as Marian Anderson, the singer; Jack Robinson, baseball player; George W. Carver, scientist, and hundreds of others — who have succeeded in obtaining a wide following even among whites. Negro music and Negro folklore have enriched American culture and literature. Negro manners, customs, and dialects furnish literary material which is being explored and brought to the attention of the general public. 2.Migration northward. As a result of World War I and the subsequent restrictions on immigration, many employers of labor in the North encouraged the Negro to leave the South. From 1910 to 1950 the proportion of Northern Negroes to the total Negro population increased steadily. As a result, the Negro problem is ceasing to be an exclusively Southern problem and is becoming national in scope. Some Northern cities — New York, Philadelphia, Chicago — have a larger Negro population than cities in the South. Each census has revealed that the total number of Negroes in the country (about fifteen million ) has tended constantly to bear a smaller relation to the total population. In the past this has probably been caused by the increase in the white population resulting from immigration and by the high mortality among the Negroes. 3.Lynchings and race riots. One of the most serious blots upon American civilization has been the large number of lynchings in the South and the serious race riots in the North. Lynchings are happily being reduced as a result of a campaign carried on by both the Negro and the white. The terrible race riots in Northern cities, which are a result of the movement of the Negro northward to take advantage of industrial opportunities, also seem to have abated. 4.Race prejudices. Despite strenuous efforts to secure equal political rights and equal educational and economic opportunities for Negroes and other minorities, intolerance and prejudice disappear slowly. Thus it was an object of the Ku Klux Klan movement of the twentieth century to foment a feeling of ill will and discrimination toward the Negro, the Jew, and the Catholic. The fact that the movement was ridiculed by the bulk of the people and was comparatively short-lived gives some hope that as time passes, much of the prejudice against the Negro and other racial groups will tend to disappear. However, there was a revival of Klan activities after World War II. The yellow race. Other racial problems have become acute during America's industrial transformation. The liberal immigration policy encouraged large numbers of the yellow race to come to America. Their presence was tending to cause the same racial trouble in the Pacific coast states that the presence of the black race has caused elsewhere. To avoid another racial problem the government took steps in 1882 to check Chinese immigration and in 1907 brought Japanese immigration nearly to an end. Restrictions have been eased since World War II. (See pages 604-607. For the Indian problem, see pages 372-374.) Factors tending to cause a decline in racial prejudice. Every now and then America suffers outbreaks of racial and religious intolerance, such as the "Know- Nothing" movement of the 1850's, the American Protective Association movement of the 1890's, the Ku Klux Klan movement of the 1920's and mid-1940's. These and other prejudice movements are directed against minority racial or religious groups. Part of the intolerance is caused by ignorance and stupid prejudices, and part of it is based upon the fear of economic competition. Unscrupulous leaders also see an opportunity to enrich themselves by organizing these societies. Agitators and vote-seeking politicians sometimes play upon racial sympathies and prejudices to further their own ends. Not only have the Negroes suffered from these unreasoned prejudices, but other groups as well—Jews, Catholics, and the various "minority" racial groups that make up the American people. In the past these waves of intolerance and prejudice have not enjoyed a very long life. The intermingling of various racial groups in many sections of the country, particularly in our large cities, and the ever-widening influence of the public schools have tended to emphasize the American ideals of tolerance and equality. However, false notions of racial inequality, popularized by the unscrupulous, and the economic competition for jobs have caused many to fear serious outbreaks of prejudice and discrimination. Undoubtedly racial and group intolerance is one of America's most pressing social problems. Much more has to be done before Americans may justly boast of their intelligence and their sense of justice. 2.Discuss the proposition that governmental corruption is no greater than that which exists in business. 3.Consider yourself on the staff of an advertising company that has been requested to map out an advertising campaign to promote (a) the sale of Western railroad bonds; (b) the westward migration; (c) the election of either Hayes or Tilden; Cleveland or Blaine; Bryan or McKinley; (d) the adoption of Civil Service Reform. Prepare sample advertisements. 4.Should the principle of the merit system be applied to all but a few elective and appointive positions? Reasons. Make a study of the conditions of civil service in your city, county, and state. 5.Roscoe Conkling said: "When Dr. Johnson said that patriotism was the last refuge of a scoundrel, he ignored the enormous possibilities of the word reform." What did Dr. Johnson mean? What did Conkling mean? Why might you expect Conkling to entertain this point of view? Do you agree? Reasons. In the previous chapter we reviewed the presidential campaigns of an interesting period in American history. It was a period in which the population of the country more than doubled: 31,000,000 in I860, 38,000,000 in 1870, and 76,000,000 in 1900. It was a period when immigrants flocked to our shores by tens of thousands, when our cities grew rapidly in size and number, when politics gave flagrant evidences of its ugliness in the cities, in the states, and in the nation. It was the period when the prostrate South slowly recovered from the war and the "crime of reconstruction," when railroads spanned the continent, when big businessmen organized American industry, when the farm lands of the West began to yield rich harvests, and when national labor unions began to play an important part in American life. It was a period of great progress; it was also a period of unrest and discontent as the people struggled to adjust themselves to the great changes that were taking place. The people, then as now, formed many associations to champion the cause of various reforms. The country debated many issues; and some of them it still continues to debate. What is the best tariff policy? How shall we rid ourselves of political corruption? How shall we deal with "Big Business," with monopoly prices, with the "unfair practices" of railroads? How shall we rid ourselves of panics and depressions and extend prosperity to all groups and all sections? How can we develop a banking and credit system that will serve the needs of all and yield special privileges to none? And there was then, as always, the political question: what part should government play in helping the people find the answers to these questions? The rise of the West. As might be expected in a country as big and diverse as the United States, not all of these questions have been in die forefront of popular interest at the same tune. In the last third of the nineteenth century — the period of the "emergence of modem America" — the outstanding political development was the revolt of the farmers of the West and South against the dominant influence of captains of industry, railroad magnates, and banking overlords. The West grew rapidly; with the help of laborsaving machinery the American farmers. By the phrase "return to normalcy" President Harding meant that we should adjust our economy once again to the tasks of peace, forget our great adventure in world affairs, and set our domestic house in order — revise the tariff upward, curtail expenditures, pay our debts, and reduce taxes. Harding's administration concluded a separate peace with Germany, sponsored the Washington Conference on Naval Limitation and Far Eastern Affairs (pages 706-707), and in the domestic field initiated budget reform, a high tariff, and the restriction of immigration. 1.The national budget. Unbusiness like methods had been followed by Congress in drawing up tax bills and in appropriating public funds. Several committees of Congress had a hand in the process and there was no co-ordination among them. The haphazard system of appropriations encouraged 'logrolling" by the members of Congress, each of whom tried to secure for his own district elaborate post offices, expensive river and harbor improvements, and so on. The National Budget Act of 1921 created a Bureau of the Budget with a director at its head. It is the duty of the director to obtain estimates of future needs from the various heads of departments and to prepare the budget — an estimate of receipts and expenditures for the ensuing year. The budget is then sent by the President to Congress, which has the power to disregard or change the various items. Charles G. Dawes was the first Director of the Budget and gave the new system a good start. The fact that Congress can disregard the budget is the essential weakness of the plan; however, a vigorous President, if he so desires, can create a live public opinion which can do much to compel a "logrolling" Congress to toe the mark. 2.The Fordney-McCumber Tariff, 1922. The Harding administration also undertook to revise the tariff. The result was the Fordney- McCumber Tariff, which raised the average level of duties to the highest point yet reached in the nation's history. The Fordney-McCumber Act contained one novel feature —a "flexible" clause permitting the President to raise or lower the import duties within 50 per cent of the figure set by Congress. In using this power, Presidents Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover tended to raise the duties rather than lower them. Corrupt practices in Harding's administration. Hardings administration was disgraced by some of the worst scandals in our national life. The sickening details of wrongdoing in the Veterans' Bureau, the Prohibition Bureau, the Department of Justice, and the Department of the Interior (pages 616-617) make the Harding administration a close rival of Grant's administration for the dishonor of being labeled the most corrupt in American history. Harry J. Daugherty, who was chiefly responsible for Harding's nomination, was made Attorney General. He and his Ohio gang proceeded to demand their "pay-off," enriching themselves and their henchmen. As the corruption began to be noised abroad, there was a trail of mysterious deaths and suicides. The hands of the unfortunate Harding were tied, because the "gang" could blackmail him by threatening to expose details of his private life. Harding's sudden death in August, 1923, just as the news of the extent and seriousness of the corruption was being revealed, probably saved him from impeachment. He was succeeded by Vice-President Calvin Coolidge, formerly Governor of Massachusetts. Calvin Coolidge, 1923-29. Following the depression of 1921-22, the country enjoyed seven years of remarkable prosperity. This helped to make Coolidge's administration popular. More interest was shown in Secretary of the Treasury Mellon's proposals to reduce taxes than in social or economic problems. 1.The Coolidge "era of good feeling." The continued consolidation of business into enormous corporations found the public singularly apathetic. Coolidge's popularity was achieved by a policy of economy in federal expenditures, by reductions in taxes made possible by the large revenue from mounting incomes, and by avoiding any attempt at reform. Large sections of the population were willing to forget politics and concentrate on the task of making and spending money. The discontent of the farmer, yearly growing more bitter, was the only disturbing element in the Coolidge "era of good feeling". 2.The campaign of 1924. Coolidge easily secured the Republican nomination in 1924. The Democrats, after a contest between the supporters of W. G. McAdoo and Alfred E. Smith (in the first national convention to be broadcast by radio), finally nominated John W. Davis, a conservative corporation lawyer. The domestic policies of the Progressives attracted much attention. They advocated public ownership of water power, public utilities, and railroads, a government marketing corporation for the benefit of the should approximate the cost of maintaining highways; (6) that the oil industry give up ownership of pipe lines. Effect of the depression on railroad revenues and securities. Although these demands arose in response to a steady decline in traffic, the railroads were unable to obtain any substantial relief from Congress until the serious depression of 1929 threatened the stability of railroad stocks and bonds. For years railroad bonds, along with government bonds, had been considered ideal investments for savings banks, insurance companies, and trust funds, but in 1931 nearly all of the weaker railroad companies and many of the strongest as well were in the hands of receivers. In January, 1932, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation was authorized to lend money to needy railroads in order that their maturing bond obligations could be met, to save the railroad system from utter collapse (pages 554-556). The effort to sustain the railroads by government funds was inspired by a desire to avoid a disastrous breakdown of our entire credit structure. Agrarian discontent once more. Just as serious as the conditions of the railroad industry was the low income of the farmers of the nation. Once again in our history there was a prolonged period of agrarian unrest and discontent. Unlike the farm problem in the last third of the nineteenth century, the farm problem in the 1920's and 1930's was not primarily a problem of credit, for various laws had been passed to help the farmer get credit (page 551); it was a problem of declining markets, surplus production, and over expansion of crop acreage. Effects of World War I on agriculture. World War I brought temporary prosperity to the farmers. With the slogan "Food will win the war," and the lure of high prices, farmers cultivated a larger acreage, buying land at two or three times its normal value and borrowing money to purchase expensive farm machinery. When the war ended and prices dropped, thousands of farmers were bankrupt. The continued production of a surplus tended to keep farm prices down, so that the farm problem became chronic. Thousands of farms were abandoned. It is estimated that the farm population, which in 1920 amounted to thirty-one million, had dropped to about twenty-seven million in 1930. Farm tenancy. Farm wages, the value of farm land, and the standard of living on the farm steadily declined after 1920, while farm tenancy was on the increase (that is, an increasing number of farmers rented instead of owned the farms they worked). The increase in farm tenancy was caused largely by declining prices and the inability of the farmer to pay his taxes or the interest on his mortgage. In 1910, 35 per cent of all the farms in the United States were operated by farm tenants; in 1920, 38 per cent; in 1930, 42.5 per cent; and estimates for later years place it as high as 50 per cent. The percentage of farm tenancy differs in the different sections, being as low as 6 per cent in the New England states and as high as 63 per cent in the South Central states. This trend of the farm population from independent landowner to propertyless tenant is in itself a social fact of great importance. Agriculture and the machine age. Despite the decline in the number of farms and farmers, America's farm production did not decline. The reason for this was the continued mechanization of agriculture and the increasing use of scientific methods of farming. The combine, the tractor, the internal- combustion stationary engine, the com picker, the cotton sledder, the cream separator, and a hundred other kinds of machines took the place of farm laborers. As an illustration, in 1920 there were about two hundred fifty thousand tractors in use on American farms; in 1930 there were about nine hundred thousand. Because of superior mechanical equipment the American farmer produces a larger crop per man than any other farmer in the world. At the same time crop production per acre has been lower in the United States than in many European countries, due to the fact that we have not felt any need to economize in the use of land. However, farm machinery is costly and its benefits can be secured only on large farms, or by a group of small farmers co-operating in its purchase and use. Scientific farming and machine farming have tremendously increased output. They have not solved the farmer's problems; they have aggravated them. As the farmer was bringing more land under cultivation, much of it poor land, and increasing his output through mechanization, he was losing his former world market. Canada, Argentina, Australia, and Russia competed increasingly with the American wheat grower; the British colonies, Japan, and China with our tobacco growers; and India and Egypt with our cotton growers. Moreover, the restriction of immigration and the decline in the rate of population growth prevented any large increase in the demand at home for agricultural products. Changes in the dietary habits of the people, as well as the substitution of tractors and automobiles for approximately ten million horses and mules, further limited the market for American farmers. Farm co-operative associations. Apart from the "industrialization" of the farm, probably the most important development among American farmers is the organization of co-operative enterprises of various sorts. This movement is in itself a significant social development, because the American farmer is, by tradition, imbued with a spirit of independence, initiative, and self-reliance. The success of the California Fruit Growers Exchange, organized in 1895 to pack, grade, and market oranges and lemons, stimulated the The present civilization of the Western Hemisphere is dominated by peoples of Old World origin. Ever since the days of Columbus, successive waves of immigration have poured into the New World. According to the first census (1790) the population of the country was a little less than four million. The census of 1950 gave the continental population of the United States as close to one hundred fifty million. Immigration contributed no small part to this stupendous growth. Causes of immigration. The causes of immigration have been many; but outstanding at all times has been the economic motive — the desire for land ownership. Even when religious, political, and racial persecutions played their part in causing people to seek another place to live, the desire for economic improvement was usually present also. Colonial immigration. In the colonial period a number of different peoples of Europe settled on the Atlantic seaboard. There were, for example, French, Dutch, Swedish, German, Irish, and Scotch, although most of the settlers in what is now the United States were English. Since the English predominated, they determined the language, laws, and forms of government that became the basis of American life. The periods of immigration. There are about five great periods in the history of immigration to the United States: the first, from the close of the Revolution to about 1825; the second, from 1825 to the War between the States; the third, from the close of the War between the States to about 1890; the fourth, from 1890 to World War I; and the fifth, from World War I to the present. Immigration before the War between the States. In the first period a total of about three hundred thousand people came to this country, chiefly from the nations of northern and western Europe. In the second period there arrived about five million immigrants from the same countries. This migration included large groups of German and Irish immigrants, especially in the period between 1845 and 1855. The Irish potato famine of 1846 and 1847 and dissatisfaction with England's economic and political policies toward Ireland sent hundreds of thousands of Irish to our shores. Within a period of about seven years more than a million and a half Irish came to the United States. Political troubles in Germany in 1848 led hundreds of thousands of Germans to seek refuge in the United States. The beginnings of opposition to the immigrant. During this period the older settlers began to show signs of opposition toward the newer ones. The immigrant has always been content — at least for a few years after his coming — to accept a lower standard of living than those already here. The immigrants who furnished the bulk of the unskilled labor of the country crowded the earlier inhabitants out of the lowly and poorly paid jobs, and were later crowded out themselves by succeeding waves of immigrants. Labor began to oppose unrestricted immigration on the ground that immigrants tended to keep wages down and to lower the American standard of living. Prejudice toward the new immigrant also began to appear at this time. This prejudice was based on differences in religions and on differences in nationality. Very frequently, however, it was really caused by fear that the immigrant was taking jobs and economic opportunities away from the earlier immigrants. As early as the 1830's secret societies were formed to protest against the foreigner, and "native" Americans organized political movements to discriminate against him. One evidence of this feeling was the Know-Nothing movement of the 1850's; a more recent manifestation of it was the Ku Klux Klan movement of the 1920's; more frequently local groups have organized to propagandize their pet prejudices against particular foreign groups. Despite these "nativist" movements the general policy of the government toward the immigrant was one of welcome. Americans took pride in America as the land of opportunity, the haven for the oppressed. Immigration from 1860-90. The economic revolution after the War between the States required large numbers of workers. Manufacturers and the builders of railroads welcomed immigrants. The Western states also encouraged immigration. Larger numbers than ever before began to come to the land of opportunity. The chief source of immigrants during this period continued to be Germany and the British Isles; large numbers also came from the Scandinavian countries. The "new" immigration, 1890-1914. As the decades of the 1880's closed, it was noticeable that the origin of the immigrant stream shifted from northern and western to southern and southeastern Europe. For example, in the early 1880's about three fourths of the immigrants were from northwestern Europe. Some twenty years later, nearly three fourths came from Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Italy. Taking the census year of 1890 as an arbitrary date, it has become customary to refer to the immigration before that year as the "old" immigration and that since 1890 as the "new" immigration. The new immigration came when the industrial revolution was in full swing and the frontier had disappeared. These new immigrants found an America very different from that found by their predecessors. There was no longer good land to be had for little or nothing. Two thirds of the new immigrants were men of working age, almost a fourth of whom came to America intending to return to their families in the Old World after they had accumulated a little fortune. Encouragement of immigration by business interests. The large corporations sent their agents to Europe to spread stories about great opportunities that awaited the immigrant in America. They lured many would-be immigrants to the new world by offering them jobs. Steamship lines promoted immigration by means of alluring advertisements and salesmen who told such tales of American wealth that many immigrants came to believe that American streets were paved with gold. The hard lot of the new immigrant. Many of the new immigrants were poor, unskilled, and illiterate. Leaving overcrowded, backward countries, they went directly to our industrial centers and accepted work at the bottom of the wage scale. They huddled together in hovels and tenements under living conditions often worse than they had left. New immigrants in the factory and mining towns. The story of Lawrence, Massachusetts, is that of many a mill town of the East. In 1848 the textile mills of Lawrence were doing a thriving business. The population was six thousand, and of this number two thirds were native Americans. The other third were Irish immigrants. In 1910 the population was eighty-five thousand. Of this number six sevenths were of foreign birth or of foreign parentage. Nearly one third of this group were new immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. The majority of the laborers in the textile mills were foreign-born. The same tendency was noticeable in other cities and other industries. In 1870 the coal miners of eastern Pennsylvania were either native Americans or immigrants from the British Isles and Germany; by 1910 most were Slavs or Italians. The development of a policy of selective immigration coincides with labor's opposition and the coming of the "newer" immigration. Differences between the old and new immigration. (1) The old immigration had come at a time when the country was growing and could absorb many new settlers. (2) The old immigration came in smaller numbers than the new. (3) Politicians more easily exploited the new immigrants to obtain their votes. (4) The old immigrants had come from nations with institutions, customs, and ideas similar to those of the settlers already here; the new immigrants had customs that were different from American ways. Thus it was claimed the "new" immigrant could not be so easily assimilated, that is, molded to American ways of living. By 1900, Mulberry Street was the heart of "Little Italy" in New York City. Many of the poorest Italian immigrants from southern Italy settled in this district. i ne 'problem of Americanization. The new immigrants crowded together with others of their own kind. Most of our great cities soon had areas known, for instance, as "Little Italy," "Little Greece," "Little Bohemia." Bewildered by their inability to speak our language, the immigrants read foreign-language newspapers and went to foreign- language churches and theaters. The older people found it almost impossible to become Americanized. The public schools, however, did invaluable work, and the second generation of foreigners quickly adapted themselves to the ideals and conditions of American life. Various organizations attempted to carry the work of Americanization to the adult foreigners, but the task was extremely difficult. The necessity for Americanization was obvious when war broke out in 1914. The problem that resulted while America was a neutral was embarrassing enough; it became a serious matter when the United States entered the war. Although most of the "hyphenated" Americans, as they were called, supported the country of their adoption, some did so reluctantly and some were outspoken in their sympathy with America's enemies. This wartime experience was a factor which strengthened the movement for Americanization and the demands of labor for the restriction of immigration. Selective immigration. With the general immigration act of 1882 Congress began the practice of selective immigration. This law suspended Chinese immigration, the only definitely restrictive law that Congress passed until 1921. But between 1882 and 1921 Congress passed a series of laws which excluded certain classes of immigrants. In general these laws excluded: (1) criminals, (2) the mentally disabled, (3) those afflicted with certain diseases, (4) those likely to become public charges, (5) anarchists and other radicals who advocated the overthrow of government by force, (6) contract laborers, that is, those who were contracted for by steamship companies or industrial corporations, (7) polygamists, (8) aliens not eligible for citizenship (this referred chiefly to all Asiatics), and (9) those "who cannot read the English language or some other language or dialect." This literacy test was vetoed by Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson, but was finally passed over Wilson's veto in 1917. Restrictive immigration. After World War I there was a rush of immigrants to the New World. Fearing that the problem of Americanization would get beyond control, and that serious disturbances might attend the addition of large numbers to our labor supply during a period of adjustment, Congress passed an immigration bill. 1. The law of 1921. This law — the first to restrict immigration by numbers, or quotas — specified that each nation would be allowed to send to the United States each year no more than 3 per cent of the number of persons of that nation in the United States as shown by the census of 1910. The number expected to enter was about three hundred fifty thousand; but the law permitted so many exceptions that in 1924 twice that number entered the country. 2. Discrimination in favor of the old immigration. In 1924 Congress reduced tire number of immigrants allowed to enter. Two per cent of the foreign "nationals" in the country, according to the census of 1890, were permitted to enter. On this basis the annual quota was about one hundred sixty-seven thousand. The 1890 census was used as a basis for the determination of quotas in order to cut down the proportion of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. One of the chief reasons for discriminating in favor of the peoples of northern and western Europe was the popular, although false, notion, that the people of northern and western Europe are superior mentally and physically to the peoples of southern Europe. This theory of "Nordic supremacy," although no reputable scientist sustains it, flatters the "Nordic." Hitler and the Nazis gave some popularity to this idea. The National Origins Plan, July, 1929. The 2 per cent feature of the law of 1924 was temporary. The permanent feature of the law is known as the "national origins plan." 1.Determination of quotas. The national origins plan of quota restriction, which finally went into effect July 1, 1929, provides that the total immigration from "quota" countries in one year shall be limited to 150,000. "The annual quota for any one nationality shall be the number which bears the same ratio to 150,000 as the number of inhabitants in continental United States in 1920 having that national origin bears to the number of inhabitants in continental United States in 1920 of European origin." The great difficulty in applying the principle was to determine the number of inhabitants in 1920 of the national origin of the group to be admitted. A special Quota Board was set up to determine this figure and the annual quota for each country. In filing its report, the Quota Board observed that "the information available raises grave doubts as to the value of these computations as the basis for the purpose intended." 2.Other features of the Quota Law. There are three other features of the law which need mention. First, the law specified that every country should be allowed to send a minimum of one hundred immigrants per year, even though its quota figure fell below that amount. Secondly, the law definitely excluded Asiatic immigrants. In the third place, the Quota Law did not apply to the Western Hemisphere. 3.Non-quota immigration from the Western Hemisphere. Since 1929 non-quota immigration to the United States from countries of the Western Hemisphere has been as heavy in some years as the quota immigration from Europe. Thousands of laborers from Mexico have crossed the border into our Southwest. There they are welcomed by fruit and beet-sugar growers and other employers of unskilled labor. Some have proposed that quotas be assigned to the countries of Latin America, but nothing has been done, partly because the depression acted as a bar to immigration and partly because employers objected to cutting off the supply of low-paid laborers. The immigration of Asiatics. The way in which our immigration policy may influence our international friendships is best illustrated by the story of the exclusion of Asiatics. 1. Opposition to the Chinese. After the settlement of California in the middle of the last century large numbers of Chinese migrated to the Pacific coast, where they worked as unskilled laborers. Many were imported to work on railroad construction. Gradually opposition to Chinese immigration developed, and in 1880 China, by treaty, recognized the right of the United States to "regulate, limit or suspend" the immigration of Chinese laborers. In 1882 Congress suspended Chinese immigration for a ten-year period. This restriction was later renewed. In 1894, by another treaty, the entry of Chinese laborers was prohibited for ten years, and in 1904 Congress continued the exclusion of the Chinese without any tune limit. During World War II (1943) this law was repealed and the Chinese placed under the provisions of the Quota Law. 2.The "gentlemen's agreement" with Japan. Meanwhile, Japanese immigration began to grow in numbers. The Japanese, instead of engaging in manual tasks, obtained land and began to compete with American farmers. The presence of the Japanese became an issue in the politics of the Pacific states, particularly in California. Japanese children were for a short tune excluded from the public schools. Japanese were not allowed to become landowners. The Pacific states even proposed to check immigration by state action. The Japanese government protested to the federal government, which could do nothing but inform the Japanese officials that it had no control over the school or land laws of states. The situation was tense. The whole problem was quietly solved by the famous "gentlemen's agreement" of 1907, by which Japan promised to refuse passports to Japanese laborers seeking admittance to the United States. The United States was content to let Japan control the migration of her own people. 3.Abrogation of the gentlemen's agreement. Although Japan lived up to her promise, congressmen from the Pacific coast, in the debate on the law of 1924, urged that the United States abrogate the gentlemen's agreement of 1907 and assume direct control over her own immigration policy. The protest of the Japanese ambassador and his statement that "grave consequences" might follow such an act stirred the nationalistic ardor of Congress, and the threat was answered by the insertion of a clause stating that "aliens ineligible to citizenship" could not be admitted. In approving the law of 1924 Coolidge expressed regret that Congress had seen fit to abrogate the gentlemen's agreement. This feature of the law of 1924 was a factor in weakening the friendly relations that Japan and the United States had maintained for some time. Refugees and displaced persons. Conditions in Europe in the 1930's brought up the question of modifying our quota laws to admit a large number of political and religious refugees. Nothing was done, however, until after World War II, when the problem of finding a haven for hundreds of thousands of displaced persons was particularly acute. In 1948 a law permitted the entry of 205,000 displaced persons over a two-year period. Many leaders in both the Democratic and Republican parties were dissatisfied because the law clearly discriminated against a large percentage of displaced persons. In 1950 the restrictions were removed and the number of displaced persons permitted entry was increased to 345,000. The McCarran-Walter Immigration Act of 1952. Congress enacted a new comprehensive immigration law in June 1952. Many had hoped that this law would do away with the peculiar provisions of the 1924 law. But the law in substance retained the provisions of the earlier law on maximum immigration and the quota system. It thus continued the discriminatory restrictions on immigration from eastern and southern Europe. The new law removed the outright ban against Asiatic and Pacific immigration but limited the immigration from this area to 2000. The law established a screening process in an effort to keep out "subversives and other undesirables." Special powers were given to the Attorney General to deport immigrants who were members of the Communist party or Communist front organizations, even after they acquired United States citizenship. President Truman wrote a vigorous message vetoing the bill, claiming that it was discriminatory, unenlightened, and that it would " intensify the repressive and inhumane aspects of our immigration procedure." But by a narrow margin Congress overrode the President's veto and the McCarran- Walter Act became law. When H. G. Wells visited the United States in Theodore Roosevelt's time and saw New York City, he thought it "lavish of light,. . . lavish of everything,. . . full of the sense of spending from an inexhaustible supply." What he said of New York could be applied to American life everywhere; indeed, it characterized the attitude of the whole country. Extravagant exploitation of natural resources. From the days of the earliest settlements people acted as though American resources in soil, minerals, and forests were unlimited; and so they seemed. Through ignorance or carelessness or greed, a great portion of these resources have been destroyed. Forests were regarded as a common nuisance and burned as rapidly as possible in order to clear the land. The grasses, leaves, and surface mold were likewise burned. The fires did threefold injury: (1) valuable timber was destroyed; (2) the killing of the surface roots allowed rains to wash away the richest earth, only to clog the navigable rivers; (3) the burning of the decaying vegetable matter seriously reduced the fertility of the soil. A similar waste characterized the development of our mineral resources. Since it was both difficult and expensive to cap the outlet pipes of oil and gas wells on account of high pressure, in many cases these were allowed to flow unchecked, as though the oil or gas would flow forever. Carelessness in mining coal, taking out only the richer part of the coal seam and abandoning the mine with two or three times as much of the less easily mined coal left behind, meant the total loss of much of the material, for it would probably never pay to reopen such an abandoned mine. The search for quick profits, as well as the absence of improved equipment and methods, was responsible for much of the waste in mining. Waste in use. There were also wastes in use. Much coal has been wasted by imperfect combustion in furnaces, either because of improperly built furnaces or of ignorance in stoking. Formerly, lighting plants converted less than one per cent of the heat value of the coal into electric light. Heat, gases, and other by-products went to waste. After World War II several thousand Puerto Ricans migrated to the United States, the great majority settling in New York City. The government of Puerto Rico. For over half a century Puerto Rico was an unincorporated territory; that is, all parts of the American constitution did not apply to it. The main features of the Puerto Rican government, as fixed by laws passed in 1900 and 1917, were as follows: (1) The executive authority was vested in a governor appointed by the President of the United States. (By a law of 1947, the Puerto Ricans elected their own governor, but the President continued to appoint some administrative and judicial officials.) (2) There was a two-house legislature. The laws were subject to veto by the governor, but if the legislature overrode the veto, the law was submitted to the President of the United States, who had absolute veto. (3) The citizens of Puerto Rico were citizens of the United States. (4) Puerto Rico was represented at Washington by a commissioner who had the courtesy of the floor of the House of Representatives, but no vote. (5) Articles of commerce exported to the United States were exempt from customs duties, but were subject to revenue taxes just as if they had been produced in the United States. However, the tax collected on Puerto Rican products was turned over to the Puerto Rican treasury. Under this regime some Puerto Ricans agitated for complete independence, some for commonwealth status, and others for statehood, a proposal endorsed by the Democratic platform of 1932. The great majority of Puerto Ricans steadily advocated a greater voice in their own government. Thus they were greatly pleased when President Truman appointed a native Puerto Rican as governor and when Congress gave them the power to elect their own governor. Puerto Rico finally achieved "home rule" in 1952 when a constitution drafted by Puerto Ricans and approved in a popular referendum by a vote of 375,000 to 83,000 was also approved by Congress. The new constitution gives Puerto Ricans complete control of their own government, but at the same time links Puerto Rico to the United States as part of its federal structure. The status of "The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico," as it is referred to in the constitution, might be described as somewhat similar to that of a British commonwealth like Canada. The Puerto Ricans celebrated their "home rule" independence on July 4, 1952. The acquisition of overseas territory like Puerto Rico and the Philippines was only one evidence of the drift toward imperialism. Economic penetration or dollar diplomacy was the form of imperialism. United States Marines "fall in" at Nicaragua. On more than one occasion in the cast the Marines have been used to maintain order in Central America. Since the restriction of immigration to the United States many Europeans and Orientals have migrated to South America. The great opportunities for wealth in Latin America have been confined to a comparatively few rich landowners; the mass of the people have remained in a semi-feudal state, working on large plantations or in mines. However, in recent years social reforms have been put into effect, and large sections of different Latin-American countries have become more and more industrialized. All the countries of Latin America are republican in form, having constitutions modeled in many respects after that of the United States. Frequent internal revolutions and the rise to power of self-seeking dictators have created an impression of political instability. Not infrequently these revolutions have been influenced by rivalries among foreign financial interests. In recent years illiteracy has been greatly reduced and some revolutions have inaugurated important social and economic reforms; in particular they have weakened the economic power of foreigners. The effect of economic changes on the diplomacy of the Western Hemisphere. As the United States is gradually lessening its exports of raw materials, it is no longer so strong a competitor of Latin America for the same world markets. The United States has been trying to find in Latin America a market for its manufactured products, and to compete successfully with other industrial nations in supplying manufactures and capital to Latin America. There is also noticeable in Latin America a trend toward industrialization. In these economic shifts may be found the explanation for the changing attitude of the United States toward Central and South America. Among the 310,000,000 people of North and South America there exist enormous possibilities for the development of a vast trading empire which should bring peace and prosperity to all. Efforts have been made to achieve this goal, but not infrequently the actions of the United States, as the strongest nation, have caused ill will. The movement to secure these mutual advantages, formerly known as Pan-Americanism, is now known as Inter- American Co-operation. The meaning of Inter-American Co-operation. Pan-Americanism, like many other similar terms, is an expression that may mean a number of things. To some it has meant an attempt to exchange valuable information concerning markets and materials. To others it has meant simply the holding of periodical conferences to discuss problems peculiar to the Western Hemisphere. To still others Pan-Americanism has meant the leadership of the United States in the affairs of the Western Hemisphere. To some Latin- American statesmen it has meant the association and co-operation of equal states for the promotion of common ends; to still others the term Pan-Americanism has been regarded as an instrument of "Yankee imperialism" To get rid of the bad odor that formerly attached to the term "Pan-Americanism," the movement is now called Inter-American Co-operation, and the Pan-American Conferences arc now known as the International Conferences of American States. The new names emphasize significant changes in American policy and in the spirit and character of the movement. An early Pan-American Congress. The ideal of inter-American cooperation is a logical consequence of the Monroe Doctrine — in a sense the positive aspect of the Doctrine; namely, the promotion of friendly cooperation among the republics of the New World. Simon Bolivar, the great South American patriot and revolutionary, in the 1820's envisioned a federation of the American states for the purpose of protecting the Americas from European interference; he was the leading spirit in the promotion of a Panama Congress in 1826 (page 234). In the early years of the nineteenth century Henry Clay was the great advocate of close ties with Latin America. But the United States did not take part in any of the four American Congresses which were held in 1826, 1847, 1856, and 1864. The Monroe Doctrine, which might have been converted into an inter-American doctrine, remained exclusively a doctrine of the United States. The Pan American Union. Blaine revived the idea of co-operation and economic reciprocity among the Americas and became president of the first Pan-American Conference in 1889 (pages 648-651). The Pan American Union created by this first conference is supported by the contributions, apportioned according to population, of the republics of the Western Hemisphere. It is managed by a governing board representing all the republics of the Western Hemisphere. The Union issues a monthly bulletin in English, Spanish, and Portuguese. It is housed at Washington in the beautiful Pan-American Building, erected by Andrew Carnegie. In addition to making arrangements for the holding of the general International Conferences of American States the Union has arranged for many special conferences of journalists, jurists, scientists, educators, and others. Its aims are to develop commerce, friendly intercourse, and understanding and to preserve peace. International Conferences of American States. Since the first conference in 1889 eight others have been held: in Mexico City, 1901; Rio de Janeiro, 1906; Buenos Aires, 1910; Santiago de Chile, 1923; Havana, 1928; Montevideo, 1933; Lima, Peru, 1938; Bogota, 1948. The conferences give an opportunity for the exchange of ideas and the discussion of grievances, plans for arbitration treaties, and trade relations. They have also been instrumental in clarifying basic principles of international law. The ninth conference at Bogota, the capital of Colombia, drafted a new charter for the organization of American states. copper, coal, lumber, furs, and fish. Agriculture is possible on approximately 1,900,000 acres, but less than one third are actually under cultivation. The strategic value of Alaska and the Aleutian Islands as the shortest route to Japan was clearly demonstrated during World War II. 2. Hawaii. The Hawaiian group of islands, situated a little more than 2000 miles southwest of San Francisco, comprises a total area of about 6400 square miles. The population of the eight inhabited islands in 1950 was close to 500,000, only a small portion of which is native Hawaiian. About one fourth of the population are of Japanese origin; about one tenth are Filipinos. As a result of the United States immigration laws no Japanese were admitted in recent years, but the number of Filipino immigrants increased. The chief products of the islands are sugar and pineapples. The great bulk of Hawaiian trade is with the rest of the United States; about 90 per cent of Hawaii's imports come from the mainland, while 98 per cent of her exports go there. Population and races. The Philippine archipelago, situated some 500 miles off the coast of China, consists of 7000 islands, most of them being mere bits of rock sticking out of the ocean. The entire archipelago is about 1100 miles in length and nearly 700 miles in width. The Philippines have in all a land area of about 115,000 square miles. The population — more than 19.500.000 in 1950 — is composed of a wide variety of races, illustrating every degree of civilization. A few of them at the time of American acquisition were little more than savages; but under American occupation savage practices have been largely abandoned and the wilder tribes are approaching a state of semi civilization. There are about seven main branches of language with perhaps eighty-seven different dialects. Ninety per cent of the population are Filipinos. Most of them are Christians, having been converted to Roman Catholicism by Spanish missionaries. About 400.000 inhabitants of the island of Mindanao are Mohammedans — called Moros by the Spaniards, after the Mohammedan Moors who once dominated Spain. Resources. It is almost impossible to exaggerate the importance of the islands as an agricultural producing center. Farming methods, however, still need considerable improvement, and only about one third of the available farm land is under cultivation. The chief products are tobacco, sugar, hemp, and coconut oil. The islands also contain some minerals not as yet developed to any great extent. Government experts have reported that the islands possess about two million acres suitable for the cultivation of rubber. About 70 per cent of the trade of the Philippines is with the United States. The Philippine Commission. The government of the Philippines has been one of our country's most difficult tasks. Just before the Spanish-American War the Spaniards had crushed a Filipino revolt; at the time of the American conquest a number of the rebels expected the United States to assist them in achieving independence. When it became apparent that this was not the intention of the United States, a revolt led by Aguinaldo broke out against the Americans. It took the army some years to subdue the Filipinos. In 1901 the American military authorities surrendered control of the country to a civil body — the Philippine Commission — and William H. Taft became the first governor. In 1907 the Filipinos were given a legislature, but the Commission, appointed by the President, continued to act as an upper house. The Jones Act. Under Wilson the Filipinos were given a larger share in the government. In 1916 Congress passed the Jones Act, which established the government of the Philippines until 1935. Both houses of the legislature were elected by the Filipinos themselves; that is, those Filipinos who owned property, or paid taxes, or could read and write. The chief executive was the governor general, appointed by the President of the United States. He had the power to veto acts passed by the legislature; and if the legislature passed these bills over his veto, they had to be submitted to the President for his approval. Neither the United States nor the Philippine Islands taxed imports from one another. The Filipinos were never granted United States citizenship. The promise of independence. The Jones Act contained the following preamble: "It is, as it has always been, the purpose of the people of the United States to withdraw their sovereignty over the Philippine Islands and to recognize their independence as soon as a stable government can be established therein." This promise encouraged many Filipinos to agitate for independence. At times serious difficulties developed and various Presidents sent investigating commissions to study conditions and make recommendations. Each investigation produced administrative reforms and increased the opportunity of the Filipinos for self-government; but each reported against the granting of independence, largely on the ground that the Filipinos had not achieved a "stable political or economic system." But beginning in 1929 new forces within America were beginning to work on the side of Philippine independence. (1) Possession of the islands had not materially increased our trade with China and the Far East. (2) The cost of administering, fortifying, and defending the islands was beyond all proportion to the value of the Filipino trade; "imperialism" in the Philippines did not pay. (3) Military and naval experts questioned the ability of the United States to defend the Philippines successfully without weakening our defense of Hawaii, the Pacific coast, and the Canal Zone. (4) Migration of Filipinos to California, like the Japanese migration of twenty years before, led to a demand for a restrictive policy. We could hardly shut out the Filipinos so long as the Philippines belonged to the United States. (5) American competitors of Filipino exports desired a tariff on Filipino products. Philippine independence. In January, 1933, Congress passed over President Hoover's veto a complicated bill granting independence to the Philippines, after a ten-year trial period of self-government. Before becoming effective this bill had to be accepted by the Philippine legislature; but that body rejected it in the summer of 1933 because it gave the United States the right to keep certain military and naval bases in the islands. Early in 1934 President Franklin D. Roosevelt suggested that Congress eliminate from the original bill the offending clause. On March 24, 1934, Congress passed the McDufffe-Tydings Act, carrying out the President's suggestion, and on May I, 1934, the Philippine legislature voted to accept the bill. Independence was to be proclaimed on July 4, 1946. During the intervening years (1) the United States was to keep control over finances and foreign affairs; (2) free trade between the Philippines and the United States was to continue, except that the United States might impose its regular tariff duties on Filipino exports of sugar, coconut oil, and hemp in excess of certain amounts; (3) Filipino migration to the United States was limited to an annual quota of fifty, but after 1946 the regular immigration laws would apply; (4) beginning with 1941, the Philippines might impose gradually increasing export duties on goods exported to the United States; (5) the United States promised to enter into treaties with other nations to guarantee the neutrality of the island. In accordance with the provisions of the law, a Philippine convention drafted a new constitution. This was ratified in May, 1935. In September, Manuel Quezon was elected as the first president of the Philippine Commonwealth. A high commissioner was appointed to take charge of American interests in the islands. The new constitution contains a bill of rights, limits the president to one six-year term, and provides for a one- chamber legislature and a Supreme Court of eleven members, which has the power to declare laws unconstitutional by a two-thirds vote. There is also a provision for the compulsory arbitration of disputes between labor and capital. Having achieved this concession from the United States, many Filipinos were not so sure as formerly of their desire for complete independence. Thus, one of the Filipino commissioners suggested in the House of Representatives that independence be postponed, and President Quezon declared that "the Philippines are not anxious to be cut off completely from United States protectorship," although in campaigning for office he had declared, "An independent Philippines must depend on herself for protection." In May, 1942, the United States lost the Philippines to Japan; but after the reconquest of the islands in 1945, and shortly before his death, President Roosevelt assured the Filipinos that they would be given their independence. The record of the United States in the Philippines. During the more than forty years of American control, the United States gave an especially fine example to the world of enlightened colonial administration. Illiteracy was reduced from 85 to 37 per cent, more than a million children were in public schools, and the University of the Philippines had more than seven thousand students. The health of the population was much improved; cholera and smallpox were no longer a menace. Small agricultural landholdings were encouraged. An extensive public works program provided employment for large numbers. Complaints against American administration were given sympathetic attention, and a cordial good will was established. While a majority of the Filipinos desired independence, there was a large minority who were satisfied with American administration and were reluctant to face the economic problems which complete independence would bring. The enlightened policy of the United States toward the Philippines paid handsome dividends during World War II, when Filipinos fought shoulder to shoulder with Americans against the Japanese. Filipinos assisted in the reconquest of the islands in 1944 and 1945 and in the Korean War. The European powers in China. While the United States was busily engaged in the development of its own resources, the other powers — especially England, France, Germany, Russia, and Italy — were pursuing imperialistic policies in the Near East, in Africa, and in the Far East. Their object was to get economic or political control of backward areas. The European powers frequently secured this control by compelling the backward areas by force or bribery to grant them "concessions" which safeguarded the interests and property of their citizens. Frequently these concessions were followed by a protectorate. China became a field for imperialistic activities before the War between the States; but Japan, on the other hand, quickly accommodated herself to Western methods and became a strong nation. Toward the close of the nineteenth century there was an eager scramble for leases and concessions in China. China lay prostrate. "The chief powers of Europe came, like fishermen after blubber, and took here a province and there a harbor." It was just at this time that the United States obtained Hawaii and the Philippines. At this time, too, the United States feared she would be shut off from the markets of the Far East. Secretary Hay and the policy of the "open door. " To stop the partitioning of China and to protect American trade with that country, Secretary of State John Hay invited the powers of Europe to do two things: (1) to agree to maintain the Chinese tariff in the territories they had seized, and (2) not to discriminate against other foreigners by the grant of special port and railroad rates to their own nationals. These principles have been summarized as the policy of the "open door." The European nations responded in cautious notes to Hay's suggestion, saying in effect that they would carry out the policy if other nations agreed to it. Hay tactfully announced that the replies he had received were a "final and definite acceptance of the American policy." Hay's statement was, however, more hopeful than accurate. The powers continued to do lip service to the principle of the open door and the theory of Chinese integrity, but in practice proceeded to ignore them. The Boxer uprising. Within a few months after Hay's efforts to secure European agreement to the principle of the open door, a Chinese association, known as the "Boxers," started a revolution. The purpose of the Boxers was to put an end to the Westernizing of China and to get rid of foreigners, their customs, their machines, and their trade. The foreign legations in Peking were besieged. A joint relief expedition composed of soldiers from France, England, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, and the United States hurried to the assistance of the legations. While cooperating with the European powers, the United States warned them that it was opposed to using the Boxer uprising as an excuse to dismember China. The Boxer indemnity. In the negotiations which followed, Hay accomplished his main purpose. The European powers agreed to the principle of China's independence and integrity, and merely insisted that the rebel leaders be punished and that China pay an indemnity to foreign individuals and nations to compensate them for the loss sustained. The bill of indemnity was a heavy one, far in excess of the actual losses. The United States was awarded $24,000,000, but on examination this was found to exceed, by about $11,000,000, the actual losses. Acting upon the advice of President Theodore Roosevelt, Congress ordered the return of this excess indemnity to China — an act which earned for us the good will of China in the years to come. China used the money returned to create a fund to send Chinese to American colleges. This fund enabled about sixty students to come to American colleges annually. Many returned to China to become leaders in the movement to maintain their country's independence. A strong Chinese nationalist movement gradually developed. In 1911 the Manchu dynasty was overthrown and China became a republic. For several years China was dominated by war lords, who ruled various provinces in China and sometimes obtained money from foreign governments in return for special privileges. Finally a strong National People's party (called Kuomintang) was organized by China's great hero. Dr. Sun Yatsen. After his death in 1925, Chiang Kaishek became the head of the People's party and founded the Nationalist Government of China. However, Chiang Kaishek was opposed by Chinese Communists, and in 1949 he withdrew his forces to the island of Formosa. The United States and Japan. At the beginning of the twentieth century the United States looked with favor upon the growing strength of Japan. It thought that Japan as a strong nation might be a factor in supporting the open door policy and in checking the piecemeal partition of China by European nations. When the Japanese attempted to oust the Russians from Northern China in 1904, most Americans applauded. But Japan's success in the war was so great that American sentiment shifted, and ever since then the United States has feared Japan's increasing power in the Far East. Japan also had grounds for suspicion of the United States. President Roosevelt actively intervened to bring the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-05 to a close (in a peace treaty signed at Portsmouth, New Hampshire). During the negotiations Roosevelt urged Japan to be moderate in her demands upon Russia. Subsequently, many Japanese claimed that Roosevelt acted as he did in order to deprive Japan of the fruits of victory. Furthermore, Japan resented American hostility to Japanese immigrants (page 606). World War I and conditions in the Far East. Japan used the opportunity presented by World War I to insist that China agree to twenty-one demands. The net effect of these demands (1915) was to give Japan the dominant position in China and the Orient. Secretary of State Bryan sent a mild note of protest to Japan. China accepted Japan's demands after they had been considerably modified. Two years later, by means of the Lansing-Ishii agreement (1917) the United States recognized that Japan had special interests in China, "particularly in the part to which her possessions are contiguous." Many Chinese leaders began to feel that American friendship, as manifested by Hay's diplomacy and the return of a portion of the Boxer indemnity, had become lukewarm. World War I strengthened the Japanese position. The European powers were weakened by four years of conflict; Japan emerged stronger than ever. She received the German possessions in the Pacific north of the equator as a mandate from the League. She was also given control of Shantung, a Chinese peninsula which Germany had controlled. The Far Eastern question and naval rivalry. The United States and Japan, in a better position than the other participants in World War I, started an extensive program of naval construction. England tried to compete. In an attempt to check this rivalry, President Harding in 1920 issued a call for a conference at Washington to discuss Far Eastern affairs and the limitation of naval armaments. Since disturbed conditions in the Far East were the chief reasons for the naval construction, any agreement to limit navies depended upon the settlement of the problems of the Pacific. At the time, the Washington Conference was enthusiastically hailed as a great step toward international co-operation and peace. In the light of subsequent events, however, the Washington Conference is chiefly interesting as an object lesson of what can happen to formal statements of good intentions and solemn international treaties. The treaties limiting naval armament are described elsewhere (pages 750-752), but one clause of the naval limitation treaty deserves mention at this point. Japan and the United States agreed, with minor exceptions, to maintain the status quo as regards naval bases and fortifications in the Pacific. This agreement meant that the two countries would not enter into competition with each other to secure a preponderance of naval strength in the Pacific. We now know that Japan used the next twenty years to establish bases on numerous islands in the Pacific, many of which were mandated to her by the League of Nations at the end of World War I. Japan also violated the treaties concerning Far Eastern affairs. The more important agreements were: 1.The Four-Power Treaty. England, France, Japan, and the United States agreed (a) to respect one another's possessions in the Pacific and to refer all disputes that might develop to a conference of the four nations for consideration and settlement; and (b) to consult with each other and to determine the actions to be taken by all four nations if some other power should threaten aggressive action. 2.The Nine-Power Treaties. The treaties concerning China are referred to as Nine-Power treaties because they were agreed to by all the nations which had interests in the Pacific — England, France, Japan, Italy, China, Belgium, Holland, Portugal, and the United States. One of the Nine-Power Treaties was substantially an endorsement of the American policy of the open door. The Powers agreed (a) to respect the independence and territorial integrity of China; (b) to refrain from securing special rights and privileges in China; and (c) to support the principle of equal opportunity for all nations in trading with China. The Powers also promised to grant China full control over her own tariff policy and to take under consideration the surrender of "extraterritorial rights." (Extraterritorial rights are the special privileges that several nations had obtained to have their citizens tried under the laws and by officials of their own country rather than those of China.) Chinese nationalism. The development of a strong nationalist movement in China, much more than these promises of the Powers, gave China a larger control over her own affairs. Thus, for example, in February, 1929, China assumed control of her own tariff, and in January, 1930, she announced that she would no longer recognize the extraterritorial rights of the Powers. However, she did not succeed in eliminating extraterritoriality until World War II. Japan finally withdrew from Shantung in 1929, as she had promised to do. Not able to get Congressional approval of many of the measures he advocated. Mr. Truman's failures in Congress were attributed to a coalition of Republicans, Southern Democrats, and a few conservative Democrats from other regions. The President's steady support of "civil rights legislation" (pages 811-813) alienated many Southern Democrats; still others in the South and elsewhere were opposed to what many critics of the Fair Deal began to describe as the "welfare state." A filibuster in the Senate by Southern Democrats effectively blocked Mr. Truman's "civil rights program." Enough Southern or conservative Democrats joined with Republicans to prevent the enactment of many other administration measures. The following items in the Fair Deal program were not carried out: repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act; creation of valley authorities, similar to the T. V.A., for the Columbia and Missouri rivers; admission of Alaska and Hawaii as states; approval of the St. Lawrence Seaway; passage of laws to provide federal aid to education, a universal military training program, an improved farm support program, and a national health insurance program. Congress also illustrated its independence of the President by overriding his veto of a new immigration law and of a law designed to curb Communist activities. In spite of these set-backs, however, the accomplishments of the Fair Deal were substantial. The minimum wage rate set by the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 at forty cents an hour was raised to seventy-five cents. Congress, at the urging of the President, corrected weaknesses in the Displaced Persons Act and doubled the number of persons to be admitted (page 607). Federal rent controls were retained in modified form; the Reciprocal Trade Agreements program was continued. Although the President's National Health Insurance program, characterized by the American Medical Association as "socialized medicine," went down to defeat, Congress did appropriate funds for hospital construction, medical research, and a National Science Foundation (page 624). Congress, by laws in 1949 and 1950, subsidized slum clearance and authorized a public housing program (page 624) as well as a loan and mortgage system to encourage private construction. One of the most notable achievements of the administration was the improvement and extension of the social security system (pages 623-624). Throughout the four-year term to which Mr. Truman was elected, prosperity was general. During the spring of 1950 a mild recession occurred, with the number of unemployed increasing slightly. The outbreak of the Korean war in June, 1950, put an end to the temporary recession. Government expenditures for war materials and the expansion of defense industries stimulated prosperity in the latter half of 1950 and throughout 1951 and 1952. During this prosperous period, prices, taxes, and wages increased. President Truman's administration was plagued by the unearthing of scandals which touched some members of the administration. There was unsavory evidence of "influence peddling" on the part of individuals who collected "5 per cent fees" and substantial gifts for efforts to secure government contracts or favors for friends. Investigation also revealed certain officials in the Internal Revenue Rureau who were guilty of wrongdoing in the handling of income tax cases. Several officials were dismissed; others were permitted to resign; some were brought to trial. Senator Kefauver of Tennessee won a national reputation as head of a Senate Crime Investigating Committee to uncover the connection between organized gambling, crime, and politics. Prosecuting attorneys in many cities and states were kept busy seeking indictments and convictions of those whose activities had been exposed by the committee. Early in 1952 President Truman announced that he would not be a candidate for re-election. In spite of setbacks and scandals, the Democratic party was generally satisfied with its accomplishments, both foreign and domestic, under the Truman Fair Deal. It appealed to the country in the 1952 elections on the ground that under President Truman it had attempted a liberal and progressive program. Unresolved and continuing issues. Some phases of the Fair Deal program which were not enacted into law were fundamental issues that had been long in developing. Opinions throughout the country were sharply divided, with the divisions appearing within both the Democratic and the Republican parties. Several of the issues reappeared in the presidential campaign of 1952 and are likely to be the subject of debate and congressional action during the decade of the 1950's. (1) What should the federal government do about labor- management relations? Should the Taft-Hartley law be amended or repealed? (2) How can the federal government cope with the rising cost of living? What federal or local controls, if any, should be established over prices, wages, production, and credit? How can the government debt and taxes be reduced? (This issue is, of course, closely related to foreign policy and government expenditures for foreign aid and military defense.) (3) To what extent and how shall the government embark on a program of federal aid to education? (4) What should be the policy of the federal government toward civil rights legislation? (5) What should be the policy of the government toward communism on both the domestic and international fronts? The budget, the national debt, and taxes. In the one area in which campaign pledges urgently called for action the Eisenhower administration moved with caution. Although Congress was in a mood to reduce taxes, President Eisenhower argued that taxes should not be reduced until the budget was balanced. (It was not until the fiscal year of 1956 closed that there was a surplus of receipts over expenditures.) In 1953, the President, with the help of Senator Taft, prevailed upon Congress to extend the excess profits tax. In subsequent years the Eisenhower administration endeavored, without too much success, to prune the amount spent for defense and foreign aid. There were minor but not substantial changes in the tax structure. Economic controls are lessened. In February, 1953, wage controls adopted during the Korean War were lifted. Gradually price controls were removed from various items. Rent controls were retained only in specified areas where there was a serious housing shortage. The Defense Production Act of 1950, which had been enacted to strengthen the national economy for the effort to support the Korean struggle, was allowed to expire. The Reconstruction Finance Corporation, which had functioned throughout the depression and the war, terminated its activities. Congress gives the states control of offshore oil deposits. Probably the most controversial law of the first months of Eisenhower's administration was one which gave the states control of offshore or tidelands oil deposits. President Truman had vetoed bills to accomplish this purpose, and the matter became an issue in the campaign of 1952. The St. Lawrence Seaway and Power Project approved. For a quarter of a century the proposal to connect the Great Lakes with the Atlantic by the way of the St. Lawrence River had been the subject of controversy. The construction of the Seaway also involved the proposed construction of hydroelectric power plants. Hoover, Roosevelt, and Truman had urged the project and conducted negotiations with Canada. Congress, however, failed to take action. Finally in 1953 Canada announced that it would proceed without American approval. President Eisenhower then persuaded Congress to give the State of New York the right to co-operate with the Province of Ontario in building dams and hydroelectric power plants at the International Rapids. The electric energy generated is to be divided between New York and Ontario, with the understanding that New York will make some of the energy available to nearby states. Other Eisenhower successes. In general, President Eisenhower pursued a middle-of-the-road policy. Not infrequently, both in the Republican- controlled Eighty-third Congress and the Democrat-controlled Eighty-fourth Congress, a combination of moderate Republicans and moderate Democrats gave the President the majority he needed. Thus, in spite of opposition from members of his own party, Mr. Eisenhower succeeded in getting the Reciprocal Trade Agreements extended, first for one year, and then for a three-year period. The number of people covered by the Social Security Program and its benefits were increased. The Social Security Program, first inaugurated in 1935 during the days of the depression, now provides old-age and survivors insurance for more than 80 per cent of all gainfully employed workers. In 1953, Congress created the Small Business Administration to protect the interests of small businesses and to make loans to them. In 1954 the minimum wage rate was raised to one dollar per hour. The insurance and mortgage features of the Housing Act were liberalized to encourage home ownership, and provision was made for the construction of 45,000 low-cost housing units through 1956. In 1956 the Congress approved a gigantic appropriation for the construction of highways. The Federal Highway Bill of 1956 provided for the construction, during the next thirteen years, of a network of superhighways designed to connect most cities with a population of 50,000 or more. The federal government will allocate twenty billions to the states to help pay for the highways. In addition, the law appropriated two and a half billion dollars — to be matched by the states — for the construction of primary, secondary, and rural roads. To help pay the cost of this program the federal gasoline tax was raised from three to four cents a gallon. In 1952, Congress had passed the McCarran-Walter Immigration and Nationality Act over the vigorous veto of President Truman. This law continued to be a matter of controversy. It was liberalized in 1953 to permit the admission of 214,000 immigrants above the normal quota, during the next three years. This temporary modification of the law was intended primarily to provide for the admission of displaced persons from countries behind the iron curtain. There were also a few minor amendments to the law in 1954, but many people continued to argue that the whole immigration policy of the country needed a complete revision. Prosperity is general, except among farmers. During President Eisenhower's administration the country enjoyed eight years of rather general prosperity. There was a record number of employed persons; industrial production increased each year; wages remained high, and prices for most items tended to be somewhat stable. 