Today's schools teach art, literature, science, and all the practical subjects. They also help children to develop strong bodies, to understand each other, and to grow into responsible adults. The education of most girls was limited to cooking, weaving, candlemaking, and other household tasks. As for farm and frontier children, they could rarely be spared from work at home. What little learning they received often came from stern Scotch-Irish traveling preachers or from village schoolmasters who kept a one- room school and boarded with each family in turn. Worst off were the Indians and the Negroes, who were seldom educated at all. But the American colonists believed in book-learning, and once the colonies became a republic, education was even more iin[)ortant. The nation needed qualified leaders and it needed qualified voters. Today, all children who wish an education may have one. From the primary grades even through college, there are free schools for them. Enormous sums of money and thought and effort are spent on erecting beautiful buildings, with sunny classrooms, fine gymnasiums, pleasant lunchrooms, and good libraries. Instruction generally includes not only reading, writing, and arithmetic, but also science, social studies, business courses, music, and languages. Teachers are well-informed and highly trained. Colorful and interesting textbooks are especially written for each subject. All this has come about because, from the first, Americans have believed in education, in the abilities of their children, and in the future of their country. These trails themselves followed the rivers through passes wherever possible. By using bridges, trestles, and tunnels, however, engineers straightened and shortened the routes that nature had provided. In a similar way, geography has influenced the location of motor highways that now span the continent. You have already learned that the advance of the frontier almost always followed the waterways, so that a silhouette of settlement would take the form of long, slender fingers groping westward. But what about the people who came later in great numbers to this continent, after the frontier had been pushed all the way to the West Coast? Where did they go, and why? Several things influenced their choice of living place. In the East, the largest number settled along the middle and northern coast, in or near the port cities where they had landed. This was often because they were too pool to go farther. But craftsmen chose towns and cities because such communities afforded markets for the various things that they made. Other immigrants settled in one place or another because friends or relatives, or even just people of their own nationality, had already settled there. Some went where they could find work that they were used to. Miners turned to the mining regions, and lumbermen went where there was logging. Unskilled workers headed for areas where they had heard that roads or railroads w-ere to be built. But there were great tracts of land beyond the Appalachians to be had for nothing or almost nothing, and into these areas poured the farmer immigrants—the Germans into the north-central region and the Scandinavians into the Northwest. In the FaT West the immigrants from the Orient remained largely west of the mountain barrier. Immigration into our country has now been severely limited by law. The present- day distribution of population may be seen in the map on page 41. Summing Up. This chapter has pointed out the chief ways in which geography has influenced the history of our country. Let us sum them up briefly: 1.The location of our country between the Atlantic and the Pacific led to its early exploration by European nations seeking a westward route to the Orient, and to its later favorable position in world trade. 2.Coastal rivers and great inland waterways served to open up the interior of the country to explorers, trappers, traders, and. finally, settlers. Small settlements at strategic points on these waterways later became important cities. 3.The Appalachian Mountains kept the English colonists on the eastern seaboard for about 150 years. Confined to this narrow, protected strip of land, they developed a sense of unity and became strong and self- sufficient. 4.Once the wide Appalachians had been crossed by settlers, the great open spaces and the presence of free land kept the frontier moving constantly westward, till it reached the Pacific. 5.Climate and soil everywhere influenced occupations and industries. Settlers in New England turned from the rocky fields to fishing, trading, and manufacturing. The fertile soils and the warm, moist climate of the South encouraged cotton growing, and so helped make slavery seem essential to the planters in this region. The rich Central Plains were ideal for dairy cattle and the raising of many different crops, and the great Mississippi River system provided easy transport. The drier plains to the west and south became cattle ranches. On the West Coast, again, ocean commerce became of great importance. 6.When railroads began to connect the larger cities, their routes, like those of the settlers, were influenced by the presence or absence of geographical barriers. 7.Our natural resources in water power, coal, gas and oil, and minerals made possible a tremendous industrial development. This, in turn, encouraged mass immigration and the growth of a large population that supplied manpower for industry and a market lot its products. All these geographical factors appear also to have affected the national character, for they tended to make Americans self-reliant, freedom-loving, and tolerant of others. As you read the rest of this book, refer often to this chapter to review the ways in which geography influenced our history. Neither should it deny the right to vote to citizens who were not Puritans. The church and the state should be entirely separate. When Williams learned that the Puritan leaders planned to send him back to England, he fled to the woods and lived with his Indian friends. In 1636 lie and some friends made a settlement near Narragansett Bay and called it Providence. Two years later the Indians gave them a deed to the land. Other settlements were soon made in that region, including one by Anne Hutchinson and her husband. Like Williams, she had been driven from the Bay Colony because of her teachings. In 1644 the English Parliament gave Williams a charter which united these settlements into the Providence Plantations and upheld the right to religious freedom. .As you can guess, people of every religion were welcomed in Rhode Island. The Colony of Delaware (1638). The first permanent settlement in Delaware was made by Swedish people in 1638 on the site of Wilmington and named Fort Christina to honor their queen. The surrounding country was called New Sweden. More Swedes and some Finns came in 1640. It was these people from the wooded north- lands of Europe who first built the log cabins used so much by later pioneers on the frontier. The Dutch took over Delaware for a while, but it came under the Duke of York when Stuyvesant surrendered New Nether- land in 1664. Later, some of the land was bought by William Penn. In time he let the Delaware people have their own assembly, but the colony remained under the governor of Pennsylvania until the Revolutionary War. The Colony of North Carolina. Some Virginia settlers moved south between 1653 and 1660 and made their homes near Albemarle Sound in what is now North Carolina. They made their living by gathering naval stores and selling them to seamen from the northern colonics. Later, in the 1700's, German and Scotch-Irish settlers found their way down the Great Valley from Pennsylvania and settled what is now western North Carolina. The founding of the last English colony in America came about in an unusual way. The laws of eighteenth-century England stated that a man who could not pay Ids debts must he* put in prison. Because of hard times and this law, English jails were full of debtors. James Oglethorpe, who felt that imprisonment for debt was unfair, went to the king with a plan to start a colony in America for such unfortunate people and for the persecuted Protestants of Germany and Austria. He arrived at a time when the colonists in South Carolina were asking the king for protection against the Spaniards. The king, George II, agreed to give Oglethorpe and his friends the southern portion of Carolina as a buffer between the English colonies and the Spaniards. Oglethorpe made his first settlement at Savannah in 1733. The colony got off to a slow start because of unwise rules set up by the proprietors. At first there were many difficulties. After colonists came from Scotland, Germany, and France, and slavery was allowed, the colony got a fresh start and slowly began to prosper. In 1742 the Spaniards tried to drive the English from Georgia, but they were defeated. In 1752 the trustees asked the king to make Georgia a royal colony. A royal governor came two years later. Summing Up. Spain, France, England, the Netherlands, and Sweden took the lead in building colonies in the Americas. A New Spain was built rapidly in the Caribbean, Central and South America. A New France was begun in Acadia and along the St. Lawrence River. Farther south, Maryland and Pennsylvania were developed by men w ho wanted religious freedom for their colonists, and who had land to sell for a profit. North Carolina was begun by settlers who moved south from the older colonies. South Carolina was a gift to his friends by a king who wanted Englishmen to settle this land before the Spaniards in Florida took over. Georgia was given to a group of trustees for the same reason, but the trustees also wanted it as a home for debtors and persecuted Protestants. Thus, by 1753, England had thirteen colonies in America, scattered along the Atlantic Coast from Maine to Florida. The big question at that moment was whether France and Spain would let England take this land "from sea to sea" without a fight 96 About a fourth of the colonists were not of English parentage. Most of these were of Scotch and Scotch-Irish descent. Also, as you read in Chapter 5, there were goodly numbers of Dutch. German, and French settlers, as well as some Swedes and Finns. Things in Common. Whether the colonists came from England or from the mainland of Europe, they shared many things in common. Most of them built their own homes, raised their own food, and made their own clothing. They made peace with the Indians or had to defend themselves 2. LIFE IN THE SOU The Social Classes. There were four social groups or classes in the Southern Colonies. The officers of the king and the plantation owners were the most important group. The owners of the small farms and the merchants were a larger group in number, but they had less influence. Still less important were the indentured servants, whose happiness was in the hands of their masters. The Negro slaves were the last group. Ways of Earning a Living. In 1750 some men were making tar, pitch, and turpentine from pine tree sap and selling these products to His Majesty's navy and to shipowners all the way from New England to the West Indies. Lumber and tall tree trunks for ships' spars were also being taken from southern forests and shipped to England. Besides these salable items, Virginia had more than enough corn, wheat, beans, beef, and pork, so these goods were exported to the other colonies and to England. Tobacco Farming. Although some men gathered deerskins, naval stores, and furs against the red men. As time went on, most of the colonists became landholders. Sectional Differences. In spite of the fact that the colonists held these things in common and were all subject to English laws, the colonies of 1750 actually were divided into four distinct sections or regions—New England, the Middle Colonies, the South, and the frontier. These four divisions had different geography, different social customs. and different ways of making a living, as you will learn from this chapter. In some respects that is still true today. Indeed, throughout the colonial period of American history nine tenths of the people were farmers. Land was cheap and there seemed to be no end of it. The first task of each householder was to raise enough food for his family. The next step was to produce extra food or a money crop—one he could sell for cash or barter for things he needed. The soil and climate made farming easy in Virginia. John Rolfe showed the farmers of Jamestown that their best money crop was tobacco. London merchants paid such high prices for well-cured Virginia tobacco that Maryland and North Carolina colonists also turhed to tobacco raising. Rice and indigo proved to be belter export crops for South Carolina and Georgia. The Plantation System. You recall that at first no Jamestown colonist could own land. Then a small plot was granted to each man who wanted one. After tobacco became the main money crop, the London Company. The Colonies in between. The people or the South and of New England were primarily of English descent; the Middle Colonies attracted people from many countries. This mixture of peoples was a kind of preview of what this nation would become some day. As colonists the Dutch, Germans, Scotch Irish, Swedes, French, Irish, Finns, and English took the lead. Socially, the people of the Middle Colonies probably were somewhere between the middle-class, democratic society of the North and the more aristocratic society of the South, but a mixture of both. In manufacturing and trade the Middle Colonies stood next to New England. There were many farm villages and thousands of small farms like those in New England, and large farms and estates like the plantations of the South. Two Trading Centers. By 1750 New York and Philadelphia were the important centers of population in the Middle Colonies. Dutch customs and ideas had not vet disappeared from life in and around New York. The Quaker influence was still seen and felt in and around Philadelphia. Both cities had become busy ports. At their docks ships were loaded with such things as butter, cheese, lard, and grain from Middle Colonies' farms. These were sent to the other colonies, the West Indies, and Europe. So were grains for feeding livestock. In return the merchants in these cities received such things as fish from New England, tobacco from the South, and manufactured articles from England. The merchants who handled this heavy trade were to become as important in the Middle Colonies as the planters were in the South. Religion and Education. The religious life of New York was centered about the Dutch Reformed Church. That church had many followers in New Jersey too. So did the Quakers. Pennsylvania had a mixture of churches, but the Quakers were the most important. We must remember that Penn and Calvert had established the idea of religious freedom in this section at its very beginning. The proprietors of New Jersey followed their example and invited people of every faith to settle there. As a result, people of many faiths came. There were fewer schools than in New England, but elementary education was not neglected in the Middle Colonies. The Dutch wanted their children to write well and know how to figure. The Quakers firmly believed in providing schools for all children. They organized schools for those whose parents could pay a fee. Later, these schools became free. In 1751 an academy was opened in Philadelphia; it later became the University of Pennsylvania. This school was planned by Benjamin Franklin to give training for business, navigation, anti some of the trades. Government. The government of the Middle Colonies varied greatly from place to place. It combined features of both the township government of the North and county government of the South. The greatest advance toward the democratic government we were later to enjoy in this country Unpopular Laws. The Federalists were strong enough to put John Adams in the White House in 1797, but Jefferson came in as Vice-President. President Adams was courageous and honest, but he lacked the reputation and great personal qualities of Washington. Over the years, the Republicans had been gaining more and more strength in their opposition to Federalist policies. Under the leadership of Jefferson, this opposition took the form of speeches, posters, newspaper articles, and books. Unfortunately for the Federalists, they were not able to bear up under all this abuse without losing their patience. In a moment of near panic a Congress controlled by Federalists passed some very John Adam s was brought up on a farm, but he was graduated from Harvard College and trained as a lawyer. He helped get the Declaration of Independence adopted, played a leading part in the fight for American independence, and served as the first United States minister to England. After two terms as Vice-President, Adams served as President at a time when the French people wanted our help in their revolution. Adams sent a delegation to France to explain why we could not help. This made him unpopular. While Adams was President, Congress passed laws which caused the Federalists to lose the presidential election of 1800. Adams retired to private life, embittered by his unpopularity with many of his countrymen. unpopular laws. The Naturalization Act required a foreigner to live in the United States fourteen years before he could become a citizen. The Alien Act gave the President power to order out of the country or imprison all foreigners he regarded as dangerous to the safety and peace of the United States. And finally, the Sedition Act set heavy fines and long prison terms for all persons who attacked or challenged the authority of the government, officers, or laws of the United States in speech or writing. These laws, particularly the Sedition Act, caused discontent everywhere. The Republicans accused Congress of denying them their Constitutional rights of free speech and free press. Some people accused Adams of trying to set up a dictator-type government. Tfie Federalists had gone too far in their attempt to establish a strong central government. The Sedition Act, more than anything else, was to cause the Federalists to lose the presidential election in 1800. In Kentucky and Virginia the state legislatures passed resolutions stating that the Sedition Act was against the spirit of the Constitution. Both states called upon their sister states to find the Alien and Sedition Acts unconstitutional. Several states replied that the courts should decide when a law is unconstitutional, but most of the legislatures soon called for the repeal of the objectionable laws. The Election of 1800. As a result of the great unpopularity of Adams' administration and Federalist policies, most of the electors chosen in the election of 1800 were Republicans. Thomas Jefferson became President and Aaron Burr was chosen Vice-President men to spend federal money for state projects. Congress was able to slip through a few hills for general improvements by attaching them to bigger bills which Jackson was forced to accept if he was to get money for running the government. A Debate over Land Sales. During Jackson's term in office. Congress was rocked by a series of long and bitter debates. The first of these began in 1830 over the sale of land. The Westerners were demanding again that the price of land be lowered. The At the left is a schedule of toll rates charged on toll roads such as the National Road (above). North (New England and the Middle States) was opposed. The North needed more factory workers. Manufacturers could count on about so many immigrants working in factories until they had enough money to buy land. If the price of land was lowered, fewer immigrants would work in die factories. The North also argued that more land had already been opened than was being bought and settled. In December of 1829 Senator Samuel A. Foote of Connecticut offered a resolution that the Senate look into die sale of public lands and see if it should limit the sale to those lands already on the market. His resolution touched off a bitter fight and opened the way for one of the most dramatic debates in American history. Senator Hayne, of South Carolina, was chosen to reply for the West and South. Hayne's Argument. After scolding the North for its narrow sectionalism, Hayne then presented again the question of the rights of the individual states. He insisted that the United States was a league of independent states. "If one section of the nation insists upon laws harmful to another section. Leland Stanford drove a golden spike to complete the first railroad across the Rockies to California. The Union Pacific Railroad would start building at Council bluffs, Iowa, and proceed westward. It would climb over the Rockies through South Pass and meet the Central Pacific at the California-Nevada line. Each company would receive a right- of-way 100 feet wide, plus alternate sections of land for each mile of track laid. The number of sections was doubled in 1864. Besides, the government would help with loans. East and West United by Rail. Thus, while a war raged between the North and the South, two companies set out to bind the East and West together by rail. After the war was over, the actual construction of the railroad became a race between the two companies to see which one could build its track faster. There were many difficulties to be overcome. First, workers must be secured. The Union Pacific met this problem by employing large numbers of immigrants from Europe. The Central Pacific obtained the services of some 10,000 Chinese laborers who were brought to California for that purpose. Another serious problem to be dealt with was the attempt of the Indians to prevent the "iron horse with little round feet" from cutting across their hunting grounds. They often attacked the workers, destroyed camps and supplies, and ripped up the track. The building continued from 1863 into 1866. That year Congress told the Central Pacific that it might extend its tracks across Nevada and eastward until they should meet the Union Pacific. After that the race to see which crews could build the most track was watched by the world. Finally, on May 10, 1869, the two railroad lines met at Promontory Point near Ogden, Utah. The race had been won by the Union Pacific because part of its 1,086 miles of track had been laid across the plains. Most of the Central Pacific's 689 miles of track were laid in rugged country. In an effort to sell their land, the railroads sent agents to Europe to round up immigrants and bring them to the lands between the Mississippi and the West Coast. The railroads also advertised in eastern newspapers for settlers. Millions came. Their farms and ranches in turn provided income for the railroads with shipment of millions of bushels of grain, tons of cattle, and other farm produce. By 1900 a network of railroads covered the country, and on either side of each railroad was spread a network of farms, ranches, villages, and towns. The map on the opposite page shows how extensive this railroad network is now. Improved Railways. As railroad mileage increased, improvements in safety and comfort of railroad travel were made. George Pullman of Chicago devised the first sleeping car. Shortly afterwards, George West- ing house introduced the use of air brakes. Roadbeds were improved. Today, in modern, air-conditioned cars, passengers travel comfortably no matter what the temperature is outside. Refrigerator cars have made it possible to carry perishable food from one end of the country to the other. An elaborate network of safety devices and warning signals enables trains to travel. 2. AUTOMOBILES A New Form of Transportation. Automobiles play such an important part in our lives that it is difficult to imagine a time safely at high speeds in the worst kinds of weather. The Electric Railway. During the 1870's Thomas A. Edison and others, as a result of their work with the dynamo (see page 446), developed a kind of railway car powered by electricity. Run on tracks on the street, it was called the streetcar or trolley car. Operated on tracks built above the street, it was spoken of as the elevated. Raced through tunnels underground, it became the subway. Today, when most city transport depends upon buses and trucks, it is hard to realize that the electric railway was a tremendous factor in building American cities. Millions of workers could concentrate in one spot, such as Chicago, and ride to work at little expense. Speaking of bicycles, we must not forget that at one time millions of Americans depended upon bicycles to get them to work on weekdays and to picnic spots on Sunday. The "bicycle age" began about 1889 when the air-filled rubber tire came into use. Although it is still popular, the bicycle gave way to the automobile as a common means of transportation to work. From the Old World to the New. The growing industries of the 1800's demanded millions of workers. This demand was met by thousands of Americans who left the farms for new occupations and by the millions of immigrants who came from abroad. Fewer than 10,000 immigrants came to America each year in the period between 1810 and 1820. Then, as you read in Chapter 14, a period began in which hundreds of miles of canals and railroads were constructed. These projects called lor thousands of laborers and made it easier for immigrants to get to the cheap western lands. As a result, between 1830 and 1840 over 500,000 people came from Europe. Of these, 15 per cent were English, 25 per cent were German, and 33 per cent were Irish. In the 1840's more than 1,500,000 came, 45 per cent of them Irish. The majority of German immigrants were also from the working class, but thousands of them were artisans, and hundreds were professional people. The artisans and professional people tended to form little German colonies in the cities, especially in Cincinnati, Cleveland, Milwaukee, and St. Louis. The Middle West was soon dotted with the farms of German-Americans. The descendant of one such family, Dwight D. Eisenhower, became the President of the United States in 1952. In the period immediately following the War between the States, there was a great sweep of immigrants from Norway and Sweden into the Midwest. countries were pleased with the good soil they found in Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and the Dakotas. To add to their pleasure, some of them found pine forests and sparkling lakes similar to those they had known in Scandinavia. A large number of settlers from Switzerland made Wisconsin the cheese-making center of the United States. Here they carried on a trade they had learned in the "old country." In this and similar ways the United States benefited by having skills developed through hundreds of years in other lands. Big Decisions. Those who were persuaded to leave the Old World for the New World came to the decision in various ways. Hard times, political or religious persecution at home, and various pressures made millions want to leave Europe. Letters re reived from family and friends already in the United States answered many questions about the country and urged them to come too. Such letters were often passed from person to person and even printed in the newspapers of Europe. The railroads of America sent agents to Europe. They sought to increase immigration because they wanted to sell the land which they had received from the government. Later, railroads operated special trains for immigrants to certain points and lowered their fares to get as many passengers as possible. The railroads also helped these people adjust themselves to their new homes. America Was Open to All. Up until 1882 anyone could enter the United States. From ail over the world people came— sometimes in ones and twos, but more often in family groups. People of every nationality, rate, and faith they were, most of them seeking a better life. Upright and courageous, they were usually educated, skillful at using tools, eager to become American citizens. Between 1865 and l!H)0 some 13,500,000 arrived, and an even larger number after 1900. "New" Immigrants. Most of the immigrants of which you have been reading came from northern Europe. More than 90 per cent of them could read and write. They were similar in culture, beliefs, and even in language to the people already here, so most of them experienced little dif ficulty in mixing in and becoming a part of American society. Sometimes people spoke of them as "those foreigners who are taking good jobs away from Americans." Sometimes there were clashes because of religion, but for the most part these immigrants were accepted. By the 1880's a change was beginning to take place. More and more immigrants were coming from southern and eastern Europe. Italians, Poles. Hungarians, Russians, Greeks, Czechs, and Austrians found a refuge and work in the large industrial centers. The majority of these were unskilled laborers who took jobs in factories, coal and iron mines, steel mills, railroads, and construction industries. In order to overcome some of their difficulties. immigrant groups tended to make "island" communities in the industrial cities. Here the newcomers tended to live and talk as they had in Europe, making little attempt to become Americanized. They accepted backbreaking work in mines, on railroads, and in factories at wages many native Americans would not want to accept. In 1882 Congress decided it must begin to screen those coming to our shores. An increasing number of immigrants were people who did not adjust to American ways, or quickly seek citizenship. A considerable number could not read or write. Many of them came from countries in which they had little opportunity to learn democratic ideals or how to live in a democracy. Some had lower standards of living than ours because their homelands were poor in natural resources. Their languages were so different These immigrants feel both joy and sadness as, for the first time, they see the Statue of Liberty. Unties. From English that they had trouble understanding their American neighbors and in making themselves understood. Their customs, too, made them seem "different" to Americans. Some native Americans said, "America must continue to be a land of opportunity, offering a helping hand to the persecuted and poor of other lands. Let them come." Another group argued, "We are achieving a good way of life. Let us keep American institutions and our high standard of living as they are." Congress took steps to meet the demands of both groups. It did not shut out any nationality group, but from 1882 to 1896 it gradually passed laws that shut out the insane, paupers, convicts, alcoholics, and physical, moral, and mental defectives of other kinds. In 1917 the rule was made that before a person could be admitted to the United States he must be able to pass a simple reading test. The immigration laws were especially hard on immigrants from China. The gold rush of 1849 brought thousands of Chinese to California. Then, the demand for cheap labor brought an average of 4,000 Chinese a year for a white. By the late I870's there were almost 150,000 Chinese in California alone. They aroused the antagonism of American workers because they would work long hours for little money, and they tended to live together and keep their Chinese language, religion, customs, and way of life. As a result of this antagonism, California passed laws discouraging the employment of Chinese. In 1882 Congress prohibited further Chinese immigration for a ten-year period; in 1924 it passed a law batting them and Japanese permanently. The Quota System. A quota system had been set up in 1921 whereby the immigrants admitted annually from a European country might be 3 per cent of the number of persons of that nationality who were living here in 1910. The immigration law of 1924 reduced the percent admitted to 2. and changed the base to the census of 1890. For example, there were about 2,500,000 Germans in the United States in 1890. Two per cent of this number is 50,000. Therefore, tip to 50,000 German immigrants might be permitted to enter the United States in one year. In 1929 Congress passed a new immigration law which kept the quota system, but the number of people who could come to America was based on the 1920 census. Under the new law only about 150,000 immigrants could be admitted in one year. Citizens and Aliens. When an immigrant comes to the United States, he is, in the eyes of the law, an alien. An alien is a person who owes allegiance to a country other than the one he lives in. Each newcomer had to decide whether or not to become a full-fledged citizen. Most of them did. Some of them were able to do this rather quickly; others took a longer time to decide. When an alien wishes to become a citizen of the United States, he must declare his intention of doing so. After he has lived here for five years, he may apply for citizenship. Immigrants. For many years people coming to our country to live were examined at Ellis Island in New York Harbor. Today our public health doctors examine immigrants before they leave their ships. If they are found to be physically or mentally ill, they are not permitted to land on our shores. These people are then returned to their homeland. Some cases may be held for special examination. Any alien in the United States may be returned to his own country' under any one of four conditions: (1)if he has entered illegally, (2)if he must beg for a living, (3) if he is convicted of a crime, (4) if he plots to overthrow our government. Any alien so deported is not allowed to return. Many thousands of Indians were converted to the Roman Catholic faith, but in remote sections of the country the old customs and the ancient religion continue to the present time. Mexican Independence. In 1808 the armies of Napoleon invaded Spain and overthrew the Spanish government. For many years the people of Mexico had resented Spanish rule. The trouble in Spain gave the Mexican people the chance to rise up against their rulers. One of the great heroes of Mexico is Miguel Hidalgo, a priest who called upon his followers to rise up against their Spanish rulers on September 10, 1810. Although Hidalgo and his followers were defeated, and he himself was seized and put to death, this event marked the beginning of the fight for liberty. The Mexican people regard Hidalgo very much as we do George Washington. One of Hidalgo's followers was a priest named Jose Morelos, who took up the cause ol freedom after Hidalgo's death. Morelos also was captured and put to death, but the struggle continued. In 1821 Mexico finally won its independence front Spain, and an independent monarchy was set up. In 1824 the monarchy was overthrown, and a republic took its place. Today Mexicans celebrate September Hi as their independence day, with colorful parades, music, dancing, and fireworks. Mexico Today. II you visit Mexico City, or any other large Mexican city, you will see many modern buildings. In the center of the city you are likely to find a plaza, or town square, around which are grouped the main government buildings and the church. It is not unusual, as one walks along the streets, to see Indians in their colorful native dress. They come to the city to sell the things they have grown or made. In out-of- the-way places of southern Mexico that are seldom visited by the tourist, the Indians live much as their ancestors lived for hundreds of years. They have retained their native religion as well as their ancient dress and customs. A number of cities along the west coast have become popular with tourists. The beautiful ocean beaches and the modern hotels attract many Americans every year. Cities like Acapulco and Ma/atkin resemble the cities ol Florida, with their gleaming, white hotels along the ocean beach. Mexico City and other inland cities on the central plateau, at altitudes between 7,000 and 8,000 feet above sea level, also attract many tourists because of the moderate climate. During recent years many Mexicans have come to the United States to work on farms. When labor was scarce during the period of the Second World War and the years following, many American industrialists recruited laborers from Mexico. Some of these people have remained in the United States, and some have become American citizens. Central America. Between Mexico and South America are six independent repub- lics—Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rita, Panama—and the colony called British Honduras. These countries occupy a narrow, bridgelike strip of land nearly 1.200 miles long that connects North and South America. 