* * *WestsStory ofOur CountryWEST, RUTHrevised byWILLIAM E. GARDNER, PH.D.Mammond. Ind.Ri '67 156255.83ORIGINAL AUTHORSWILLIS MASON WEST - Mr. West grew up in the vigorous Americanism of the earlyNorthwest. Teacher, principal, superintendent of schools, college professor, and scholarextraordinary, he was always master of the "choice word and measured phrase." It wasnot surprising that he himself, reared in a frontier environment, should pioneer in thewriting of America's history, with prophetic thoughts for America's future.RUTH WEST - While a student at the University of Minnesota, where her father washead of the History Department, Miss West worked with him on several of his books.Then, during her own teaching days in three States - Minnesota, Illinois, and Wash-ington, she learned at first hand the interests, needs, and varying abilities of America'syouth. With this background, she collaborated with her father in writing Story of OurCountry.REVISING AUTHORWILLIAM EARL GARDNER - Dr. Gardner's contribution to the writing of Story of OurCountry in this revised edition brings down to the present the story that has such deeproots in the beginnings of our country. Dr. Gardner has been a well-qualified teacherof junior high school, high school, and college students for several years; and he ispresently teaching both at the University of Minnesota and the University High School.Fully understanding the interests and the varying abilities of today's American youthas well as their needs for tomorrow, Dr. Gardner has revised Story of Our Country ina way that guarantees its continuation as an outstanding American history text forjunior high school students.MAPS BY: Donald T. PitcherDRAWINGS BY: Ray Granai, Pictograph Corporation, and Robert Van LeuvenUNIT ILLUSTRATIONSJacques Cartier, New World ExplorerBettmann ArchivexivMAYFLOWER Il in Cape Cod BayLaurence Lowry42The Liberty BellPhiladelphia Convention & Visitors Bureau106The Transfer of LouisianaCourtesy Louisiana State Museum168Lee's Ferry on the Colorado River, Crossroad of the WestLaurence Lowry232Items Involved in a Great TragedyArnold Newman, Photographer288Industrial Giant, the Gary Steel Works Courtesy United States Steel Corporation348Passing Through Gaillard Cut in the Panama CanalFoto Flatau, Panama424War Bond RallyMyron Davis, Photographer480Launching of the Hawk MissileCourtesy Raytheon Company568Bunker Hill Monument (Appendix)Laurence Lowry615C1960, 1963 BY ALLYN AND BACON, INC.PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICARiTEXT CONTENTSUnit 1 Europe Finds A New World1Chapter 1INDIAN CIVILIZATIONS IN THE AMERICAS42How MEN LIVED IN THE OLD WORLD153SEEKING TRADE ROUTES, EUROPEANS EXPLORE AMERICA24Unit 2 Europeans Find New Homes in America43Chapter 4 SPAIN AND FRANCE SETTLE THE NEW WORLD475ENGLAND STARTS COLONIES IN AMERICA586How ENGLISH COLONISTS LIVED AND WORKED83Unit 3 A New American Nation Is Born107Chapter 7SUCCESS IN WAR CAUSES PROBLEMS FOR BRITAIN1108THE BRITISH COLONIES BECOME AMERICAN STATES1259THE NEW NATION MAKES A GOVERNMENT146Unit 4 The Young Nation Takes Up Its Tasks169Chapter 10 THE NEW GOVERNMENT GOES TO WORK17311 THE NATION GROWS AND TRIES ITS STRENGTH18912 INVENTIONS CHANGE WAYS OF LIVING207Unit 5 Democracy Grows as the Nation Expands233Chapter 13 THE PEOPLE'S GOVERNMENT MEETS NEW PROBLEMS23614 THE GROWING NATION MOVES WESTWARD24915 IDEAS CHANGE AS THE NATION EXPANDS270Unit 6 Testing the Nation's Strength289Chapter 16 NORTH AND SOUTH GROW FARTHER APART29217 THE WAR BETWEEN THE STATES: 1861-186531118 THE NATION REBUILDS AFTER THE WAR331Unit 7 United Again, America Continues to Grow349Chapter 19 AMERICANS CONQUER THE LAST FRONTIER35320 CITIES GROW AS IMMIGRANTS POUR IN37321 SCIENCE AND INVENTIONS START Big INDUSTRIES38622 New PROBLEMS CHALLENGE THE GROWING NATION401Unit 8 The Nation Becomes a World Power425Chapter 23 THE UNITED STATES EXPANDS OVERSEAS43024 THE UNITED STATES ADOPTS NEW POLICIES44725 AMERICANS FIGHT IN WORLD WAR I463ixUnit 9 War and Peace Bring Problems: 1920-1960481Chapter 26 PROBLEMS OF PEACE PROVE VERY DIFFICULT48427 AMERICANS AGAIN FIGHT FOR FREEDOM50628 THE UNITED STATES FACES WORLD PROBLEMS53129 AMERICANS STILL PIONEER FOR A BETTER AMERICA552Unit 10 Living in Twentieth Century America569Chapter 30 SCIENCE - MAN'S MASTER OR MAN'S SERVANT57231 AMERICANS BUILD A STRONG DEMOCRACY589Appendix615PRESIDENTS AND VICE-PRESIDENTS OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA616STATES OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA617DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE620CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES624Index642xChapter 5ENGLAND STARTSCOLONIES IN AMERICAOur country owes much to all theshall give special attention to theearly settlers, but it owes most to theEnglish colonies.colonists from England. Their de-In the year 1707 England andscendants make up nearly half ourScotland were joined by the Act ofpopulation today. It was the Eng-Union. From that time on, we usu-lish who brought with them the ideaally speak of the British, rather thanof governing themselves. It was they,the English government or colonies.mainly, who succeeded in setting upSince then, the name Great Britain,an independent and united govern-or United Kingdom, is used for thement, and who made our Constitu-whole country. England refers only

tion. For all of these reasons, weto the southern part of the Isle.ENGLISHMEN SEE AMERICA AS A LAND OF OPPORTUNITYEven the earliest settlers lookedmuch the same reasons for coming toupon America as a "land of oppor-America.tunity." If today we ask a group ofMany English Seek Better Liv-foreigners newly arrived in theings. Probably most men came, thenUnited States why they came, theyas now, because they wished to makewill give many answers: "To make aa better living. In England, the landliving"; "To get an education"; "Tostill belonged to the rich landlords.have liberty"; "To worship God inBut in America, even a poor manour own way." To most people,might get land of his own; for in theAmerica is the land where the poor-vast new continent across the sea,Lest have a chance. Here they hope toland could be had almost for the tak-Slamake a suitable living so that theying. It was a wilderness, to be sure,gcan educate their children and givebut who ever saw the wilderness thatWthem opportunities they themselveswould not yield before two strongtodid not have. The earliest settlers,hands? One's children, at least, couldshas we shall see, would have givenhave a farm and all of the privilegesto58Unit 2Departure of Raleigh's Col-onists. Sir Walter Raleigh backedthe expedition which establishedEngland's first colony in the NewWorld. The colony, however, wascompletely destroyed in an Indianraid.Courtesy Raleighabiotel, Washington, D.C.that went with land ownership.and harvested the old fields wereMany a man had thoughts like thisthen left without jobs. Many had noas he packed is small belongingsmoney with which to pay their waytogether.to the New World; but in order toMany others came to America be-go, they willingly sold their labor forcause of the high cost of living ina term of years in exchange for freethe Old World. Prices were risingpassage. Men who were bound torapidly. People living on wagesa master in this way were calledcould hardly make both ends meet.bond servants or indentured sero-In England, many laborers were outants.of work. The owners of big estatesThere was also another class ofhad found the growing of wool soservants sent out from England. Eu-profitable that they turned theirropean laws in those days were sofarms into pastures. It took verysevere that men were put in prisonlittle labor to care for large flocks offor very small offenses. People weresheep. The men who had plowedeven kept in jail for being in debt.Landing of the Pilgrims. Aftersixty-five days on the wintry At-lantic, the Pilgrims were verygrateful to set foot on shore. Theywere the first colonists who cameto America for the right to wor-ship as they chose, and the firstto form a democratic government.59Since English officials complainedto "purify" the church worship),that the prisons were full, the gov-Quakers, Baptists, and Presbyterians.ernment sometimes sent to the NewNeither these new sects nor the oldWorld as bond servants many whoRoman Catholics were allowed theirhad been convicted of petty crimes.own way of worship in England, soAfter they had served some mastermany of their followers came tothe required length of time, theseAmerica. Since most of the Englishmen were permitted to start anew.coloniesgwere among the few placesMany Seek Religious or Politicalin the world in the seventeenth cen-Freedom. Some men brought theirtury where a man could choose hisfamilies to face hardship in Americaown form of worship, men frombecause they wanted free govern-France and from Germany also camement. England at that time was theto these colonies to have a chance atonly large country of Europe intheir own form of religion.which the people had a share in theFor all these reasons, men soongovernment. For many years Eng-became enthusiastic about foundinglishmen had elected to Parliamentcolonies. Some young men fromrepresentatives who made laws andwealthy families became colonistslaid taxes. Then, in 1603, James I ofthemselves. Such men went chieflyScotland became King of England.for love of adventure. In 1631 Cap-He refused to recognize the rightstain John Smith, à leader in the Vir-his English subjects had so long en-ginia colony, wrote what he thoughtjoyed. As a result, many Englishmenwere the best reasons for temptingcame to América to try their ownmen to the colonies. They are givenideas of government. To them,here, with the spelling modernized:America was the "Land of the Free.""And truly, to a generous spirit,Other settlers came because theythere is no pleasure comparable towished to worship God in their owngood employment in noble actionsway. In the sixteenth century, allto see daily new countries,Englishmen were supposed to be-people, fashions, governments, strat-long to the Church of England. Butagems; to relieve the oppressed, com-not all Englishmen agreed about re-fort his friends, subdue enemies, andligion. They divided into many newadventure upon any danger for Godsects, such as Puritans (who wishedand his Country."ENGLISH MERCHANTS RISK MONEY TO FOUND COLONIESAs we shall see, most of the earlyhowever, had little money for suchEnglish colonists were poor men.projects. Rich merchants and greatSomeone else had to pay the cost oflords took over the task of paying forsending these settlers to the Newnew colonies.World. In France and Spain theWhy should these men risk theirgovernment paid the costs of the col-money in the New World? Someonists. The English government,were patriotic. They saw Spain's(60Unit 2

War of Tripoli. One of the firstconflicts to involve our Navy afterits official creation during the timeof trouble with France in 1798 wasthe war against the Barbary Pi-rates. When the Pasha of Tripolidemanded more tribute and at-tacked our shipping, PresidentJefferson dispatched a fleet tothe Mediterranean. There vic-tories by Stephen Decatur forcedthe pirates to give up their de-mands.Brown BrothersWhen Americans heard the report,This naval war, however, did notthey were furious. Congress beganlast long, for a young general calledpreparations for war. WashingtonNapoleon Bonaparte overthrew thewas appointed Commander-in-ChiefFrench government and made him-of the army. A Navy Departmentself master in France. Bonapartewas created, and frigates (warships)who had great plans for conqueringwere built. During the next fewall Europe did not wish to keep upmonths, the French captured manya petty war with the United States.American merchant vessels. Ameri-Many Americans were so angry withcan frigates, in turn, captured sev-France that they would have pre-eral French privateers and someferred to go on fighting, but AdamsFrench frigates which were foundwisely took the first chance to makesailing alone on the high seas.an honorable peace.TROUBLE ABROAD BRINGS ILL FEELING AT HOMEThe Alien and Sedition Acts. Thewhom he considered dangerous. Theworst result of this short war withSedition law said newspapers orFrance was bad feeling at home -speakers who criticized the govern-a common result of war. The Fed-ment or its officials were to be con-eralists thought the Republicans dan-sidered guilty of sedition (treason).gerous because they had sympa-The Virginia and Kentucky Reso-thized with the French Revolution.lutions. Some Republican editorsThe Federalists got through Con-were imprisoned and fined for criti-gress some laws known as the Aliencizing Adams. Then the legislaturesand Sedition Acts. The Alien lawsof Virginia and Kentucky passed res-gave the President power to im-olutions declaring that these lawsprison or deport (send out of thewere contrary to the Constitution.country) any aliens (foreigners)They pointed out that the Constitu-Chapter 10185Historical Pictures ServiceCourtesy U.S.D.A. PhotogrophJohn Marshall and the Supreme Court. In establishing the right of judicialreview in the Marbury versus Madison case, Chief Justice Marshall establishedthe power of the Court in our constitutional system of checks and balances.tion guarantees jury trials and prom-John Marshall. Before leaving theises that Congress will not interferecapital, John Adams made an im-with freedom of speech.portant appointment. He made JohnAlthough the laws were unpopu-Marshall Chief Justice of the Su-lar, the legislatures of other Statespreme Court. Marshall remaineddid not join Virginia and KentuckyChief Justice for thirty-five years.(the states in which the Democratic-During that time he had many im-Republican party was strongest).portant cases to decide.People began to see that if a StateSometimes the judges of the Su-could say laws passed by Congresspreme Court have to decide whetherwere not constitutional, there soona law is "constitutional." In suchwould be no central government.cases, Marshall often argued that theHowever, there was a way to rem-"necessary and proper" clause of theedy things without destroying theConstitution gave Congress powergovernment. An election was com-to do many things that were noting; the people could elect new menstated in so many words. Althoughto carry out their wishes. The Fed-he had been too young to be a mem-eralists, who had passed the un-ber of the Constitutional Conven-popular laws, were defeated in thetion, Marshall's decisions on consti-election of 1800. Jefferson, leadertutional issues gave him the right toof the Democratic-Republicans, wasbe called one of the makers of thechosen as our third President.Constitution.186Unit 4

who needed them. Parks and play-money voted for improvements wasgrounds gave both children andwasted by dishonest or incompetentgrown-ups a chance to have health-officials. The citizens did not alwaysful outdoor recreation. Better schoolskeep themselves informed on howwere built. Every city of any sizethe city was being run. There washad its art gallery, museum, andmuch to learn, but more and moretheaters.Americans came to see that theirMany times mistakes were madetowns and cities must be well gov-in the attempts to settle the prob-erned if they were to have healthfullems of the new cities. Often theand happy homes.AMERICA ATTRACTS IRISHAND GERMAN SETTLERSThe "Melting Pot." We Ameri-land. Besides, English laws keptcans, even the Indians, are descendedthem from doing much manufactur-from immigrants or are immigrantsing.ourselves. From all over the worldWheat did not grow well in Ire-S.our forefathers have poured into theland, and the people did not try togUnited States, thus making thisraise much but potatoes. Then inflecountry the world's greatest "melt-1846-1847 the potato crop failed.afing pot." The United States was likeSince England had a tariff on wheatpea huge magnet, pulling hundreds ofwhich made the price of bread tooththousands of people to its unplowedhigh for poor people to pay, thereland and bustling cities.followed a dreadful famine. Hun-stilEarly in American history, mostdreds of thousands of the Irish peo-lanimmigrants came from a few coun-ple died of hunger before Englandwetries in Northern Europe. We haverepealed the tariff on grain. All whomoalready read about English, Dutch,could do so escaped to the Unitedfertand German immigrants in colonialStates where they had better chancescoudays. During the early years of theto make a living and could have aThenineteenth century, the numbers in-voice in the government. More thanlandcreased steadily. Because of bada million people came from IrelandMinconditions at home, Irish and Ger-in the next ten years. Most of themandman immigrants made up a largesettled in the cities and towns. Manymadshare of the total number duringhelped to build our growing citiesbuildthose years.and the thousands of miles of ourThThe Potato Famine. In Irelandroads and railroads. Soon they beganEastthe people hated English rule. Theyto furnish leaders in all fields ofimmiwanted home rule - a governmentAmerican life.of Nof their own. They wanted to ownThe Germans. The people of theAftertheir little farms instead of payinglittle German states also had hadcamerent to English landlords who de-several years of bad crops. They hadEastermanded more money whenever along been oppressed by tyrannicalAustrifarmer improved his house or hisrulers, and in 1848 they revolted andand R376Unit 7tried to set up a united German re-These newcomers had much topublic. This revolt was crushed.contribute to America. The GermansThousands of Germans then turnedbrought with them a love of music,to America to find the freedom whichan interest in science, and enthusi-they could not have in their ownasm for liberty. Many of them hadcountry. Many Germans were skilledbeen students at German universitiesworkmen, much needed in the newwhich were far ahead of ours at thatfactory towns. Many more took uptime. They were soon furnishingland and became farmers in what weboth scholars and statesmen to ournow call the Middle West.lists of great American citizens.AFTER 1860, IMMIGRANTS COME FROMOTHER PARTS OF EUROPEThe War Between the Statespeoples who wanted more freedom.slowed down the numbers of immi-Some of them, like the Russian Jews,grants to the United States, but thewere persecuted for their religion.flood of people increased rapidlyFew of them had had a chance toafter the war. In 1873, over 450,000learn to read or write or to make apeople came to this country, morecomfortable living. In their homethan in any one year before the war.land, they were given almost noThe Scandinavians. Many peopleshare in governing themselves. Allstill came from Germany and Ire-this made them want to come toland, but now Swedish and Nor-America, but it also made it hard forwegian farmers left their smallthem to fit themselves quickly formountain farms to find on our widethe duties of American citizens.fertile prairies all the land theyOlder Americans complained thatcould use lying ready for the plow.these new Americans were slow toThese settlers went into the farmbecome "Americanized." Since thelands of Michigan, Wisconsin, andchance to get a farm was now poor,Minnesota. Honest, hard working,the immigrant had to find a home inand thrifty, these Scandinaviansone of our large cities or in a miningmade great contributions to thetown. There he often worked andbuilding of the Middle West.lived side by side with men from hisThe Immigrants of Southern andold European home. On his smallEastern Europe. Before 1890, mostpay, he had to live in some crowdedimmigrants came from the nationstenement near his work where hisof Northern and Western Europe.neighbors knew no more of Ameri-After 1890 most of our immigrantscan ways than he. It took him a longcame from lands in Southern andtime to learn the ways of his adoptedEastern Europe - especially Italy,country or to feel at home here.Austria, Poland, and Russia. AustriaPeople from these countries hadand Russia ruled over many subjecthad lives of hardship at home, andChapter 20 377

10(IMMIGRATION IN MILLIONS)8642Courtesy Philadelphia Museum of ArtImmigration 1840 to 1920. The graph shows the total immigration to ourcountry during ten-year intervals. Because immigration was so great, accom-modations on most ships were crowded and poor, but fares were low.in the new land they were afraid tohire workers. The firm agreed torefuse a job, even though wagespay the passage money, and the im-were very low. In every city, scoresmigrant agreed to work out theof greedy men lay in wait for theamount at a very low wage.newcomer to take advantage of hisAmerican workmen resented this,ignorance of our language and ouras it made it difficult for them to getways. The immigrant was oftenthe wages needed to pay for thetricked into signing a contract bythings they considered necessary -which he would be obliged to workneat homes, nourishing food, andfor months, or even for years, atadvantages for their children. Thewages that would buy very little in-labor unions finally succeeded indeed, by American standards. Biggetting Congress to forbid this con-firms even sent agents to Europe totract labor.AMERICA TAKES STEPS TO LIMIT IMMIGRATIONMany Americans began to won-no more good farm land for home-der if we had not been growing toosteaders. It also reported large for-fast. In 1890 the census reportedeign quarters in big cities. In the378Unit 7past we had been proud of our swiftlabor. While white labor was stillgrowth. We had wanted large armiesvery scarce in our West, we wel-of laborers for our expanding indus-comed Chinese workmen to do thetries. Now that the frontier washeavy work in building our trans-disappearing, perhaps Americacontinental railroads. After the rail-should close its doors to newcomersroads were built, white laborersfrom abroad. Immigration was be-became more plentiful. Trade unionscoming a problem.objected to the Chinese on the WestLaws to Keep Out UndesirableCoast because they "lowered theImmigrants. After 1890 several lawsstandard of living" for Americanwere passed limiting immigration.labor. After 1882 Chinese workmenThey aimed at keeping out convicts,were no longer allowed to enter thelunatics, idiots, paupers, and peo-United States.ple with contagious diseases. An-The Gentleman's Agreement.archists (people who believed allSome years later, the Japanese begangovernment wrong) were also for-to come to the United States, andbidden to enter. Then in 1917again white workmen objected. Mis-Congress made a law that every im-understandings arose which threat-migrant must pass a literacy test toened to cause trouble with Japan.show that he could read at least hisFor many years the United Statesown language. President Clevelandand Japan had a gentleman's agree-and President Taft had vetoed simi-ment. Japan declared itself quitelar laws, and President Wilsonready to keep its people away fromvetoed this one. The three presidentsplaces where they were not wanted,thought that men of character andand it promised to keep its laborersability ought not to be kept out justfrom coming to the United States.because they had had no opportun-This agreement worked very well,ity to go to school in their own coun-but Congress paid no attention to ittry. Congress, however, passed thein the new immigration law of 1924bill over Wilson's veto.which forbade all immigration fromThe Chinese Exclusion Act. OneJapan. As a result, the Japanese feltof the most difficult problems of im-that Americans were no longer theirmigration had to do with Orientalfriends.AMERICA IS STRONGER BECAUSE OF ITS IMMIGRANTSThe Immigrant - a Builder. Ourinto thriving farms and prosperousAmerica is what the immigrants fromtowns. Later, immigrants from Eu-the seventeenth to the twentiethrope and Asia did much of our hard-century have made it. In the yearsest work - digging tunnels, gradingjust after the War Between therailroad beds, and working in ourStates, the hundreds of thousands ofmines and factories. Skilled work-Scandinavians and Germans helpedmen from other lands helped to putto turn the waste places of our Westour growing industry in first place.Chapter 20379

In 1890 an American writer de-The Immigrant - a Contributorscribed the immigrant as "the Ameri-to Our Culture. But our foreign-can man-of-all-work". - saying:born citizens brought much more"I contribute eighty-five per centthan the work of their hands. Theyof all the labor in the slaughteringmade our national life richer by con-and meat-packing industries;tributing new ideas and customs.I do seven-tenths of the bitumin-They furnished leaders in all linesous coal mining;- poets, artists, musicians, scholars,I do seven-eighths of all the workscientists, inventors, and statesmen.in the woolen mills;Most of them had firm faith in Amer-I contribute nine-tenths of allican ideals of liberty and democracy.labor in the cotton mills;Frederick Haskin already quoted onI make nineteen-twentieths of allthis page, also speaks for the immi-the clothing;grant in the following words:I manufacture more than half of"I looked toward the United Statesthe shoes;with eager eyes kindled by the fireI build four-fifths of all the furni-of ambition and heart quickenedture;with newborn hope.I make half of the collars, cuffs,"I approach its gates with greatand shirts;expectation.I turn out four-fifths of all the"I entered in with fine hope."leather;This "fine hope" was sometimesI make half the gloves;disappointed, when newcomersI refine nearly nineteen-twentiethsfound themselves lonely and even,of the sugar;perhaps, rudely treated by Ameri-I make nearly half of the tobaccocans who had lived here longer. Onand cigars.'the other hand, millions of peopleThe Immigrant - a Contributor. Albert Einstein (left), a German, advancedthe theory of relativity, a basis for the later development of atomic energy.Edward Bok (right), a Dutchman, became an outstanding journalist and author.Wide World PhotoWide World PhotoIMass Naturalization. New citi-zens take the oath of allegianceat a ceremony held by courtesy ofthe court in a Washington, D. C.,hotel as part of the final sessionof the 13th Annual National Con-ference on Citizenship. The rightto become American citizens haslong been a major reason for im-migration to this country.Courtesy Immigration andNaturalization Servicehave found in America a chance totime from her household tasks to golive in freedom and happiness asto evening classes, but she will man-they could not do in the lands fromage it if she can, as she will not wishwhich they came.her husband and children to leaveThe Immigrant - a Citizen. It isher behind in the job of becomingfairly easy for a newcomer to thean American.United States to become an Ameri-But what do our neighborhoodscan citizen. Most cities have schoolsdo? Do we children of earlier immi-for the study of English and govern-grants make it easy for strangers toment. A man or woman who hasfeel at home? Do we see that theylived in the United States for fiveget fair treatment in the factory? Doyears may apply for citizenship. Hewe welcome them to the school, themust have two sponsors to swear tochurch, and the neighborhood? Dohis good character. The judge of thewe share the good things of ournaturalization court asks him ques-community with them and give our-tions about American government,selves a chance to enjoy the contri-and if replies are satisfactory, he isbutions to American life made bythen sworn in as a citizen.the newcomers? This is a challengeMeantime his children learnto each friendly American who be-American ways in a public school.lieves in fair play, a basic idealHis wife may not be able to takewhich characterizes the American.Chapter 20381OUR NEW CITIZENS STILL SEEK FREEDOM AND OPPORTUNITYBefore moving on to the next chap-"Religion is an important part ofter, let's stop for just a moment tomy life. In the old country I was notstudy two questions. Why did immi-able to worship God the way Igrants come to America? What rea-pleased. I have heard that in Amer-sons did they have for leaving homeica I shall have this right."and families to seek a new and dif-"I believe that people should haveferent life in a new land?a voice in the government. In Amer-America - a "Land of Opportu-ica, I shall have that right.'nity." Suppose it were possible toPeople of all times in our historyask those questions of a German im-came for these reasons. America wasmigrant in 1690 and a newcomerlooked upon (and still is) as thefrom Russia in 1890. Their reasons"land of opportunity" for millions ofwould be much the same. Bothoppressed people the world over.might make statements such as:America Seeks Immigration."My father tilled soil belonging toAmerica did not hesitate in invitingother men all his life. When he diedimmigrants. Many States eager tohe had nothing to leave to his sonsdevelop their resources, advertisedand daughters. I came because Ifor new settlers by passing out post-want to own land of my own.ers and pamphlets in many foreignLure of the West. American railroadcountries.companies urged Europeans to em-Railroad and steamship compan-igrate to Western farmlands in the lateies advertised, too. All over Europe1800's.their posters could be seen, urgingCourtesy The Baker Library, Harvard Universityfamilies to come to the United States.Unfortunately, much of this adver-EMIGRANTStising painted conditions in far tooLOOK TO YOURrosy colors; and newcomers often ex-INTERESTpected ease and comfort, differentindeed from what they found.FARMS AT $3. PER ACRE!Probably our best advertisers wereAND NOT A FOOT OF WASTE LAND.the immigrants themselves. TheyFARMS ON TEN YEAR'S CREDIT!wrote back to their old homes aboutAnd pertion of the principal regisiredthe splendid chances they were find-Lands not Taxable for Six Years:ing in America. As a result, wholevillages sometimes migrated fromFARMING LANDS INthe Old World to the New. In 1905KANSASMIT RIDE FROM THX enfy of THERIFER ARK OFFERED os TEMNE TO THE ACTUALmore than a million Europeans came.ARTTIER LARGER BENEHIS THANCAS NK so UNDERTHEBy 1910 one-third of the total whiteTHE CENTRAL BRANCHpopulation of the United States wasPACIFIC BILL ROAD CO.either foreign-born or of foreign par-Offer for sale their lende in the

ents.EICKAPOO INDIAN RESERVATION,382-141152.417 ACRES.Eighteenth forbade the manufacturebig oil interests to get hold of Teapotand sale of alcoholic beverages; theDome (a government oil reserve inNineteenth gave the vote to women.Wyoming) and other government oilBoth went into effect in 1920.lands. In return he had acceptedFor the most part, the Americanlarge amounts of money. The Fed-people were not interested in carry-eral government took back the oiling on the reforms of Teddy Roose-lands, but not until 1931 was Fallvelt and Woodrow Wilson. "Goodconvicted and sent to prison.times" were returning. Soon, the"Silent Cal," a Friend to Business.people believed, everyone will beVice-President Calvin Coolidge tookprosperous. The great war was over,Harding's place and carried on hisand the world was safe for democ-policies. People liked Coolidge's pol-racy. Now the time had come toicy of cutting government expenseshave some fun.and lowering taxes. The taxes onScandal in the Harding Admin-very large incomes were cut theistration. As we have seen, Warrenmost, for business leaders claimedG. Harding was elected President inthis would make the whole country1920. During his administrationmore prosperous. At the same timeCongress raised the tariff and cutprotective tariffs were raised again.taxes. After he died suddenly inIn 1924, Coolidge was re-elected.1923, the nation was shocked to learnThis quiet New Englander had veryof corruption in the government.little to say, but the people thoughtPeople appointed by Harding tohim honest and sensible.high positions had used their officesFurther Restrictions on Immigra-to line their own pockets, and thosetion. During World War I, the num-of their friends.ber of immigrants to the UnitedThe worst case of corruption wasStates dropped drastically. After thethat of Secretary Fall, of the Depart-war, many Americans did not wantment of the Interior. He had allowedmillions of new people arriving eachtaNThe Accuser. Many people be-tlieved that one of our nation'sSEWATEagreat mistakes was the refusal tojoin the League of Nations andI:the Senate's failure to ratify thetlTreaty of Versailles. This cartoon-elist pictured the Senate as anassassin. Do you agree with theopinion? Why?Rollin Kirby, Courfesy Boston Public Libraryjolpo490year. They claimed that immigrantsTHOUSANDSfrom the war-torn nations of Europe800would take jobs from Americanworkers. In 1921, 1924, and 1929700Congress passed laws which put im-migrants on a "quota system." This600meant that each nation was given a500quota - a certain number of peoplewho could enter our country each400year. At first the number whichwould be admitted under the quota300system was about half a million an-nually. By 1930, however, this num-200ber was cut to 150,000.Those same laws also forbade im-100migration from any country of East-ern Asia. President Coolidge warned19201930194019501960that this was unwise, as our "gentle-IMMIGRATION, 1920-1960men's agreement" with Japan hadworked very well for nearly twentywere fighting with the Americanyears. Bitter feeling arose at onceforces overseas in the European thea-in Japan. The Japanese people feltter of the war.insulted and hurt. They resented a

These laws passed after 1920law that seemed to declare Japanesechanged the whole pattern of immi-inferior to Americans. They talkedgration to America. For several yearsof boycotting American goods, andafter 1930, fewer than 100,000 immi-street riots broke out in Tokyogrants came to our shores each year.against Americans living there.In fact, more people left the countryAnother law said that Asiaticsthan came in. Refugees from re-could not be naturalized, althoughligious and political persecution intheir children born in this countryEurope were no longer admitted un-are of course American citizens.less they came "within the quota" ofMany Japanese residents, long loyaltheir country, no matter how smallto America, thus became "enemythat quota. Some countries, likealiens" when war broke out in 1941.Great Britain, never filled their largeIf they lived near the Pacific coast,quotas. After World War II, specialthey were sent to detention camps,rules were made for people fleeingeven though their sons and brothersfrom despotic governments.THE 1920's ARE PROSPEROUS YEARS FOR MOST AMERICANSDuring World War I, our chiefand to find ways of getting goods tolobs were to produce as rapidly asthem. Farmers were urged to raisepossible the things our Allies neededmore grain, and many mortgagedChapter 2649160°90°50°amounting to great losses of life andmaterials of war, sometimes as muchas half a million tons a month.The United States decided toCANADAspeed up the delivery of goods bycarrying them as far as Iceland in theNorth Atlantic. Iceland had just be-come an independent country and40"had invited the United States toUNITED STATEShelp defend it against the Nazis.Denmark gave us permission to de-BERMUDAfend Greenland also. We "extendedATLANTIC OCEANthe Americas" to include these twonorthern countries. If Germany hadBAHAMASseized them, the war would haveBRITISHcoANTIGUAcome dangerously close to our shores.HONDURASJAMAICAST. LUCIAThe war was already too close forcomfort. The President reportedDIRINIDADthat American ships outside the war*U.S. BasesBRITISHzone had been torpedoed by theGUIANASOUTH AMERICA8*Nazis. He asked Congress to permitour merchant ships to carry guns inself defense. By this time - Novem-United States Bases in BritishPossessions. How were these navalber, 1941 - most Americans were noand airplane bases important to our de-longer neutral in feeling. They ap-fense of the Western Hemisphere?proved the act which armed ourships and permitted them to enterThey said their countries did notthe war zone. We were learning thatwish to conquer territory. They be-no nation - least of all, a powerfullieved that all peoples should freelyone - can remain at peace in a war-choose the form of government theytorn world.wished. They said they would workThe Democracies Sign the At-for better trade relations so that alllantic Charter. A few weeks earlier,peoples might find it easier to getPresident Roosevelt and Britain'sthe things they need. They believedPrime Minister Churchill met at seathat aggressor nations (those who at-near the coast of Iceland. Theretacked their neighbors) should bethey drew up a set of "peace aims,"disarmed as soon as they were de-known as the Atlantic Charter. Itfeated. They believed that as fastwas a statement of what the Unitedas possible "the crushing burden ofStates and Britain hoped a demo-armaments" should be lightenedcratic victory would bring - very"for all peace-loving nations." Theydifferent from the domination (rule)hoped war could be done away with.of the whole world by a master race.They hoped that some system couldChapter 27515Courtesy United NationsCourtesy UNICEF PhotoToward a Better Future. A UN expert explains machinist skills to a Pakistani(left). A UN nurse examines a painful boil of a young Turk (right). The work ofthe UN since World War II has aided greatly the improvement of living con-ditions in underdeveloped nations of the world.everyone. To carry out these aimshad strict immigration laws, but itthe UN has six main branches.made special rules so that, for a fewThe General Assembly. The Gen-years, more displaced persons mighteral Assembly is where all membercome to our country than could havenations are represented and wherebeen admitted by our quota system.each nation has one vote. The As-The Assembly serves as a sort ofsembly meets once a year, and itinternational town hall. Any subjecttakes several months to clear up allconnected with the peace of thethe fifty or sixty items of world busi-world may be discussed and actedness that are brought before it. Iton there, and every delegate has amakes no laws, but it does makechance to say what he thinks. Oftenmany recommendations to memberthere are arguments and disagree-countries.ments. Sometimes countries like theFor example, the Assembly recom-USSR and the United States say ex-mended several times that membertremely unpleasant things aboutnations give homes to as many dis-each other. This may seem to be aplaced persons as possible (peoplewaste of time, but on the other handwho were made homeless by theit may be a good thing to have awar). Some nations refused to admitplace where people can relieve theirany; some were very generous, likeminds with words, instead of takingNorway who took in large numbersup guns to shoot each other. Mean-oflind children. The United States

time, many important decisions areChapter 28535

