Pennsylvania and New York, though in dwindling numbers, until long after the American Revolution. Relatively few landed in New England, where the economy was not such as to create much of a demand for them. In the seventeenth century they flocked to the tobacco colonies of Virginia and Maryland. Afterwards some continued to go there, but more and more the white servants were supplemented and replaced by Negro slaves. The first Negroes in the English mainland colonies arrived in Jamestown in 1619. "About the last of August," the Jamestown planter John Rolfe noted, "came in a Dutch man of War that sold us twenty negars." The local planters bought these people not as slaves, it seems, hut as servants to be held for a pc- nod of years and then freed, like the white servants with whom the planters already were familiar. Gradually permanent bond age for Negroes took the place of temporary servitude in Virginia, and the number of black slaves increased slowly— until about 1700. Then the importation of slaves began to rise very rapidly while the arrival of servants declined even more rapidly. There were two main reasons for this change. In the first place, slavery gave the master a constant labor supply and practically complete control over it. Slaves, identifiable by their color, could not merge themselves with the mass of free humanity so easily as white servants could. Slaves, moreover, could not rise out of their bondage to compete with their masters for wealth and political influence as the servants sometimes did. In the second place, slaves (considering the length of their service! were cheaper than servants, especially with the fall of slave prices after when the monopoly of the Royal African Company was broken and the slave trade was opened to English and colonial merchants on a competitive basis. Slavery' in colonial times, of course, was not confined to Virginia, nor was it confined to Negroes. Numerous attempts were made to enslave the Indians, and while a few of them lived out their lives in bondage, they were in general rather difficult to catch and to hold. Negro slaverv came to the rice country of South Carolina and Georgia from the West Indies and took the place of white servitude from the outset. Slaves labored as domestics and occasionally as farmhands for wealthv families in the North. As of 1763, there were in all the colonics about 230,000 Negroes. most of them slaves. About 16,000 lived in New England, 29,000 in the Middle Colonies, and the rest in the South. Population Growth Besides the Africans, other non-English peoples came in large numbers to the colonies after the end of flic seventeenth century, while immigration from England itself fell off. Recovering from a prolonged depression in the 1630's, England thereafter began to develop more and more industries which demanded workmen, so that the talk of overpopulation ceased to be heard. Instead of encouraging emigra tion from its own shores, the government tried to check the loss of English manpower by prohibiting the departure of skilled artisans, while continuing to unload the unemployable or the undesirable upon the defenseless colonics. Although during the eighteenth century the colonies received relatively few newcomers from England, the populations of several of them were swelled by vast numbers of arrivals from France, Germany, Switzerland, Ireland, and Scotland. Of these immigrants the earliest though not the most numerous were the French Calvinists, or Huguenots. Under the Edict of Nantes (1398) they had enjoyed liberties and privileges which enabled them to constitute practically a state within the state in Roman Catholic France. In 1685 the edict was revoked, and singly and in groups the Huguenots took the first opportunity to leave the country, until a total of about 300,000 had left for England, the Netherlands, America, and elsewhere, only a small minority of them going to the English colonies. Of these emigrents were mostly artisans, merchants, and men of letters and science who enriched their new homes with both their talents and their wealth. In America they settled in the towns along the coast from Charleston to Boston, to become the ancestors of Americans like Paul Revere. Like the French Protestants, many German Protestants suffered from the arbitrary enactments of their rulers, and German Catholics as well as Protestants suffered even more from the devastating wars of the Sun King of France, Louis XIV. The Rhineland of southerwestern Germany, the area known as the Palatinate, was especially exposed to the slaughter of its people and the ruin of its farms. For the Palatine Germans, the unusually cold winter of 1708-9 came as the last straw, and more than 12,000 of them sought refuge in England, the Catholics among them were shipped back to Germany and the rest were resettled in England, Ireland, or the colonies. Arriving in New York, approximately 3,000 of them tried to make homes in the Mohawk Valley, only to be ousted by rapacious colonial landlords. Some of the Palatines moved farther up the Mohawk, but most of them made their way to Pennsylvania, where they received a hearty welcome. After that, the Quaker colony was the usual destination of Germans, who sailed for America in growing numbers, largely Moravians and Mennonites with religious views similar to those of the Quakers. But quite a fewer of the German Protestants went to North Carolina, especially after the founding of New Bern by a company of 600 German-speaking Swiss. All together, the Germans comprised the largest body of eighteenth-century white immigrants except for the Scotch-Irish. The Scotch-Irish, the most numerous of the newcomers, were not Irishmen at all. though coming from Ireland, and they were distinct from the Scots who came to America directly from Scotland. In the early 1600's King James 1, to further the conquest of Ireland, had seen to the peopling of the northern county of Ulster with his subjects from the Scottish Lowlands, who as good Presbyterians might be relied upon to hold their ground against the Irish Catholics. These Ulster colonists —the Scotch-Irish—eventually prospered despite the handicap of a barren soil and the necessity of border fighting with the Irish tribesmen. Then, after about a century, the English government destroyed their prosperity by prohibiting the export of their woolens and other products, and at the same time threatened their religion by virtually outlawing it and insisting upon conformity with the Anglican Church. As the long-term leases of the Scotch-Irish terminated, in the years after 1710, the English landlords doubled and even tripled the rents. Rather than sign new leases, thousands upon thousands of the ill-used tenants embarked in successive waves of emigration. Understandably a cantankerous and troublesome lot, these people often were coldly received at the colonial ports, and most of them pushed out to the edge of the American wilderness. There they occupied land with scant regard for ownership, believing that "it was against the laws of God and nature that so much land should be idle while s6 many Christians wanted it to labor on and to raise bread/' There also they fought the Indians as earlier they had fought the Irish. Among their illustrious descendants was the characteristically Scotch-Irish Andrew Jackson. The Scots and the Irish, as migrants to America, had no connection with the Scotch-Irish. Scottish Highlanders, some of them Roman Catholics frustrated in the rebellions of 1715 and 174;, went with their tartans and kilts and bagpipes to more than one of the colonies, but mostly to North Carolina. Presbyterian Lowlanders, afflicted with high rents in the country and unemployment in town, left in largest numbers shortly before the American Revolution. These Scots, Lowlanders and Highlanders alike, with few exceptions became loyalists after the outbreak of the Revolutionary War, but the Scotch Irish were patriots almost to the man, as were the Irish. The Irish had migrated in trickles over a long period and yet, by the time of the Revolution, were about as numerous as the Scots, though less conspicuous, many of them having lost their Roman Catholic religion and their identity as Irishmen. All these various immigrants contributed to the remarkable growth of the colonies. In 1700 the colonial population totaled a quarter of a million or less; it was nearly ten times as large, more than two million. The number practically doubled every twenty-five years, as Benjamin Franklin observed, leading the English clergyman Thomas Malthas to his pessimistic conclusion (1798) that any population, if unchecked, would increase in a geometrical progression while the means of subsistence (except in a new and favored country like America) could not be increased nearly so fast. Important as the continuing immigration was, the rapid growth of the colonial population was mainly due to natural increase, to the excess of births over ..deaths. In the colonies, with their abundance of land and opportunity, large families were an asset rather than a liabilitv. and husbands and wives heeded the Biblical advice: "Be ye fruitful and multiply." Hence the colonists of English origin, those who had arrived earliest and had had the longest time to multiply, continued greatly to outnumber those of non- English origin. Yet the proportion of non-English ancestry increased year by rear, from a tenth in 1700 to a third (in- cluding the people from Africa) in 1760. There was a good deal of intermarriage between the different nationalities, and even before the Revolution thousands of Americans could trace their ancestry to two or more nations of the Old World. As compared with the population of England, that of the colonies was not only mixed but also youthful and masculine, containing somewhat fewer old persons and women, especially along the frontier. And the colonial population was surprisingly mobile. New Englanders resettling in New Jersey and other colonies to the south, Pennsylvanians (Scotch- Irish and Germans) swarming up the Shenandoah Valley to emerge upon and people the hack country of the Carolinas. In all the colonies men and women pushed upstream toward the unsettled wilderness, until with Daniel Boone leading the way into Kentucky (1-69) they began here and there even to occupy the land beyond the mountains. Along the seacoast a number of villages grew into small cities. For more than a century after its founding, Boston remained the largest town, but eventually it was overtaken bv both Philadelphia and New York. In 1760 Philadelphia had more than 21,000 people. New York about 18,000, and Boston nearly 16,000. After 1700 these colonial towns increased more rapidly than most English cities, yet not always so rapidly as the American population as a whole. Eight out of a bundled Americans lived in towns in 1720, and only about five or six out of a hundred in 1742. The rest of the people—the overwhelming majority throughout the colonial period—were scattered over the countryside and lived upon farms of one description or another. Agriculture and Industry. Though there were regional differences, farming throughout the colonies had certain characteristics in common. In all the colonies it was a matter of adapting European plants and animals to American conditions or applying European techniques to the cultivation of native crops. 'Hie ground was broken with hoe and mattock or with a crude wooden plow', usually drawn by oxen because of their slower and steadier pull than horses could provide, and often requiring two men to hold and guide it. In New England the early settlers usually took up land in groups, each member receiving a village lot of his own, sharing the "common" as pasture and timberland. and tilling the strips assigned to him in the outlying fields. This township system was a relic of the manorial system, but here the town proprietors took the place of the feudal lord, and the farmers themselves planned their interdependent labors at their town meetings. After 1700 tire commons were divided into private property and the strips were consolidated into separate farms. The typical farm became one that was small enough to Ire worked by the farmer, his sons, and perhaps an occasional hired hand, with the aid of neighbors at harvests and at house or barn raisings. It was bounded by fences made of stones that had been laboriously cleared off the fields. A fairly self-sufficient unit, producing mainly for use rather than for sale, it contained a variety of scrawny livestock, apple and other orchards, and fields devoted chiefly to hay and com, the prevalence of the "blast" or black-stem rest basing discouraged the cultivation of w heat. In New York, despite the abundance of excellent soil, agricultural productivity lagged because of the engrossment of the land in great estates, running to thou sands and even hundreds of thousands of acres, on which few people w'ere willing to work as tenants when they could get George Logan, a Philadelphia Quaker who, with no official authorization but with a letter of introduction from Vice President Jefferson, visited France to work for peace in the midst of the undeclared war. After Logan returned, Presi dent Adams gave him a sympathetic hearing, though the Federalists in Congress passed a law, the so-called Logan Act, to prohibit citizens from engaging in private. The Americans agreed to a new treaty which canceled the old ones, arranged for reciprocitv in commerce, and ignored the question of damages. When Adams submitted this treats' to the Senate, the extreme Federalists raised so mans' objections that its final ratification was delayed until after he bad left office. Nevertheless, the "quasi-war" had come to air honorable end, and the United States at Naturalization Act. No alien shall be admitted to citizenship unless he has resided within the United States for at least fourteen years. No native, citizen, subject, or resident of a country with which the United States is at war shall he admitted to citizenship. Alien Act. The President may "order all such aliens as lie shall judge dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States" to depart. Alien Enemies Act. When war is declared or invasion threatened, "all natives, citizens, denizens, or subjects of the hostile nation or government, being males of the age of fourteen years and upwards, who shall be within the United States, and not actually naturalized, shall be liable to be apprehended, restrained, secured and removed, as alien enemies." Sedition Act. Any persons combining of conspiring "with intent to oppose any measure or measures of the government of the United States" shall be liable to fines up to S5.000 and imprisonment up to five years. Any person writing, uttering, or publishing "any false, scandalous and malicious writing or writings" against the government, the Congress, or the President shall be liable to a fine and imprisonment up to two years. When, in 1800, Adams' new three-man mission arrived in France, Napoleon Bonaparte was in power as First Consul. The Americans requested that France eliminate the treaties of 1778 and pay damages for seizures of American ships. Napoleon replied that, if the United Mates had any claim to damages, the him must rest upon the treaties, and if lire treaties were ended, the claim must be abandoned. Napoleon had his way. last had freed itself from the entanglements and embarrassments of the "per- petual" alliance with France. Repression and Protest The outbreak of hostilities in 1798 had given the Federalists an advantage over the political opposition, and in the congressional elections of that year they increased their majorities in both houses. Meanwhile their new-found power went to their heads. Some of them schemed to go on winning elections by passing laws to weaken and to silence the opposition. They had as an excuse the necessity or the supposed necessity of protecting the nation from dangerous foreign influence in the midst of the undeclared war. By persecuting their critics, the Federalists produced a crop of Republican martyrs, gave rise to protests against their disregard of the Constitution. Alien Act nor deport any aliens, but this law together with the Naturalization Act doubtless had some effect in discouraging immigration and encouraging many foreigners already here to leave. The administration did enforce the Sedition Act, arresting about two dozen men and convicting ten of them. Most of these were Republican newspaper editors whose writings, while tending to bring the Federation which helped to bring their party to defeat. "Resolved, that the several States composing the United States of America are not united on the principle of unlimited submission to their general government; hut that bv compact under the style and title of a Constitution for the United States and of amendments thereto, they constituted a general government for special purposes, delegating to that government certain definite powers, reserving each State to itself the re- siduary mass of rights to their own self-government; ami that whensoever the genera] government assumes undelegated powers, its acts are unau- thoritative, void, and of no force: That to this compact each State acceded as a State, and is an integral party, its co-Statcs forming, as to itself, the other party: That the government created by this compact was not made the exclusive or final judge of the extent of the powers delegated to itself; since that would have made its discretion, and not the Constitution, the measure ot its powers; hut that as in all other cases of compact among parties having no common fudge, each party has an equal right to judge for itself, as well of infractions as of the mode and measure of redress." Since many Republican critics of the administration were foreigners by birth, especially Irish or French, the Federalists in Congress thought it desirable to limit the political rights of aliens and make it more difficult for them to become citizens of the United States. The Federalists struck at the civil liberties of both native Americans and the foreign-born in a series of laws commonly known as the Alien and Sedition Acts. President Adams did not invoke the federalists into disrepute, were not truh seditious at all. One of the editors merely had expressed the wish that, when a salute was fired in honor of the President wadding of the cannon had "struck him in the rear bulge of the breeches." The Republicans had no reason to loot to the Supreme Court for relief. Indeed, the Court never yet had declared an act of Congress unconstitutional, and the Re publicans denied that it had the power to do so. The much greater rise in life expectancy at birth than at age twenty reflects the fact that infant mortality was reduced much more than the death rate for those who survived infancy. longer than in earlier generations. The population increase, however, was due less to lengthened life than to the maintenance of a high birth rate, which more than offset the death rate. Immigration accounted for little of the population growth before the 1840's. 'Hie long years of war in Europe, from 1793 to 1S15, had kept the number of newcomers to America down to not more than a few thousand a year, and then the Panic of 1819 checked the Immigrant tide which had risen after Waterloo. During the 1820's arrivals from abroad averaged about 14,000 annually. Of the total populatiob immigrants as ballast, so to speak. Competition among shipping lines reduced fares so that, bv the 1830's, the immigrant could get passage across the Atlantic for as little as $20 or $30. No longer did he need to sell his services to a temporary master in America in order to pay for the voyage. And so the system of indentured servitude, which had dwindled steadily after the Revolution, disappeared entirely after the Panic of 1819. From 1840 to 1S50 over 1,500,000 Europeans moved to America; in the last years of the decade the average number arriving yearly was almost 300,000. Of the 23,000,000 people in the United States in 1S50, 2,210,000 were foreign-born; of these almost a million were Irish and over half a million were Germans. Special reasons explained the prevalence of immigrants from Ireland and Germany: widespread poverty caused by the economic dislocations of the Industrial Revolution; famines resulting from the failure of the potato and other crops; dislike of English rule by the Irish; and the collapse of the liberal revolutions of 1848 in Germany. 'Hie great majority' of the Irish settled in the Eastern cities where they swelled the ranks of unskilled labor. Not until after 1850, however, when the tide of immigration reached even greater heights, would foreigners outnumber na- tive-born in the labor population. Most of the Germans, having a little more money than the Irish, who had practically none, moved on to the Northwest, where they became farmers or went into business in the Western towns. The number who came in the fifties exceeded even that of the previous decade, reaching an estimated aggregate of over two and a half million. As before, the overwhelming majority of the newcomers hailed from Ireland and Germany. By i860 more than a million and a half Irish had migrated to the United States, and approximately a million Germans. Generally the newcomers, the Irish as well as others, were welcomed in the United States. They were needed to provide labor for building canals and railroads, manning ships and docks, and performing other heavy work essential to the expanding economic system. Rut the Irish, as Roman Catholics, excited Protestant prejudices in some communities. In 1834 an anti-Catholic mob set fire to a convent in Charlestown, Massachusetts, and the next year Samuel F. B. Morse (who is better remembered as a portrait painter and as the inventor of the telegraph) published his Foreign Conspiracy, which served thereafter as a textbook for nativists crusading against what thev imagined was a popish plot to gain control of the United States. Out of these tensions and prejudices there emerged a number of secret societies to combat the "alien menace." Originating in the East and later spreading to the West and South, these groups combined in 1850 to form the Supreme Order of the Star-Spangled Banner. Included in the official beliefs of the order were op position to Catholics or aliens holding public office and support of stricter naturalization laws and literacy tests for voting. When members were asked to define their platform, they replied, because of the secret rule, "I know nothing," and hence were popularly called "Know- Nothings." Soon the leaders decided tit seek their objectives by political methods, and formed the American party. In the East the new organization scored an immediate and astonishing success, casting in the elections of 1854 a large vote in Pennsylvania and New York and winning control of the state government in Massachusetts. Still, despite the nativist movement, the federal government did nothing to check immigration, and shipowners, employers, and some of the states took measures to encourage it. The West (including both Northwest and Southwest) continued to grow much more rapidly than the rest of the country. In 1840 the largest cities in the country were in the Northeast and the South. But in the next two decades, as the East became increasingly industrialized, cities there shot ahead of their Southern rivals. The following figures show the comparative rates of growth. The most spectacular population gains were scored by the new Western cities. From 40,000, Cincinnati climbed to 161,000 in 1860. In the same period St.Louis went from 10,000 to 160,000, and Chicago, astonishing everybody but itself, from 3,000 to 109,000. lean people lived to the west of the Ap- ntknians; bv 1S50, nearly a half. Some of the seaboard states suffered serious losses of manpower and womanpower, not to mention the personal property the departing migrants took away. Years later year the Carolinas gave up nearly as such in human resources as they gained natural increase; their populations re- mined almost stationary . The same was true of Vermont and New Hampshire. Many a village in these two states was completely depopulated, its houses and as many, as there had been in 1790. While the vast majority of Americans continued to reside in the open country or in small towns, the number of city dwellers increased remarkably. In 1790 one person in thirty lived in a community of 8,000 or more; in 1820, one in twenty; and in 1840, one in twelve. The rise of New York City was phenomenal. By 1810 it had surpassed Philadelphia, which earlier had replaced Boston as the largest city in America. New York steadily increased its lead in both to be cheaper than railroad, but the rail- rads could move goods in about half the time required on water. A new feature of railroad development and one that profoundly affected the nature of sectional align- ments—was the trend toward the consolidation of short lines into trunk lines. Four roads had surmounted the Appalachian barrier to connect the Northeast with the West. Two. the New York Central and the New York and Erie, gave New York City access to the lake Erie ports. The Pennsylvania road linked Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, and Baltimore and Ohio connected the Marvland metropolis with the Ohio River at Wheeling. From the terminals of these lines other roads into the interior touched the Mississippi River at eight points. Other important trunk routes were the Michigan Central and the Michigan Southern, which entered Chicago from the cast, and the Rock Island and Chicago, which connected the Great Lakes and the Mississippi. Chicago became the rail center of the West, served by fifteen lines and over a hundred daily trains. The great trunk lines increasingly diverted traffic from the water routes, the Erie Canal and the Mississippi River. By lessening the dependence of the West upon the Mississippi, the railroads helped weaken West South economic ties; by fading more closely the East and West, dm prepared the way for a coalition of those sections. Yankee Enterprise Developments in transportation and communication steadily broadened the scope of business enterprise while bringing about a greater degree of geographical specialization in economic activity. More than ever, a particular locality could concentrate upon the production of a certain kind of goods, since it could depend on other parts of the country to buy its surplus ana supply its needs. While such specialization intensified differences of economic interest and thus accounted for much of the growing sectionalism in politics, it also made the East and the West, the North and the South, increasingly interdependent. While mills and factories multiplied, the household and the workshop declined but slowly as producers of manufactured goods. In the textile industry the use of machinery and the dependence on water. During the James K. Polk administration, met one million square miles of new territory came under American control, and the western boundaries of the United States advanced from the Louisiana Purchase line to the Pacific Ocean. Well might the ordinary-looking little man from Tennessee feel proud of his work. To other President except Jefferson had squired so much for his country. Manifest Destiny Those four years, 1845-9, were a period of tremendous territorial expansion. Die tide of emigration continued to roll into the upper Mississippi Valley, increasing the population of the states in that area and bringing tw o new states, Iowa (1846) and Wisconsin (1848), into the Union. The settled frontier bad now moved to a line halfway across the continent. The expansive energies of the American people were not, however, confined to the territorial limits of the United States, even though huge regions in the trans-Mississippi West were still unsettled. Americans looked longingly toward lands not clearly owned by their government— the Oregon country—and to lands owned by another government—Mexico —as places where they would like to live and which they would like to possess. A contemporary editor who approvingly observed the expansionist spirit of the 1840's called it "Manifest Destiny," and his apt phrase has been adopted by historians to characterize both the mood and the process of expansion. The editor meant that it was the destiny or fate of the American people to advance into and to take possession of certain regions. Although Manifest Destiny had the virtue of elasticity and could, if necessary, be stretched to cover any coveted area, its productive facilities, and at the end of the war were turning out more products than at its beginning. A powerful stimulant to the expanding economy was provided by the economic legislation enacted by the Republican party during the war. The Republicans represented Northern industry and agriculture. and, now that the war had removed Southern opposition, they proceeded to put into effect the kind of program their supporters expected. The Homestead Act (1862) and the Morrill LandGrant Act (1S62) were measures which the West had long sought. The first provided that any citizen, or any alien who had declared his intention to become a citizen, could register claim to a quarter section of public land (160 acres), and, after giving proof that he had lived on it for five years, receive title on payment of a small fee. Although some Western migration occurred during the war, no great use was made of the act until the rears immediately after its close. The Morrill Taw was an answer to Western demands for federal aid for the promotion of agricultural education. By its terms each state was to receive 30,000 acres of public land for each of its congressional representatives, the proceeds from the donation to be used for education in agriculture, engineering, and military science. The measure provided the basis for the development of the so-called "land-grant" colleges and universities. Industry' scored its first gain a few days before President Buchanan left office. Congress passed the Morrill Tariff Act, which provided a moderate increase in duties, bringing the rates up to approximately what they had been before 1846. Later measures enacted in 1862 and 1864 were frankly protective. By the end of the war the average of duties was 47 per- tent, the highest in the nation's history, and more than double the prewar rate. Other legislative victories for business rare achieved in connection with railroad and immigration. With Southern opposition to a Northern transcontinental railroad now absent, the promoters of that project successfully revived their plans. Two law's (1862, 1864) created two Federal corporations: the Union Pacific Rail road Company, which was to build westward from Omaha, and the Central Pacific, which was to build eastward from California. The government would aid the companies by donating them public lands and advancing government loans. Although actual construction would have to wait until after the war, these measures represented internal improvements on a scale never dreamed of by the Federalists or the Whigs. Immigration from Europe fell off in the first years of the war. partly because of the unsettled conditions. The decrease, coupled with the military demands for manpower, threatened to cause a labor shortage, and President Lincoln and business leaders asked Congress for governmental encouragement of immigration. In 1864 Congress passed a contract labor law by which business was authorized to import laborers, paying the costs of their transportation, with the future wages and homesteads of the migrants being mortgaged to repay the costs. Over 700,000 immigrants entered the country during the war years, some coming in under the new law and others responding to the normal attractions of America. Perhaps the most important measure affecting the business-financial community was the National Bank Act, enacted in 1S63 and amended in 1864. Conceived partly as a long-range reform of the hank- ing system and partly as a solution to the immediate financial needs of the government. the act created the National Banking System, which lasted without serious modification until 1913. Its architects, in including Secretary of the Treasury Salmon P. Chase, thought of it as a law' that would restore control over the currency to the national government. They argued that both for the military present and the economic future the country needed a uniform and standard banknote currency; wealth created bv modern industry. From 1860 to 1900 the population of the United States leaped from approximately 31 million to almost 76 million. Immigration accounted for a substantial portion of the increase; in this forty-year period some 14 million aliens entered the country. Up to 1880 the great majority' of the immigrants had originated in the countries of western and northern Europe: England, Ireland, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries. Although there had always been points of friction between these people and "native'' Americans and some resistance to their pres- cnee, especially to the Irish, they were in culture and outlook essentially similar to those among whom they settled, and they were assimilated without too much difficulty. But in the eighties the immigrant stream began to flow from another source —southern and eastern Europe. Among the new ethnic stocks were Austrians, Hungarians, Bohemians, Boles, Serbs, Italians, Russians, and Jews from Poland and Russia. They came for the reasons that had always brought immigrants to the United States: the desire to escape unfavorable economic and political consequences and their influx called into existence a short-lived nativist organization, the American Protective Association, which was vaguely but bitterly anti-alien and anti-Catholic. Laborers, fighting to raise their incomes and improve their working conditions, were incensed by the willingness of the immigrants to accept lower wages and to take over jobs of strikers. The later immigrants flocked in pre pondcrant numbers to the industrial cities of the East and became unskilled laborers. They did not have the capital to begin farming operations in the West; percentage of total population ditions at home; the advertising propaganda of railroads, which in their eagerness to dispose of their landholdings painted an alluring picture of America; and the demand for cheap labor by industry, which until 1885 could import workers under the labor contract law. The later immigrants provoked more fear and resentment among Americans than had the earlier arrivals, most of whom, or their offspring, were now assimilated and thoroughly suspicious of new foreigners. To natives of whatever origin, flic newcomers seemed strange indeed. They had different cultural and economic standards and spoke diverse languages (the British and Irish who composed the bulk of the previous immigration had presented no language dissimilarity). They were in overwhelming numbers Catholics in a predominantly Brotcstant country. they had to have immediate employment, and this was offered them by the meat packers, railroads, coal producers, anti steel manufacturers, hungry for cheap labor; and in a strange land they felt the need of that association with their fellows which only city life could give. Crowded info miserable slums, exploited economically, patronized by natives, the aliens seemingly offered prime material for the recruiters of reforms. The leaders of the extreme left, the anarchists and socialists, expecting a ready response, directed their appeals squarely to the migrant masses. Most of the support the anarchists were able to enlist came from aliens, but the great bulk of the newcomers were repelled by its justification of violence. The doctrines of socialism were only slightly more attractive. The Socialist Labor party, founded in the seventies, The newcomers had at first little comprehension of such native ideals, preached but not always practiced, as civic participation and responsibility and efficient and honest government. They were accustomed to being governed instead of governing, they had profoundly legislation of the nineties enlarged the proscriptive list and increased the tax. These measures reflected rising American fears that continued unlimited immigration would exhaust the resources of the nation and endanger its social institutions. The laws kept out only a small number of aliens, however, and were far from fulfilling the purposes of the extreme inclusionists. The latter group worked for a literacy test, a device intended to exclude immigrants from eastern and southern Europe. Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece land, just before leaving office at the end of his second term, vetoed it. The city was a place of violent contrasts. There could be seen, often in close proximity, the richest and the poorest people in America, the most palatial homes and the worst slums and tenements in Western civilization. Jacob Riis, a Danish immigrant and New York Cilv reporter, crusaded against slum conditions and described them without restraint in I low the Other Half Lives. The urban masses had to have a means of rapid and cheap transportation. Before the Civil War some cities had experimented with streetcars drawn by horses, and after 186; horsecar lines appeared in all the metropolitan centers. Richmond, Virginia, introduced an electric railway system in 1887, and soon other cities followed suit. New York opened its first elevated railway Humanitarian groups and individuals interested themselves in improving the physical environment and raising the standards of the poor, particularly the immigrant poor. Working in conjunction with city governments or private philanthropists, they secured money' to construct parks and playgrounds in the slum areas. Social workers established settlement houses in the foreign colonies to entice the aliens from the saloons and streets and bring them under religious in fluenccs. lire most famous of the houses were the Henry Street Settlement in New York, founded by Lillian D. Wald, and Hull-House in Chicago, directed by Jane Addains. By 1900 fifty' such centers were operating in American cities. The Organization of Labor As business became big, consolidated, and national, inevitably labor attempted to create its own organizations that would New Yoke's Elevated Railroad. With the rise of flit city in America there emerged the problem of urban rapid transit—how to transport huge number of people, particularly workers who went to their jobs or left them at the same hours of the day. New York was the first to experiment with an elevated railroad. A short line was opened in 1870, and a longer one, the Sixth Avenue Elevated, shown above, in 187S. Other ertics to follow suit were Brooklyn. Kansas City, Chicago, and Boston. Steam locomotives furnished the power on the "L's. Transit on streets in New York, as in many other cities. Cheap labor was one of the reasons for high profits; unrestricted immigration seemed one of the reasons for cheap labor. At the same time that the big industrialists fought against a lowering of the tariff bars, they welcomed in, or even recruited, the low-paid workers of Europe. While the flow of the "old immigrants" from northern and western Europe continued, a new' flood, comprising about 72 per cent of the total between 1900 and 1910, poured in from southern and eastern Europe. For the most part they were Italians, Slavs, and Jews. In the single year 1905, over 1,250,000 arrived. In most big cities of the North, immigrants and their children outnumbered the native- born. Bewildered at being thrust into an alien culture, living under conditions far below the level of native Americans (ex- cept Negroes), they filled most of the backbreaking unskilled jobs in the new Ctm.n at Spindi.es in a Carolina Textile Mill, 1900. According to the 1900 census, one out of three of the employees in Southern cotton mills was a child under 16. Under strong pressure from within. Southern states gradually passed laws prohibiting the worst of the abuses. Ill North Carolina, manufacturers diafted a law passed in 190T prohibiting children under 16 from working more than sixty- six hours per week, banning children under 14 from night work, and allowing children or 11 to work only as apprentices. As a means of obtaining graphic evidence of violations of even this lenient law, the Secretary of the National Child Labor Committee brought Mine, a documentary photographer of city slums, into some of the worst of the mills. The American Federation of Labor (whose president, Samuel Gompers, was himself an immigrant) fought to cut off this flood of cheap, unskilled foreign labor, which was said to keep wages down and hamper unionization. Many Americans, both conservative and progressive, were susceptible to the popular dogma of Anglo-Saxon superiority, and joined in the anti-immigration movement. They feared the high birthrate among immigrants as compared with the low birthrate among natives in the higher-income groups; Theodore Roosevelt warned darklv against "race suicide." They blamed the squalor of the slums and the power of the political bosses largely upon the immigrants, and felt that through restriction could come improvement. In 1907 they succeeded in stopping the immigration of Japanese to the agricultural lands of the Pacific Coast through the "gentleman's agreement" that Roosevelt negotiated with the Japanese government. A series of restrictive laws prohibited various undesirables, ranging from ex-convicts to alcoholics, from entering the United States. In 1917, over the veto of President Wilson, Congress passed a law setting up a literacy test as a means of reducing the number of immigrants. For all those, immigrant or native, crowded into city tenements, life was far from enviable. Jacob Riis, the crusading journalist, thought that by 1900 the worst of the New York slums were gone. In their place were a scattering of parks and plavgrounds; in some of the worst remaining areas there were privately financed settlement houses to aid the poor. Nevertheless, for millions of city dwellers, housing was barely tolerable. In New York Citv, two thirds of the city's three and a half millions lived in tenement houses. Most of them were by no means slum dwellings hut were nevertheless of the "dumbbell" tvpc, which provided direct light and air for only four rooms of the fourteen on each floor. It was the goal of progressives to right the various wrongs. Where from among the American people could there come a movement forceful and persistent enough to overcome the entrenched economic power which maintained these conditions? Populists had vented their indignation against many of the same evils and had proposed some concrete remedies. But Populism had been a protest movement limited largely to the distressed farmers of the West and South. Now, the farmers were enjoying a renewed prosperity. Progressive leaders were chiefly from the urban middle class, to a remarkable extent college-educated self employed professional men or small businessmen, of native-born Protestant background. For the most part they were about forty years old, financially secure civic leaders who had earlier been McKinley Republicans. Following these leaders was a middle class, like them still clinging to the traditional agrarian values, but caught up in the social whirlpool of the new industrial age. The older segment of the middle class, the independent professional and business men from which such a high proportion of progressive leaders came, somewhat more than doubled between 1870 and 1910. This meant it grew as rapidly as the population as a whole, which increased about two and a third times. The working class (including farm laborers) trebled; farmers and farm tenants doubled. But there was another group, a new middle class of white-collar workers—the clerks, sales people, and technicians who worked for corporations or service enterprises, ft increased almost eight times, from 756,000 to 5,609,000 people, thus reaching a number almost double the size of the older middle class. While members of this new white-collar class did not provide leadership for the progressive movement, to a considerable extent they did provide it with voting strength. Political action was their onlv outlet for economic protest, since they did not belong to unions or trade associations. Often it was they, on their fixed salaries, who were worst caught by rising prices. And basically, like the older middle class, they were urbanites who still expressed the emotions of their rural roots. These two groups, the white-collar class and the older middle class, combined to form the respectable element of the towns and cities who, along with many of the more successful farmers and some of the laborers, were ready to accept the new progressive creed. Urban political bosses frightened the middle classes, not only because of their corrupt ties with the industrial moguls but also because of their hold over the ignorant laboring masses (often largely immigrants) of the cities. Also, these middle-class people had some fear of the new rising labor unions. Populist farmers resentment over a trickle of 500 to 1,000 Japanese immigrants coming in each year, and their excitement over lurid "Yellow Peril" articles in the newspapers. Resentment in Japan flared high, and jingos in each country fanned the flames hotter. Roosevelt worked skillfully to douse the flames. He persuaded San Francisco to desegregate its schools, and in return in 1907 he negotiated a new, more effective "gentlemen's agreement" with Japan to keep out agricultural laborers. I Tien, lest the Japanese government think he had acted through fear, he launched a spectacular naval demonstration. He sent sixteen battleships of the new navvy "the Great White Fleet," on an unprecedented 45.000-mile voyage around the world. It gave the navy invaluable experience in sailing in formation (and demonstrated a dangerous dependence upon foreign coaling vessels). Most important, the Japanese invited this formidable armada to visit Yokohama, and gave it a clamorous welcome. Tims Roosevelt came to feel that through brandishing the big stick he had helped the cause of peace. For the moment, the United States had demonstrated sufficient naval strength to restore an unsteady balance in Asian waters. In 1908, before the fleet had returned home, Japan and the United States negotiated the comprehensive Root-Takahira Agreement. Both countries agreed to support the Open Door in China. The United States tacitly seemed to give Japan a free hand in Manchuria (where rivalry with Russia continued) in return for an explicit guarantee of the status quo in the Pacific. It was a precarious equilibrium, and might be destroyed by am future upset in the naval ratios. At the same time that he was directly engaged in balancing the powers in the Pacific, Roosevelt was participating somewhat less directly in trying to maintain a balance in Europe. American relations with Great Britain were increasingly cordial. In 1905, the British agreed to the establishment of an Alaskan boundary' commission on terms highly favorable to the United States, and then voted on the tribunal against almost all the Canadian claims. After the settlement, the British pulled almost all of their fleet units out of the Caribbean, allowing it to become virtually an American lake. Toward Germany, Roosevelt was outwardly friendly, but had reservations because of German efforts to expand overseas. When the European powers quarreled over Morocco, Roosevelt was reluctant to involve the United States. "We have other fish to fry," he told Taft in 1905. Nevertheless, he resolved to try "to keep matters on an even keel in Europe." Con sequently he intervened on behalf of the Kaiser to persuade France and England to attend an international conference for establishing the status of Morocco. Germany was protesting because tire French were excluding foreign economic inter ests there. Roosevelt insisted that a con fcrcnce be held, to forestall the danger of war. At the conference, which was held at Spain, the United States played a less decisive role, but did vote with the British and the French as thev defeated the Germans at the conference table. Ibis alignment boded ill for the next European crisis, but for the moment the United States had helped avert, or at least postpone, a war into which it might ulti mately be dragged. The Iron-Fisted Neighbor Roosevelt's preoccupation with the American strategy of defense in the Car- ibbean—especially his almost obsessive fear of German penetration—betrayed him into becoming an iron-fisted neighbor toward small countries to the South. He first impetuously used his might to start work on a canal in Panama. Even before Roosevelt became President. The tariff gave agriculture little real protection, but it did provide industrialists with several benefits. It accepted the principle that, when foreign firms had lower costs of production than their American competitors, the tariff should be high enough to offset the differential. It prohibited most competing imports and led to higher prices at home. Other nations followed the American lead in economic nationalism; by 1928 some sixty countries had raised their tariffs. Along with high walls against competing goods. Congress finally succeeded in erecting barriers against incoming foreigners. The movement to curtail immigration came to a spectacularly successful climax with the beginning of the 1 larding administration. Racist objections to the "new immigrants," and the unionists' fear that the newcomers were perpetual ing a pool of cheap labor in the United States, were reinforced by the new allegation that some of them were radicals. This led employers who had previously favored immigration to switch to the restrictive side. I n the spring of 1921, Congress passed an emergency immigration act, setting up a quota system: immigrants from any country1 could not exceed 3 per cent of the number of persons of their nationality' who had been in the United States in 1910. This cut the number of immigrants from 800,000 in the year ending June 30, 1921, to about 300,000 in the following twelve months. Racists still were not satisfied, so Congress in 1924 enacted the National Origins Act. This measure not only banned the people of East Asia entirely, but set a quota of 2 per cent for Europeans, and this on the basis of the 1890 census. It cut the yearly total to 164,000, heavily weighted in favor of those from northwestern Europe. On July 1, 1929, new smaller quotas based on the 1920 census went into effect, but during the entire depression decade of the thirties the total net immigration was less than 70,000. 'lire great flood of so many decades had been cut to a few drops. In the decades that followed, the effects within the United States were profound. Excluding all aliens ineligible to become citizens meant excluding the Japanese in particular. It was an unnecessary insult to the Japanese, since the Gentle- men's Agreement had worked well, and the application of a quota system to Japan would have allowed only a tinv trickle of immigrants. Indignation in Japan against the act of 1924 was so extreme that Hughes lamented privately, "It has undone the work of the Washington Conference and implanted the seeds of an antagonism which are sure to bear fruit in the future." It was vital to the enemy than because it would be damaging to public opinion of the armed forces. Diligent newspapermen, aided by Price, exerted pressure on the armed forces to make censorship an instrument for security, not for the con cealing of incompetence. Newspapers following Office of Censorship rules censored themselves to withhold local news that might be of value to the enemy. The overlapping and conflict among government information agencies led to the establishment in June, 1942, of the Office of War Information under a shrewd news commentator, Elmer Davis. Although the O.W.I. consolidated four previous organizations, it coordinated rather than assumed the information function of domestic war agencies. The O.W.I. aroused the misgivings of Congress, partly because of internal feuding and the mass resignation of the pamphlet writers, mainly because conservatives objected to several of the O.W.I. pamphlets: one opposing inflation, another on Negroes in the war, and another which was a tax primer. A fourth pamphlet intended only for overseas distribution, a cartoon biography of Roosevelt, especially worried antiadrninistra- tion congressmen. They feared O.W.I. might promote New Dealish policies and the 1944 candidacy of Roosevelt. In 1943, Congress cut funds for the Domestic Branch so drastically that it had to stop producing propaganda. Overseas, O.W.I. carried on a program employing 8,400 persons by VE day. Through "Voice of America" broadcasts begun in 1941 and propaganda of many sorts it presented an idealistic view of American war aims and aspirations for a peaceful postwar world. As the symbol of this idealism it dramatized President Roosevelt. By the end of the war, Roosevelt was more of a hero overseas than at home, and American aims appeared more idealistic abroad than in the United States. The war produced less hatred and vindictiveness at home than had World War I. The energy that had gone into crude vigilantism in the earlier war went in the second World War into serving as air raid wardens and doing similar duties for the Office of Civilian Defense. People continued to cat hamburgers and sauerkraut and listen to Wagner. They demonstrated little animus toward Americans of German background and practically none toward Italians. A few Nazi agents and American fascists were jailed, but the most ambitious effort to punish them, a sedition trial of 28, ended in a mistrial after the defendants' lawyers had engaged in long weeks of delaying tactics. A few papers like Father Coughlin's Social Justice were barred from the mails. But socialists went unpunished, and religious conscientious objectors who were willing to register went to Civilian Pub lie Service camps rather than prison. In sad contrast to this moderation, the frenzy of public fury turned on the Japanese. The fighting in the Pacific developed a fierce savagery, reflected in the public anger within the United States. On the Pacific Coast, hatred of Americans of Japanese background became extreme. Wild stories circulated about sabotage at Pearl Harbor—later proven 100 per cent untrue. Under public pressure, Roosevelt in February, 1942, authorized the army to remove all people of Japanese ancestry from the West Coast Some 117,000 people, two thirds of them United States citizens, were abruptly herded behind barbed wire, and later shipped into ten relocation centers in wild and disagreeable areas. They suffered the financial loss of at least 4 percent of their possessions and for several years were barred from lucrative emplov- ment. Yet Japanese-Americans in Hawaii were left unmolested without incident throughout the war. There were Japanesc-Americans in the armed forces. Their units, especially in Italy, established outstanding records for bravery under fire. iThis persecution of Japanese-Ameri- cans was the only major blemish in the wartime civil liberties record, but it represented a serious erosion of civilian rights, since the Supreme Court in validated the evacuation, and in other decisions upheld military" control over civilians. 