He was also an excellent businessman. He advertised his colony widely on the Continent as well as in England, and from the beginning it grew rapidly. Individual founders of colonies, such as Calvert and Penn, were called proprietors, and their colonics were known as proprietary colonics. Carolina was another proprietary colony. It was founded by favorites of Charles II. Their chief interest was profit, but the colony disappointed them in that respect, and they finally handed it back to the king. In 1691, the colony was split into North Carolina and South Carolina. Three other colonies were settled by people from Massachusetts. Religious differences, discontent with the government, and the lure of better land led to the establishment of three other colonies in New England: Rhode Island, New Hampshire, and Connecticut. Many of the settlers in these new colo- nics came from Massachusetts. The stem Puritans of Boston were not very easy to get along with, especially if, like Roger Williams, a person had his own ideas about religion. Because lie criticized the Puritan government in Massachusetts, Williams was exiled. In 1636, he founded a settlement at Providence, Rhode Island. Another religious exile from Massachusetts, John Wheelwright, settled in New Hampshire in 1639. However, this new settlement was not officially separated from Massachusetts until 1680. Some people left Massachusetts because they wanted better land. Thomas Hooker and his followers, for example, settled in Connecticut in 1636 because that region offered more abundant pasture land for their cattle. The Netherlands and Sweden founded colonies. Two of the original thirteen colonies, New York and Delaware, were not started by the English at all. New Nethcrland (New York) was founded by the Dutch West India Company shortly after the Pilgrims landed at Plym outh. A few years later, the Dutch colony's main settlement. New Amsterdam, was established on Manhattan Island, which was purchased from the Indians for trinkets and goods worth twenty-four dollars. The Dutch com pany was mainly interested in trade; but the colony attracted many settlers, English as well as Dutch. Delaware was originally founded in 1638 by the Swedes, but they were overcome by the Dutch in 1655. The now enlarged Dutch colony was, in turn, gobbled up by the English in 1664, when Charles II gave New Netherland to his brother James, the Duke of York. Fierv old peg-legged Peter Stuyvesant, the Dutch governor, could not match the forces which the Duke sent against him; so New Netherland became the colony of New York, and New Amsterdam became New York City. Not long after taking over the Dutch colony, the Duke of York divided it. He gave the southwestern part to two friends, John Lord Berkeley and Sir George Carteret. The new owners called their colony New Jersey. William Penn persuaded the Duke to turn over Dela ware to him so that Pennsylvania might have a good outlet to the sea. For twenty years Delaware continued to be a part of Pennsylvania, but in 1702 it became a separate colony. Georgia was founded by James Oglethorpe. The last of the thirteen English colonies was Georgia, founded in 1733. more than one hundred years after the AMERICA'S STORY BEGAN IN EUROPE settling of Jamestown. England knew that a strong colony located between her colonies in the Carolinas and those of Spain in Florida would help protect the English settlements. Also, the increasing number of debtors in English prisons was creating problems. Thus the king was glad to have James Oglethorpe and his associates try' to establish a colony in the territory of Georgia as a refuge for imprisoned debtors. The colony grew very' slowly and was not a great success. In 1752, Oglethorpe and his associates turned it back over to the king. American stock is immigrant stock. It is well to remember that all the settlers in the British colonics were immigrants or descendants of immigrants, and that the whole history' of America is a record of immigrants and their children. There has been a tendency at times to look down upon immigrants as being inferior to American native stock; yet the so-called native stock is immigrant stock. These early immigrant settlers were a picked lot, because only the courageous dared to come in the first place, and only those who were strong could survive once they did come. They were people with vision and with high hopes for the future. They were also practical men and women with a keen appreciation of their opportunities and a determination to make the most of them. Out of the vision, hopes, practical know-how, and determination of these settlers came a gTeat nation. Colonial America was a land of many nationalities. During the seventeenth century, most of the seftiers living in the colonies had come directly from England, with the exception of the Swedish and the Dutch colonists (who were absorbed when Britain annexed New Amsterdam in 1664). Then, beginning early eighteenth century, thousands of new settlers began to pour into the British colonies from France, Germane, and Scotland. The population of the colonies rapidly became a mixture of many- different peoples. The settlers who came from France were chiefly Huguenots, or French Protestants, who were seeking to escape religious persecution in France. They settled in various colonies, especially South Carolina. Although comparatively few in number, they produced several important colonial leaders, including John Jay and Paul Revere. Much more numerous were the Germans who came to America to escape the devastation and religious persecution that followed in the wake of a long series of wars in southwestern Germany. In the first quarter of the eighteenth century, 50,000 Germans came to the new land. So many of them moved into Pennsylvania that by the 1750's, they made up one third of the population of that colony. Their descendants, known as Pennsylvania Dutch, are still living in Pennsylvania today. The German immigrants became model farmers, fruit growers, and cattle raisers. Some of them were skilled workmen. They developed the iron stove, the sharp-shooting long rifle, which was the trade-mark of the frontiersman, and the famous covered or Conestoga wagon. About this time large numbers of Scotch-Irish began to leave northern Ireland for America in order to avoid English laws which interfered with their manufacture of wool and linen products. Most of the Scotch-Irish, like the Germans, headed for the frontier. Many took up farm land in the Juniata (joo- nee-af-uh) and Susquehanna valleys of Pennsylvania. In some years, as many as twelve thousand Scotch-Irish immigrants came to America. After 1735, many moved out of Pennsylvania into the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia. Some settled in what is now West Virginia. Others moved south into the Car olina mountains, northern Georgia, and Tennessee. The Scotch-Irish turned out to be good frontiersmen and Indian fighters. They took naturally to government and politics, too; and from their ranks eventually came such outstanding leaders as Presidents Andrew Jackson and Woodrow Wilson. Immigrants from Africa also came to America, but they came as slaves. In 1619, the first Negro servants were brought to Virginia. By 1760, there were nearly 300,000 Negroes in America scattered throughout all the colonics, though the majority were in the South where the rice and tobacco plantations were located. Already slavery was becoming the basis of the South's economy. The population of the colonies grew rapidly. Bv 1750, the British colonies extended along the Atlantic coast from Spanish Florida to French Canada. Up and down this coast, the colonists established thriving little communities with energetic, self-reliant populations; and already some restless and daring men were moving inland toward the West. Such pioneers favored particularly the river valleys which promised better land for fanning and which provided convenient transportation to the communities along the coast. Once the British colonics became established communities, their populations increased at a remarkable rate, as can be seen in the chart at the top of the next column. Figures are important in order to help give you a quick and accurate impression of certain situations. But figures lack life. What counts is what lies behind them. Suppose you could turn the figures into a moving picture of colonial history. Then you would sec people clearing thousands of square miles of land and turning it into pastures and farms. You would see flocks of sheep and herds of cattle taking the place of deer and wolves. Farms, villages, and towns would dot land that once had been wilderness. Everywhere you would see men and women hard at work—men and women who brought the best of Europe to the New World and with it built the foundations of modem America. Vasco da Gama's voyage around Africa Settlement of Jamestown Settlement of Plymouth Founding of the last of the thirteen colonies, Georgia to create a Navy Department, and to put the country in readiness to fight. Washington was recalled from retirement to resume his old place as Commander-in- Chief. Neither France nor the United States actually declared war formally, but from 1798 to 1800, there was an undeclared war at sea. The American Navy captured French ships, and the French Navy seized ours. Finally, despite the clamor for war from within his own party, Adams decided to send a new commission to France to try once more to get a settlement. Meantime, Napoleon had come to power in France, and he wanted to end the trouble with the United States. In September of 1800, representatives of the two governments signed a treaty which dissolved the Alliance of 1778, and declared that cargoes carried in neutral vessels would henceforth not be subject to capture. The agreement did not require France to pay for American cargoes she had seized illegally, but it did end the danger of war. The Federalists passed the Alien and Sedition Acts. The threat of war with France in 1798 gave the Federalists an excuse to go after the Jeffersonian newspapers. Some of the newspapers had editors who had come to the United States from Europe. It was bad enough, the Federalists thought, for foreign-born editors to insult good American citizens at any time; but with the safety of the nation at stake, the sharp attacks became unbearable. The Federalists decided to silence foreign journalists. By means of a new naturalization law in 1798, the Federalist majority in Congress lengthened the residence requirement for citizenship from five years to fourteen. Also in 1798, as part of this same policy. Congress put through the Alien and Sedition Acts. The Federalists actually did not use the Alien Law against anybody, but several foreigners left the country for fear of what might happen. Under the Sedition Law, however, the Federalists made twenty-five arrests, including the editors of four leading Jeffersonian papers. Some of the suits were based on such flimsy charges that the Federalists damaged their own cause, and people all over the country began to protest against the acts. The Federalists defended the Alien and Sedition Acts on the ground that severe measures were necessary to save the government. They said such laws could be passed under the principle of broad construction of the Constitution. Kentucky and Virginia passed resolutions. The Jeffersonian Democrats saidl that the Alien and Sedition Acts denied the fundamental principles of free eminent. The Alien and Sedition Acts themselves expired soon after Jefferson was elected President, but the question of their constitutionality, which was raised in the Second Kentucky Resolution, started a dispute that lasted for over sixty scars. Some people believed that states could decide whether or not a law of Congress was constitutional. If a pie claimed, it could keep that law from being enforced within its borders— regardless of what the Federal Supreme Court ruled. This states'-rights viewpoint is called the doctrine of nullification. The states'-rights people claimed that it was unfair for the Supreme Court to decide the issue in a dispute between a state and the federal government be- ®*usc the Court itself was part of the cderal government. They said the was almost certain to decide against the states. Jeffersonian Democrats found fault with all he did, and he was even refused recognition as head of his own Federalist party by- Hamilton and his friends. Since 1800 was the year of a presidential election, the party needed harmony. However, Adams took this time to dismiss Hamilton's friends from the Cabinet, which of course split the party even more. Hamilton announced that he would not I support Adams for a second term. But J the Federalists nominated Adams in spite of Hamilton. In disgust, Hamilton wrote: "My mind is made up ... If the cause is to be sacrificed to a weak and perverse man, I withdraw from the party." The Democrats nominated their leader, Thomas Jefferson. For the Vice-Presi- dency they picked Aaron Burr. Adams received sixty-five electoral votes, while Jefferson and Burr (who each received the votes of all the Democratic electors) tied with seventy-three apiece. So, as the Constitution provided in case of a tie [56], the election went to the House of Representatives. Some Federalist members of the House who objected. Child labor was widely used in United States factories right up into the twentieth century. The making of textiles was only one of various industries in which children could be employed. The little girls in this picture are stripping tobacco leaves. is still active in the Connecticut region around New Haven, Waterbury, and Thomaston. These machines cut down the need for hand labor. In America skilled labor was relatively costly and hard to get; manufacturers were eager, therefore, to have machines to substitute for it. The factory system produced a large variety of goods at low prices. Before long, the factory system was applied to many large-scale industries. In 1846, for example, Elias Howe secured a patent for a sewing machine. This machine was responsible for the development of the ready-made clothing business. It also helped to put the making of shoes and harness on a factory basis. However, of all American large-scale industries, cotton manufacturing developed most rap- idly—and the value of the factory system with its improved machinery was quickly reflected in the falling price of cloth. In 1815, plain cotton sheeting cost forty cents a yard, but by 1829 the price had dropped to four and one-half cents. The iron industry was not far behind the cotton industry, and furnished essential material for the rapidly increasing machine shops and railroads. Beginning in 1840, the ironworks used anthracite coal for smelting, and with this improved fuel they greatly increased their production. In 1845, American rolling mills began to make iron rails for the railroads; when the War between the States began, there were over thirty mills for making rails. Pennsylvania became the center of the iron industry, just as Massachusetts had taken the lead in cotton manufacturing. In addition to rails, American ironworkers were making hardware for buildings, parts for steam engines, stoves for cooking and household heating, and many other items. Industrial developments brought both problems and opportunities. The rise of the American factory system resulted in a large increase in the number of wage earners. Few of the factory jobs called for physical strength, so women and children could do the work as well as men—and at much lower wages. A visitor to the "cotton works" of Paw- tucket in 1801 found that the operations of cleaning, carding, spinning, and winding cotton were left to children from four to ten years old, who were paid twelve to twenty-five cents a day. This factory employed more than one hundred children. The hours of labor at f first were those common on the farms, from sunrise to sunset; or, if the working davs were the same length throughout the year, twelve hours. This twelve-hour day left little time for education or play —either for working children or for adults. Such a situation was bound to arouse indignation eventually. Nevertheless, before 18^0. adult wage earners in America were well off compared to European workers. Conditions were so much better here than in the mill towns of England and France that some European visitors expressed surprise at the contrast. Writing in 1836, the Frenchman, Chevalier, exclaimed: "The United States arc certainly the land of promise for the laboring class. What a contrast between our Europe and America!" Writing a few years earlier, an Englishman found the American workingman too independent: The workmen are under very' little subjection: sometimes they are absent from their work for several days, to the great detriment of their employer; but should they be reprimanded, it might cause the proprietor to be insulted; and the indignation of the working people, in this land of equality, is really to be dreaded. A worker could afford to be independent because of the shortage of manpower and the American tradition of individual freedom. Before 1850, there were rarely enough laborers except during depressions. Also, the job he had would not be his only chance to make a living. A wage earner who saved his money could become his own boss. Any able-bodied immigrant, fresh from Europe, could earn a dollar a day at unskilled labor. Board and room cost him two dollars a week, and his clothing was cheap. In a short time he could buy a farm. In many eastern towns, so many men left for the West that women outnumbered the men. The shortage of men meant that many women could not find husbands, and more and more women were forced to work in the factories to support themselves. The mills at Lowell were famous. During this period, Lowell, Massachusetts, was the leading manufacturing town in the United States. It had the largest and best-managed factories. The Lowell cotton mills produced more yarn per spindle and more cloth per loom than any other mill in the world. There were six thousand employees: five thousand were women from seventeen to twenty-four years old, most of whom were farmers' daughters. The mill owners built boardinghouses for these girls. They' provided them with clean living quarters and good meals. The girls earned from three to six dollars per week, depending on their skill and the kind of work they did. Out of these earnings, they paid $1.25 per week for board and room at the company boardinghouses. Boardinghouse rules such as the following were common: The girls must on all occasions . . . show that they are penetrated by a laudable love of temperance and virtue, and animated bv a sense of their moral and social obligations. . . . Every individual who shall be notoriously dissolute, idle, dishonest, or intemperate, who shall be in practice of absenting herself from divine service, or shall violate the sabbath . • • shall be dismissed from the service of the company. . . . Games of cards are prohibited ... in boardinghouses. The novelist, Charles Dickens, visited the Lowell mills on one of his trips. Machines on the farms did not cause unemployment. They merely made it easier to make money from the land and encouraged more people to take up farming. In Iowa in 1864, a man could buy eighty acres, build a house, and pay for it all out of the profits from his first crop. Prosperous America appealed strongly to suffering Europeans. The progress just described makes it easy to see why Americans were proud of their country and full of hope for the future. America was a place where individual human beings counted for something. There was not only room for everybody; there was opportunity for everybody. Compared with Europe, worn out from the long Napoleonic wars and still troubled by revolutions, the United States looked indeed like a "Promised Land." America needed help in developing farms, building and operating factories, and in constructing canals and railroads. Europeans caught the fever of hope and ambition and flocked to the new land. In 1825, nearly ten thousand immigrants entered the United States. In 1842, the new arrivals numbered over one-hundred thousand and in 1850 over three-hun- dred thousand. In twenty years, from 1830 to 1850, more than two million i^. migrants came to the United States. There were three main groups in this peaceful invasion. In 1825, fifty-three Scandinavians came into New York. They were soon followed by thousands of their countrymen, who settled chiefly in the Northwest, especially in Wisconsin, Minnesota, Nebraska, and Iowa. Between 1830 and 1855, more than one- half million Germans came, settling for the most part in the Northwest, also. In the 1840's, a terrible potato famine forced large numbers of Irish to seek new homes in the United States. The great majority of them settled in the cities or the manufacturing towns of the Northeast. Of all these immigrants, few went into the South. They could not compete with slave labor. The Northeast and West, on the other hand, offered both opportunity and equality. So the South fell behind the other two sections in population. On the whole, the growth of separate economic interests in each region worked out as Henry- Clay and the supporters of the American System expected. The products of each section added to the prosperity of the entire nation. But an event in 1819 showed that great differences in the customs and interests of the sections might eventually endanger national unity. In 1818, Missouri applied for admission to the Union. The bill for admission started through Congress without arousing much interest. Therefore, each had equal representation in the Senate. I11 the House, however, representatives from the free states already outnumbered those from fhc slave states 103 to 81. If Missouri should come in as a free state, the slave slates would be outnumbered in the Seriate as well as in the House. For a time the outlook was troubled enough, the cooler-headed congressmen saw a way out. The northeastern counties of Massachusetts were applying for admission as the state of Maine, nobody wanted slaves there. So. in 1820, Kye Missouri Compromise was arranged. Maine was to enter the Union ls a free state while Missouri was to in as a slave state. For the time being, the compromise preserved the even balance in the Senate, hut it also provided that any more states from the Louisiana Purchase territory north of latitude 36° 30' (the southern boundary of Missouri) were to come in as free states. As the map shows, the compromise was far more favorable to the North than to the South. The territory north of the 36° 30' line was at least four times as large as that to the south. In spite of this apparent unfairness, the southern members accepted the compromise—probably, in the main, because of the widespread feeling of nationalism. Leaders from both North and South were really interested in the building of a stronger, greater nation. Like reasonable persons, they were willing to compromise their differences. The Missouri Compromise furnished a formula for dealing with slavery' in all to arbitration; that is, to let a group of outside, neutral people decide the dispute. The company refused. The union then ordered its members not to handle any trains that had Pullman cars attached. The strike spread to twenty- seven states. When the railroads refused to detach Pullman cars from their trains, the crews quit. Transportation nearly came to a standstill, for there were few strikebreakers competent enough to replace the striking crews. Debs told his men to avoid violence, and the strikers claimed they did so. Nevertheless, some violence did occur— but only in a very few cases. For a while, the strike was well-run— and effective. The railroad companies were being hurt and needed help. Ordinarily, they would have turned to the governor, but they had no confidence in Altgeld since his pardon of the Hay- market anarchists. They appealed instead to President Cleveland and his Attorney General, Richard Olney. The railroad managers charged that the strikers were interfering with the carrying of the mails. Actually, the union had only refused to move trains that included Pullman cars—which were passenger cars, not mail carriers. Attorney General Olney was a former railroad lawyer, and he was on the side of the railroad companies. On his advice, the President sent troops to Chicago, although Governor Altgeld insisted that they were unnecessary. According to the Constitution, the federal government may send troops into a state to put down violence if the legislature or the governor asks for them [79]. In the Pullman strike, the legislature was not in session and the governor did not want troops. Cleveland finally acted on the ground that troops were necessary to keep the mails moving. The troops not only prevented interference with the mail trains, but seriously interfered with the strike. Another move by the Attorney General proved disastrous to the union. He obtained from the federal court in Chicago a court order called an injunction, which forbade officers and members of the union from taking any action that would interfere with the operation of the railroads. A person who disobeys an injunction is guilty of contempt of court and may be punished by the judge without a jury trial. It was clear that if the injunction was enforced, it would break the strike. Debs and other union officials ignored the injunction. They' were arrested, and Debs was sentenced to six months in jail. Without its leaders, the strike collapsed. The Pullman strike created great excitement and set everybody to arguing the issues. The Pullman Company was severely criticized by many people. Even some business leaders felt that the Pullman Company had acted stupidly. They believed that the company should have met the men halfway and submitted the dispute to arbitration. Union leaders made the most of the fact that the company had millions of dollars on hand when it cut wages. President Cleveland also received a great deal of criticism for sending federal soldiers to Chicago against the wishes of the governor, and there were bitter attacks on Attorney General Olney. Many people felt that lie had used the power of the government to protect his friends, the railroad managers. In general, the Pullman strike left bad feeling that poisoned relations between workers and employers for y'ears. Labor's defeats encouraged radicalism. The labor history of the 1880's and 1890's was very disheartening to men like Eugene Debs. A few labor leaders began to wonder if something was wrong with the American system of private business. Debs was one of these. Before the Pullman strike he had paid little attention to radical ideas. He had started work in the railroad shops of Terre Haute, Indiana, when he was fifteen. Later he became a locomotive fireman. The other firemen liked him and elected him an officer of their union. He was a good leader and was the principal organizer of the great American Railway Union. While Debs was serving his six months' jail sentence after the Pullman strike, he did a great deal of thinking. He read many books on socialism, and by the time he was released from jail, he had become a Socialist. He then spent the rest of his life working for socialism and ran for President five times on the Socialist party ticket. Socialists believe that major industries such as mines, steel mills, and railroads should be owned and run by the government. The government, they believe, would not be interested in profit and would deal fairly with its employees. They also believe in democratic methods and arc opposed to violence. In 1905, a handful of labor leaders, including Debs, organized the I.W.W. —the Industrial Workers of the World. Popularly known as the "Wobblics," it consisted of both skilled and unskilled workers. Its members believed in the idea of one big union and in the eventual triumph of some form of socialism. It w'as especially active in the mines and lumber camps of the West, and at its height had a membership of sixty thousand to one-hundred thousand workers. After World War I, however, it declined rapidly. Radical labor organizations such as the I.W.W. and political parties such as the Socialists never did gain a strong foothold in this country, but many of their ideas were later taken over by the major labor unions and political parties. Immigrants added to the problems of labor. Among the reasons for the rather slow progress of the American labor movement was immigration. After 1865, the number of newcomers to the United States increased rapidly. Europeans had always looked upon America as the land of opportunity, and during this period, prospective emigrants received more than the usual encouragement. Around 1865, steamship companies began to send agents throughout Europe urging Cheap, fertile land was no longer available after 1890, so most of the later immigrants settled in urban regions and became industrial workers. Despite the new challenges many of them rose to prominence in such fields as politics, industry, and the entertainment world. people to come to the United States. American railroads also did their best to encourage immigration. Railroads had land to sell; and any increase in population, particularly in the West, meant more business. Thousands of Europeans came over under a contract labor law passed in 1864. The law allowed manufacturers to hire laborers abroad and to let them work off the cost of their transportation when they arrived—an arrangement not very different from the seven- teenth-century plan under which indentured servants came to America. This practice was abolished by Congress in 1885. Between 1860 and 1900, fourteen million immigrants entered the United States. During the next thirty years, eighteen million more came. Before 1890, most of the new arrivals were from northern and western Europe: the British Isles, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries. They found many of their fellow countrymen already here, and it was fairly easy for them to adjust to American ways of life, because the customs of western and northern Europe are not very different from ours. After 1890, many new nationalities came to America. These immigrants, sometimes refered to as the "new immi- grants," were mostly from southern and eastern Europe. From eastern Europe came Slavic peoples: Poles, Serbs, Croats, Russians, and many others. From southern Europe came millions of Italians. Large numbers of persecuted Jews also came from southern and eastern Europe. The immigrants who came before 1890 had on the whole a better chance than the immigrants who came later. Before 1890, there was plenty of land for new farms, and it was fairly easy to find work. Most of the later immigrants, however, had to stay in the industrial cities and work in mines and factories. Large numbers settled in Pennsylvania where they dug coal and made steel for the great new industries. Most new immigrants were desperately poor. They labor spoke languages that sounded strange to older Americans, and they brought different customs with them. They took what jobs they could get, and at first they accepted whatever pay the employer offered. These new Americans from overseas contributed much of the hard, sweaty labor that was needed to build this country into a great industrial nation. But they were often a problem to the struggling labor unions, for they provided businessmen with an abundant supply of strikebreakers when trouble broke out in their factories. Native American workers complained that the newcomers took jobs away from them and pushed down the wages. It was hard for the old and the new Americans, with their differing languages and customs, to join together in strong unions. It is not surprising, therefore, that the unions were among the first to demand laws restricting immigration. In 1882, Congress excluded the Chinese and placed a small tax on other immigrants. Three years later, the Knights of Labor won a law making it illegal to import contract laborers. Before the end of the century, a beginning had been made toward excluding by law immigrants who were physically or morally unfit. Limitations on able-bodied immigrants had to wait a while longer. Labor made some gains through legislation. Labor problems, strikes, and union defeats might all seem to add up to a dismal picture from the standpoint of labor in the late nineteenth century. Yet, progress was being made. The American Federation of Labor grew in numbers and influence. Its cautious methods reduced some people's fears of labor organizations. The workingman had friends in the state legislatures, and some lawmakers began to realize that they had to protect the welfare of workers. In 1886, Massachusetts prohibited factory owners from hiring children under ten years of age. Children between ten and fourteen might work eight hours a day if they went to school six months each year. Several states passed employers' liability laws that made the employers pay the costs of accidents to their employees. In 1892, Congress established an eight-hour day for government employees; and some of the states moved slowly in the direction of the eight-hour day. especially for workers in dangerous occupations. Nevertheless, labor was not to receive full recognition of its rights until well into the twentieth century. Under their direction, the city voted for new hospitals and asylums which were never built. The money appropriated for them went into the pockets of the Tweed Ring. The city even voted salaries for the staffs of these nonexistent institutions and the ring profited once more. Bills for goods sold to the city were padded, and the excess went to Tweed and his friends. The most famous example of Tweed's thieving came to light after New York County got its new court house. Designed to cost $250,000, this famous building actually cost nearly fifteen million dollars. The bills for lumber alone amounted to $460,000, although the lumber was actually worth only $48,000. For safes, carpets, furniture, woodwork, painting, plumbing, and gas fixtures, the cost was $7,389,466—although the actual value could not have exceeded $625,000. One plasterer charged nearly three million dollars for nine months' work. Thermometers cost $7,500. Before the building was even finished, one contractor sent in a bill for well over a million dollars for "repairing fixtures." By such glaring frauds, Tweed and his friends wasted the taxpayers' money and increased the city debt by over eighty million dollars. Public opinion finally caught up with the Tweed Ring. The clever cartoonist, Thomas Nast, helped wake up New Yorkers to what Tweed was doing. He drew a series of cartoons showing Tweed and his friends robbing the city. Tweed sent one of his men to Nast offering him a million dollars if he would stop drawing the cartoons. "I don't care about your newspaper articles," Tweed said. "The people who vote for me can't read, but they can't help seeing them draw pictures." Nast kept on drawing the pictures, and finally some outraged citizens appointed an investigating committee. Tweed was arrested, but escaped to Spain. However, a Spanish official who had seen the Nast cartoons recognized him. The Spanish government sent him back to America, where he died in prison. Other cities had crooked political organizations so powerful that many voters felt it was hopeless to try to fight them. In Philadelphia, for example, a notorious Republican machine under James McManes robbed the city for years and protected criminals in return for money. There were several reasons why corrupt political machines were able to control and plunder leading American BOSS TWEED. By handing out jobs to the right people and by much public display of charity to the poor, Tweed dominated New York City politics for nearly fifteen years. "LET US PREY." This cartoon by Thomas Nast was one of the most scathing and effective attacks made on the corrupt Tweed machine. Tweed and his Tammany cohorts are depicted as vultures who are in the process of picking clean the carcass of New York City. One was the flood of immigrants that poured into the cities during the last part of the century. They were poor, unfamiliar with American ways, and often overwhelmed by the problems they faced in the great cities. The politicians helped them with their worst difficulties and saw to it that they became citizens as soon as possible. In return, the newcomers were supposed to vote as their "friends" directed—and for a time they did. A second reason was the complex form of city government common at that time. So many officials were elected that even a wise voter could hardly tell who was to blame when government was bad. A third reason was the fact that businessmen sometimes found it profitable to do business with corrupt politicians. A businessman could always get what he wanted for a price: a streetcar, gas, or electric monopoly; freedom from inconvenient inspection of his business; or lax enforcement of regulations. Still another reason—and perhaps the most important—was the indifference of otherwise good citizens. Many of them were so busy making money that they gave little thought to politics. the cities began to solve their problems Better streets and transportation were provided. Regardless of bad government, waste, and graft, the cities somehow managed to make progress. One of their most urgent needs was for better streets. Around 1865, city streets were either badly paved or not paved at all. Chicago in 1890 had over two thousand miles of streets, of which only 629 miles were paved. By 1900, however, most of far away. Japan, however, was close and had more at stake than just the Open Door policy. Japan was a rising power in Asia. The hermit country Commodore Perry had opened up in 1854 (see page 277) was rapidly becoming a first-rank military and industrial nation. Japan needed raw materials for her factories and markets for her goods in order to support an increasing population. To meet these needs she hoped to gain control of Korea and Russian-dominated Manchuria. A look at the map will show you another reason why Japan wanted these two areas. The Korean peninsula is, geographically, "a dagger pointed at Japan." Whoever holds Korea is in a strong position to attack Japan—and whoever holds Manchuria can easily invade Korea. Japan was encouraged in her designs against Russia by Great Britain, who was anxious to preserve her own interests in the Far East and to check Russian expansion. Finally, in February of 1904, Japan broke off diplomatic relations with Russia. Then, without making any declaration of war, she attacked the Russian fleet at Port Arthur. American sympathies were with Japan, one reason being that Russia clearly was violating the Open Door policy. Another reason was that Americans always sympathize with the underdog, and little Japan fighting giant Russia appealed to the American imagination. President Roosevelt shared the popular preference for Japan in the war, and he hoped to see Russia stopped in Manchuria. Japan was surprisingly successful, defeating the Russians time after time. In fact, from Roosevelt's standpoint, she was almost too successful. A completely victorious Japan could be as much of a threat to American policies in the Far East as Russia had been. But Japan's victories were so costly in money and men that she was nearly. After a year and a half of fighting Japa nese leaders asked Roosevelt to arrange a peace conference. The Asians were ready to stop the fightint too, although by continuing they might have won in the end. The President was delighted with the Japanese request and arranged a conference at Portsmouth, New Hampshire. With some help and prodding from Roosevelt, the delegates from the fighting nations wrote the peace treaty in less than a month. Under its terms. Japan was free to do what she liked with Korea—she annexed it in 1910. (In a secret memorandum signed before the conference had begun, Roosevelt had agreed not to interfere with Japan in Korea, in return for Japan's promise to keep hands off the Philippines.) Japan also took from Russia the important city of Port Arthur, as well as Russian railroad and mining properties in southern Manchuria and the southern half of the island of Sakhalin. The Russians never forgot these losses; and after World War II, as you will sec, they took back most of the territory and privileges they had lost in 1905. The Japanese had done well for themselves, and their leaders were probably; glad to see the end of the war. But t e Japanese people believed that the Americans had kept them from winning even I greater prizes. They thought that in addition to giving up should have paid all the costs of war. Furthermore, they felt j3?^ should. THE RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR. This historic photograph shows Russian infantry awaiting a Japanese advance near Pass in Manchuria. The outcome of this battle, and of the war, was disastrous for Russia and led to a revolution in that country in 1905. For Japan, the war marked her emergence as a world power. Nobel Peace Prize, however, and considerable fame at home and abroad. Our relations with Japan became more difficult. Americans who hoped that the outcome of the Russo-Japanese War would make it easier to uphold the policies of the Open Door—especially in Manchuria—and the territorial integrity China were soon disappointed. Japan Came out of the war a major world pow- Er strong enough to take what she want- ln Manchuria; and Roosevelt was to realize he would have to develop Policy of "give-and take" with Japan were to be averted. For example, an act by the board of Sail Francisco aroused deal of Japanese resentment. A stream of Japanese immigrants had been moving into California since the end of the Russo-Japanese War, and Californians feared the competition of cheap Japanese labor would bring down wages and farm prices. When the federal government hesitated to stop the immigration, the Californians acted themselves. The San Francisco School Board ruled that Japanese pupils were not entitled to attend public schools. The Japanese government protested vigorously against the board's policy. Roosevelt agreed with the Japanese and accused the Californians of stirring up trouble. However, the national government had no power over local schools. Roosevelt, therefore, could not actually force the San Francisco Board of Education to change its ruling, but lie nevertheless invited the members to come to Washington to talk over the situation. As it turned out, he was able to persuade them to withdraw the ruling. In return, Roosevelt promised to do something to stop Japanese immigration, which he did. In 1907, following long negotiations, the Japanese and American governments adopted the Gentlemen's Agreement, an arrangement under which the Japanese government promised to keep Japanese laborers from going to the United States. Throughout 1906 and 1907, a number of Japanese were talking openly about war with the United States, and Roosevelt determined to make it very clear that this country had no fear of Japan, lie ordered the Navy, by then second only to Great Britain's, on a "good-will" tour around the world. One of its stops was Tokyo, where the Japanese gave the fleet's officers and men a welcome which was surprisingly cordial in view of the circumstances. After the fleet's visit, Roosevelt made another effort to improve relations. In 1908, we signed the Root-Takahira Agreement with Japan. It provided: (1) that Japan and the United States would respect each other's rights and possessions in the Far East (indirectly recognizing Japan's special rights in Manchuria); (2) that both governments would recognize the political independence of China; and (5) that both would uphold the policy of the Open Door. The Spanish-American War revived interest in a canal across Panama. At the same time that the United States was involving itself in Far Eastern affairs, it was even more active in the Caribbean. Since before the War Between the States, Americans had wanted. In spite of the Root-Takahira Agreement, the two countries did not become very friendly. Annoying incidents were continually cropping up. The Japanese always very sensitive to slights, complained bitterly when California and a few other states passed laws to prohibit the Japanese from owning land within their borders. The national government could not interfere, since the states are free to make any laws they wish about their land. Americans, on their part, continued to be suspicious of Japan's activities in China. President Taft was considerably less skillful than Roosevelt in handling Far Eastern problems. Taft believed that the biggest threat to the Open Door and Chinese independence was foreign ownership of railroads in China's territory, lie therefore tried to arrange a great international loan to enable China to take over the railroads herself. The plan was, of course, doomed to failure, since neither Japan nor Russia—which still owned some railroads in northern Man- churia—were ready to give up concessions over which they had fought a war. The plan only succeeded in making both Japan and Russia feel that we were interfering with their rights; and it further worsened our relations with Japan, which continued to be rather unsatisfactory right down to the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941. You may remember that back in 1846 the United States had signed a treaty with Colombia which had given us the right of transit across Panama, then a province of Colombia. In return, the United States had guaranteed the neutrality of the region. Four years later, in 1850, we made the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty with Great Britain. In this treaty, we gave up the right to build a canal except in cooperation with Great Britain. At the time it seemed a satisfactory arrangement. After the War Between the States, when we were stronger, we regretted this promise; but Britain held us to it—so we did nothing about a canal. Then in 1878, a French company headed by Ferdinand de Lesseps, the builder of the Suez Canal, secured from Colombia the right to build a canal across Panama. This company actually began work in 1881, but never completed the project. Tropical diseases, especially yellow fever, killed off the workers; and the company went bankrupt. De Lesseps' efforts did not arouse widespread American interest in building a canal. It took the dramatic voyage of the battleship Oregon around South America during the war with Spain to make people realize how necessary a canal was to our security. That voyage made it clear that the Navy needed a short cut so ships could go quickly from ocean to ocean, especially in time of war. In 1899, President McKinley began talks with the British in order to cancel die Clayton-Bulwer Treaty so that we could build the canal ourselves. Great Britain, who was having troubles with Germany and Russia, was anxious for die friendship of the United States. This situation helped clear the way for a new agreement: the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty of 1901. The treaty provided: (*) that the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty was cancelled; (2) that the United States would have the sole power to build, opiate, and control the canal; and (3) that toll charges would be equal for the ships of all nations. (This last provision was the only point the British gained in return for giving up their rights under the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty.) By the time the Ilay-Paunce- fote Treaty went into effect, Theodore Roosevelt had become President. With characteristic enthusiasm, he made the building of the canal a major goal of his administration. There were two possible routes for the canal: across Nicaragua or across Panama. After some debate as to which route was best from an engineering standpoint, a commission of American engineers recommended the Panama route. But the French company still owned the right of way in Panama and wanted over 109 million dollars for its rights. The price was much too high, so the commission advised Roosevelt to take the Nicaraguan route. At this, the French company came down in its price, and agreed to sell for forty million dollars. The next step was to get a treaty with Colombia which would permit us to build and control a canal across Panama. Roosevelt's Secretary of State, John Hay, worked out an agreement with the Colombian representative in Washington. In January of 1903, they signed the Hay-Herran Treaty. It provided that the United States would pay Colombia ten million dollars in gold at once; and after nine years, 250 thousand dollars annually for a ninety-nine- year lease on a strip of land across Panama six miles wide. Our Senate agreed to the treaty, but the Colombian Senate turned it down. They claimed it gave too many rights to the United States, but more important, they said the price was too low. By waiting two more years until the French company's rights expired, they hoped to get more money from the United States. On September 16, 1920, a bornb exploded at noon in the heart New York's financial district, kill, ing thirty-eight persons and injuring hundreds of others. This disaster, which was regarded by many as part of a wide-spread plot to destroy America's economic system, helped intensify the red scare. Most hysterical fear of Communist radicalism which engulfed the United States was called the "red scare." The "red scare" started as the result of what seemed to many people to be a mounting Communist threat in this country. First, the more radical wing of the Socialist parts' split off and formed the American branch of the Communist party. (One of its leaders, and later its head, was William Z. Foster, the man who organized the 1919 steel strike.) Then, railroad employees backed the Plumb Plan, a socialistic experiment which called for all railroads to be placed under government ownership, and for the railroad workers to share in both management and earnings. The plan was submitted to Congress; and although it was turned down, it frightened many businessmen. In addition, the I.W.W. (see page 411), was still active in 1919—although it was soon to disappear. Members of the I.W.W. were called "Wobblies," and some of them were frankly Communist and openly advocated acts of violence to achieve their goals. Fears that the country was in danger of a red revolution seemed to be confirmed when a series of bornb outrages occurred. Bombs were found in the mail of a number of prominent individuals. One wrecked the home of Attorney General Palmer. Another blew off the hands of a senator's maid when she opened a package. The worst one exploded in Wall Street in New York, killing thirty-eight persons and injuring many others. We know now that the country was actuallv in no real danger- Membership in all of the more radical parties totaled only a tiny fraction of one per cent of the population. Good police work was needed, but not a n - tion-wide hysterical crusade. Nevertheless, the nation became thorough J alarmed. Unfortunately, in the excitement the authorities seized many persons who were actually innocent. The states, as well as the federal government, took drastic action against radicals- In 1920, the legislature of New York expelled five members solely because they were Socialists, even though they had been properly elected by the voters. In some states, teachers were required to take an oath of loyalty in order to prevent the teaching of any dangerous ideas. It did not seem to occur to anyone that patriotic Americans might object to such an oath simply because they resented the implied suggestion that they were disloyal—and that a real subversive would be quite willing to take an oath and then violate it to suit his purpose. Americans turned against immigration. The rising fear of radicalism went hand in hand with a suspicion of foreigners, and the demand for strict limits on immigration increased in the years following 1919. You may recall some limitations had been placed on immigration during the 1880's. During Theodore Roosevelt's administration other restrictive laws Were passed. Despite these laws (which were aimed chiefly at Asiatic peoples), migration continued at a rate of only 3 million newcomers each year at the outbreak of World War I. Immigration was sharply checked by but after the Armistice it began rising again. Congress passed an emergency law and each year to two per cent of the foreign- born persons in the United States according to the census of 1890. After 1927, the total was to be only 150,000 immigrants per year, and the selection of nationalities was to be based on the national origins of the United States' population. If, for example, three per cent of our population were Italian in background, only three per cent of the 150,000 immigrants admitted could come from Italy. The law greatly favored Great Britain and northern Europe, since most of our population was made up of people whose ancestors were from these areas. It severely reduced the number of immigrants coming from southern and eastern Europe. By the 1930's, this law, plus the depression, practically halted immigration into the United States. One feature of the Immigration Act of 1924 further embittered our already uneasy relations with Japan. The law completely excluded immigrants not eligible for citizenship—which meant Orientals. Thc Japanese people regarded it as an insult. They felt that thc exclusion marked them in the eyes of thc world as an inferior people. Thus, bad feeling between the two countries increased. Another result of the immigration law was to partly cut us off from a source of talent that has done a great deal to enrich American culture; for in spite of being handicapped by the prejudice against them, immigrants made valuable contributions to every phase of American life. The list of famous immigrants is long, and it includes such names as Albert Einstein, whose theory of relativity led to the development of atomic energy; Enrico Fermi, a great atomic physicist; Marlene Dietrich, who is almost a legend in the entertainment world; and Gion-Carlo Mcnotti, the "MACHINE GUN" KELLY. On the country's most notorious gangsters, Kelly is shown after his apprehension in Gangsters like Kelly Capone made the twenties one of the most lawless decades jn America's history. Composer of operas like Amahl and the Night Visitors. New tensions developed in American society. The postwar wave of fear influenced more than immigration quotas. In the grip of hysteria, some people did not reason too clearly and thus fell in with the thinking of the Ku Klux Klan, which lumped all minority groups together as "un-American." Negroes, especially, suffered from this kind of thinking during the twenties, even though many of them had risked their lives in Europe during the war. However, there were other reasons for the heightened bad feeling between white and Negro citizens than just the general hysteria. In the North, thousands of Negroes, lured from the South by high-paying war jobs, had moved into the cities during the war. When the overcrowded Negro residential districts bulged into white areas, trouble resulted. Another source of conflict was the competition between white and Negro workers during the postwar shortage of jobs. In the South, the return of Negro war veterans, trained in the use of arms and accustomed to more nearly equal treatment in the service, was viewed with alarm by some people. In 1919, a year of general violence in the United States, tensions burst into sonic of the worst race riots the country has ever known. The most serious ones took place in Longview, Texas; Washington, D. C.; and Chicago, Illinois. But other cities, such as Omaha, Nebraska, and Knoxville, Tennessee, were also subjected to race riots. There were a few more of these riots during the twenties, but] happily the violence decreased after T919, and the tensions gradually ca5TMj The United States experimented with prohibition. The worst violence of the twenties arose not from racial conflict, but from gangsterism, which, in turn, was largely an outgrowth of prohibition. Prohibition closed the saloons and "as followed by noticeable reductions in arrests for drunkenness. Deaths from alcoholism declined as well. But drink mg did not stop. A large minority of the population, especially in the cities, opposed prohibition and continued to demand their customary drinks. Moreover, Congress never provided money enough for adequate enforcement. Whether vigorous and efficient enforcement would have made the amendment work satisfactorily, we shall never know. Enforcement of any law that a great many people oppose is always difficult. Prohibition ran into difficulties at once. Because people were ready to pay high prices for liquor, many illegal dealers, or "bootleggers," appeared. They made huge profits and were able to bribe authorities and occasionally control local governments. Often, "hijackers" attacked the bootleggers and carried off the liquor. Consequently, bootleggers and their associates hired gunmen for "protection," and also to kill off their rivals. Soon almost every part of the country had a gangster mob. The most famous gangster was Al Capone of Chicago. Capone went to Chicago in 1920 to help a prosperous beer king. In three years lie was the liquor boss of Chicago. According to reports, he had a gang of seven hundred men working for him; and between 1920 and 1930, Chicago had over five hundred. Two cruise ships enter the Eisenhower Lock os they proceed through the seaway. There are seven locks in the seaway, which raise or lower ships a total of 226 feet between Montreal and Lake Ontario. that often the new super highways became, in a surprisingly short time, almost as crowded as the old roads had been. Furthermore, by the time the fifties had arrived, the railroads were in serious trouble, particularly in the eastern part of the country. For a century or more the railroads had been the backbone of the American transportation system. They moved most of the country's heavy freight. They took the commuters to work in the morning and back home again in the afternoon. They carried passengers long distances in both low- cost day coaches and luxurious Pullman ears. But as the nation passed the mid- twentieth-century mark, the railroad's prosperity was declining alarmingly. Hie airlines skimmed off the cream of the long-distance passenger business, and the commuters turned more and more to their own automobiles to get to and from work in the cities. Railroad passenger profits graduallv lessened and then turned into serious deficits. A study by the Interstate Commerce Commission in 1958 predicted that there would be no passenger trains at all by 1970. Moreover, even in their profitable freight business, railroads faced stiff competition from trucks, which were often close to being as large as small freight cars and which could speed shipments over the new highways in record time. In the early sixties, the railroads seemed as far as ever from solving their problems. The Saint Lawrence Seaway joined the Great Lakes to the Atlantic. Another development in the fifties gave the United States, in effect, hundreds of miles of added coastline and many more Atlantic seaports. For more than a quarter of a century', Canada had been eager to join forces with the United States in a project to open the huge waterway system of the Saint Lawrence River and the Great Lakes to oceangoing vessels. Congress hesitated to give its approval, fearing possible injury to our existing seaports, railroads, and other interests. In 1974, however, it finally authorized the President to join with the Canadian government in building the seaway, while the state of New York and the Canadian province of Ontario would co-operate in developing the waterpower resources of the river. The result was a ship channel twenty-seven feet deep from the city of Montreal to Lake Erie, thus connecting the Atlantic Ocean to Duluth, Minnesota, more than two thousand miles inland. On April 25, 1959, the first ocean-going vessel passed through the new locks of the Saint Lawrence on its way to the Great Lakes. On June 26, President Eisenhower joined Queen Elizabeth II in dedicating the new waterway. Now European grain ships could take on their cargoes at Great Lakes ports which were close to the grain fields themselves, and iron ore from the rich new mines of Labrador could be moved cheaply to the steel mills of the Middle West. The way was open for direct trade between North America's inland cities and the world's ocean ports. America's population and living standards rose dramatically. The number of Americans rose sharply in the years following World War II, until in 1962 our estimated population was 186 million. The greatest part of this rise in population came from bigger American families, for well over ninety per cent of the American people were native born. However, the immigration restrictions of the twenties (see page 615) had been eased somewhat, as a result of which the number of carefully selected foreigners entering the country had been increasing moderately. The number of immigrants rose from about 109,000 in 1946 to more than 326,000 in 1957. It seemed that the larger our population became, the better we lived. In the late fifties the average American was buying two times more goods than in the booming years of the twenties. In 1962, figures issued by the United States Department of Commerce showed that the average personal income per family had risen to more than $7,100 per year. More impressive still, the number of families with incomes over $10,000 had climbed to well over eighteen per cent. Yet, eighteen million families were still living on less than $4,000 per year; so poverty in the United States was far from conquered. Worse still, not only stubborn unemployment, but also discrimination against certain minority groups denied to millions of Americans an equal chance to compete for a better living. For example, a United States Department of Labor report indicated that in i960 the incomes of non-white males in this country averaged only about half the incomes of white males. President Kennedy, in an address to the nation on June 11, 1963, stated: "The Negro babv born in America today . . . has about one-half as much chance of completing high school as a white baby . . . one-third as much chance of completing college, one-third as much chance of becoming a professional man, twice as much chance of becoming un- employed." Americans grew more concerned about social justice. Many people were troubled by the continued denial of equal opportunities to Negroes. 