FIRST REVISED EDITION
BOSTON ■ NEW YORK • CHICAGO • ATLANTA ■ DALLAS • PALO ALTO ■ TORONTO
OUR
COUNTRY’S
HISTORY
The American eagle represents the spirit of freedom.
The olive leaves represent the desire for peace.
And the arrows signify our determination to defend
both. The thirteen leaves, arrows, and stripes
represent the thirteen original colonies.
GINN AND COMPANY
DAVID S.JVUJZZEY
Professor Emeritus of History • Columbia University
ARTHUR S. LINK
Professor of History • Princeton University
*
*
•See p. ii for the qualifications of these outstanding
historians.
In preparing this First Revised Edition of
Our Country's History we have continued those
classroom tested features which thousands of
teachers and some 30 million students have
so thoroughly enjoyed: the exciting story,
chronological organization, built-in atlas, corre-
lations with geography, pertinent illustrations,
challenging exercises, superb map program,
functional time tables, topical analysis, famous
quotations, and illustrated unit overviews.
What is new? The entire text has been
scrutinized line by line in the light of most
recent historical research. New data appears on
nearly every page. New chaptersjnclude “The
Antebellum Period” (1850’s), “The Eisenhower
Era,” and “New Frontiers.” Significant rewrit-
ing characterizes the chapters on “The Consti-
tution,” “Reconstruction,” and “America at
Midcentury.” End-of-chapter bibliographies
have been rewritten with an eye to the interests
and needs of the general student. New Focus
features enrich each chapter with interesting
biographical data, contemporary discoveries,
history-making episodes, and highlights of the
times. Each Focus on Economics points up some
significant economic understanding.
We have spared no effort to present the pano-
rama of American history in its marvelous
richness and diversity. Economic, social, and
cultural developments enrich the political and
diplomatic mainstream of our narrative.
The' authors take this opportunity to ac-
knowledge the devoted assistance of Dr. Ronald
B. Edgerton of the Editorial Department of
Ginn and Company. They are also grateful to
Mr. David Meyers of Brookline (Mass.) High
School and Mr. Mark Stone of Olney High
School, Philadelphia, for their help in prepar-
ing the features entitled Focus and Focus on
Economics respectively, Miss Alice Marie Buck-
ley, Head Librarian, Jamaica Plain (Mass.)
High School, for revising end-of-chapter bib-
liographies, and Professor John Hope Franklin,
chairman of the History Department, Brooklyn
College, and Professor Vincent P. De Santis,
Chairman, Department of History, University
of Notre Dame, for reading the entire text and
making valuable historical criticisms and sug-
gestions.
David S. Muzzey
Arthur S. Link
The Authors ■	— — - — ■	..	— — - —
Dr. David S. Muzzey was graduated from Harvard, studied at the University of Berlin and the
Sorbonne, and took his Ph.D. at Columbia University. He was Professor of American History
at Barnard College for some twenty years, Carnegie Lecturer on American History in Paris,
Edinburgh, and Prague, and Gouverneur Morris Professor of American History at Columbia
University. His superb American history texts for secondary schools have been used by over
thirty million students to date.
Dr. Arthur S. Link was born in Virginia and was graduated from the University of North Caro-
lina TTET~Beta~Kappa), where he took his Ph.D. in 1945. He was full Professor of American
History at Northwestern University, Harmsworth Professor at Oxford, and now serves as Pro-
fessor of History and Director of the projected forty-volume Woodrow Wilson papers at Prince-
ton University. Dr. Link is author of eight books and twice winner of the coveted Bancroft
Prize for the best biography: Wilson: The New Freedom (1956) and Wilson: The Struggle for
Neutrality (1960).
© Copyright, 1965, 1964, by Ginn and Company. Philippines Copyright, 1965, Ginn and Company. All Rights Reserved.
ii
The Hall of Fame for Great Americans
Every American is a shareholder in the Hall of Fame
On the campus of New York University in New York City stands an imposing
circular colonnade containing the sculptured heads of men and women who have
made America great. At the base of the colonnade are these inspiring words.
“By wealth of thought or else by mighty deed they served mankind.
In noble character in world-wide good they live forever more.”
Eighty-nine men and women have already been elected to the Hall of Fame since
its origin in 1900. Elections are held every- five years by a panel of 125 electors (his-
torians, judges, statesmen, authors, scientists, college presidents, and businessmen)
chosen by the university officials for life. These electors by a majority vote may then
choose a maximum of seven new members to the Hall of Fame from the hundreds
of nominations sent in by Americans. Any American who has been dead 25 years or
more is eligible to nomination. The next election will be held in 19657
Be prepared to identify these famous Americans by “wealth of thought,” “mighty
deed,” or “world-wide good” through which they “served mankind.”
Excellent for preview
and review.

The Art*	^
Edwin Booth
Charlotte S. Cushmon
Stephen C. Foster
Edward MacDowell
Augustus Saint-Gaudens
Gilbert Charles Stuart
James A. M. Whistler
Authors
George Bancroft
William Cullen Bryant
Samuel L Clemens (Mark Twain)
James Fenimore Cooper
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Oliver Wendell Holmes
Washington Irving
Sidney Lanier
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
James Russell Lowell
John Lothrop Motley
Thomas Paine
Francis Parkman
Edgar Allan Poe
Harriet Beecher Stowe
Henry David Thoreau
Walt Whitman
John Greenleaf Whittier
Businessmen
Peter Cooper
George Peabody
Educators
Mark Hopkins
Mary Lyon
Horace Mann
Alice Freeman Palmer
Booker T. Washington
Emma Willard
Engineers
James Buchanan Eads
Explorers
Daniel Boone
Inventors
Alexander Graham Bell
Thomas Alva Edison
Robert Fulton
Elias Howe
Samuel F. B. Morse
George Westinghouse
Eli Whitney
Wilbur Wright
Judges
Rufus Choate
James Kent
John Marshall
Joseph Story
The Military
David G. Farragut
Ulysses S. Grant
Thomas (Stonewall) Jackson
John Paul Jones
Robert E. Lee
William T. Sherman
Physicians
William C. Gorgas
William T. G. Morton
Walter Reed
Reformers
Susan B. Anthony
Frances E. Willard
Scientists
Louis Agassiz
John James Audubon
Josiah W. Gibbs
Asa Gray
Joseph Henry
Matthew F. Maury
Maria Mitchell
Simon Newcomb
Statesmen
John Adams
John Quincy Adams
Henry Clay
Grover Cleveland
Benjamin Franklin
Alexander Hamilton
Patrick Henry
Andrew Jackson
Thomas Jefferson
Abraham Lincoln
James Madison
James Monroe
William Penn
Theodore Ropsevelt
George Washington
Daniel Webster
Woodrow Wilson
Theologians
Henry Ward Beecher
Phillips Brooks
William E. Channing
Jonathan Edwards
Roger Williams
III
l/Each of the nine units of this text is accompanied by a painting
appropriate to the central theme.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The Hall of Fame for Great Americans	PAGE iii
Alphabetical Key to Maps	viii
Why Study American History	ix
American Memorials	X
UNIT 1	| How Our Country 1 Wnc Discovered and Settled	
CHAPTER 1 The Age of Discovery		4
2	A Century of Exploration	22
3	The English Settlements	36
4	Colonial America	60
	How Our Country Won Its	
UNIT	JTS Independence and Established	
	a Republic	
5	Liberty or Empire?	84
6	The War for Independence	100
7	The Confederation and the Constitution	124
8	Launching the New Government	144
The table of contents makes a fine
outline for the course.
How the Republic
Faced the Problems of Expansion,
War, and Sectional Rivalry
9 Jeffersonian Democracy and Expansion
10 The War of 1812
1 1 Sectional Rivalry
12 The Jacksonian Era
164
176
198
220
How Our Union Was Enlarged,
Endangered, and Preserved
13	The Advance to the Pacific
14	The Antebellum Period
1 5 The House Divided
1 6 The Civil War
240
258
276
296
How Our Reunited Country
Increased in Wealth and Power
UNIT V
17
Reconstruction
The New Industrial Age
Party Battles and Foreign Problems
The Rising of the South and West
322
18
340
19
356
20
378
V
■A»

UNIT VI
How Our Country Undertook
Democratic Reforms
and Became a World Power
21	Dominion over Palm and Pine	398
22	The Era of Theodore Roosevelt	416
23	The Progressive Movement	434
24	Woodrow Wilson and the “New Freedom" 452
25	The United States and World War I	468
UNIT VII
How Our Country
Sought to Return to “Normalcy”
26	Back to "Normalcy”
27	Prosperity under Coolidge
28	The Hoover Administration
498
514
532
How Our Country
Fought Depression at Home
and Aggression Abroad
VIII
UNIT
29
The New Deal and the Depression
546
568
584
30 Neighbors Good and Bad
31
The United States and World War II
|/This analysis is especially helpful
for topical reviews and summaries.
MHgPa How Our Country Faced the KiilHlfl Challenges of the Atomic Age		
32	The United Nations	602
33	The Truman Administration	614
34	America at Midcentury	642
35	The Eisenhower Era	658
36	New Frontiers	686
Reference Materials
l/ Topical Analysis of Text	709
*	Atlas: The United States in the World Today	710
* * The Declaration of Independence	727
** The Constitution of the United States	730
Basic Reference Library	747
Our States, Territories, and Dependencies	748
Presidents of the United States	749
The United States Supreme Court	749
Focus features appear in every chapter
(/J/ Famous American Quotations appear at chapter ends
Time Tables of Contemporary Events at Home and Abroad:
pages 59,123,197, 319, 377, 467, 531,583, and 641.
*	The Atlas is vital for correlations
of history and geography
Index	750
**These documents are completely annotated.
Note: The following aids are available to teachers: Anno-
tated Edition including Audio-Visual Aids; and Teachers’
Editions of the Workbook for Pupils, and Chapter and
Final Tests.
l/V' Rich resources for social and cultural
history.
Central Concepts:
1.	How a growing population developed dif-
ferent social and cultural standards.
COLONIAL AMERICA
2.	How three different types of colonies devaj.
oped along economic and geographic lines. 1
3.	How the mercantile theory affected British,
colonial relationships.
4.	How wars between Britain and France re-
sulted in British supremacy and a growing 1
spirit of independence in the colonies.
'fa SOCIAL AND CULTURAL BACKGROUNDS
Importance of the Colonial Period •
To most Americans today colonial times seem
very' remote and strange. Those of us who
live in the states along the Atlantic seaboard,
however, have many reminders of our fore-
fathers. There are hundreds of colonial
houses here with their pillared fronts and dor-
mer windows. Slender white church spires
overlook colonial burying grounds with
slanting, moss-covered headstones. Monu-
ments and markers in almost every7 town keep
alive the memory of historic events.
Even the direct heirs of the colonists, how-
ever, find it hard to understand the customs
and thoughts of their ancestors. For these
people had no better way of traveling by land
than on horseback or in slow, springless
stagecoaches. They had no light but that
furnished by candles or whale-oil lamps.
For water they depended upon what they
drew up from wells or caught in barrels from
the rain running down the roof.
Nevertheless, the colonial period is as im-
portant in our history7 as the years of child-
hood and adolescence are in our lives. It was
a long period. Almost as many years passed
between the settlement of Jamestown and the
Declaration of Independence as have passed
since George Washington took office as first
President of the United States. During those
long, slow colonial years the foundations of I
the American nation were laid. The English I
colonies were gradually transformed into 1
American colonies.
Seventeenth-Century Characteristics • 1
We may divide the colonial period into two ]
parts. In the first period (the 17th century), I
which we have just studied, all the English
colonies (except Georgia) on the mainland •
of America and in the West Indies were I
established. Most of the settlers came from I
England. At times there were spurts of emi-
gration which brought several thousands to ]
the colonies, as in the case of Massachusetts I
from 1628 to 1642. On the whole, however, 1
the growth of the population was slow.
As the seventeenth century drew to a I
close there were only about three hundred 1
thousand people in the colonies. The greater I
part of them stayed rather close to the I
neighborhood of the original settlements. I
They were concentrated in the region about
Boston, the Connecticut and Hudson valley's, I
Philadelphia, the Jamestown peninsula, and
Charleston. Intercolonial travel was rare in ]
the absence of roads and the presence of I
dangerous Indians. Each colony was more I
closely in touch with England and the West I
Indies than with its nearer neighbors in I
60 *Suggested rsoorts: Compare homes, living conditions, methods of
travel and transportation, and communication then and now.
V	populated areas? What were the two natural ways inland?* Which nationality groups
peopled successive frontiers? How did each frontier encourage democracy? See p.62
V	Coastal areas where there were good rivers and harbors.
♦Cumberland gap, Mohawk Valley.
61

l/U/hich had been granted by King Henry
ffriday aUt Jan.
Came Mrs Marparott Brent and requested to have vote in the
howse for her selfe and voyce allso for that att the last Court
3'1 Jan: it was ordered that the said Mr* Brent was to be lookd
uppon and received as his L>" Attorney. The Gou' denyed
that the s? M” Brent should have any uote in the howse. And
the sJ M" Brent protested agst all proceedings in this pin
Assembly, unlesse shee may be pfit. and have vote as aforesJ
Maryland Archives, Maryland Historical Society
Women’s Rights Requested and Denied • In
1639 Margaret Brent asked the Maryland Assem-
bly for the right to vote. Note the interesting
spelling, and the abbreviations for lordship, said,
and present. Who had the last word?
Sees Constitution, Art. XIX, p.745
America. Except for the New England Con-
federation of 1643, there was no attempt at
unity or co-operation between the colonies.
V Vital Changes in the Eighteenth Cen-
tury • In this period the population grew
» steadily until it reached some 2,750,000 on
the eve of the American Revolution. Reli-
gious and political persecution in Europe drove
thousands to the New World to swell the nat-
ural increase of the large colonial families.
Thousands of Huguenots (Protestants) were
expelled from France by Louis XIV’s revoca-
1/ tion of the Edict of Nantes (1685). They
came to New England, New York, and South
Carolina. The defeat of the Scotch sup-
porters of the Stuart cause in 1715 and 1745
sent many Highlanders to America.
Over 50,000 Germans fled from the de-
struction of the Rhineland by the French
armies to Pennsylvania between 1727 and
1754. Protestants from the north of Ireland
(the Scotch-Irish) were oppressed by the
harsh English laws against their industries
and commerce. They came over to settle
the frontier region from New Hampshire to
the Carolinas. There were nearly 400,000
of them here at the time of the Revolution.
Altogether, the non-English stocks made up
* more than a quarter of the population in 1776.
62 *5es map, p.61.
IV of France in 1598.	w
The colonies were still far from the idea of I
a political union in the first three quarters of I
the eighteenth century. They were, never- 1
theless, closer in many ways. Many stage lines I
and post office routes connected the chief ?
towns from Portsmouth to Savannah. The I
Indian menace declined with the ending of ]
the series of wars that lasted from 1690 to I
1763. Trade between the colonics increased!
rapidly. Commercial firms in New York and I
Philadelphia had accounts with firms in
Boston and Charleston. Families of New I
England and Maryland, Pennsylvania and I
the Carolinas, intermarried. Virginians, like I
James Madison, were being sent to college in I
New Jersey (Princeton).
By 1750 the colonics had tens of thousands 1
of people who had no attachment to Eng- I
land. Already the descendants of the origi- 1
nal settlers were thinking and speaking of I
English officials or visitors who came over 1
as “strangers.” The struggling, isolated Eng- I
lish colonies of the seventeenth century had 1
become the prosperous, self-reliant American ]
colonies of the eighteenth.
Social Classes • The colonies all had cer-
tain institutions and certain experiences in ]
common. The English language, English
ideas of law, and English patterns of govern- I
ment prevailed from New Hampshire to I
Georgia. All the colonies had representative I
assemblies elected by the people allowed to
vote. The colonies with western frontiers I
had a common problem in the rivalry be- I
tween the “back country” and the older 1
settlements on the coast. They quarreled
over such matters as money for defense ]
against the Indians and a fair share of seats in
the assemblies. The merchants had a com- ]
mon interest in and grievance against the
acts of Parliament and the orders of the j
Board of Trade in London governing com-
4
NORTHERN 41
COLONIES


Alban:
jNJtfC- V
Trenton
tphiUiMphln
■/^Baltimore*
yR.fijiwac R[A
StauntongtJj^
WilHamsburf
.Allwwarle
rSuuitd
F.dentonv
/Wilmington
GA. Afe, N,
J f t.Auguatu Vchurl3r>.
i	ton*/
iavannah
..	soil, and opportunities for
Cl ifT*a 9
in the South.
, - - - Those common problems determined
the trend of our history in the eighteenth
century-
Furthermore, conditions in colonial Amer-
'ca prevented the rise of separate social
classes as in Europe. We had no kings or
nobles at one end of the social scale, and no
downtrodden serfs or peasants at the other.
Land here was abundant and cheap. Even
the poor “redemptioner,” who had to work
for five years or more in order to pay his way
over to America, could get a small farm when
he became his own master. There was, to be
sure, a colonial “aristocracy,” consisting of
the rich merchants of New England and New
York and the great planters of the South.
They went about with powdered hair, silk
knee breeches, ruffles, and silver buckles.
But it was an aristocracy of wealth and not of
birth. It was constantly broken into by men
who made fortunes in commerce or land
speculation or money-changing. As indus-
tries like iron and woolen manufactures grew,
the number of wageworkers in mills and
factories increased. But still they were few
as compared with the “yeomen,” or farmers,
who made up over 90 per cent of the popula-
tion at the time of the Revolution.
At the bottom of the social scale were the
Negro slaves, who were bought and sold like
cattle. Slavery existed in all the colonies, and
there were few voices condemning it as a
moral evil. In the North the Negroes were
used as house servants and were compara-
tively few in number. But they increased
rapidly in the South, where their labor was
fitted to hot work in the tobacco and rice
fields. Many of them were brought from
Africa by the rum-distillers of Massachusetts
and Rhode Island. By 1775 there were more
than half a million Negro slaves in the coun-
try. All but a few. thousand lived south of
Mason and Dixon’s line.
•The chief form of local
government in some New England
towns today.
employment were more favorable
Three Types of Colonies • Though the
colonies had much in common, we may
divide them into three groups according to
their chief interests and occupations. (1) New
England was the land of the Puritans, where
religion dominated the scene. The clergy
controlled public affairs until the rise of the
merchants and lawyers in the eighteenth
century. The towns, with church and school
as their center, were the units of settlement.
Town meetings were the form of local
Northern, Middle and Southern Colonies - Name
the colonies of each group. Why were they
grouped this way? What interests set them apart?
What interests did they have in common? PP‘53-6
THE NORTHERN, MIDDLE
AND SOUTHERN COLONIES
ABOUT 1750
Outlines areas of New England
Confederation, 1643
Q Scale of Mile* 22Q
/
MIDDLE COLONIES
SOUTHERN-
COLONIES
or k town
*
1
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS IN THE ANTEBELLUM PERIOD
A Growing and Changing Population •
Well might Americans in the 1850’s view the
present with pride and the future with confi-
dence. Increasing population meant settle-
ment of the frontier and greater wealth. And
all this in turn meant greater national power.
The population of the United States in-
creased from 23,192,000 in 1850 to 31,443,000
in 1860. It was a numerical increase by far
the largest in any single decade to this time.
The birth rate was high. Families of ten to
twelve children were common, and those of
fifteen to twenty were not unusual. Medical
science was still primitive and unable to
cope with most diseases; and the death rate
of roughly 20 to 25 per 1000 in 1860 seems
appalling to us today. Even so, a high birth
rate more than offset the toll taken by disease,
poverty, and ignorance.
In addition, immigration from Europe was
increasing rapidly. From 1846 to 1860 almost
four million immigrants came to the United
•States.
About 40 per cent of these were from Ire-
land, where a blight ruined the potato crop
(1845-1846) causing widespread famine. For
over a million and a half Irishmen emigration
was the only hope of survival. Although the
great majority were agricultural laborers, they
were so poor that they could not afford to
move to the West. They settled, therefore,
mainly in the port cities of the East (espe-
cially New York and Boston) and found jobs
as servants, day laborers, and above all as
workers on canals and railroads. Many went
also to New Orleans, to work on canals and
levees in the lower Mississippi Valley.
Political unrest caused a series of revolu-
tions in Europe in 1848. The chief sufferers
were the Germans, over a million of whom
fled to the United States between 1848
1860. Better educated and not quite so
as the Irish, the Germans moved in {jul
numbers to the growing cities of the
(especially Cincinnati, Milwaukee, and
Louis) and to the northwestern frontier]
During the same period England, ScotlaJ
and Wales sent an additional half milli0^
immigrants to swell the ever-growing
stream.
I
Effects of Population Increases • High
birth rate and immigration combined to pro-
duce two very significant changes in the
American population picture.
The first was the rapid growth of cities.
Forging ahead as the chief depot for the ex-
port of cotton from the South and wheat
from the West, New York grew in numbers
from 512,000 to 805,000. Chicago grew from
a small city of 30,000 at the beginning of the
decade into a booming port and railroad
center of 109,000 people by 1860.	fl
The population increase of the fifties, how-
ever, had its most significant impact in build-
ing new pressures on the frontier. Farmers
in search of cheap land continued to pour
into Iowa, Wisconsin, and Minnesota. They
also moved southward and westward—into
the Nebraska Territory and Kansas. The
stream of Americans going to Texas caused
the population of that state to nearly triple.
And every year the wagon trains rolled west-
ward toward new agricultural frontiers in
California, admitted to the Union in 1850,
and Oregon, which achieved statehood in
1859. The glamor of the gold rush has hid-
den the fact that most settlers moved to
California in search of land, not precious
metals.
266
♦Although the immigrants scattered over the land, the Middle
Atlantic states, especially New York, received most of the
new arrivals.
Mural painting by William Pfohl. Post Office, Wilmington, Norm v^arv»**.»
Transportation in the 1850's • With industry booming, all kinds of transportation were
in demand. Sails supplemented steam for flat-bottomed river boats. Speedy clipper
ships sailed the seas. And closed cars were pulled by wood-burning locomotives.
2ee Human aide, p.83.
Farming in the Antebellum Period- over 100,000 were in use. As a consequence,
Farming was the means of livelihood and the more and more of the Western farmers were
way 0f life of the vast majority of Americans, producing foodstuffs for the Eastern markets,
•	----*	rv of American and the United States was exporting over
1 ' ■*—
way oj uje vj ---------,	_ _
Moreover, the great majority of American
farmers lived on family-sized farms and
worked their own land with family help. In
the West farms averaged about 200 acres in
size. But in the South, too, at least 80 per
cent of the people were small farmers owning
and tilling their own land.
The completion of the Erie Canal in 1825
and the building of railroads from Boston
y and New York into the West caused a revo-
lution in the agriculture of New England and
the older Northeast. Unable to compete
with cheap Western grains and meat, East-
ern farmers turned to sheep raising, dairying,
fruit growing, and truck farming.
In the West another revolution was in
progress due to new inventions. One was the
steel plow, strong enough to break the tough
■ sod of the prairies. Invented in 1837 by John
......................' ----* cuksrnnrial
producing iuuujiuhw _______
and the United States was exporting over
four million bushels of wheat to Europe.
The Southern Plantation • The soil and
weather of the South made it possible to
grow certain staple crops—tobacco, cotton,
rice, and sugar—which the home and world
markets demanded in increasing quantity.
One could grow rich only if he produced
these crops on a large scale, and large-scale
production demanded many workers to till
the fields. By 1700 the large plantation,
using African slave labor, was the chief means
of large-scale production of tobacco in the
Upper South and of rice in the new colony
of South Carolina.
Southern plantations were agricultural-
industrial units in which capital was invested
in land and labor for the production of staple
-----------------------,1”	hv 1850
/
OLXvVrA	' • y     ^
sod of the prairies. Invented in 1837 by John in tana unu u*w. j~. ~~ ,
Deere of Illinois, it went into substantial crops at a profit. Generally speaking, by 1850
production only in the 1850’s. Even more a planter had to own at least twenty slaves be-
important was the reaper invented by Obed fore he could operate profitably. Only with
Hussey and Cyrus H. McCormick. By 1860 a labor force at least of this size could he af-
"’ttori soil only with difficulty. Pro-
267
y Organized to protect skilled labor from competition of unskilled
workers as well as from exploitation by employers.
The American Federation of Labor
The organization which succeeded where the
Knights of Labor had failed was the AFL.
It owed its formation to Adolph Strasser and
Samuel Gompers, a member of the cigar-
makers’ union of New York. The AFL.
of which Gompers was elected president
every year but one from 1885 to his death in
1924, was an entirely different organization
from the Knights. It consisted of the workers
in the skilled crafts of the United States and
' Canada. It left to each craft union a large
direction of its own affairs. And it usually
♦kept out of politics.
It sought (1) higher wages, (2) shorter
hours, (3) security of positions, (4) sanitary
conditions in the factories, (5) protection of
women and children against overwork, (6)
the right of collective bargaining with em-
k ployers, and (7) the recognition of the unions
by legislatures and courts.
The Federation never contained more
than a minority of the workers of the country
in its dues-paving membership. And such
important organizations as the railroad
brotherhoods and some miners’ federations
were outside its ranks. Nevertheless, it ex-
erted an influence far beyond what its mem-
bership of nearly two million by 1914 would
seem to justify.
Labor and Politics • Although the Ameri-
can Federation of Labor usually kept out of
politics, other labor organizations did not.
Some adopted the European idea of organized
labor parties to capture the government at
the polls. Karl Marx, in his Communist
Manifesto, had cried out “Workers of all
lands unite!” In his work on Capital he had
predicted that the workers would take po-
litical power away from the “bourgeoisie” (the
middle class). Workers would convert capital-
ist countries into socialist states. Classes
Brown Brothers
Samuel Gompers • A cigar-maker by trade,
Gompers was president of the American Federa-
tion of Labor for almost forty years. Between 1881
and his death in 1924, he was the most powerful
conservative influence in American trade unionism.
would then disappear and the wealth would
belong to the laborers who created it.
Marx found followers in America, chiefly
among the immigrants who, fleeing from the
oppressions of the Old World, dreamed of
starting a revolution in the New World. In
1868 there was organized a National Labor
Reform party, which entered the presi-
dential campaign. Its platform declared that
“our government is wholly perverted from
its true design. ... In this beneficent country
of unlimited resources . . . the mass of the
people have no supply beyond their daily
wants and are compelled ... to become
paupers and vagrants.” Its candidate polled
less than thirty thousand votes. A few years
later (1877) a Socialist Labor party was
formed. Its program was based on Marxian
doctrines and it was made up largely of
350 *long a weakness of early labor. The AFL "rewarded its friends
and punished its enemies" at the ballot box but did not enter
party politics until the 1930’s.
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and Bridgeport, Connecticut, were noted for their
efficient government under Socialist mayors,
immigrant workingmen and still exists, al-
though it never could command more than
a few thousand votes.
Not even the Socialist Party of America,
organized in 1901 and led in five campaigns
by the genial and persuasive Eugene V. Debs,
could make much impression here. The
ideas of individualism and the opportunity
for men to rise by their own efforts from the
ranks of the workers to independence and
wealth were too strong. The Socialists, to be
sure, polled nearly a million votes in 1912,
and had visions of capturing the government
in the near future. But they were split by
World War I, and even under so able a leader
as Norman Thomas they could not equal
their 1912 vote thirty-six years later. They
never carried a state in a presidential election,
and sent only an occasional member to the
House of Representatives. The American
people preferred to enact reform by other
principles.

PROTESTS OF THE FARMERS AND DEMANDS FOR WOMEN’S RIGHTS
million. In California they organized co-
operative banks. In Iowa they built grain
elevators and started the manufacture of
farm machinery. But these ventures failed
because they lacked the money to compete
The Grangers • American farmers no less
than workers began to organize for their own
protection soon after the war. In fact, the
first great national farm organization, the Pa-
trons of Husbandry, entered the scene (1867)	____
almost at the same moment that the Knights of with the industrialists.
Labor were organized. This farmers’ league
was started by Oliver H. Kelley, a clerk in
the Department of Agriculture at Washing-
ton. The object of the association was (1)
to spread agricultural education and (2) to
create social fellowship among the farmers.
The “grange,” as the local unit was called,
was a kind of club. Here the farmers met
with their families to enjoy games and a
picnic supper. Or they might listen to a
lecture on improved methods of cultivation
or discuss a plan for “chipping in” to buy a
new reaper.
At first the Grangers took no part in poli-
tics. They welcomed the new railroads which
increased the value of their land and furnished
transportation for their products. By 1875
there were thirty thousand granges in the
country, In the upper Mississippi Valley (Illi-
nois, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Iowa), where
more than one-third of the wheat was grown,
they boasted a membership of over half a
*We propose meeting together, talking together, working
together, buying together, and acting together for our
mutual orotection."
The Granger Protest • It was impossible
for so many farmers to get together without
eventually going into politics. They had too
many grievances which they thought they
could remedy by political action: (1) the
growing expense of farm machinery, (2) the
monopoly of land by absentee owners, partic-
ularly the western railroads, (3) the mounting
burden of interest on farm mortgages, and (4)
high railroad rates and unfair practices.
In addition to these specific grievances,
there was the more general fact of the de-
pressed condition of agriculture in the 1870’s
to generate discontent. Beginning in 1871,
farm prices began to decline sharply. The
farmer saw his wheat, which had sold for
S2.85 in 1867, sink to less than $1.00 a bushel
ten years later. Finally, he was burning his
corn because he could get only fifteen cents a
bushel for it.
The cause of this misfortune was in large
351
V
These frauds involved over-payment to selected holders of certain
routes. Stalwarts high in office were implicated in this graft. ai*
—c~ij <oo.	resigned from the Cabinet." Yet Presides
Arthur rose to the responsibilities of hj_
great office and gave the country an honest
The Assassination of Garfield, 1881 • The
choice of Garfield, instead of harmonizing
the Republican factions (the “Half-Breeds”
versus the “Stalwarts”), resulted in bitter
strife. “Stalwarts” like Conkling had sup-
ported him and done much to secure his
election. But he refused to fulfill the
promises they claimed he had made to them
during the campaign. He appointed Conk-
ling’s chief enemy, Blaine, as Secretary of
State. He removed the collector of the port
of New York to make place for one of the
leaders of the Half-Breeds. His new Post-
master General even went so far as to expose
a nest of rascals and grafters in the “Star
Route Frauds.” Stung by this “ingratitude,”
Roscoe Conkling and Thomas Platt resigned
from the Senate in protest. They then ap-
pealed to the legislature of New York for
re-election. But even with Vice-President
Arthur’s help they failed. Factional spirit
ran high and ended in a terrible crime.
On the morning of July 2, 1881, President
Garfield, accompanied by Blaine, prepared
to take the train for a commencement address
at Williams College in Massachusetts. As
he entered the railroad station in Washing-
ton, he was shot in the back by an insane
office-seeker named Guiteau, who boasted,
“I am a Stalwart and Arthur is President
Garfield died on September 19, after
and efficient administration.
now.
lingering in great pain through the summer.
His assassination caused a strong public
reaction against “Stalwartism.”
President Arthur’s Administration •
To the friends of good government, “Chet”
Arthur’s elevation to the Presidency was
about the worst thing that could have hap-
pened. They feared that this former com-
panion of the bosses and spoilsmen might
wink at graft and corruption. Indeed, the
Half-Breeds and independents immediately
vigorous, ...,.....................
He insisted on fair terms to China in the
act of 1882 for the restriction of Chinese
immigration to the United States. The
Burlingame Treaty of 1868 permitted Chi-
nese to immigrate freely to the United States
though they could not be naturalized.
Thousands of Chinese were then brought
over to work on the construction of the Cen-
tral Pacific Railroad. By 1870 there were
over seventy thousand Chinese in the
country, nearly five sixths of them in Cali-
fornia. Their low standard of living aroused
the opposition of American labor.
A crusade against them was led by Dennis
Kearney, the “sand lots” orator of San
Francisco. “Four dollars a day and roast
beef” and “The Chinese must go” were
Kearney’s slogans. President Hayes had
vetoed a bill limiting Chinese immigration
(1879) as a violation of the Burlingame
Treaty. In 1880 a new treaty secured China’s
consent to our “regulation, limitation or
suspension” of Chinese immigration. Con-
gress thereupon forbade the entrance of Chi-
nese laborers into the country for twenty
years. Arthur vetoed the bill because “sus-
pension” of immigration for twenty years
was equal to forbidding it. He forced Con-
gress to reduce the period to ten years. But
at the close of the ten-year period Congress
renewed the exclusion of the Chinese.
Arthur tried to prevent raids on the Treas-
ury by vetoing bills which set aside huge
sums for small harbors and unnavigable
rivers. He proposed a fair revision of the
tariff. He laid the foundation for our
modern navy. Finally, he signed the act
which has been called “The Magna Carta of
Civil Service Reform.”	-1
G
360
♦The challenges of the American Presidency have brought out the
best in so-called "average" men called to carry its responsi-
. bilities. Arthur and Truman are examples.


The merit system has greatly expanded. Today a great many local and
state positions are also under civi*	’ -
The Pendleton Civil Service Act, 1883 •
Guiteau’s pistol shot had brought home to
Americans the disgraceful condition of the
civil service. In his Presidential message
0f December, 1882, Arthur urged Congress
to remedy the situation. Thereupon George
jl. Pendleton, a Democratic senator from
Ohio, introduced an excellent civil service
bill. It provided for (1) a commission to
classify the grades of the civil service and (2)
a “merit system” of competitive examina-
tions for selecting candidates. (3) The bill
also forbade political assessments, and (4)
prevented removals from office for failure to
make “voluntary” contributions to campaigns.
The bill was passed by large majorities in
both houses and signed by Arthur (January'
16, 1883). But he did not rest there. He
appointed the secretary of the Civil Service
Reform Association as chairman of the Civil
Sen-ice Commission. He set up rules for the
faithful execution of the act. And he im-
mediately put about 15,000 government
employees into the classified service. Thus
Brown Brothers
“The Plumed Knight" • James G. Blaine repre-
sented the state of Maine with great distinction as
Speaker of the House, and was later unanimously
elected to the Senate. He twice served as Secre-
tary of State where he promoted the ideas of
reciprocity, arbitration, and Pan-Americanism.
1 _______________


which fate had called him.
♦ Blaine and Pan-Americanism • Arthur,
like Hayes, deserved renomination. Unlike
\ Hayes, he was eager for it. But his inde-
' pendence had offended many Republican
leaders, especially the powerful Blaine.
During his nine months as Secretary- of
State (March to December, 1881), Blaine
had increased his popularity by a strong
advancement of the prestige of the United
States. (1) He had tried to get Great
Britain to give up the Clayton-Bulwer
Treaty of 1850. This would leave to the
United States the sole ownership and control
of any Isthmian canal. (2) He had inter-
vened in Peru and Chile in support of
American claims to nitrate and guano beds,
♦Parties have
the man most
in which he was accused of being personally
interested. (3) The plan closest to his heart
was for a league of the countries of Latin
America under the leadership of the United
States. They should work out common
policies on trade, tariffs, currency, copy-
rights, weights and measures, public health,
and a number of other economic and social
questions. He had, with Arthur’s approval,
sent invitations in November, 1881, to the
states of Central and South America to
attend a Pan-American congress at Wash-
ington the next year. But when Blaine left
office in December, his successor Freling-
huysen was instructed to cancel the invita-
tions. Thereupon Blaine wrote an angry
open letter to the President. He charged
the tendency to nominate not the best man, but g^j
likely to get elected.
(/ Cried the Grand Army of the Republic's Commander» "(Hay God palsy tha
hand that wrote the order (and)...the brain that conceived it."
V
He was unmercifully criticized by the Re-
publicans for “weighing the merits of the
veterans in an apothecary’s scales.” He was
accused of “insulting” the army when he
vetoed a Dependent Pension Bill. This
granted a pension of twelve dollars a month
to every dependent soldier and sailor who
had served three months, regardless of
whether he had received any injury or had
even participated in a battle. Congress
upheld his veto, however. And even the
veterans meeting in convention at St. Louis
approved it by a vote of 318 to 173.
Cleveland’s unpopularity with the of-
ficials of the Grand Army of the Republic,
the powerful Union veteran’s association,
was increased by his “rebel-flag order” of
April 30, 1887. This order instructed the
Adjutant General to return to the Southern
states a number of battle flags which had
been captured from the Confederate armies
and had been lying in the attic of the War
Office building. Cleveland was amazed at
the storm of protest that arose over this
“recognition of the lost cause.” He realized,
on further thought, that the disposal of the
flags belonged to Congress and not to the
President. He therefore withdrew the or-
der. In 1905 a Republican Congress under
Theodore Roosevelt voted unanimously to
return the flags.
Labor Unrest of the 1880’s • The middle
years of the decade were disturbed by so
many conflicts between capital and organized
labor that they have been called the period of
“the great upheaval.” Strikes increased from
485 in 1884 to 1411 in 1886. They involved
nearly ten thousand establishments and a
half a million workers.
The situation was made worse by the
arrival of radical agitators in the flood of
immigrants who came to our shores. The
social revolutionists and anarchists of Chi-
cago had formed the International Working
People’s Association in 1883. They advo-
cated violence in the class struggle. Among
their members were many bitter revolution-
aries from Europe. Of the eight anarchist
newspapers in the city, only one was printed
in English.
The labor strife led to a deed of horror on
May 4, 1886. An open-air meeting in Hay-
market Square, Chicago, was called by the
anarchists. The purpose was to protest
against the use of force in stopping a strike
in the McCormick reaper works and to de-
mand an eight-hour day. The police ordered
the crowd to go home. The reply was the
explosion of a dynamite bomb thrown into
the midst of a police squad, killing eight men
and wounding seventy' others.
No proof could be found as to who threw
the bomb. Nevertheless, eight anarchist
leaders were arrested and tried for inciting
to murder. Four of them were hanged the
next year. One of the men under the death
sentence was found dead in his cell. The three
others serving a life sentence in jail were
pardoned by Governor Altgeld of Illinois in
1893. He felt that no evidence of their direct
guilt had been produced at the trial.
These severe labor troubles led President
Cleveland to send a special message to
Congress in which he cited the provision of
the Constitution authorizing the national
government to protect the states “against
domestic violence” (Art. IV, sec. 4). He
recommended the creation of a national
commission of three members to help
settle labor disputes. Congress failed to act
on the President’s suggestion. However,
several of the states (Massachusetts, New
York, Iowa, Kansas) passed laws in 1886
and 1887 creating boards for the settlement
of labor disputes by arbitration.
364 *Reports» Sources(l3) and (14), page 376.
FOCUS ON ECONOMICS
]/ Beef on the hoof mere full of water when
weighed.
Thirsty critters
aren’t they?
Watered Stock • What is the point of this cartoon? How did the dishonest financier apply
this trick when selling stock (shares) in a business? How is this prevented today?
The Problem of Railroad Regulation •
One of the most serious problems of the
j'j time concerned the railroads. During the
five years before Cleveland’s election the
v railroad mileage had increased four times as
fast as the population. Over 130,000 miles of
track wove a network which covered the
nation. The railroads had done great service
* in carrying many thousands of settlers to the
rich Western lands. These farmers had
sent back millions of bushels of wheat and
com to the seaboard cities and Europe.
But the railroads had also been guilty of
grave offenses. They had (1) influenced,
legislatures to show them favors in taxation,
(2) charged rates to pay dividends on
V “watered stock,” and (3) given some ship-
pers, such as the Standard Oil Company,
better treatment than others.
♦The railroads had also united the
values tremendously. In so doing,
corruption had crept in.
We have seen how the Granger laws tried
to curb the railroads and why they generally
failed to do so. It fell upon Congress to deal
with them because their traffic crossed state
lines, and only Congress could regulate on an
interstate level, as the Supreme Court pointed
out in the Wabash case in 1886.
The Interstate Commerce Act of 1887 •
Senator S. M. Cullom of Illinois was made
the chairman of a Senate committee for the
investigation of interstate railroads in 1885.
The committee traveled through the country',
talking to railroad officials, shippers, and farm-
ers. The result of its long labor was adoption
of an Interstate Commerce Act and creation
of an Interstate Commerce Commission.
The most important of the twenty-four
sections of the act were as follows: (1)
nation and increased land 3^5
however, much graft and
"If a nation...keeps order and pays its obligations, it need fear
interference from the United States."
n0
part of a Latin-American state. He said that
we were bound by the Monroe Doctrine to
intervene, “however reluctantly,” and to
V “exercise an international police power.”
With the consent of the president of Santo
Domingo, he therefore negotiated a treaty
making the United States the receiver for the
/ bankrupt republic. Then he appointed an
official to collect the revenues. The Senate
refused to ratify the treaty. But Roosevelt
went on with the policy under an “executive
agreement” until the Senate gave way in
1907. Under our management of her fi-
nances Santo Domingo was soon able to pay
* her debts and her creditors were satisfied.
Heretofore we had only forbidden Europe
to interfere with the governments of the re-
publics of the New World. Now we stepped
in ourselves. This exercise of “police power”
to prevent intervention by a European power
is called “the Roosevelt corollary to the
Monroe Doctrine.”
In 1907 Roosevelt and President Diaz of
Mexico co-operated in establishing the
Central American Court of Justice. To this
the five republics between Mexico and the
Isthmus of Panama agreed to submit all their
disputes with one another. In the next year
a further step toward the security of the
Caribbean countries was taken. A Central
American International Bureau was organ-
ized to further the interests of education
trade, agriculture, and industry.
Disagreement with Japan • A serious
problem with Japan threatened in 1906. At
that time the board of education of San Fran-
cisco ordered children of Japanese, Chinese
and Korean parents to attend separate
schools provided for them. Up to the close
of the nineteenth century not more than
twenty-five thousand Japanese immigrants
had come to our Pacific shores. But the
crowded condition of the islands of Japan
and the economic distress caused by the war
with Russia sent the immigration up to
seventy-five thousand by 1906.
The Japanese government protested against
the San Francisco order as a violation of the
treaty rights of 1894. These gave Japanese
residents here the status of citizens of “the
most favored nation.” Certain newspapers
of California and Japan fanned the flames
with insults and appeals to race prejudice.
•Claims ware reduced almost in half by mutual agreement; 55% of reve-
nues and any surplus set aside to pay debts.
The Panic of 1907
Some called it the "Rich Man's Panic”; others
called it the "Roosevelt Panic." It began on
October 22, 1907, with a run on the Knicker-
bocker Trust Company of New York City. This
bank was the third largest in the city and a
respected institution. People waited in line,
night and day, to withdraw their money from
banks. Public confidence disappeared; fear
and terror began to set in. On October 24,
the panic hit Wall Street and stock prices col-
lapsed.
Business placed the blame on Theodore
Roosevelt's shoulders. The President was ac-
cused of making unwarranted attacks on busi-
ness; of seeking to regulate the nation's busi-
ness; of discouraging industry; of unnecessary
prosecutions of the trusts. Roosevelt summarized
his feelings by stating: "If trouble comes from
having the light turned on, remember it is not
really due to the light, but to the misconduct
which is exposed.”
As the panic ran its relatively short course,
many banks failed, businesses closed their
doors, and factories shut down. Out of these
experiences came action by Congress. Currency
and banking reforms resulted.
426
♦•Panics were "can side re cf^uTTe^na^ur aT^irf*! he ups and doiuns^^
the business cycles in our history. It was only when govern-
ment deliberately stepped in that reforms designed to prevent
excesses resulted.
In 1908,
possible

the Root-Takahira Agreement was made
sources of friction.
Roosevelt summoned the mayor of San
Francisco and several of the anti-Japanese
leaders to Washington. He warned them
that they must leave the settlement of an
international question in the hands of the
Federal government. However, he promised
them that he would at once “take action that
would meet the needs of California.”
The result was a settlement satisfactory to
both sides. The San Francisco school board
cancelled its segregation order. The Japanese
government, for its part, promised in the
“F^ntlomen’s Agreement” of 1907 to pro-
hibit the immigration of Japanese laborers
to this country7. Again in 1909 Roosevelt
had to step in with a threat of Federal action.
This was to prevent the California legislature
from passing bills to keep the Japanese from
holding land. But it was only a truce. Four
years later the legislature at Sacramento
passed the act forbidding aliens ineligible to
citizenship to hold land in the state.
to eliminate other
Our Fleet Sent Round the World • It
was perhaps chiefly to impress Japan with the
naval strength of the United States that
Roosevelt decided to send a fleet of battle-
ships around the world. Many people pro-
tested against leaving our own shores un-
protected. Some even predicted that Japan
would attack our Pacific coast as soon as the
fleet had put to sea. But the President, as
commander in chief of the navy, had a right
to send the vessels where he pleased. He
had money enough, he said, to send them as
far as San Francisco. They could remain
there if Congress refused to appropriate the
funds for the rest of the voyage.
The w'hite fleet of twenty-eight ships left
Hampton Roads, Virginia, on December 16,
1907. They circled the world by way of the
Strait of Magellan, San Francisco, Hawaii,
Australia, the Philippines, China, Japan, the
Suez Canal, and the Mediterranean. At
every port of call the men and officers were
received with enthusiasm. Nowhere was
there greater friendliness than at Yokohama
and Tokyo.
They returned to Hampton Roads on
February7 22, 1909, without the slightest acci-
dent in their long voyage. President Roose-
velt was there to greet them. It is difficult
to tell whether this was a contribution to
world peace. But the voyage of the battle-
ships was certainly a dramatic illustration
of Roosevelt’s belief that a show of force by
the second largest navy in the world was the
best guarantee of peace. It was truly a spec-
tacular climax to a spectacular administra-
tion.
THEODORE ROOSEVELT AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Conservation • In his first message to
Congress (1901) Roosevelt spoke of the con-
servation of our natural resources in forests,
minerals, and water power. He described
it as “the most vital internal question of the
United States.” Our government had given
away its unoccupied lands in the days when
they were supposed to be endless. Our
people had proceeded to waste the natural
* ■	*	*	i_


resources of the country by careless mining
of the coal and reckless cutting of the forests. *
They neglected to fertilize the fields, and
they let the oil flow from the wells to film the
surface of the rivers.
It was clear that a campaign of education
in responsibility was necessary. How else
would the present generation learn to con-
sider the general welfare and secure these
Forest fires, in remote areas, burned until rain fell or there

1. I_ _
J__U.
427
each. Veterans were
each day in service
©
l/Averaging about $1,000
^/overseas and $1.00 for
depended chiefly for its income. The Repub-
licans could not, if they wished, go back to
the days of Hanna and McKinley. Then, in-
direct taxes from imports and excises (levied
on liquor, tobacco, playing cards, perfumery,
etc.) furnished enough money to run the gov-
ernment. These taxes the consumer paid,
without realizing it, in the prices of the goods
he bought. But now, in addition, he agreed
under the Sixteenth Amendment to pay a
part of his income directly into the Treasury.
He soon knew that he was being taxed and
for how much.
granted $1.25
at home.
NR
©
The Soldiers’ Bonus • The question of
tax reduction was complicated by the de-
mands of veterans for a cash bonus. The
government hoped to avoid a repetition of
the pension abuses which had followed the
War between the States. Generous provision
was made for the disabled, but the men who
returned to civil life uninjured received noth-
but the $60 bonus paid them on discharge.
J/ The war pay of privates had been $30 a
month (from which $15 was deducted for
the wife at home and another $6.60 for the
premium on an insurance policy of $10,000).
Veterans compared this with the $150 or
$200 a month which their neighbors had
been earning meantime in factory or ship-
yard. Uncle Sam was rich, they reasoned.
He could afford to make up some of this
difference to the men who had been ready
to risk their lives on the battlefields of
France.
In March, 1922, the House for a second
time passed a cash bonus bill. Cheers came
from the crowded galleries where a delegation
of veterans was massed. This time the Sen-
ate agreed by a vote of 47-22. President
Harding on September 19 vetoed the bonus
bill, declaring that the soldiers themselves,
while serving in the war, did not expect a
502 *Afit®r World War II, Congress
liberal insurance terms, and
Reynolds, in the Portland Oregonian
Here’s Hoping He Saves the Mutton • Why did'
the cartoonist use the lion to symbolize demands
for tax reduction? Why was Congress afraid of
both the lion and the veteran? Did the veterans
ever get their bonus? (See page 503.)
bonus. The House immediately passed the
bill over the veto. But the vote in the Senate
was four short of the number necessary to
override the President.
Advocates of the bonus continued their
pressure upon Congress by a powerful lobby.
In the spring of 19.24 they got an “adjusted
compensation” bill through both houses of
Congress. The bill provided not for the
direct payment of cash to the veterans but for
the issuance to them of “certificates,” or
paid-up insurance policies, falling due in
twenty years. Nearly 3.1 million ex-service-
men were entitled to receive these certificates,
and their total claims on the government
amounted to nearly 3.1 billion dollars. The
men might borrow' on them as on a life
insurance policy. President Coolidge vetoed
voted a generous GI Bill of Rights,
state financial bonuses, (p. 616) J
©

|
v
Payments mere to be spread out over
on ability to pay. Only 2") billion
the “adjusted compensation” bill on May 15,
1924. Four days later it was passed by large
majorities in both houses over his veto. This
was not the end of the bonus question, how-
ever. When hard times came in the early
1930’s, the veterans, who had already bor-
rowed over 330 million dollars on these cer-
tificates, demanded that the government cash
them immediately. Finally, in January, 1936,
Congress voted to pay off the certificates.
See p. 537, p. 539
The European War Debts • Besides the
tariff, tax revision, and the bonus, a fourth
financial problem of the administration con-
cerned the debts owed by Great Britain,
France, and Italy, our former allies. These
amounted to over nine billion dollars.
Various reasons wrere advanced why the
United States government should wipe these
debts off the books. (1) It wTas argued that
America had delayed entering the w'ar until
it was nearly over. Hence, Americans should
consider this expenditure as a fair offset to
the suffering and loss of life which the Allies
had endured in the “common cause.” (2)
The United States had made several times
nine billion dollars out of the w'ar during the
two and a half years of its neutrality. (3) The
good will of former allies in future trade rela-
tions wras w'orth more than the money that
they owed. (4) Most of the money lent had
been spent here in America. The debt,
sixty-two years and mere based
dollars mere repaid,
therefore, represented goods we had shipped
to them. It could be repaid only in goods
they should ship to us. By insisting upon
high tariffs to protea our home industries,
w'e were actually preventing our debtors from
paying their debts in the only economic way
open to them.
The American government, however, in-
sisted that the wrar debts should not be can-
celed. They were represented by Liberty+
Bonds sold to the American people, the inter-
est on which had to be raised by taxation.
Early in 1922 President Harding appointed a
committee to negotiate with the debtor gov-
ernments. Soon they had made agreements
to pay in installments spread over a period of
many years. The arrangements were most
generous and the interest rate nominal. By
1927 the United States had made contracts
writh sixteen debtor nations to pay eventually
about 11^ billion dollars. At first most of
them paid their semiannual installments in
June and December. During the depres-
sion of the early thirties, however, they
began one by one to default on these pay-
ments. Finally, only Finland continued to
pay. Today, neither we nor our debtors any
longer figure payments on the debts of World
War I as items of the budget. The billions
that we lent to the Allies in both World Wars
I and II are now recognized as part of our
contribution toward those victories.
V
1/
LABOR AND IMMIGRATION
1/ V Interference by unions not
directly involved in dispute.
Labor at Ebb Tide • Many gains made in
union membership during the war were lost
in the following decade. With over three
million veterans thrown upon the market,
strikes were generally unsuccessful. Bitter la-
bor-management struggles, such as those of
the coal, steel, and textile workers, bordered
upon open warfare. Hard-won Federal child-
labor laws and a minimum-wage law for
women in the District of Columbia were de-
clared unconstitutional. Secondary boycotts
were found illegal, and sweeping court in-
junctions in labor disputes were common.
Widespread opposition was raised to union
1/1/
•Despite reasons listed above, most Americans viewed inter-
national loans on the same basis as individual loans,—
payable by honest debtors.
503
1/
5),
Y
1/
Tor another important reason, see Focus. Even at its height, however,
only one worker out of four employed belonged to a union.
The Immigration Laws • Organized la-
bor was especially opposed to competing with
a flood of cheap labor imported from abroad
During the war the number of immigrants
fell off drastically. However, when the war
was over, there was the prospect of a new
flood of peoples from the distressed countries
of Europe. “The world is preparing to move
to America,” wrote the Commissioner of Im-
migration. Labor and the millions of de-
mobilized veterans seeking work after the
armistice were convinced that reasonable
restrictions should be placed upon our hospi-
tality.
The war had also revealed some alarming
facts in regard to our foreign-born popula-
tion. (1) Many immigrants neglected to
become naturalized American citizens. Some
retained their real allegiance to the lands from
which they had come. (2) Some immigrant
labor agitators were suspected of “taking
their orders from Moscow.” (3) Over one
thousand newspapers in the United States
were printed in foreign languages. (4) Over
10 per cent of the people here could not speak
English.
Realization of these facts jolted many
Americans. They began to fear that it would
be impossible to Americanize the foreigners
already here if the huge immigration of the
prewar years began again. Consequently,
they joined forces with organized labor to
demand speedy action by Congress to reduce
the flow of peoples from Europe.
The Quota System • The method adopted
was a quota system. On May 19, 1921,
President Harding signed the Emergency
Quota Act. This limited the number of im-
migrants that any country could send to the
United States in any given year to 3 per cent
of its people who were here according to the
census of 1910. 'Phis law met strong criticism
504 *0Pen shop—any one may be
hired; closed shop—only
union members may be hired; union
shop—worker must join union to
FOCUS ON ECONOMICS
Why Organized Labor Declined
In the 1920’s, the automobile and electrical-
equipment industries grew to giant size. Yet
organized labor lost membership. A major
reason for this was the refusal of the American
Federation of Labor leaders to change their
forms of organization.
It was not until the 1930’s that the workers
in the auto, steel, radio, and electrical indus-
tries were finally organized into great indus-
trial unions (one union for all workers in each
industry). For the dramatic results which fol-
lowed, see page 562.
pleas for the closed shop. Moreover, com-
pany-dominated unions wrcre organized in
the railway, metal trades, electrical, and other
industries. By 1927 these already had 11
million members. Most important, manage-
ment set out upon welfare benefit programs
of its own, thus undercutting the appeal of
union organizers. The power of organized
labor was indeed at ebb tide by 1929.
Coal Miner Cabins, West Virginia • “Sixteen
tons and what do you get? Another day older
and deeper in debt." What are other reasons why
the coal miner’s life has not been a happy one?
__________________________________ Brown Brothers


V

gecause bulk of east and south
European immigration came after 1890.
because its quotas favored immigration from
eastern and southern countries of Europe,
such as Russia, Poland, and Italy. It was
argued that similarities in language, customs,
educational opportunities, and social institu-
tions in northern and western Europe made
it easier to “Americanize” these immigrants.
A new law, the National Origins Act, was
passed in 1924, fixing the quota at 2 per cent
of the nationals of each country in the United
States according to the census of 1890. The
new date chosen resulted in cutting down the
quotas from eastern and southern Europe to
about one eighth of what they previously had
been. It boosted the quotas for the British
Isles, Germany, and the Scandinavian coun-
tries in great measure. xMexicans and Cana-
dians were exempt, and Japanese and other
* Asians were specifically barred. The new law
also provided that after July 1, 1927 (opposi-
tion delayed this until 1929), only 150,000 im-
migrants should be admitted annually. They
were to be divided among the several coun-
tries in proportion to the numbers of their
nationals here according to the census of 1920.
After 1929, quotas were figured on a “na-
tional origins” basis. These included the
number of people who by birth or descent
came from the various countries within the
quota areas. Between 1931 and 1945, except
for the year 1939, less than one third of the
quota was filled each year.
Recent Legislation • World War II
changed the picture temporarily. Then
special legislation was passed permitting the
entrance of a certain number of displaced
persons and refugees from war-threatened
areas. Many of the world’s finest scientists
entered under these provisions. President
Truman issued a special directive in 1945
authorizing the admission of more displaced
persons. Three years later Congress passed
Opposed by many as an unnecessary
earned America much hatred which
**Check Readers Guide for current a
Brown Brothers
Immigrant Inventors • To Ernest Alexanderson,
born in Sweden, we owe many scientific ideas
regarding radio, television, and transmission of
pictures by radio. To Michael Pupin (right), born
in what is now Yugoslavia, we owe advances made
in long-distance telephoning and X-ray photog-
raphy. Cite other ideas we owe to immigrants.
the Displaced Persons Act of 1948 authoriz-
ing entrance for about 400,000 more. Further
special legislation enabled over 100,000 “war
brides” to enter. In 1952 the McCarran-
Walter Immigration and Nationality Act
went into effect. It codified all the existing
immigration laws in one act. It gave the
largest quotas to the highly educated, the
technically skilled, and to close relatives of
American citizens. But it also removed the
old ban on immigration of Orientals. In 1953
conditions in the refugee camps in Europe
encouraged Congress to pass special legisla-
tion making it possible for 214,000 extra
orphans and others to enter. Security pre-
cautions and lack of United States sponsors,
however, held down the number admitted.
In the ten postwar years about two million
immigrants found refuge here. Efforts are
being made, however, to find some means
by which waiting applicants from oppressed
nations may exercise the quota privileges**
unused by others. See chart, page 506.
slight to Japan, this clause
bore fruit in World War II,
rticles for oral reports.
The Changing Pattern of Immigration
WHERE 42,112,30	5 IMMIGRANTS CAME FROM, 1821-1961
NORTHERN AND 1 WESTERN EUROPE 1	19,230,814 |
SOUTHERN AND
EASTERN EUROPE
LATIN AMERICA
AND CANADA
ASIA
1,119,110
All OTHER AREAS
418,743

HOW 20 YEARS CHANGED THE PICTURE
SOURCES OF
IMMIGRATION
1821-1890
SOUTHERN AND
EASTERN EUROPE
11%
All OTHERS
NORTHERN AND WESTERN EUROPE
198,000
141,000
125,000
506
Before 1921
AVERAGE NUMBER
ADMITTED
ANNUALLY
150,000	1901-1920
the Effects of Legislation Since 1921
NUMBER
ALLOWED TO
ENTER UNDER
1921 ACT
NUMBER
ALLOWED TO
ENTER UNDER
1924 ACT
NUMBER
ALLOWED TO
ENTER UNDER
1929 AND 1952
ACTS
The above chart contains a great deal of valuable data.
See also the latest World Almanac (Book of Facts) for re-
cent data on individual nations.
THE WASHINGTON NAVAL CONFERENCE, 1921-1922
The Washington Conference • The
Harding administration soon discovered that
it was impossible for the United States to be
comfortably isolated from world affairs. The
country ih 1920 and 1921 found itself on the
brink of what many people thought would be
a disastrous naval race with Great Britain and
Japan. Moreover, relations with Japan were
so unsettled that the “yellow” press (news-
papers given to sensationalism) in both
countries was speaking of war.
Few Americans wanted a naval race, and
almost none wanted war with Japan. Senator
Borah of Idaho, therefore, came forward with
a proposal on May 15,1921. It was an amend-
ment to the huge naval appropriation bill of
494 million dollars. It authorized the Presi-
dent to invite Great Britain and Japan, our
chief naval competitors, to a conference in
Washington to discuss the possibility' of end-
ing the naval competition. The amendment
passed without a dissenting vote. The Presi-
dent thereupon sent invitations not only to
Great Britain and Japan, but also to France
and Italy as important naval powers. More-
over, China, the Netherlands, Belgium, and
Portugal, as nations with large interests in the
Far East, were likewise invited.
Delegates from these nine powers (includ-
ing the United States) met at Washington for
the opening of the conference on November
12, 1921. In his address of welcome, Secre-
tary Hughes startled his listeners by propos-
ing (1) a “naval holiday” for at least ten
years, during which no new battleships
should be built. (2) A number of capital
ships (warships of over 10,000 tons or carry-
ing guns of over eight inches bore) either
already built or in process of construction
should be “scrapped.” The United States
was ready to scrap 30 ships totaling 845,700
tons. Great Britain was asked to scrap 19
Charles Evans Hughes
(1862-1948)
An outstanding attorney, twice governor of
New York, and a Justice of the Supreme Court
from 1910 to 1916, Hughes seemingly had
accomplished all that any man could hope to
achieve in a lifetime. But in the years after
his defeat for the Presidency, he managed to
contribute even more.
In 1921, Harding appointed Hughes Secre-
tary of State, and he was chairman of the
Washington Disarmament Conference in that
year. Stated an observer: “Secretary Hughes
sunk in 35 minutes more ships than all the
admiralties of the world have sunk in a cycle of
centuries." Hughes resigned as Secretary of
State on March 4, 1925. In 1926, Coolidge
appointed him a member of the Hague Court
of International Arbitration. In 1928, he was
elected a judge of the World Court (Perma-
nent Court of International Justice). National
and international fame and recognition were
his.
In 1930, Hughes accepted appointment by
President Hoover as Chief Justice of the
United States. He served for eleven years.
He is considered one of the great jurists in the
Court’s long history.
FOCUS
Significant Facts about Immigration • Where have a majority of all of our immigrants
come from? In which decade did the “old” immigration reach its peak? the “new”?
How did the percentages of "old” and "new” stand in 1890? 1910? What has been
the principal effect of legislation since 1921? From where do “displaced persons” come?
*Ses Focus
507
)

1/ In 1963-64,
millions of
farmers wanted, while the Benson program
drove more and more farmers out of the
Republican camp.
Neither side had had its way completely.
Secretary Benson could point to the progres-
sive lowering of price supports—from a flex-
ible scale of 821 to 90 per cent to a general
scale of 65 per cent. Congressional represent-
atives of the farmers could point to the pro-
gram for using American agricultural sur-
pluses abroad. For example, agricultural
products with a total market value of nearly
4\ billion dollars were sold for foreign cur-
rencies to prevent famine in countries like
India.
Neither side, however, could claim credit
for any solution. Farmers produced more
every year, despite lower price supports—or
perhaps because of them. Farm income con-
tinued to decline, in spite of an outpouring
from Washington of about 4 billion dollars in
1959 and 2.6 billion in 1960 in subsidies of
one kind or another. And surpluses so huge
as to be almost unmanageable continued to
* burden the warehouses and granaries. By the
end of 1960 the government still owned over
one billion bushels of wheat and nearly a bil-
lion and a half bushels of corn. The farm
problem was one of the most urgent and cer-
tainly one of the most difficult problems with
which the new administration had to wrestle.
Expanding Economic Security • During
the campaign of 1952 one commentator
quipped that the best hope for the survival of
the New Deal and Fair Deal was the election
of a Republican President! He meant simply
that a Republican administration would have
no choice but to continue the Democratic
economic and social programs. Moreover,
there would never be any thought of repealing
them once both parties could claim credit for
them.
the needs of the Soviet Union and its satellites for
tons of wheat helped reduce surpluses here.
This, to be sure, was pretty much the way
it worked out. There is no evidence that
President Eisenhower and his parly- leaders
ever planned to turn back the clock of eco-
nomic and social reform. Such an effort
would have been politically too risky, for the
American people were determined to pre-
serve the gains of the preceding twenty
years. Repeal of New Deal-Fair Deal laws
would not have been possible anyway after
1954, for the Democrats controlled both
houses of Congress by increasing majorities
to the end of Eisenhower’s second term.
It was, actually, an important part of the
President’s middle-of-the-road policy not
only to preserve but also to strengthen and
extend programs for social and economic
security. The only differences between Re-
publicans and Democrats in Congress, or
between Democrats in Congress and the
President, involved the questions how much
and how fast?
Thus the President and Congress agreed in
1954, and again in 1956, to increase social se-
curity benefits and to broaden the system to
include an estimated ten million new workers.
In 1955 Congress and President Eisenhower
compromised on a new minimum-wage law
increasing the minimum wage from 75 cents
to one dollar an hour.
In providing low-cost public housing for
poorer workers, there was greater disagree-
ment between the two branches of the gov-
ernment. The Democrats wanted generous
measures and were disappointed to have to
accept administration bills. The important
point was, however, that Republican occu-
pancy of the White House meant a continua-
tion and not an end of Federal expenditures
for public housing. For example, the Federal
government spent some 1.3 billion dollars for
urban slum clearance and public housing
between 1953 and 1961.
♦Storage costs alone were running more than $1 million per
day. Complaints about graft and corruption came to a head
with disclosures in the Estes case in 1962.
662
in 1964 he secured passage of a much stronger Civil
As President
Rights Act.
In health and medical welfare as much as in
housing and slum clearance, President Eisen-
hower carried forward programs begun by
Roosevelt and Truman. On April 1, 1953,
Eisenhower signed a bill (earlier proposed by
Truman) raising the Federal Security' Agency
to Cabinet rank as the Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare. Although President
Eisenhower opposed Truman’s plan for gen-
eral national health insurance, he asked Con-
gress in 1954 to provide Federal support for
the private health-insurance plans that had
been growing rapidly since the 1940’s. A Re-
publican Congress refused, but bills provid-
ing Federal funds for medical research and
hospital construction were adopted with little
opposition all through the 1950’s. In 1960
the Federal government spent 80 million
dollars on hospital construction alone.
Recognizing that immigration policies af-
fect the welfare of our nation in a vital way,
President Eisenhower appointed a commis-
sion to study the entire immigration and
naturalization program. This commission
recommended complete revision of the Immi-
gration and Nationality Act of 1952. Con-
gress refused to alter the basic features of our
immigration policy. But it did pass the
Refugee Act of 1953, allowing an additional
214,000 immigrants to enter during the next
three years. Thousands more were admitted
when Russia brutally suppressed a revolt in
Hungary in 1956.
The Civil Rights Crusade • Wc have
seen how' the civil-rights issue split the Dem-
ocratic Party in 1948 (p. 622). Nevertheless,
President Truman used every executive
power at his command to abolish racial segrer
gation in the civil service and armed forces,
to appoint Negroes to high Federal offices,
and to identify his administration with the
cause of civil rights.
WEARt"'ADflPl0S""
avJOrldwaR*
XoENTTOWH'Cn
IWNTAIM THE SPIRIT OF
CONSTITUTION WITH ITS BILLIlf R!6HI5
will IN HE L0N6 RUN DO MORE.
TO MAKE ITBOTH SECURE AND
THE OBJECT OF ADULATION
Than the number, of
HYDROGEN BOMBS
we STOCKPILE.
Fitzpatrick, in the St. Louis Post-Dispatch
In the Arsenal of Democracy • What is the point
of this cartoon? Do you agree or disagree? Why?
President Eisenhower carried this program
forward from the White House wfith deter-
mination if no personal enthusiasm. But
presidential action was bound to be limited in
effectiveness. Only Congress had the power
to strengthen civil rights by legislation, and
threats of a filibuster (endless talk) by South-
ern senators prevented civil-rights bills even
from coming to a vote before 1957. The log
jam was finally broken in that year in a most
unexpected way. Senator Lyndon B. John-
son of Texas, Democratic leader in the Senate,
persuaded administration Republicans and
Northern and Western Democrats to accept a
moderate bill that sought only to protect the
Negro’s right to vote in the Southern states.
In return, the Southern senators permitted
the mild measure to pass without a filibuster.
♦First Secretary of H.E.W. was Oveta Culp Hobby, the second
uuoman in our history to attain Cabinet rank. (First, Frances
Perkins, Secretary of Labor, 1933-1945)
663