the--INUNITED STATESHISTORYD. C. Heath and CompanyE178.1,G41theHAGICONTENTSUNIT ONE. The Colonial Heritage3CHAPTER1. Europeans Find a New World52. Europeans Come to Live in the New World193. England Establishes Thirteen Colonies344. The Colonists Make a Living605. An American Society Emerges75vii61-61722UNIT TWO. Americans Form a New Nation976. The Colonists Resist Imperial Control997. The Thirteen Colonies Win the War for Independence1158. The Nation Experiences a Critical Period1289. Our Federal Constitution Is Made and Ratified13910. The Constitution Outlines Our Federal System151UNIT THREE. The National Government Grows Stronger16511. Federalists Launch the New National Government16712. Foreign Problems Perplex the New Nation17513. Thomas Jefferson Serves as President19014. The War of 1812 Completes Our Independence20515. Nationalism Contributes to an Era of Good Feeling217UNIT FOUR. Democracy Makes Important Gains23716. The Spirit of Sectionalism Becomes Strong Again23917. Andrew Jackson Rises to Power with the West25818. An American Culture Develops27719. Economic and Social Changes Gain Momentum29320. Reformers Seek a Fuller Life for All307UNIT FIVE. The Expanding Nation Divides and Reunites33121. The United States Expands to the Pacific33322. Sectional Discord Leads to Disunion35323. The Confederate States Fight for Independence36924. Reconstruction Is a Tragic Era391viiiUNIT SIX. Modern America Emerges (1865-1900)41125. The Industrial Revolution Continues41326. Urbanization Changes Ways of Living and Thinking43227. The Rise of the Labor Movement45528. The Frontier Period Comes to a Close46829. The Agricultural Revolution Creates Problems47830. Political Discontent Produces Populism489UNIT SEVEN. The Progressive Movement51531. A New Era of Reform Arrives51732. Theodore Roosevelt and Taft Further Reforms53133. Wilson Advocates the New Freedom546UNIT EIGHT. The United States Becomes a World Power56534. The United States Gains an Empire56735. The United States Extends Its Influence58136. The United States in World War I59737. The United States Refuses World Leadership615UNIT NINE. Prosperity, a Terrible Depression, and a SecondWorld War62938. Life in the Incredible Twenties63139. Conservative Republicans Control the Government65140. The Nation Suffers an Economic Collapse66641. The Country Tries a New Deal68442. Isolation Proves Impossible70743. The United States Fights for Survival729ixUNIT TEN. The United States Struggles with the Responsibilitiesof World Leadership75944. Domestic Affairs in the Postwar Years76045. The Cold War77346. The Republicans Return to Power79347. America Moves Forward813APPENDIXPresidents and Vice-Presidents833Map of the World Today834Declaration of Independence836The Constitution of the United States838INDEX850ACKNOWLEDGMENTS877XBaltimore, Maryland, in 1752, from a sketch by John Moale5. AN AMERICAN SOCIETY EMERGESThe Europeans, on coming to America, left behind them, in large part, the traditions of the past,the institutions and customs of their fatherland; they built a society which has analogies withthose of Europe, but which at bottom is radically different.-Alexisde Tocqueville, 1835England's Colonies Are Rapidly PeopledColonial population grows rapidly.Immigrants came for various reasons.In 1700 the English colonies con-Some people came from Europetained about 300,000 settlers. Seventy-to the English colonies in search of re-five years later the population had in-ligious freedom. Among them werecreased to between 2,500,000 andPilgrims, Puritans, Quakers, German3,000,000. This tremendous growth wasand Swiss Mennonites, Huguenots, Ro-due partly to a high birth rate andman Catholics, and Jews. Some camepartly to immigration. Though the peo-as officials, ministers of the Gospel, orple had settled all along the Atlanticmissionaries to the Indians. Some cameseaboard, the good trading centersfor love of adventure. Others came towere the first towns to become heavilyescape political persecution. The larg-populated.est number came in the hope of makingDuring the colonial period and fora better living. The custom of givinga long time afterward, American fam-the newcomer fifty or one hundredilies were large. Families of eight, ten,acres of land attracted the poor work-or twelve children were rather com-ing people and peasants of Europe.mon. Children helped in the hard workHere they could become independent;of the home and the farm. Thus thein Europe it was practically impossiblemore numerous they were, the moreto reach that goal.likely the family was to get ahead. Thecustom of early marriage also favoredCrossing the Atlantic was perilous.large families. Even though many chil-Immigration to America was heldadren died in infancy, the average fam-back by the cost and dangers of the1ily raised more children than is thejourney. At best the trip from Europecase today. It is estimated that at leastrequired six to eight weeks; if stormsiltwo thirds of the colonists at the timedrove the ship from its course, the voy-r,of the Revolution were not immigrantsage might last three or four months.but descendants of earlier comers.There were no regular lines of ships,75

no regular dates of sailing, and no lawsMost indentured servants cameto regulate fares or protect the safetyhere gladly, but some adults and chil-and health of the passengers. The trav-dren were carried here against theireler, after making a bargain with thewill and forced to become servants.sea captain for passage, had to wait inKidnapers stalked the streets of Lon-port, possibly for several weeks, untildon and other seaports in the Britishthe ship was ready to sail and windsIsles. They made a business of hustlingwere favorable. Meanwhile, he was us-their victims into ships bound foring up his money and the store of foodAmerica. Upon arrival here the captainhe had bought for the journey.delivered his unwilling passengers toShips were small and completelywhoever would pay him most.lacking in comfort. Sanitary arrange-Some indentured servants camements were crude. The sick and thefrom English prisons. To avoid the ex-well lived, slept, and ate in a crowdedpense of keeping offenders in prison, thehold. The supply of fresh water, al-authorities frequently sentenced themways very limited, became dangerouslyto be transported to America. Somelow if the journey was prolonged bywere in prison because of their re-lack of wind or by stormy weather.ligious or political ideas, many becauseContagious diseases frequently brokeof debts, others because of very minorout. It was not unusual for half or moreoffenses, a few because of seriousof those on board to die from small-crimes. Those sent to America had topox, measles, or dysentery. Young chil-serve masters in the colonies for a termdren, weak mothers, and the sick wereof years, usually seven, and were thenalmost sure to perish under the hard-given their liberty. Some 50,000 pris-ships of a long voyage.oners were brought to the Americancolonies. They were known as "HisPoor people came as indentured servants.Majesty's Seven-Year Passengers."Many farmers and plantation own-ers were so eager for laborers that theySlave merchants brought in Negroes.paid the cost of the voyage for immi-Until after 1700 white indenturedgrants who would work for them a pe-servants were more numerous thanriod of years. In exchange for their pas-Negro slaves. The colonists from Mary-sage adults had to serve from three toland southward, however, graduallyseven years; children, until they camecame to depend on slave labor, espe-of age. The contract between mastercially on the plantations. Throughoutand servant was known as an inden-the 1700's the importation of slaves in-ture; this gives us the phrase "inden-creased rapidly.tured servant." About one third of theNegro slavery existed in all of theimmigrants to the English coloniescolonies, but three fourths of the slavescame as indentured servants.were in the five southern colonies-The terms of the indenture wereMaryland, Virginia, North Carolina,harsh, and the servant little better offSouth Carolina, and Georgia. Slavethan a slave. But when the time oflabor drove free labor from the planta-servitude was up, he was free. He usu-tions. As indentured servants gainedally received a suit of clothes and sometheir freedom and as new immigrantsfarm implements from his master. Mostarrived, they avoided the plantationcolonies allowed fifty acres of land toregions. They settled in the northerneach freedman. Many freedmen be-colonies, or else pushed beyond thecame prosperous farmers or mechanics.plantation area in the South, to makeOthers remained day laborers.homes on the frontier.76The Frontier Is a Melting PotMeanwhile, just beyond their settle-and a Levelerment, newcomers were going througha similar struggle to subdue the wilder-Life on the frontier is hard and bare.ness. Whoever they were, and wher-The differences between life inever they settled, the first settlers, orAmerica and life in Europe were great-pioneers, lived much the same kindof life.est in the back country and on thefrontier. At the outset the frontier wasthe coastal strip itself. The colonistsThe coastal plain is settled.had to adjust themselves to the wilder-As. the population grew, the fron-ness or die. They learned from the In-tier was pushed westward and north-dians how to grow corn, to make barkward. The river valleys were settledhouses, canoes, and snowshoes, to findfirst and then the hillier and less fertilegame, to tan skins and shape them intoland in between. By 1775 most of theclothes and moccasins, to clear theland as far west as the Appalachiansland by girdling trees, and to use thewas occupied, and settlers were trick-native plants for food and medicine.ling through the first highlands. In theThey had to be hunters, fishermen,Carolinas and Georgia, the Piedmontfarmers, and all-round craftsmen. Ev-(the plateau between the coastal plaineryone-man, woman, and child-hadand the Appalachians) was only partlyto work hard. There was little time forsettled. There were still great tracts ofidleness or recreation or cultural pur-virgin forest lying between the riversuits. Gradually, as a group of settlersvalleys. Yet even here frontiersmen hadgot well established, life became easierpenetrated the mountains and settledand more comfortable. Yet by ourin what is now Kentucky and Tennes-standards it was still a life of toil.see.ENGLISH1,500,000SCOTCH-IRISHAND IRISH370,000ONTARIOGERMANS200,000MDUTCH67,000CONNSCOTCH HIGHLANDERS17,000N.JMDDEL ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE. ThisRGINTAFrench historian traveled in theUnited States in 1831. Hewrote, prophetically: "In a fewyears these impenetrable for-HNAests will have fallen, the noiseof civilization and of industrySOUTHwill break the silencewe\CAROLINAare perhaps the last travelersto whom it has been given toGEORGIA\contemplate [this solitude] inits primitive splendor."NATIONAL ORIGINS OF WHITE SETTLERS

While the American envoys wereMistakes Lead to Downfallon the way, Napoleon set himself up asdictator of France. He was glad to set-of the Federaliststle the quarrel with the United Statesin order to give all his attention to fight-Federalists pass Alien and Sedition Acts.ing in Europe. A new treaty betweenIn the summer of 1798 the Fed-France and the United States was com-eralists in Congress saw a chance topleted (September, 1800). The twoweaken the Republican party. Theygovernments promised to return all na-passed a series of four laws known asval vessels they had captured, and thethe "Alien and Sedition Acts." BecauseUnited States gave up its claim forwar with France seemed likely, Fed-damages to American commerce Theeralist congressmen claimed that theseagreement prevented war. By makinglaws were necessary to protect thefriends with Napoleon, it helped tocountry from internal enemies.clear the way for the purchase of Lou-1. The Naturalization Act statedisiana.that an alien must reside in the UnitedAdams, by his independence ofStates fourteen years before he couldcharacter and personal courage, hadbecome a citizen. Previously only fivedone a great service to his country. Yetyears was required. Since most immi-he was not re-elected (see p. 187).grants supported the Republican party,Though he never again held publicthe real reason for this measure was ob-office, he had no regrets and years latervious.suggested as his epitaph: "Here lies2. The Alien Act required all for-John Adams, who took upon himselfeigners to register with the federal gov-the responsibility of the peace withernment and allowed the President toFrance in the year 1800."deport without trial any whom hethought "dangerous to the peace andsafety of the United States. This actcaused great anxiety and resentmentamong aliens, especially if they hadbeen critical of the Federalist adminis-N.HMtration. President Adams did not de-4port a single alien, but two shiploadsN.Y.12of French immigrants left the countryR.I.4PENN,CONN.9for fear of what might happen.15N.J.T3. The Alien Enemies Act gave theDEL 3MD. 10President power to deport or imprisonKY.4aliens in time of war almost at will.TENNSN.C.124. The Sedition Act authorizedS.C.8heavy penalties for those who tried toMISS.GA.4TERRhinder the operation of the governmentor who publicly criticized it. Twenty-SPANISfive persons were arrested for criticiz-ing the government and ten were con-Jefferson,DividedRepublican -73victed, most of them Republican edi-No ReturnsAdoms,tors and printers.Federalist -65Those sent to prison were gener-ally considered martyrs in the cause ofPRESIDENTIAL ELECTION, 1800freedom. Many showed them honor.184offices of the government. To him thejobs, Republicans were appointed. Jef-poorest citizen was as worthy of respectferson said his aim was to have an equalas the highest officer. The White Housenumber of officeholders from eachduring Jefferson's stay there was asparty.open to visitors as his spacious home inVirginia had been.Some Federalist laws are repealed.In yet another way, Jefferson de-The Republicans promptly re-parted from Federalist customs. Hepealed the hated excise on whiskey,stood firmly for freedom of speech andthus carrying out a promise they hadof the press. Although opposition news-made before the election. The Naturali-papers abused him without letup, hezation Act was changed to permit amade no effort to silence them. Underforeigner to become a citizen in fivehis leadership Congress gave reportersrather than fourteen years. The much-desks on the floor of both houses, withcriticized Alien and Sedition Acts werethe right to report everything that wentallowed to expire. The fines alreadyon. Reporters had formerly not beencollected under these acts were re-permitted to comment on happeningsfunded and the men imprisoned werein Congress.set free. The Judiciary Act of 1801 wasrepealed and a new one passed whichJefferson hopes to unite the country.set up six circuit courts instead of six-The new President had wide popu-teen. Yet for the most part, the govern-lar support in all sections, yet he wasment structure built by the Federalistsfeared and distrusted by the Federal-was left unchanged.ists. He hoped to win many of thesemen over to support Republican prin-The national debt is reduced.ciples. To quiet Federalist fears thatUnder the Federalists the nationalthe South would control the new ad-debt had grown to 80 million dollars.ministration, Jefferson chose two de-The Republicans had promised to re-partment heads and the Postmasterduce the debt. Soon after taking of-General from New England. He pickedfice, Secretary of the Treasury Gallatina fellow Virginian, James Madison, tooutlined a program for paying off thebe Secretary of State. Albert Gallatinentire debt in sixteen years. He cut gov-of Pennsylvania was appointed Secre-ernment expenditures and persuadedtary of the Treasury.Congress to increase tariff duties slight-When Jefferson began his presi-ly. In eight years he slashed the debt todential term, jobs in the federal gov-52.5 million dollars, in addition to pro-ernment were held entirely by Federal-viding 15 million for the purchase ofists, many of them bitterly hostile toLouisiana. His thrifty policies pleasedJefferson. His followers urged him tothe people. Gallatin has gone down indischarge all Federalists. This he re-history as one of the ablest men ever tofused to do, but he did dismiss twentyfill the position of Secretary of theofficials appointed by Adams after theTreasury.election. Jefferson said it is not fair fora defeated President to make appoint-The Tripolitan War, 1801-1805.ments that will continue after he hasJefferson always opposed war whenleft office. Similarly, the so-called "mid-it could be avoided. Yet when neces-night judges," who had not yet receivedsary he defended American rights bytheir commissions when Jefferson tookforce, as in the undeclared war againstoffice, did not get them. As time wentTripoli. Tripoli was one of four Bar-on and vacancies occurred in federalbary states in North Africa whose rulers192

world where spinning and weavingrapidly. Furthermore, a gun could bewere done under the same roof. Simi-easily repaired by using spare parts.lar factories were erected at severalThe system of interchangeableplaces on the Merrimack River and onparts greatly reduced the cost of vari-scores of smaller streams in New Eng-ous other articles made of a number ofland and eastern New York. Cottonparts, such as clocks.cloth now came into everyday use.Before long many other productsThe Northeast develops manufacturing.were being made in factories; usingThe factory system grew muchmachines turned by water power or byfaster in the Northeast than in othersteam power. But the coming of thesections. Perhaps the most importantfactory did not stop manufacture atreason for this was the fact that North-home or in small shops using handerners had more money to invest inmethods. Farm families continued tofactories-money they had made inmake many of the things they needed.commerce, shipbuilding, and banking.On the plantations the slaves were keptMoreover, Northern investors had busi-busy during the winter in spinning,ness experience. The Northeast hadweaving, making their own clothes, andstill other advantages for manufactur-producing articles for plantation use.ing. A cheap source of power was atAs late as 1850 a great deal of manu-hand in the streams and waterfalls offacturing was still carried on by handNew England and in the coal fields ofmethods throughout the country.Pennsylvania. The necessary raw ma-terials were either produced locally orEli Whitney devises the systemwere readily brought in by water. Aof interchangeable parts.good labor supply, consisting of surplusAlthough the American Industrialfarm youth and of immigrants from Eu-Revolution started with English inven-rope, was available. In New Englandtions, it was carried forward by Ameri-particularly, the land could not supportcan inventions. Probably no inventionthe growing families, and factory em-was more important than the system ofployment was welcomed.interchangeable parts. This system wasworked out by Eli Whitney, owner ofThe Industrial Revolution producesa gun shop near New Haven. In thosegreat changes.days the parts for each gun were madeThe rise of the factory system inone at a time and then carefully as-the United States had far-reaching ef-sembled by a craftsman, who workedfects. Among these were the following:on the parts until they would fit to-1. Existing cities in the Northeastgether. A part taken from one gungrew rapidly. New cities, like Law-might not fit any other gun. Whitneyrence, Lowell, and Fall River, ap-decided to use machine tools to stamppeared on water-power sites.or shape identical parts. He obtained2. Two new social classes ap-a government contract in 1798 to pro-peared-the industrialists who ownedduce 10,000 rifles in two years, an un-the factories and the laborers whoheard-of number. He produced theworked in them.rifles by making 10,000 identical bar-3. Factory workers suffered fromrels, 10,000 identical triggers, and solow wages, long hours, and unhealthyon. Since the parts were made to pre-living and working conditions. Slumscise measurements, they required nomultiplied as these people crowdedhand finishing to make them fit to-into cheap tenements close to theirgether. Hence they could be assembledplaces of work.240

in the Southwest. Beginning about 1815were the same as on the western fron-cotton planters moved into the richtier. Again, there were rising townsvalleys of Alabama, Mississippi, Loui-and cities along the Ohio River. A fac-siana, and Arkansas. Most of themtory owner in Cincinnati was as likelycame from plantations farther eastto demand a protective tariff and awhere the soil had been exhausted.liberal immigration policy as a factoryThey came with scores-sometimes hun-owner in New Haven. Small farmersdreds-of slaves, herds of horses andwere numerous in each section andcattle, and long wagon trains of goods.most of them were likely to need easierThey bought land already cleared, andcredit and better transportation.the frontiersmen who had cleared itNo section was a solid unit in itsmoved farther west or settled on rough-demands, and the West least of all.er lands not suited to plantations. TheThere were really two Wests-theclass system which the planters broughtNorthwest, which was closed to slavery,with them was altogether opposed toand the Southwest, which was not.the democratic ideas and customs ofWherever slavery existed the plantersthe frontiersmen.formed the ruling class and wished theTRADING POST at Bellevue, Nebraska. At such posts as this efforts were made to reducefriction between the Indians and the westward-moving white hunters and traders.The West consists of two distinct parts.slave system to be protected and ex-tended. Usually when we speak of theIn discussing sectional interests weSouth we mean the whole area whereshould keep in mind that the sectionsthe plantation system was found. This,overlapped. For example, there wereof course, includes the Southwest. Yetfrontier areas in northern New Eng-for some purposes we lump Southwestland where the needs of the peopleand Northwest together as the West.250Music, too, is borrowed from Europe.Americans Contribute toScientific AdvanceMusic developed even more slowlyin America than did the other arts. Incolonial times few people had time toAmerican scientists study natural history.learn an instrument, and there wasThe young republic also leanedvery little music except singing. Theheavily on Europe in the field of sei-first musical society in the colonies wasence. American scientists purchasedfounded in Charleston in 1761. In 1786books and equipment abroad. Some ofWilliam Billings, a tanner, organized athem studied in Europe, since Ameri-singing society at Stoughton (Mass.)can colleges neglected research. Thewhich is still in existence.study of science was encouraged byLowell Mason did more than any-two learned societies, the Americanone else to encourage congregationalPhilosophical Society, founded by Ben-singing in churches. He collectedjamin Franklin in 1743 (see p. 89), andhymns and set them to music, oftenthe American Academy of Arts andusing tunes written by the great Ger-Sciences, founded by John Adams atman composers. Also he promoted mu-Boston in 1780. Both societies collectedsical education by establishing theand published scientific writings andBoston Academy of Music (1832). Sixboth maintained libraries.years later he succeeded in having mu-In the first half of the 1800's, nat-sic introduced into the Boston schools.ural history was the favorite field ofLittle music was written in Amer-American scientists. Among the mostica until late in the 1800's. Americanpicturesque American naturalists wassongs were generally set to EuropeanJohn James Audubon. Audubon cametunes. Stephen Foster was one of theto the United States from France infirst Americans to write original melo-1803. He spent many years observingdies for his songs. His "Old Folks atand painting the wild birds in variousHome" (1851) became popular at once.parts of the country. One of his greatGerman immigrants to the Unitedworks, Birds of America, contains re-States contributed enormously to themarkably exact likenesses of nearly 500development here of an appreciation ofspecies. He began a similar study ofmusic. Wherever a group of GermansAmerican four-footed animals whichsettled, musical activities were sure tohis sons completed after his death.become a feature of the communityAsa Gray (1810-1888) became onelife. It was a German, Gottlieb Graup-of the world's leading botanists. Hener, who founded the first genuine or-described and classified a vast numberchestra in the United States. Known asof American plants. His scheme of clas-the Boston Philharmonic Society, itsification is still used by botanists. Asbegan its activities about 1810. Fivea teacher at Harvard and a writer, Grayyears later Graupner helped to launchhelped popularize the study of botany.Boston's still famous Handel andAmong other Americans who madeHaydn Society, a group of singers whoimportant contributions to science inproduce oratorios. After 1845, whenthe first half of the century were Mat-thousands of German intellectuals camethew Maury and Joseph Henry. Maury,here to escape persecution, a largea naval officer, founded the science ofnumber of orchestras, bands, singingoceanography. In one of his researchessocieties, and music schools were estab-he used a large number of ships' logslished. Fine music from then on ceasedto study winds and ocean currents.to be the privilege of the few.Then he prepared tables showing the286

POPULATION GROWTH, 1790-1850Number of Immigrants17903,930,0001,700,00018005,300,00018107,250,000600,00018209,640,000144,000183012,870,0001821-1830 1831-1840 1841-1850184017,070,000185023,200,00005101520millionsbe found in homes, especially in thethe place of homemade rag rugs.cities. New methods of heating wereSpring-construction furniture made itscoming into use. All through the North-appearance. Rocking chairs becameeast, kitchen fireplaces had been closedpopular. The doorbell was taking theand iron ranges had taken their place.place of the door knocker. The inven-In cities coal was replacing wood as ation of photography enabled the poorfuel. Hot-air furnaces were being in-as well as the rich to have their por-stalled in public buildings, churches,traits made. By 1850 homes often con-and the houses of the well to do.tained photographs of the family.Lighting was also improved. It issaid that this generation was born bycandlelight and died by oil lamps. TheImmigration Alterslamps burned whale oil or lard, forAmerican Lifepetroleum had not yet come into use.By 1850 gaslights were replacing whale-The number of immigrants to theoil lamps for lighting city streets.United States rose rapidly during theThe kitchen was changed not onlysecond quarter of the 1800's. In 1830by the new cookstove but by new kitch-only 3 per cent of our people wereenware. In place of heavy copper andforeign-born, but in 1850 the figure wasiron utensils, tinware made its appear-10 per cent. The newcomers cameance. Tinware was so cheap that mostlargely from the British Isles and Ger-housewives could afford a good supplymany.of pots and pans.Wallpaper, once found only in theWhy immigrants came.homes of the well to do, now was madeBefore 1830 the United States of-cheaply in American factories. As a re-fered little to unskilled laborers andsult it was coming into common use.poor tenant farmers from Europe. JobsCarpets, too, were being made in Amer-were scarce and land was too expensive.ica at a price that middle-class peopleThen the picture changed. The boom ofcould afford. They were rapidly takingthe 1830's, with its feverish building of303canals and railroads and the growth ofImmigrants settle in the North.industry, created many jobs for theSince poor men found little chanceunskilled. Another cause of the rise into get ahead in the South, few immi-immigration was the Pre-emption Actgrants went there. Instead they arrivedof 1830, which encouraged poor menin northern ports and remained in theto settle on the public land in hopesNorth. Many immigrants, particularlyof being able to purchase it at somethe Irish, landed with empty pocketsfuture time (see p. 247). Americaand therefore stayed in the city wherelooked all the more attractive becausethey landed. However, many were hiredthe Industrial Revolution in Englandin gangs to dig canals or build railways.and Germany was robbing thousands ofAfter these jobs were finished the im-craftsmen of their means of livelihood.migrants generally went to some near-At the same time the packet lines wereby factory town to seek work. Germanmaking it easier to come to America.immigrants were more likely to arriveIn the 1840's a series of bad cropwith some cash. Many of these went toyears drove many English, Scotch, andBuffalo, Cleveland, Detroit, Cincinnati,German peasants to come here. IrelandSt. Louis, and Milwaukee. A still largersuffered a famine in 1846 in which onenumber bought land in rural areas.in every five of the people died. Toescape starvation nearly a million IrishImmigrants meet opposition.peasants came to the United States.As the foreign-born became moreUnsuccessful revolutions in Ger-numerous, they met with considerablemany and elsewhere in Europe in thehostility from the natives. Some groupsearly 1830's and again in 1848-49of immigrants were more resented thancaused still others to flee to America.others, depending mainly on whetherMany well-educated German liberalsthey were non-English, whether theyfled during these years. Among themwere willing to work for lower wageswere distinguished scientists and hun-than Americans, and whether they weredreds of professional musicians.Roman Catholic.IMMIGRANTS, arriving in New York. These newcomers had left behind them a continentplagued by wars, revolutions, and famine.

Most of the newcomers were un-ble they settled near their countrymeneducated and unskilled. Often theyand tried to preserve their own culture.had spent everything they had to getThe Germans, for example, formed Ger-to America and they had to accept anyman-speaking communities, establishedjob they could find. They frequentlytheir own schools, clubs, and churches,took work as strikebreakers, thus defeat-and published their own newspapers.ing the efforts of other wage earners toNew York City in 1851 had seven for-obtain higher pay and better workingeign-language papers-four German,conditions. The bitter feeling that re-one French, one Italian, and one Span-sulted sometimes led to street fights.ish. Although adult immigrants mightThe Irish were the chief target forcling to their old customs, their chil-attack. Not only were they very poor,dren rapidly became Americanized. Inbut they were of the Roman Catholicthe public schools these boys and girlsfaith. Most Americans in those dayslearned to speak English and to getdeeply distrusted the Roman Catholicalong with people of various back-Church. They knew little about it, forgrounds and religions. When they grewin 1815 only one in a hundred Amer-up and established homes of their own,icans was a member. In the 1830's,they considered themselves to be, andwhen Irish immigrants first began com-were accepted as, Americans.ing in any number, an anti-Catholicdrive started. A Boston mob destroyedFOR IDENTIFICATIONa convent school. In other cities, too,ClermontRobert FultonRoman Catholic churches and conventsJohn Deere"Know-Nothings"were sometimes damaged or destroyed.Cyrus W. FieldCyrus McCormickAnti-Catholic and antiforeign feel-John FitchSamuel F. B. MorseFlying CloudJohn Stevensing reached its height in the early1850's, when the so-called "Americanparty" was organized to oppose for-FOR EXPLANATION OR DEFINITIONeigners and Roman Catholics. Mostagriculturalpacket shipsrevolutionportage railwaypeople called it the "Know-Nothingcanal erastandard gaugeparty" because when asked about theirclipper shipsturnpikepurposes, members would reply, "Iknow nothing." The Know-Nothings de-FOR REVIEWmanded that immigration be restricted1. What contributions did Fitch and Ful-and that the naturalization period beton make to the development of the steam-changed from five years to twenty-oneboat?years. They tried to prevent the elec-tion of Roman Catholics to public of-2. (a) When did steamboats become im-fice. They also tried to discourage re-portant on the Mississippi? (b) Describecent immigrants from voting. The anti-steamboat transportation on the rivers ofthe West. (c) What were some of the eco-foreign movement did not attract thenomic and political effects of the rivermajority of Americans. It collapsedsteamboat?when the slavery issue took the centerof the stage.3. (a) When was the Erie Canal built?(b) What were the end points of the ca-Immigrants seek communitiesnal? (c) Outline the economic and politi-of their countrymen.cal effects of its construction.Immigrants struggling against prej-4. (a) Describe the beginnings of steamudice and insecurity tended to clinglocomotion. (b) Describe the early Balti-together for aid and comfort. If possi-more and Ohio Railroad. (c) What were305the production of ready-to-wear cloth-getting rich at their expense. They alsoing and shoes, made possible by theresented their dependence on Northerninvention of the sewing machine. An-factories and felt that they had to payother was the production of rubbertoo much for manufactured products.goods, made possible by Goodyear'sTo remedy these grievances, South-invention of the vulcanizing process.ern leaders had various proposals. OneMost of the increase in manufac-of the most common was to do awayturing took place in the North. Bywith the protective tariff in hopes of1860 the value of manufactured goodsencouraging foreign imports and thusproduced in the South was only 8 perlowering the price of manufacturedcent of the total for the nation. Theregoods. Under Democratic leadership,are several reasons why manufacturingCongress cut the tariff in 1846 andgrew so much faster in the North. Theagain in 1857. Another idea was to boy-North had more water power, a largercott Northern manufactures and usesupply of skilled labor, a greater num-homemade articles instead. A third pro-ber of experienced managers, and moreposal was to ship cotton and tobaccocapital available for investment in in-direct to Europe instead of throughdustry. The wealth of the South wasNew York. In addition, Southern jour-tied up in land and slaves. Further-nals urged parents to send their sonsmore, the ownership of a plantationand daughters to schools and collegescarried far more prestige in the Southin the South. There was also much talkthan the ownership of a business. Inabout secession from the Union. Fewthe North, on the other hand, menSoutherners thought that the abolitionwith capital to invest could win pres-of slavery might be a remedy.tige as merchants, builders, manufac-turers, and bankers.Slaveholding Is ConfinedPopulation increases faster in the North.to a Small ClassIn 1800 the North and the Southwere about equal in population. ByMost Southerners are not slaveowners.1860 the North had nineteen millionIn discussing the differences be-people, while the South had onlytween North and South, we shouldtwelve and a half million, includingkeep in mind that the great majorityabout four million slaves. Populationof Southerners did not own slaves. Itgrew more rapidly in the North be-is estimated that only 1 in 4 Southerncause more immigrants settled there,families in the 1850's had any slaves.establishing themselves in the growingHalf of the slaveowning families hadfactory towns. Few immigrants wentless than five slaves. Only about 11,000South, because they would have tofamilies had fifty or more slaves. Thecompete with slave labor.figures given in the census of 1860 areshown in the graph. Along with theThe South faces economic problems.concentration of slaveholding went aSoutherners realized that their sec-concentration of wealth. According totion was less prosperous than theone estimate a thousand families re-North. For this they blamed Northernceived close to half of all the income re-businessmen, Southerners sold their ex-ceived in the South.port crops-cotton and tobacco-toWhen Northerners spoke of theNorthern merchants, or consigned them"slave power" they had in mind theto Northern commission men. In eitherpolitical influence of the great planters.case they felt that Northerners wereThe small farmers, who far outnum-354

eral regulation could get a charter as acanned products for the army. Scores"national bank." A national bank couldof new woolen mills were built to makebuy government bonds, deposit themarmy blankets and cloth for uniforms.with the treasury at Washington, andThe manufacture of ready-to-wearissue bank notes up to 90 per cent ofclothing, then in its infancy, suddenlythe value of the bonds. By lending itsexpanded to produce items needed bynotes to borrowers, a national banksoldiers in carload lots. Shoe factoriescould earn double interest on itsequipped with power machinery sprangcapital.up to fill huge army orders for shoes.In 1865 Congress drove the notesThe production of farm machinery, likeof state banks out of circulation bythat of factory machinery, leapedplacing a 10 per cent tax on them. Aahead. The strong demand for farmyear later 80 per cent of all the banksproducts and the drain of men intohad accepted federal regulation andthe army led farmers to buy reapers,had obtained a national charter.mowers, and other farm machines asThe adoption of the Republicanfast as these could be turned out.program meant that the policies ofThe war stimulated every type ofHamilton had triumphed over those ofindustry in the North. Many new plantsJefferson. What the planters had fearedwere built to make machines for farmsfrom the Republicans had come to pass.and factories, railroad equipment,A revolution had taken place-a newships, and guns. The need for iron ledclass had come to power. Manufactur-to the opening of scores of iron mills.ers and bankers, instead of landowners,War also helped the mining industry,now controlled the reins of govern-for the expanding railroads and warment. They could stay in command asindustries called for large quantities oflong as they had the support of thecoal, iron, copper, and lubricating oil.Western farmer.The war stimulates Northern business.The Industrial RevolutionThe war brought a period of pros-Spreads West and Southperity to the North. Business boomedas manufacturing, transportation, andExpansion continues after the war.commerce expanded to meet the needsFor several years after the war,of the United States Army and Navy.Northern industry continued its rapidThe war placed heavy demands ongrowth. Thousands of businessmen whoNorthern railroads. Thousands of mileshad made fortunes from army contractsof new track were laid. Connectinginvested their wealth in new factories.links, double tracks, and bridges werePlenty of workers could be foundbuilt. War needs led Congress to voteamong the hundreds of thousands offederal aid for building a railroad to theimmigrants pouring into the countryPacific. Although work on the firsteach year. Also these people becametranscontinental railroad began duringcustomers for manufactured products.the war, it was not completed untilThe West was filling up at the same1869 (see p. 420).time, creating a demand for farm ma-To supply the United States Armychinery, manufactures of all kinds, andwith food, clothing, guns, and ammu-more railroads. The five years after Ap-nition, mass production was needed.pomattox saw more rails laid, moreThe first large packing houses werelumber sawed, more houses built, morebuilt to fill army orders for meat. Can-coal, iron, silver, and copper mined,ning factories were erected to producemore flour milled, and more cotton414

The Union Pacific built its rail-Great railroad systems are formed.road with the labor of Irish immigrantsThe combining of short rail linesand ex-soldiers of the Union and Con-into unified railroad systems was muchfederate armies. As the men crossed theneeded. For example, freight goingIndian-troubled prairies, they workedfrom New York to Chicago by rail hadwith their rifles in easy reach. To houseto be unloaded seventeen times, cartedthe workers, a huge construction campacross towns, and reloaded into othermoved forward as they advanced-atrains. Shortly after the war Commo-"city on wheels.' The engineer indore Vanderbilt bought the separatecharge has left us an interesting sum-lines on this route and combined themmary of the problems the railroadinto the New York Central Railroadbuilders faced:system. By modernizing the equipmentAt one time we were using at leastand track and by making it unneces-ten thousand animals, and most of the timesary to change trains, he cut in two thefrom eight to ten thousand laborers. Thehours required to travel from New Yorkbridge gangs always worked from five toto Chicago by rail. In creating the Newtwenty miles ahead of the track, and it wasYork Central, Vanderbilt did not hesi-seldom that the track waited for a bridge.tate to bribe legislatures and judges, toTo supply one mile of track with materialsell stock to the public for twice itsrequired about forty cars, as on the plainsvalue, and to take advantage of insideeverythinghad to be transportedinformation to win huge sums on thefrom the Missouri River.Our Indiantroubles commenced in 1864 and lastedstock exchange. He increased his per-sonal fortune from $10,000,000 to $104,-until the tracks joined at Promontory.At that time every mile of road had to be000,000 in twelve years. One writer hassurveyed, graded, tied, and bridged underdescribed his methods as those of amilitary protection."robber baron," yet he helped to openup a continent. What he did was soonThe two railroad lines met in Utahrepeated by other railroad leaders inon May 10, 1869, and the entire coun-all parts of the country.try celebrated the great event. As thelast spike was driven into place, the tel-Railroads improve their service.egraph carried the strokes to the majorBetween 1860 and 1900 the rail-cities of the country. A wonderful featroads became more efficient, safe, andof engineering had been accomplished.comfortable. Steel rails, introduced in1863, gradually replaced iron rails. IronOther Far Western lines are built.bridges supplanted wooden ones, andThe first railroad line to the Pa-in turn were rebuilt with steel. By 1886cific was hardly finished before otherspractically all railroads had changed towere started. Within fifteen years sevena standard gauge, or width, of track,different lines had entered the Rockies,(4 feet, 8/2 inches). After this change aand three-the Southern Pacific, therailroad car owned by one companyNorthern Pacific, and the Santa Fe-could run on the tracks of any otherhad reached the coast. All but one (thecompany.Great Northern) received land grantsThe Westinghouse air brake camefrom the federal government of a valueinto use in the 1870's. Brakemen nothat was often more than the cost oflonger had to apply the brakes to eachconstruction. In addition the railroadscar separately, for the new device setasked for, and received, lavish gifts ofthe brakes on every car at once. Aboutmoney or land from the states, towns,the same time interlocking block signalsand counties which they crossed.were introduced. The automatic car420better working conditions, rather thaninto idealistic schemes for making oversociety. He urged each union to buildup a large reserve fund from dues, soit would not go to pieces in case of astrike or a depression. Under Gompers'guidance the Federation gradually wonimportant gains for skilled workers.Labor unions face many obstacles.Throughout the nineteenth cen-tury most workers did not belong to aunion. Enormous difficulties stood inthe way of labor organizations.1. Scarcity of able leaders. Thekind of men who make effective lead-THE SHOEMAKERS STRIKE in Lynn, Massachu-ers of labor unions could usually earnsetts, in 1860. Eight hundred women, pre-far more by going into business forceded by the city guards and a band, led thethemselves or by working up into anworkmen's protest march through the snow.executive position in industry. Also, aslong as free land could be had, theFederation of Labor was Samuel Gom-bolder and more capable workmen-pers. His father, a London cigar maker,the possible leaders-were apt to gocame to this country with his family inwest and become farmers, leaving other1863. Samuel went to work in his fa-workmen leaderless.ther's trade at the age of thirteen and2. Public opposition. Most peoplesoon became active in the cigar makers'outside the wage-earner class were hos-union. He had no schooling, but wastile to unions. During a strike a largeeager to learn. In the cigar factory hesection of the public regularly sidedfound a chance to develop his mindwith the employer, believing that hethrough reading and discussion. Hehad the right to hire and fire workerswrote long afterwards:as he chose and to offer whatever wagesIt was the custom of the cigar makershe chose. Most people, including manyto chip in to create a fund for purchasingwage earners, opposed the union de-papers, magazines, and books. Then whilemand for the closed shop-that is, athe rest worked, one of our membersshop in which only union members arewould read to us for perhaps an hour at apermitted to work.time, sometimes longer. In order that the3. Immigration. There was a con-reader might not be the loser financially,stant flood of immigrants eager for jobseach one of the other men in the shop gavehim a definite number of cigars. I had aand willing to work for any wages. Im-habit of saving any interesting magazinemigrants were so poor that they couldor newspaper articles to read to my shop-not refuse jobs as strikebreakers. Then,

mates. Others did the same.too, they could not be easily organizedbecause of language difficulties, reli-Gompers took an active part in or-gious differences, and the grudges feltganizing the A.F. of L. and served asby some nationalities toward others.president until his death in 1924. He4. Race prejudice. The unfriendlyadvised the Federation's member un-attitude of white workers toward Ne-ions to put all their efforts into raisinggro workers weakened the labor move-wages, shortening hours, and gettingment. Skilled white workers generally458A child working in a cotton mill at the turn of the centurylabor conditions in mines, laundries,Laws attempting to limit the work-and sweatshops. Others required safetyday of men did not succeed. The courtsdevices on power saws and other dan-held that such laws were unconstitu-gerous machinery. Some regulatedtional because they interfered with thehousing. Such laws were often poorlyindividual's freedom of contract. Aslate as 1900, 70 per cent of industrialenforced, yet they were signs of a newattitude toward labor. They preparedworkers labored sixty or more hoursthe way for stronger legislation in theeach week.twentieth century.Labor wins curbs on immigration.The states also made a little prog-ress in protecting women and childrenBy 1880 nearly a third of a mil-in industry. By 1900 twelve states lim-lion immigrants came here every year.ited the hours of women workers. FourWithin a few years the figure rose tostates prohibited the employment ofnearly a million. The United States, itwomen at night. Twenty states pro-was thought, had room for all whothe of young chil-wished to come. Steamship companieshibited night. employment early lawsdren at Some of thesesent agents all over Europe to persuadenow seem very timid. For instance, onestate forbade the employment at nightrailroad companies, with land to sell,people to come to America. Westerndid the same thing. Large corporationsof girls under 12 years of age. The realevils of child labor had scarcely beenmade contracts with laborers whowished to come to America. The cor-touched.465For some twenty-five years these2. Machinery for driving wells and"cattle barons" ruled the land of thepumping water was now available. Inblue sky and the prairie grass. Mean-the East farmers could get water fromwhile, small farmers, or "nesters," be-streams, springs, or shallow wells. Ongan to settle along the streams onthe plains few streams or springs ranhomesteads given them by the federalall the year round; farmers had to drivegovernment. The enraged stockmendeep wells and to pump undergroundtore down the homesteaders' fences,water to the surface. When the machin-threatened violence, and sometimesery for this was developed and turnedkilled those who insisted on staying.out cheaply by mass production afterThe homesteaders, however, had thethe war, people could live even in thefederal government behind them. Pres-drier parts of the plains. Well diggersident Cleveland ordered the stockmen'straveled through the region drillingillegal fences cut down and the grass-wells for stockmen and farmers. Oncelands thrown open for settlement.water was found, a windmill was putThis brought the "cattle frontier" toup to pump the water to the surfacean end.where it could be used.By 1890 most of the cattlemen and3. Barbed wire fencing was intro-sheepmen had moved onto lands tooduced. On the plains the lack of ma-dry for any use but pasture. They dugterials for building fences was a seriouswells and erected windmills to provideobstacle to farmers. Trees were scarce,water for themselves and their stock.and there were no rocks. Smooth wireThey bought and fenced grazing lands.strung on posts did not hold livestock.The problem was solved by the inven-Farmers Settle the Great Plainstion of barbed wire. Put on the marketin 1874, it quickly came into wide use.The Great Plains attract farmers.It spelled the doom of the open range,Within a single generation afterfor farmers could now fence in theirthe War between North and Southcrops and defy the stockmen.farmers flocked into the Great Plains.4. A network of railroads wasThey settled most of the land suitedbuilt. More than anything else, thefor crop growing, as well as much thatrailroads speeded settlement of thewas not. For several reasons farmersWest. Once a line was built, prospec-were now willing to settle in this re-tive settlers knew they could get theirgion.crops to market. Moreover, the pioneer1. Desirable land in other sectionscould ride to his new land in compara-had already been occupied and couldtive comfort and safety instead of risk-be bought only for a good price. Oning life and limb going there by wagon.the Great Plains the best land was $1.25Finally, the railroads attracted settlersan acre; poorer land could be obtainedby extensive advertising.free from the government. The Home-stead Act of 1862 granted 160 acresRailroads advertise for settlers.free to a man or woman who wouldMost of the railroads in the Westlive on it and cultivate it for five years.had received land grants along theirSettlers eagerly set out their claims.right of way. The railroads wished toLater it was realized that a farm of 160sell these lands to settlers in order toacres was much too small to support again future business. They publishedfamily on the semiarid land of themaps and pamphlets which describedGreat Plains, but this fact was nottheir territory in glowing terms. Theyknown at the time.sold tickets at bargain rates to those go-474

The Populists draw up a platform.11. Prohibition of the use of private ar-The platform adopted at the Oma-mies in labor disputes12. The direct election of senatorsha Convention has become a famous13. A single term for President and Vice-historical document. Its preamble blast-Presidented both the major parties and painted a14. Adoption of the secret ballotdismal picture of the country.In the East the Populist platformWe meet in the midst of a nationwas regarded as extremely radical. Yetbrought to the verge of moral, political,within a generation most of the planksand material ruin. Corruption dominateswere put into effect. This illustrates thethe ballot box, the legislature, the Con-gress, and touches even the ermine of thechief function of minor parties in ourbench.The newspapers are largelypolitical system-to arouse interest insubsidized and muzzled; public opinionproposed reforms.silenced; business prostrated; our homescovered with mortgages; labor impover-Cleveland is elected again.ished; and the land concentrating in theIn their 1892 convention the Re-hands of the capitalist. The urban work-publicans nominated President Harri-men are denied the right to organize forson on the first ballot. The Democratsself-protection; imported pauperized laborput up former President Grover Cleve-beats down their wages; a hireling stand-land. The tariff was the main issue ofing army, unrecognized by our laws, isestablished to shoot them downthe campaign. The violent strike in thesteelworks at Homestead that summerThe fruits of the toil of millions are bold-ly stolen to build up colossal fortunes for(p. 461) cast doubt on the Republicana few.claim that a high tariff helped theworkingman. Steel was a highly pro-The new party, the preamble stated,tected industry, yet steelworkers hadsought to restore the government to thevery poor labor conditions."plain people." The platform summar-The Populists made a good show-ized the demands of farmers and wageing, polling over a million votes. Theyearners:captured the 22 electoral votes of Colo-rado, Idaho, Kansas, and Nevada, and1. A flexible currency system, controlledthey elected several men to Congress.by the government, not the banksThe Populist movement so split the2. An increase in the amount of moneyWestern Republicans that the Demo-in circulationcrats easily won the election. For the3. Government loans at 2 per cent onfirst time since 1860 Democrats con-nonperishable farm products and onfarm real estatetrolled both houses of Congress as well4. A graduated income taxas the Presidency.5. Public ownership and operation ofrailroads, telegraphs, and telephonesA severe depression strikes.6. A reduction of the tariffDuring the next four years vari-7. Postal savings banksous events deepened the popular un-8. Prohibition of land ownership byrest. Cleveland was hardly in the Whitealiens and large speculatorsHouse when the country found itself9. Restriction of immigrationin the grip of the panic of 1893-prob-10. The eight-hour day for governmentaland industrial workersably the worst it had yet suffered. Busi-ness firms crashed, banks failed, fac-1 This phrase refers to the armed guardstories shut down, mortgages were fore-used by the Carnegie Company to break theclosed. Thousands of unemployedHomestead strike (see p. 461)walked the streets looking for jobs that502

dom. Led by the daring Emilio Agui-were too weak to protect themselvesnaldo, Filipino guerrillas for monthswithout American help. Still othersresisted a force of 60,000 Americans.pointed out that Philippine prosperityWith the capture of Aguinaldo in 1901,depended on free trade with the Unitedthe revolt came to an end.States, which would be lost if the Phil-ippines were independent. These argu-Civil government is organized.ments had such weight that PresidentsIn 1901 military control of the Phil-Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover firmlyippines ended. A commission of fiveopposed setting any date for giving theAmericans, headed by Judge Williamislands their independence. Meanwhile,Howard Taft, was given the task ofmany Filipino leaders insisted that thesetting up a civil government. Presi-islands had a stable government anddent McKinley told the commission toshould be set free.be guided in all matters by the bestBeginning in 1929 new argumentsinterests of the native people. The com-in favor of independence were heardmission carried out its work with greatin the United States. (1) Possession oftact and skill.the islands had not increased our tradeThe next year Congress passed thewith China and other parts of the FarPhilippine Act. Under it the peopleEast. (2) The cost of administering,were made "citizens of the Philippinefortifying, and defending the islandsIslands," with most of the rights ofwas a heavy expense. (3) Military andAmerican citizens except the right ofnaval experts pointed out that in casetrial by jury. Beginning in 1907 theof war in the Pacific the defense of theFilipinos were given a legislature. TheyPhilippines would be difficult. If weelected the lower house, while a com-had to place a fleet in Philippine wa-mission appointed by the Presidentters, we would weaken the defense ofacted as the upper house. By 1913 Fili-Hawaii, our west coast, and the Canalpinos held a majority of places on theZone. (4) Many Filipinos were comingcommission.to California. Labor unions wished toput an end to this immigration by mak-The Jones Act promises independence.ing the Philippine Islands foreign ter-Gradually the United States wasritory. (5) Philippine sugar, tobacco,preparing the Filipinos for independ-and coconut oil competed with Ameri-ence. In 1916 the Democratic majoritycan products, yet Congress felt an ob-in Congress pushed through the Jonesligation to admit Philippine importsAct. It provided a bill of rights forduty-free. If the Philippines were a for-Filipinos. It authorized the Filipinos toeign country, Congress would be moreelect both houses of their legislature.likely to shut out their products. TheseThe Jones Act also declared that it wasarguments could be summed up bythe purpose of the United States tosaying that imperialism in the Philip-recognize the independence of the Phil-pines did not pay. There was also aippines, "as soon as a stable govern-growing belief that we had finished ourment can be established."task of preparing the Filipinos for self-The Republicans, who returned togovernment and that we had no right topower in 1920, thought that the grant-refuse them their freedom.ing of independence should be post-poned. Some felt that the islands wereThe Philippines become free.necessary to the United States as aIn 1934 Congress passed an actcommercial base in the Far East.providing that the Philippines shouldOthers argued that the Philippinesbecome independent on July 4, 1946.574Under the American flag PuertoNon-self-governing territories.Rico made striking advances in health,education, transportation, and irriga-In addition to territories that aretion. In the first fifty years the deathfully self-governing, the United Statesrate was cut in half, which resulted inhas a few other small possessions.a rapid growth of population. IlliteracyAmong these are the Canal Zone,dropped from 77 per cent in 1898 toAmerican Samoa, Guam, and the Virgin25 per cent in 1950. The Spanish cul-Islands. We bought the Virgin Islandsture and traditions have been retained,from Denmark in 1917 because webut all Puerto Rican school childrenfeared that Germany might take themmust learn English as well as Spanish.and endanger the Panama Canal. SinceIn recent years Puerto Rican lead-1927 the people of the Virgin Islandsers have pushed a program of economichave been citizens of the United States.development. By offering low taxes andThey are largely self-governing. Incheap labor they have attracted fac-1950 the people of Guam becametories from the United States. They areAmerican citizens and received limitedalso trying to make the island a popu-self-government. Besides giving thelar vacation spot for American tourists.people of our possessions as much voiceTheir efforts have gradually createdin their government as is practicable,more jobs, but population continues toCongress has spent money generouslygrow faster than the opportunities for

to improve their welfare. Thus theemployment. That is why thousands ofUnited States has tried to be a wisePuerto Ricans come to the United Statestrustee and not an exploiter of depend-each year to look for work.ent areas.FOR IDENTIFICATION3. What did most Americans think ofEmilio AguinaldoPago PagoSeward's plan to buy the Virgin Islands,Admiral CerveraJoseph Pulitzerthe Dominican Republic, and Alaska?Commodore GeorgeManuel QuezonDeweySantiago4. Show that Alaska was well worth theWilliam RandolphWilliam Sewardprice paid for it.HearstGeneral William5. How did the United States obtain theJones ActShafterManila BayTeller ResolutionMidway Islands? Of what use are they?Midway IslandsVirgin Islands6. Why did we take control of Pago PagoFOR EXPLANATION OR DEFINITIONin Samoa?anti-imperialistsjoint resolution7. How and when did Americans becomecommonwealthmanifest destinyinterested in the Hawaiian Islands?concentration camps"Remember the Maine"imperialism"Rough Riders"8. Why was President Cleveland reluc-incorporated territory spheres of influencetant to annex Hawaii? How and when didinsular casesTeller Resolutionthe United States obtain control of Hawaii?jingo pressunincorporated territory9. Why did American planters once wantFOR REVIEWthe United States to get control of Cuba?1. Explain the point of view that indus-trialization tends to produce imperialism.10. (a) What conditions aroused Ameri-can sympathy for the Cubans in 1896? (b)2. How and when did the United StatesWhat reply did Spain make to McKinley'sbecome interested in overseas possessions?protest against conditions in Cuba?579Our Relations with Japana "gentlemen's agreement," by which itBecome Less Friendlypromised to keep laborers from emi-grating to the mainland of the UnitedWe sign a pact with Japan.States. Still the Californians were notThe United States and Japan hadsatisfied. In 1913 they passed a law tobeen friends ever since Commodoreprevent all Orientals from buying farmsPerry's visit there in 1854 (see p. 357).or leasing them for more than threeAfter the Russo-Japanese War, how-years. A few other states passed similarever, tension developed. The Unitedlaws. The federal government could notStates took note of Japan's growinginterfere, although these laws createdstrength. American leaders feared thatbitter feelings in Japan.Japan meant to extend its influence inthe Far East, especially in China. Sensa-Japan attempts new conquests.tional journalists here and in EuropeSince 1902 Japan had been a mili-harped on the "yellow peril"- the dan-tary ally of Great Britain. When Brit-ger which they said existed that theain went to war with Germany in 1914,yellow race would overwhelm the whiteJapan also declared war. Japan seizedrace.the peninsula of Shantung, which hadTo ease the tension, the Root-been a German sphere of influence inTakahira Agreement was signed atChina. Japan also took from GermanyWashington (1908). Both Japan andthe Caroline, Marianas, and Marshallthe United States agreed to respectislands in the South Pacific. There wereeach other's possessions in the Pacific,about 1400 of these little islands, withto uphold the Open Door in China, anda total area of some 830 square miles.to support China's independence andA Japanese admiral called them "nat-territorial integrity. The United Statesural aircraft carriers." (They provedrecognized that Japan had special in-useful to Japan in her attempt to winterests in Manchuria and left it free tocontrol of the Pacific in the 1940's.)annex Korea.In 1915 Japan insisted that Chinaagree to twenty-one demands. TheseImmigration leads to bitterness.were intended to turn all China into aJapanese immigration to the Pa-Japanese sphere of influence. Thecific coast states was a source of frictionUnited States protested, and Chinabetween our country and Japan. Intook courage to resist. Japan then post-1906 the San Francisco Board of Edu-poned most of the demands "for furthercation expressed the attitude of manydiscussion." Once again the UnitedCalifornians toward the Japanese byStates had shown a desire to protect thebarring Japanese pupils from the pub-independence of China.lic schools. When the Japanese govern-ment protested, President Rooseveltpersuaded the school board to changeThe United States Digsits rule. Meanwhile, Californians werea Canal at Panamademanding that Japanese immigrantsbe excluded from the United States.Early talk of a canal.Chinese immigrants had been ex-From the time when Balboacluded since 1882.) T.R. hoped to keepcrossed the Isthmus of Panama and dis-Congress from passing an exclusioncovered the Pacific Ocean (1513), menact, since it would be sure to hurt thedreamed of digging a canal across thispride of a sensitive nation. In 1907 henarrow strip of land. The United Statesgot the Japanese government to makefirst showed its interest in such a canal583

Allied war relief. On the other hand,stroy every enemy ship they found.there were nearly nine million Ameri-Neutral ships might be sunk by mis-cans of German birth or parentage,take, and they were warned to keepand they tended to support their fa-out. The Germans also stated that theytherland. In addition, many Americansmight be unable to provide for theof Irish descent were ready to cheersafety of crew and passengers on de-any foe of their ancient enemy, thestroyed vessels.British.Under the rules of internationalBoth sides tried to influence Amer-law as accepted up to that time, anyican opinion by means of propaganda.merchant ship could be stopped by aThe Allies were far more effective inwarship belonging to a nation at war.swaying Americans than were the Cen-If found to be carrying contraband, thetral Powers. This was partly due tomerchant ship could be seized andBritish control of the cables which car-taken to port, or it could be sunk.ried news from Europe. Even more im-Should the captain of the warship de-portant was the widespread sympathycide to sink the merchant ship, how-here with the Allied cause. Propagandaever, he must first provide for the safetysucceeds best when people want to be-of its passengers and crew. Germanylieve it.insisted that these old laws of "visitThe British interfere with our trade.and search" did not apply to the sub-marine. If it came to the surface nearAt the start of the war, the Britisha hostile vessel, it might be rammeddrove enemy ships from the seas andor sunk by a shell. By the submarine'sdeclared a blockade of Germany. Thevery nature, it had to torpedo a hostileAllies published a list of contrabandship without warning. Furthermore,articles which neutrals must not sendsaid Germany, it could not stop to saveto the enemy. In addition to munitions,the lives of those on board.the list included many things useful inFrom the start, the people of themodern war but not previously con-United States were appalled by thesidered contraband, such as leather,savagery of submarine warfare. It wascotton, wool, rubber, chemicals, andbrought home to them when severaleven foodstuffs. To get around theAmericans were drowned in the sinkingblockade American shippers sent car-of British freighters in the war zone.goes to neutral countries on Germany'sThen came an event which shockedborders. The goods were then re-the entire civilized world. On May 7,shipped to Germany. British ships1915, the British liner Lusitania wastherefore began to halt American shipstorpedoed off the Irish coast. The greatbound for Europe, take them into port,ship sank in eighteen minutes. Of theand search them for contraband. Ournearly two thousand persons on board,State Department sent note after notesome twelve hundred were drowned,of protest to Great Britain, claim-among them over one hundred Amer-ing that our neutral rights were beingicans. A wave of horror and angerviolated. Yet the British did not stop.swept the United States. In the Eastmany voices urged a declaration of war.German submarine warfare.President Wilson did not listen toGermany's answer to the blockadethose who called for war. Instead hewas the use of the submarine. The Ger-sent a series of sharp notes to Germany.mans proclaimed that the watersHe protested against the sinking of pas-around the British Isles were a warsenger ships and asked that no mer-zone in which submarines would de-chant ship be sunk without warning.601ported under a wartime act which gaveAt that time the Klan boasted that itthe Secretary of Labor power to de-controlled ten state governments.port alien radicals without a court trial.In 1928 the Klan campaignedState governments also took actionagainst the Democratic candidate forto suppress radicals. Many states passedPresident, Alfred E. Smith, because oflaws that forbade writing or speakinghis religion. The Klan helped defeatwords that might incite to violence inhim. Soon after, a congressional investi-a labor dispute or might lead to thegation exposed the scandalous graftingoverthrow of the government. The ef-of Klan officials. Instead of a crusade,fect was to outlaw membership in radi-the movement was shown to be a "rack-cal organizations. In certain states mereet" for collecting initiation fees andpossession of radical literature could bedues and for diverting public fundspunished. Years later the Supremeinto the pockets of Klan leaders. WhenCourt nullified some of these laws be-these facts came out, the Klan lost mostcause they went too far in limiting theof its influence.right of free speech, free press, andfree assembly.Immigration is drastically cut.The "red scare" was at its heightAnother sign of the swing towardbetween 1919 and 1921. It led to manynationalism was the change in our im-acts of intolerance. For instance inmigration policy. In the decade before1920, when the New York State legis-the war the United States received anlature opened, five members were ex-average of a million immigrants a year.pelled simply because they were So-After the war the flood of immigrationcialists. The state bar association, ledbegan again. Labor unions had long

by Charles Evans Hughes, protestedbeen asking Congress to curb immigra-in vain that the action was not a prop-tion. Now the American Legion ander way to defend democracy. Within aother patriotic societies, claiming thatfew years the fear of revolution diedit was difficult to "Americanize" sodown. Liberals could again speak free-many newcomers, asked Congress toly, and in many places radicals couldact. For the first time, employers toovoice their ideas without risk.favored restrictions. Employers nowhad an ample supply of workers. Be-A new Ku Klux Klan sows discord.sides, they thought that immigrantsAn organization taking the title ofoften had radical ideas which led to"Ku Klux Klan" sprang up after the warlabor unrest. Thus patriotic societies,to fight so-called "un-American ideas."employers, and labor unions joined inDespite its name, the organization wasasking for a new immigration law.more like the Know-Nothings of theCongress had already taken one1850's than the Klan of Reconstructionstep to reduce immigration when itdays. It directed its activities mainlyvoted in 1917 to require immigrants toagainst foreigners, radicals, Romanpass a literacy test. The law was passedCatholics, Jews, and Negroes. Using theover President Wilson's veto. In 1921flaming cross, tar and feathers, and thethe Emergency Quota Act was adopted.whip, white-hooded Klansmen spreadIt cut the number of immigrants to beterror over a large part of rural Amer-admitted from a given country in oneica. Where the Klan was strong, news-year to 3 per cent of the number ofpapers, politicians, and even businessforeign-borr from that country livingand professional men feared to speakin the United States in 1910. The John-against it. In 1925, at its peak, itson Act of 1924 made a further cut inclaimed to have five million members.immigration. It set up temporary quotas633millionsIMMIGRATION SINCE 190098765432101901-19101911-19201921-19301931-19401941-19501951-1957equal to 2 per cent of the number ofFrench-Canadian stock. Adding colo-foreign-born from a given country liv-nial and "old immigrant" figures to-ing here in 1890. Selection of the dategether, 85 per cent of our total white1890 favored immigrants from the Brit-population had its origin in the Britishish Isles, Germany, and the Scandi-Isles, Germany, Holland, and the Scan-navian countries (the so-called "olddinavian countries. The new quotasimmigrants"), who made up the ma-based on national origins went intojority of our immigrants until close toeffect in 1929.1890. Thus the Johnson Act discrimi-The Johnson Act provided that im-nated against the so-called "new immi-migrants from the Western Hemispheregrants" from eastern and southern Eu-should be admitted without a quota.rope, where living standards were low-As the number of immigrants from Eu-er and opportunities for education wererope fell, more people came here frommore limited.nonquota regions-Canada, Latin Amer-Congress included a "nationalica, Puerto Rico, Hawaii, and the Phil-origins" clause in the Johnson Act. Itippines. The greatest rise was in immi-stated that after the Census Bureaugration from Mexico.found out the national origins of ourAlthough President Coolidge andpopulation, permanent quotas shouldSecretary of State Hughes objected, thebe worked out. The total number ofJohnson Act excluded Japanese andquota immigrants who could be ad-other Asiatics entirely. The proud Jap-mitted in any year was set at 150,000.anese people regarded their exclusionThe minimum quota for any countryas an insult. They thought Congressoutside of Asia was to be one hundredshould have given Japan a quota of atpersons a year.least a hundred. In their resentment,After much study the Census Bu-many Japanese threw their support toreau estimated that our white popula-a military party which was demandingtion at that time consisted of 50 pera policy of "Asia for the Asiatics." Thiscent colonial stock, 35 per cent of "oldparty eventually tried to drive theimmigrant" stock, 14 per cent of "newUnited States out of the Far East andimmigrant" stock, and 1 per cent ofso helped bring us into World War II.634

KU KLUX KLAN initiation in New Jersey. The rebirth of this organization struck a severe blowat social reform.Congress rebuffs the new President.Congress also rebuffed the Presi-Ever since the war Congress haddent by turning down his recommenda-shown a tendency to ignore requeststion for selling the federal govern-and suggestions from the White House.ment's property at Muscle Shoals, Ala-Neither Harding nor Coolidge tried tobama, to private interests. This prop-exert strong presidential leadership.erty consisted of two nitrates plants andCoolidge showed during his first yeara hydroelectric plant built during thein office that, except for an occasionalwar and now standing idle. Althoughveto, he would let Congress have itsPresidents Harding, Coolidge, andown way. Thus it is not surprising thatHoover each in turn urged the sale ofwhen Congress passed an immigrationMuscle Shoals, the Senate refused to goact in 1924, it disregarded the Presi-along (see p. 693).dent's advice and excluded Japaneseimmigrants (see p. 634).Coolidge and Dawes are nominated.The same year Congress passedWhen the Republican conventionthe World War Adjusted Compensa-met in 1924, Coolidge easily won thetion Act over the President's veto. Thenomination for President. Charles G.measure provided a bonus to veteransDawes, Director of the Budget, wasof the World War at the rate of $1.25nominated for Vice-President. Theira day for overseas service and $1.00 aplatform called for rigid economy, fur-day for service in the United States.ther reduction of taxes, restriction ofThe bonus was in the form of an en-immigration, collection of war debtsdowment policy to mature in twentyfrom the Allies, and membership in thevears.World Court.655signed the Kellogg-Briand Pact shouldhold a conference to decide on ways toin Germany by promising to restorethat nation's prosperity, its empire, andenforce it. Roosevelt urged acceptanceof the British plan.its national pride. His Nazi party wonthe election early in 1933 and soonFor months Germany had been se-destroyed representative government.cretly and rapidly rearming. In Octo-From then on Hitler ruled with an ironber, 1933, Hitler announced that Ger-hand. He and his henchmen laid plansmany was withdrawing both from theto bring most of the world under theirDisarmament Conference and from thecontrol.League. The announcement frightenedJapan was another discontentedGermany's neighbors. Since further talkof disarmament was useless, the con-nation. Like Italy, its homeland wassmall and had few natural resources.ference broke up.Without foreign markets' it could notbuy needed raw materials and food-Germany, Italy, and Japanstuffs. Yet many countries had put upDefy the League of Nationstrade barriers which kept out JapaneseFascism threatens world peace.goods. Japan had other grievances aswell. The United States had blockedThe first World War left EuropeJapan's efforts to gain control of Chinawith a bitter heritage of poverty and(see p. 583). Moreover, the exclusion ofunrest. In several countries the peopleJapanese immigrants from the Unitedwere ready to follow a strong man whoStates in 1924 (see p. 634) was a severepromised jobs and bread, especially ifblow to Japanese pride. The fact thathe also promised to gain the nationa few of our states barred Japanese-new territory and prestige. Thus BenitoAmericans from owning land alsoMussolini and his black-shirted Fascistscaused bitterness (see p. 583). The mil-were able to seize control of Italy initary party in Japan harped on these1922. Mussolini made himself an abso-affronts to their country's dignity andlute dictator. He built up Italy's armyattacked liberal leaders friendly to theand navy and boasted that he wouldWest. In 1932 the military party seizedrevive the glories of the ancient Romanpower. It hoped to make Japan theEmpire. Similarly, Hitler rose to powerdominant nation of the Far East.MUSSOLINI and HITLER reviewing German troopsERISCHEThe task of holding prices andsion of the rights of citizens of thewages down was difficult. Farmers, whoUnited States by their own governmenthad suffered so long from low prices,that has thus far occurred in the his-insisted that farm prices should betory of our nation." Nearly all theallowed to rise, and Congress listenedNisei were released from camp beforeto their pleas. As food prices went up,the war ended. Thousands of themworkers demanded higher wages. Man-fought bravely for the United States.ufacturers and storekeepers in turnAfter the war all were allowed to re-complained that they must get higherturn to their homes.prices to cover the increased cost ofApart from the internment of thedoing business. By the end of the warJapanese, there was less interferencethe cost of living had risen 31 per centwith civil liberties than in World Warabove the 1939 level. Yet it would cer-I. Conscientious objectors were treatedtainly have risen much more had pricesmore tolerantly than in the earlierand wages not been regulated.struggle. There was no interferencewith freedom of the press; newspapersPreventing disloyal activities.adopted voluntary censorship and didOrganizations of Nazis and Nazinot print news helpful to the enemy.sympathizers, such as the German-American Bund and the Silver Shirts,Germany Is Defeatedhad been active in the United Statesbefore the war. They continued theirThe Joint Chiefs of Staff decideagitation after we entered the war un-our strategy.til their leaders were rounded up andThe military aspects of our warimprisoned. The Alien Registration Act,effort were directed by the Joint Chiefswhich Congress passed in 1940, helpedof Staff (JCS). The chairman was Ad-the FBI to watch suspicious aliens. Inmiral William D. Leahy, the personalcompliance with the act, almost fiverepresentative of the President as Com-million noncitizens residing in themander in Chief of the Armed Forces.United States were fingerprinted.The others were General George C.At the beginning of the war, manyMarshall, Army Chief of Staff; General

Americans in the Far West feared Japa-Henry H. Arnold, Chief of the Airnese attacks by air and by sea. TheyForce; and Admiral Ernest J. King,also feared that Japanese-Americans,Chief of Naval Operations. All weremost of whom lived in the Pacific states,men of high ability and long experi-might be disloyal to the United States.ence. All had spent a lifetime in theTo prevent race riots and as a precau-armed services. The President kept intion against possible disloyalty, thedaily touch with the JCS. His excellentWar Department persuaded the Presi-knowledge of military strategy enableddent to order all Japanese-Americans inhim to appreciate the advice of thisthe Pacific states removed to internmentdevoted group of men.camps. Nearly two thirds of the 112,000persons thus moved were American-"Stop Hitler first."born. There was no evidence that theAfter the treacherous Japanese at-SNisei (American-born Japanese) weretack, millions of Americans wanted re-1disloyal, and liberals condemned theirvenge against Japan. The President,Sremoval as unnecessary and unjust. Oneguided by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, de-rauthority on constitutional law wrotecided we must halt Hitler first. If in-that the relocation of the Japanesestead we threw most of our strengthAmericans was "the most drastic inva-against Japan, Hitler might subdue733provision for federal aid to education;most notable achievements of the ad-a universal military training program;ministration was the improvement ofan improved farm support program;the social security system. Old age andand a system of national health insur-survivors' benefits were increased. Anance. Congress also showed its inde-additional ten million workers werependence by overriding the President'smade eligible for old age and survivors'veto of the new McCarran-Walter Im-insurance. The new act also providedmigration Act and of the Internal Se-assistance to needy persons who arecurity Act of 1950.totally and permanently disabled.Early in 1952 President TrumanScandals are revealed.announced that he would not be a can-President Truman was troubleddidate for re-election. The twenty-yearby the unearthing of scandals whichperiod of Democratic control came totouched some members of his admin-an end on January 20, 1953.istration. The evidence revealed thatbusinessmen often paid a fee of 5 percent to individuals claiming to be ableto get them government contracts orother favors. Corruption came to lightin the granting of loans by the Recon-struction Finance Corporation. Investi-gation also revealed that a few officialsin the Internal Revenue Bureau wereguilty of wrongdoing in the handlingof income tax cases.The Fair Deal wins some success.Despite these setbacks, Fair Dealaccomplishments were substantial. Theminimum wage rate set by the FairSENATOR ESTES KEFAUVER of Tennessee won aLabor Standards Act of 1938 at fortynational reputation as head of a special Sen-cents an hour was raised to seventy-ate committee to investigate crime in inter-five cents. Federal rent controls werestate commerce.retained in modified form; the Recipro-cal Trade Agreement program was con-Americans Become Concernedtinued. Urged on by the President,over CommunismCongress corrected weaknesses in theDisplaced Persons Act and doubled theEver since the 1917 Bolsheviknumber of persons to be admitted. Al-(Communist) Revolution in Russiathough the President's national healthmany Americans have feared that com-insurance program went down to de-munism would spread. In the 1920'sfeat, Congress did appropriate fundsand 1930's, through their state and cityfor medical research, a National Sci-governments, they took various steps toence Foundation, and grants-in-aid torestrict Communists and their activities.the states for hospital construction.After World War II fear of communismCongress also provided subsidies forbecame more intense. Congress and thelow-rent public housing. To encouragestate legislatures placed new curbs onthe private construction of houses, Con-Communists and their sympathizers.gress authorized federal loans and fed-Communism was attacked as the enemyeral mortgage insurance. One of theof democracy, religion, and liberty.765

available to nearby states. Finally inof 45,000 housing units through 1956.1954 Congress authorized the construc-On these and other welfare measurestion of the Seaway jointly by themost of the argument in Congress hadUnited States and Canada.to do with the amount of money to beappropriated, not with the basic prin-TVA is the subject of political controversy.ciple of whether there should be fed-From the beginning TVA has beeneral legislation in these fields.the subject of controversy betweenCongress approved a gigantic ap-those who support government-spon-propriation for the construction of high-sored power projects and those who be-ways, but failed to appropriate fundslieve that the government should notto assist the states to build sorely need-compete with private power companies.ed schools. The Federal Highway ActIn 1954 the question arose as to wheth-of 1956 provided for the construction,er a steam-generated electric powerduring the next thirteen years, of a su-plant should be built by TVA withperhighway network. The network ismoney appropriated by Congress, orexpected to connect most cities with awhether it should be built by privatepopulation of 50,000 or more. The fed-companies with the aid of a federaleral government will pay 90 per cent ofloan. In spite of strong Democraticthe cost. To help pay for the programcriticism the Eisenhower administra-the federal gasoline tax was increased.tion awarded a contract-known as theIn 1952, Congress had passed theDixon-Yates contract-to private com-McCarran-Walter Immigration Actpanies to build a steam plant at Westover the vigorous veto of Mr. Truman,Memphis, Arkansas. When the city ofwho said the law was discriminatory.Memphis, Tennessee, announced thatUnder this law the total of quota im-it would build the power plant, how-migrants that may be admitted eachever, the Eisenhower administrationyear is 154,000. No quota restrictionscancelled the Dixon-Yates contract.are placed upon persons born in thecountries of the Western HemisphereOther successes and failures.nor on the alien husbands and wives ofIn general, President EisenhowerAmerican citizens. The following yearpursued a middle-of-the-road policy.the law ws liberalized to permit theFrequently a combination of moderateadmission of 214,000 immigrants dur-Republicans and moderate Democratsing the three-year period 1953-56, re-gave the President the majority hegardless of quota restrictions. This wasneeded. Thus, in spite of oppositiondone to provide for the admission offrom some members of his own party,refugees from countries behind theMr. Eisenhower succeeded in getting"iron curtain." There were also a fewthe Reciprocal Trade Agreements ex-minor amendments to the law in 1954,tended, first for one year, then for aand a temporary increase allowed inthree-year period, and finally (1958) for1957. That year the total immigrationa four-year period into 1962. In thewas almost 327,000.same way the number of people COV-ered by the Social Security programwas increased; so, too, were the benefits.Agricultural Distress BringsIn 1954 the minimum wage rate wasCompromiseraised to one dollar per hour. The in-surance and mortgage features of theProsperity is general, except on farms.Housing Act were liberalized, and pro-President Eisenhower's first ad-vision was made for the constructionministration had four years of rather797

