The Inoculation Battle Citizens of Boston shuddered when they recalled the terrible summer and fall of 1721. An epidemic of smallpox had struck the city. By the time it had run its course, more than half of the 10,000 inhabitants had been stricken, more than 800 had died, and hundreds of others had been disfigured. Physicians knew of no way to fight this dread disease. They could only quarantine the patient—and hope for the best. The Reverend Cotton Mather, one of the most learned men in the colonics, was not content merely to hope. He had beard about a method of fighting smallpox from an African slave. Later, in his wide reading, he had come across a report that Turkish doctors had controlled the disease by a method known as inoculation. This consisted of taking matter from the blisters of a sufferer and inserting it into the skin of a healthy person. The healthy person contracted the disease, of course, but as a mild case, and after he recovered, he was forever immune. Such was the theory. But it had never been tried in America. Only one Boston physician. Dr. Zabdiel Boyl- ston, was willing to try the new method—and did. The other physicians, and many townspeople, called Mather and BoyLston "murderers." But when the epidemic was over, the record showed that inoculation, dangerous though it was, had been effective. For the next 80 years, until Dr. Edward Jenner of England discovered how to prevent smallpox by vaccination, inoculation was widely used in the colonies and Western Europe. walk on these, our feet raise little clouds of dust. We have seen the homes of the wealthy—red brick and white stone houses surrounded by gardens and lawns. Now we pass the small shops of the artisans—baker, butcher, tailor, cobbler, blacksmith, dyer, and leather worker. We look up at the sound of a bell and pause to listen as the town crier, introducing his news with "Hear ye, hear ye," announces a sale of indentured servants just arrived from England. On our way to the waterfront we see the market house and join throngs of housewives and servants who, with baskets on their arms, crowd around the stalls. Farmers from the surrounding countryside are displaying their produce—butter, cheese, poultry', beef, mutton, and vegetables. Along the waterfront. Reaching the water, we continue along Dock Street, which parallels the Delaw are River. The noise of hammers and saws attracts our attention, and we see a shipyard with the skeleton of a small vessel rising from the ways. Next to it, from a tiny sloop, a group of fishermen are heaving the day's catch on the planks of the wharf. Beyond, its masts reaching toward the sky, lies the English ship we have come to see. Approaching its mooring place, we find ourselves in the midst of bustle and confusion. Men with boxes and bales on their shoulders are pushing their way toward the nearby warehouse. At one side a knot of colonists surrounds a sailor, plying him with questions, eager for the latest news from the Old World. And on the deck are the indentured servants, or redemptioners, some no doubt looking bewildered and unhappy. The wealthy colonists, easily distinguished by their dress and self-assurance, pass among the servants, their eyes open for a good bargain. Now' and then a sale is made, and we watch the owner and his new' servant leave the ship, the one in front leading the way, the other following with his belongings in a sack over his shoulder. English ways of life. As we retrace our steps into the town,.it would be easy to think that we are walking the streets of an English city. Passing the open door of a merchant's "counting house," we see clerks on tall stools painstakingly recording business transactions in their ledgers. Across the street is a tavern. In front of the tavern are a row of hitching posts and a hollow log to serve as a watering trough for horses. We have not seen the town hall or the jail with its pillory and stocks or the several churches that we know are an important part of the city. But we have seen enough to learn that life in the colonial towns is in many ways similar to life in English towns. The people dress and talk like Englishmen. The houses and public buildings look like English houses and public buildings. There are the same social divisions that we could see in any English town. The American "melting pot." Rut in some ways the colonial towns are different from the towns of England. Even though some people may want to do so, they cannot carry all the Old World ways to the New World. For one thing, people from many different nations are learning to live together in colonial America, The colonial towns, as well as the frontier and the farming areas, are "melting pots." Colonial Houses. Most houses in colonial times were simple one-story dwellings like these. They were designed to have a fireplace in any room requiring heat. town is filled with settlers from far-off Germany. On the streets we pass men and women from Ireland and Scotland, many of them on their way to frontier lands of the west. And if we listen carefully, we hear the accents of people from France, Switzerland, Sweden, and many other European countries. The "melting pot" of colonial America is also producing a new American vocabulary. English travelers who visit the colonies hear words they never hear in England. The colonists are speaking what Samuel Johnson, the famous English dictionary maker, in 1756 called the "American dia- lect." By the 1760's the new American vocabulary' has borrowed many words from other languages. From the Indians it has borrowed skunk, hickory, squash, raccoon, canoe, toboggan, moccasin, tomahawk, and wigwam. From the Dutch it has borrowed cruller, stoop, waffle, scow, boss, and cookie. From the French it has borrowed bureau, gopher, chowder, bogus, portage, and jnai- rie. And the colonists have invented many new words—bullfrog, eggplant, snowplow, cold snap, trail, popcorn, shingle, and backlog. Building the towns. The colonists are also trying to solve in their own way problems faced by all townspeople. They are trying to solve problems of water supply, sewage, sanitation, health, and police and fire protection. They are learning to work together, to co-operate, in an effort to solve these problems. In Philadelphia, Benjamin Franklin is one of the leaders, keeping up a steady stream of articles about these problems in his newspaper, the Pennsylvania Gazette. Largely because of his efforts, Philadelphia is one of the first cities in the world to have paved streets, street lights, police and fire departments, and a public library. To be sure, Europeans are also working for these same improvements in their cities. But the colonists take special pride in the cities they have built with their own hands. Opportunity for all. The greatest difference between English and American towns can be summed up in the word "opportunity." There is plenty of work for everyone in Philadelphia, New York, Boston, or in any of the other colonial towns. No one need remain a servant for very long. And if the town itself does not seem to offer enough opportunity, there is always the chance to move west. Many do move west. They stay in the town only long enough to save a little money; then they are off over the roads that lead to a new way of life. President John Adams was not pleased at hav - ing a Republican Vice-President in his administration. But he had little time to worry about this situation, for when he took office, the United States was threatened by war with France. On the verge of war with France. American relations with France had grown steadily worse since 1793. The French resented America's refusal to aid France by honoring the Treaty of 1778 and the American Proclamation of Neutrality of 1793. The French also resented Jay's Treaty, which France regarded as pro-British. As a result of this friction. France had become increasingly hostile during Washington's second administration. The French navy had seized ships flying the American flag and prevented them from reaching British ports. The French Directory, a committee of five men who governed France after 1795, had refused to receive the minister whom President Washington sent to Paris. President Adams regarded this as an insult to the United States. France, he said, had "treated us neither as allies nor as friends nor as a sovereign state." Nevertheless, he decided to make one more effort to preserve peace. The XYZ Affair. Early in 1797 President Adams sent three Americans to Paris to try to reach an agreement with France. The three American commissioners were John Marshall, Elbridge Gerry, and Charles C. Pinckney. The French government refused to receive the Americans officially. While waiting for an official reception, the Americans were visited by three Frenchmen. The Frenchmen, who were later identified by President Adams as merely "X, Y. and Z," made three insulting demands. First, the American government must apologize publicly to France for some remarks Adams had made in a recent speech to Congress; second, the United States must grant a loan to France; and third, the American envoys must pay a bribe of $250,000 to the five members of the French Directory. When news of this insult reached America, large numbers of Americans demanded war. Rallying around the slogan "Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute," Americans began war preparations. In 1798 the government created the Navy Department and authorized construction of warships and fortification of harbors. The government also strengthened the army and recalled former President Washington from Mount Vernon to assume chief command, with Hamilton as his first subordinate. Although war was not officially declared, a state of war actually existed. Within a few months American warships captured more than 80 vessels flying the French flag. President Adams avoids war. At this moment President Adams committed one of the most courageous acts of his career. Although many members of his own party were clamoring for a declaration of war, Adams tried once again to secure peace. In 1799 he sent another group of commissioners to Paris. By the time the Americans arrived, Napoleon had overthrown the corrupt Directory and made himself dictator of France, with the title of "First Consul." Napoleon was eager to reach a settlement with the United States, for he wanted to begin his rule free from conflicts with foreign nations. For this reason, the Americans and the French quickly reached an agreement. Both countries agreed to abandon the old treaty of 1778. The United States agreed to drop its claims against the French for illegal seizure of American ships. Nevertheless, a major source of friction remained, for the French continued to seize American ships that attempted to trade with the British. In spite of the shortcomings of the agreement. President Adams had succeeded in avoiding full- scale war with France. Like Washington before him, Adams believed that the infant nation could endure only if it avoided being drawn into European conflicts. By safeguarding America's interests in this crucial period of its history. President Adams deliberately sacrificed any popularity that he might have enjoyed with his own party. The Alien and Sedition Acts. While anti- French feeling was running high, the Federalist majority in Congress enacted in 1798 a series of laws designed, they said, to unite the country. It w'as generally understood, however, that the laws woidd also weaken the Republican Party. This legislation, often called the Alien and Sedition Acts, included four different laws— (1) the Naturalization Act, (2) the Alien Act, (3) the Alien Enemies Act, and (4) the Sedition Acts. One day, during the height of the agitation over the Alien and Sedition Acts, a liberty pole suddenly appeared in Dedham, Massachusetts. " Attached to the pole was a placard which read as follows: "No stamp act, no sedition and no alien acts, no land tax. Downfall to the tyrants of America: peace and retirement to the President: long live the Vice-President and the minority." A crowd quickly gathered. Federalists and Republicans exchanged heated words, then blows. The Federalist partisans won the tussle, pulled down the liberty pole, and tore up the placard. Federalists demanded punishment for the person who had committed this outrage. The guilty man was David Brown, a veteran of the Revolutionary War, who had seen much of the world as a sailor and who liked to discuss politics at the village store. Brown was arrested, held in jail, and eventually tried. Judge Samuel Chase of the United States Circuit Court presided at the trial, where Brown surprised everyone by saying he was sorry for what he had done. But when the Court demanded that he give the names of those who had worked with him, he refused. Judge Chase had no sympathy for "radicals" like David Brown. He sentenced Brown to the heaviest penalty that any American was ever given for violating the Alien and Sedition Acts— 18 months in prison and a $450 fine. Since Brown had no money to pay the fine, he remained in prison for two years, until Thomas Jefferson became President and pardoned him. Act. Congress passed these laws against the advice of Adams and other Federalist leaders. The Naturalization Act stated that an alien, or foreigner, must reside in the United States for 14 years before he could become a naturalized citizen. Up to that time, only 5 years of United States residence had been required. Congress justified the act on the grounds that it would help protect the country from enemy aliens in wartime. But since most newcomers joined the Republican Party as soon as they secured their citizenship papers, the partisan implications of the measure were apparent. The Federalists wished to remain in office. The Alien Act authorized the President "to order all such aliens as he shall judge dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States .. or those concerned in any plots against the government to leave the country. The Alien Enemies Act authorized the President, in time of war or invasion, to imprison or banish any foreigners he believed to be a menace to public security. The Federalists defended these two acts as necessary war precautions, hut it was evident that they could also he employed to stifle anti-Federalist agitation. After all, it was a Federalist President who would decide which aliens were "dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States." The Sedition Act was intended to silence American citizens themselves. Sedition means, among other things, the use of language to stir up discontent or rebellion against a government. Under the Sedition Act punishment by fine and imprisonment could be used to silence anybody who wrote, said, or printed anything "false, scandalous and malicious... against the government of the United States, or either house of the Congress... or the President of the United States, with intent to defame the said government. ,.." If all of these laws had been enforced, they would have effectively ended opposition to the Federalist Party. The Naturalization Act went into effect at once. The Alien Act and the Alien Enemies Act were not enforced, but the mere threat of imprisonment or deportation by the government drove many fearful Frenchmen from the country. Although the Sedition Act was used to silence only about ten Republican editors and printers who had expressed opposition to the government, the fear of punishment undoubtedly kept many others from making critical comments. To this extent, however, the Sedition Act interfered with freedom of the press and freedom of speech, two principles deeply cherished by American people then and now. The Alien and Sedition Acts in general were believed by many people to lx1 undue interference by government with the rights of individuals—aliens and citizens alike. They pointed in the direction of what we call today "a police state." Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions. The Republicans were furious at these measures, which they claimed destroyed free speech and greatly strengthened the power of the federal government, particularly the power of the President, They voiced their protest in the Kentucky and Yirginia Resolutions. The Kentucky Resolutions, prepared by Thomas Jefferson, were adopted by the legislature of the new state of Kentucky in 1798 and 1799. The Virginia Resolutions, prepared by James Madison, were adopted by the legislature of Virginia in 1798, Together, these resolutions outlined the states' rights, or coni)tact, theory of the Constitution. There were several points in this theory: (1) (he federal government had been created by the states; (2) the federal government was merely an agent for the states, operating under a "compact," or agreement, which had delegated to the federal government certain specific responsibilities and no more; (3) the federal government, or its agent, could be criticized by its creators, the states, if it committed unauthorized acts. And who was to determine when an act was unauthorized, or unconstitutional? Why, the states, of course. Carried to an extreme, the states' rights, or compact, theory of the Constitution would have given the states power to declare null and void0 any act of Congress that (he states considered unconstitutional. The theory' could lead to secession, or withdrawal, of one or more states from the Union—which, as you will see, was precisely what did happen in 1861. This interpretation of the Constitution was, of course, a complete contradiction of the views expressed by Hamilton and the Federalists, who claimed that die government had been created by the people, not by the states, and that the Supreme Court was die sole judge of the constitutionality of an act of Congress. The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions were sent to the other state legislatures with the hope that they might receive favorable action. In this respect Jefferson and Madison were disappointed.. Federalist majorities controlled most of the state governments, and the Resolutions were "tabled"; that is, action on them was indefinitely postponed. Nevertheless, the Resolutions proved to be extremely effective political weapons. They7 offered the voters a choice between a strong federal government and a decentralized union in which the power held by the states would be greater than the power held by the federal union. Thomas Jefferson's pledge that the Republicans would act with moderation did not prevent him from exercising vigorous leadership as President. Immediately upon taking office, he urged Congress to repeal a number of Federalist laws that he felt were harmful to the best interests of the country. He also did not hesitate to use the armed forces to protect American rights. And when the opportunity came to double the size of the United States, he acted quickly and efficiently, even though he was not at all sure that the Constitution gave him the power to take the action he did. Federalist laws repealed. The Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798, which Jefferson strongly opposed, had expired before he took office. But one of them, the Naturalization Act, also passed in 179S, was still in effect, and Congress, at Jefferson's urging, promptly repealed it. Congress also repealed the excise tax on whisky, which Jefferson regarded as unconstitutional. Congress likewise repealed the Judiciary Act of 1801 so that the "midnight judges" appointed by President Adams on the eve of Jefferson's inauguration were not permitted to assume office. Although Jefferson had argued that the Bank of the United States was unconstitutional, he could do nothing to disturb it, for its charter ran until 1811. And even though Jefferson had t'j also opposed Hamilton's plan to have the federal government assume the state debts, his Secretary of the Treasury, Albert Gallatin, paid off installments on the public debt as rapidly as possible. Defending American rights. In a war with the pirates of North Africa, Jefferson actually pushed forward the Federalist ideal of a strong federal government. The Mohammedan rulers of the Barbary States of North Africa—Morocco, Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli—had long made a habit of seizing the ships of Christian nations and holding their crews for ransom. Instead of declaring war on the pirates, the European governments had concluded that it was cheaper to secure protection by the yearly payment of tribute, or bribes. Since 1783 the United States, whose merchants traded with the Mediterranean countries, had also been paying tribute to the pirates of North Africa. But when the rulers of Algiers and Tripoli made exorbitant demands upon the United States, Jefferson decided that the time had come to fight. Rising immigration adds to the country's population Between 1790 and 1830 the population of the United States more titan tripled, increasing from about 4,000,000 to nearly 13,000,000. Nearly all of this growth was the result of births in the United States itself. During these years fewer than 400,000 immigrants entered the country'. Immigration grows. In the 1830's, however, the small stream of immigration swelled to a great flood. From 1830 to 1840, more than half a million immigrants poured into the United States (see chart, page 826). Forty-four per cent came from Ireland. 30 per cent from Germany, 15 per cent from Great Britain, and the remainder from various other countries of Europe. Between 1S40 and 1850, a million and a half immigrants arrived in the United States, 49 per cent of them from Ireland. Irish immigrants. The Irish came in search of relief from terrible conditions in their homeland. In Ireland during these years, many of the people worked as tenants on the estates of landlords who lived in England. The landlords did little or nothing to improve the conditions of their tenants, who barely managed to make a living. And then, in 1846, a terrible famine struck Ireland. Thousands died during the "Potato Famine," as it was called. Other thousands fled to America. The people who fled Ireland were attracted to the United States, rather than elsewhere, for several reasons. Many avoided Canada because they shared the dislike of the British Empire that was common at that time among native-born Americans. They liked what they heard about American democracy. They were thrilled at the reports of plenty in the United States. Moreover, American contractors encouraged them to come and work on the roads, canals, and railroads, and manufacturers attracted them into the new' mills and factories. Hardships of immigration. The immigrants endured hardships almost beyond belief in their efforts to reach the United States. The following news item that appeared in the Edinburgh Review of July 1854 gives a glimpse of the sufferings of the people who crossed the Atlantic as immigrants in those days: "Liverpool was crowded with emigrants, and ships could not be found to do the work. The poor creatures were packed in dense masses in ill-ventilated and unseaworthy vessels, under charge of improper masters, and the natural result followed. Pestilence [disease] chased the fugitive to complete the work of famine. Fifteen thousand out of ninety thousand emigrants ... in British bottoms [ships] in 18*47 died on the passage or soon after arrival. The American vessels, owing to a stringent passenger law, were better managed; but the hospitals of New York and Boston were nevertheless crowded with patients from Irish estates...." Poor, unable to move to the western lands, many of the Irish immigrants who came in this period settled in the slums of the growing cities. Large groups of Irish people found homes in cities like New York, Boston, Albany, Baltimore, St. Louis, Cincinnati, and New Orleans. Many of the men went to work as unskilled laborers on the roads, canals, and railroads. Many of the women took jobs in the factories, where they displaced many of the native-born American wage earners. German immigrants. Although people from many countries came to America during these years, the Germans formed the second largest group, outnumbered only by the Irish. Between 1S45 and 1860 more than 1.300,000 Germans landed in the United States. Many Germans came because, after 1815, Europe (and Germany in particular) was controlled by riders who were opposed to democracy. Thousands of Germans who took part in revolutions that broke out in 1830 and 1848 fled when the revolutions failed. Other Germans came to earn a better living. Naturally, in seeking freedom from political persecution and economic hardship, they turned to the United States, the land of free men and cheap farms. Most of the German immigrants settled on land in the Middle Western states—Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Wisconsin, Iowa, and Missouri. Able, thrifty farmers, they built prosperous farms on fertile soil. Many also moved to the cities, and by the 1860's formed a substantial proportion of such communities as Buffalo, Detroit, Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago, and St. Louis. Immigrants resented. Most of the immigrants quickly became American citizens. Because many had come to the United States in search of political freedom, they helped to strengthen political democracy. Because they were eager to work, they contributed to the wealth of the growing nation. But in spite of these contributions, the immigrants were resented by many native-born Americans, who were afraid that large numbers of "foreigners" would change die older ways of living in America. Some Germans, for instance, aroused suspicion. They organized their own clubs, gathered in social halls to talk and sing, established their own churches and schools, published their own newspapers, and continued to use their own language. Many native-born Americans viewed these activities with misgivings. But it was the Irish who became the chief target of American resentment. Like many newcomers to a strange land, they wished to settle near their acquaintances from the Old Country. As a result, clusters of Irish people kept growing in the cities. Many of them dressed for a time as they had in Ireland. Their accent was strange to other Americans. Most Irish immigrants were members of the Roman Catholic Church, toward which many native-born Protestants were antagonistic, Because the Irish were "different" in these and other ways, older settlers at first looked upon them with suspicion. Suspicion of this kind, of course, has been the fate of every large immigrant group. Feeling against the immigrants often led to friction and violence. Riots broke out in several cities. Feeling ran higher and higher as the number of immigrants increased. In 1845 a national organization of native-born .Americans was started. A year later, this society was reorganized as a secret order called the Supreme Order of the Star-Spangled Banner or the Sons of the Sires of 76. Members solemnly pledged themselves to oppose foreigners and to support only American-born Protestants for public office. When asked about the society, a member would answer, "I know nothing." Because of such answers the organization came to be known as the Know- Nothing Party. During the early 1850's the Know-Nothing Party, officially called by now the American Party, was very strong in American political life. In the election of 1854, for example, it polled one fourth of the total vote of New York and two fifths of Pennsylvania's vote. In Massachusetts it elected every state officer and nearly the entire legislature. In Baltimore the Know-Noth- ings organized the "Plug-Uglies," so-called lac- cause they attended the polls earn ing carpenter's awls to "ping," or stab, voters who did not give a secret password. However, the election of 1854 was the high tide of the movement. In the Rail Fence. In areas where timber was plentiful, farmers built several kinds of wooden rail fences to surround their fields. A common type was this "snake fence" in which trees were split into rails and interlaced according to a zigzag pattern. national convention of the Know-Nothing Party in 1855, southern and northern members split over the question of slavery, and the Know- Nothing Party gradually lost its strength. Changing ways of life. From the 1830's to the 1860's, older Americans were bewildered and upset as they saw familiar, traditional ways of life replaced by new and unfamiliar ways. The older Americans did not usually realize that it was machines, factories, and an urban, or city, life that were chiefly responsible for the revolution that was taking place. The foreigner was r only one of many new elements in the changing pattern of American society. But like minorities in other times and other places, the immigrant became a scapegoat upon whom many native- born Americans heaped the blame for all their troubles, real and imaginary. SECTION SURVEY 1. From which countries did most of the immigrants come between 1830 and 1850? 2. (a) What conditions led the Irish to emigrate to the United States? (b) Where did they settle? 3. (a) Why did the Germans come to this country? (b) Where did they settle? 4. Explain the reasons for resentment against the immigrants. 5. (a) What was the aim of the Know-Nothing Party? (b) Give your opinion of this party. identify; Potato Famine, American Party, urban. Textile manufacturers needed more and more cotton. As a result, they paid higher and higher prices for the supply that was often too small to meet their needs. Rising prices tempted southern planters to clear more land in order to grow more cotton. With the increasing demand for bigger supplies of cotton, the rich soils of the Gulf states and the Mississippi Valley beckoned cotton growers. Planters, the sons of planters, small farmers, and others saw a chance to get ahead by moving west, clearing the soil, and starting cotton plantations. Thus, to the original southern states there were added, by 1845, the states of Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Arkansas. Florida, and Texas. In order to clear the land and grow cotton, a large supply of inexpensive labor was needed. The northern Europeans who were migrating to the United States preferred to find work in the North. Cotton planters relied, instead, on slaves. The number of slaves in the southern states rose from approximately 1,000,000 in 1500 to 1,643,000 in 1820. It had risen to about 4,000,000 in 1860. By the late 18.50's the cotton economy had reached the height of its power. The cotton lands, or cotton belt , stretched in a long crescent from North Carolina in the east to Texas in the west (see map, opposite page). Travelers journeying in the autumn along the dusty roads throughout this region saw the major wealth of the South in even' field—ripe cotton bolls, white in the hot sunlight, ready to be picked, cleaned of seed, packed in bales, and shipped to mills in New England and Croat Britain. SECTION SURVEY 1. What were the chief crops and industries in the South before 1860? 2. Discuss the importance of the cotton gin invented by Whitney. 3. Describe the factors that enabled the South to become the world's greatest cotton-producing area between 1800 and 1860. 4. Show the relation between cotton production and westward expansion. 5. Explain the relation between cotton production and slavery. Who were the people who lived in the South? How was life in the southern states different from life in the North and the western regions? Numbers and social groups. By 1860 the population of the South had risen to approximately 12.000. 000. About 4,000,000 were slaves. The rest were, for the most part, descendants of pre-revolutionarv settlers. Those of English and Scotch-Irish ancestry predominated, but people of French origin were located in the coastal plains of the Carolinas and around New Orleans. There were German settlements in Texas, but on the whole, European immigrants were not attracted to the South. More than 4,000,000 immigrants were living in the United States by 1860, but only 13.5 per cent of these immigrants lived in the southern states. Most of the immigrants up to this time had come from countries of northern Europe, like Ireland and Germany. The climate and ways of living in the northern states were more familiar to them than were the warmer climate and ways of living in the South. As they entered the United States through the chief ports of entry in the North, they tended to settle in the northern cities and on the farms of the Middle West. In the South as, indeed, in other parts of the country, the population was divided into a number of social and economic groups. Except for the slaves who bad no opportunity to better their lot, energetic and ambitious men were continually moving from lower to higher economic groups. In the words of one southern historian, a man could mount "from log cabin to plantation mansion on a stairway of cotton bales...." What were the major economic and social groups in the South in 1860? The slaves and their background. The nearly 1,000,000 slaves in the South were at the bottom of the social and economic pyramid. Theirs was a supremely tragic story. Probably no other immigrants to America were ever so completely separated from their past. Driven at the crack of whips onto slave ships lying along the African coast, these desperate men. women, and children were forced to leave behind them all that they held dear in the land of their birth. Africa, the world's second largest continent, then included (and still does) numerous differ* ent social groups. Each of these groups had developed its own way of life, its own culture. There were striking differences among the groups in height, build, and color of skin. There were equally striking differences in social organization. Long before the New World was discovered, a number of African societies—among them the West African kingdoms, or empires, of Ghana, Melle, and Songhay—had attained a high degree of civilization. For example, the ancient empire of Ghana, from which the modern nation of Ghana has taken its name, flourished for centuries. It reached the peak of its power five hundred years before Columbus discovered America. Under the Negro king, Askia the Great, the two cities of Jenne and Timbuktu became commercial and intellectual centers whose fame spread to Spain, North Africa, anil the Middle East. Moslem businessmen, statesmen, and scholars traveled to the cities of this African empire regularly. At the same time scholars from the university located at Timbuktu won fame for their intellectual activities. They visited ami served as professors at the universities of Fez, Tunis, and Cairo. Africans from kingdoms and empires such as these, as well as men and women from the most primitive tribes, were torn from their homes and families. Arab and Negro slave traders drove them to the coast. There they sold their unhappy victims to European traders, who loaded them on vessels and transported them to America. Those who survived the journey were resold into slavery and joined in a common fate. The work the slaves did. By 1860 the slaves were engaged in a wide variety of occupations. Many worked in the homes of the planters, cooking the meals, doing the housekeeping, and tending the children. Some of the slaves became shilled workers. Women learned to spin, weave, and sew. Some became cooks, maids, laundresses, dairymaids, and nurses. Men became blacksmiths, painters, shoemakers, jewelers, and silversmiths. Others learned to do the carpentry, bricklaying, and other tasks required to build a house. Some were able not only to build a house, but also to make die necessary plans, draw up contracts, and complete the entire structure. The great majority of the slaves on the cotton, rice, and sugar cane plantations were laborers w ho did the hard work in the fields. They planted the cotton, com, and wheat in the spring; cultivated the growing crops during the summer; North and South, each with advantages, develop their strategies On April 15, 1861, when President Lincoln called for Union volunteers, there were only seven states in the Confederate States of America, or the Confederacy—South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas. But with Lincoln's call to arms, every state in the Union had to make its fateful choice. The states choose sides. Virginia, on April 17, became the eighth state to join the Confederacy. When Virginia left the Union, the United States Army lost several of its ablest officers. Most famous of all the Virginia officers to take up arms for the South was Robert L, Lee, to whom President Lincoln had offered command of the Union forces. Arkansas, Tennessee, and North Carolina soon followed Virginia into the Confederacy. By May 20, five weeks after Fort Sumter fell, there were eleven states in the Confederacy. The mountainous counties in the northwestern part of Virginia did not follow the rest of the state into the Confederacy. In 1863 these counties were admitted to the Union as the state of West Virginia. Control of this area, part of which lay on the Ohio River, was important to the North because it helped to keep open the lines of communication between the Northeast and the Mississippi Riser. The "border states"—Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri—were also important to the Union, but for a time it was touch and go whether some of them would fight on the side of the North or the South. Maryland was especially important, for if it joined the Confederacy, Washington, the Union capital, would have been isolated from the northern states. For a time the fate of Maryland hung in the balance. Many Marylanders were sympathetic to the Confederacy, and on April 19 a mob of angry citizens attacked the Sixth Massachusetts Regiment as it passed through Baltimore on its way to Washington. In an effort to prevent the passage of Union troops and to avoid further bloodshed, Maryland authorities burned the railroad bridges connecting Baltimore with Philadelphia and Harrisburg. But Lincoln, detained to hold Maryland in the Union, sent Federal troops into the state and arrested die leading Confederate sympathizers. Pro-Union leaders then rose to power, and Maryland remained in die Union. The other border states—Delaware, Kentucky, and Missouri—also decided in favor of the Union cause. Delaware never hesitated. At first Kentucky refused to obey Lincoln's call for volunteers and tried to remain neutral. But when the Confederate army invaded Kentucky in September, the state declared for the Union. Missouri's government was iu the hands of southern sympathizers. After several battles had been fought, however, the state officially lined up with the North. "The North" included the Pacific coast states of California and Oregon. After West Virginia had joined the Union in 1863, there was a total of twenty-four states fighting on the northern side. In every state, especially in the border states, families were torn apart as some members enlisted with the Confederacy, others with the Union. Three of Mrs. Lincoln's brothers fought and died for the South. Robert L. Lee's nephew commanded Union naval forces on the James River in Virginia while his famous uncle was fighting Union forces not many miles away. Caleb Huse, a northerner, was the Smith's ablest representative in Europe; Senator Robert J. Walker, a former southerner, was one of the North's ablest European representatives. The division within families and the breakup of lifelong friendships were some of the tragic results of the war. Northern advantages. The North had overwhelming material advantages in the War Between the States. It was greatly superior to the South in population, in manufacturing, agricultural and natural resources, in finances, and in transportation facilities. Northern strength had recently been increased by the admission of three new states to the Union—Minnesota (1858), Oregon (1859), and Kansas (1861). The population of the twenty-four northern, western, and border states totaled 22,000,000. To this total may he added about 800,000 immigrants who entered the United Stales during the war years. About 400,000 foreign-horn men served in the Union armies. The varied economic resources of the North- industrial, commercial, financial, agricultural— gave the North an enormous advantage over the predominantly agricultural South. When the war began. Farmers followed the cattlemen out on the prairies and plains. In about one generation, from 1870 to 1900, pioneers settled more land than all of their American forefathers combined. In the 263 years between the first tiny settlement at Jamestown in 1607 until 1870, Americans traasformed a total of 407,734,041 acres of wilderness into farm lands. Mighty though this achievement was, its pace was quite leisurely when compared to the speed with which men conquered the prairies and the plains. In the 30-year period from 1870 to 1900, pioneers settled an additional 430,(XX),(XX) acres—an area roughly equal to the combined areas of Norway, Sweden, Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium, Germany, and France. What was happening in America to make possible this rapid settlement of the last frontier? Free land for settlers. One attraction of the West was free land. In 1862, as you have seen (page 385), Congress enacted the Homestead Act granting 160 acres to all individuals who wished to qualify bv settling a farm, or, as it was called, a "homestead." Settlers rushed to accept the offer. Thousands of the pioneers were ex-soldiers who, uprooted by the war, sought new homes in the West Thousands of others came from worn-out farms in the East, particularly from New England, in the hope of finding more fertile land on the prairies and the plains. Still other thousands came from Europe. In many areas of the Middle West, more than half of the pioneers were immigrants —Germans, Norwegians, Swedes, Danes, Czechs, Finns, and Russians. The railroads encourage settlement. Without the railroad, however, the free land in the West, no matter how attractive in itself, would have remained unpopulated. During the I870's and the 1880's four great transcontinental railroads crossed the prairies and the plains. Those railroads along with their branch lines opened up the western country for settlement. These rail lines into and through the wild, largely unsettled western country could be built By the time this photograph was taken in Nebraska in 1901, the farmer was well established, with neighbors, a windmill, and an outbuilding of sawed wood, but the walls of his house were still of sod "bricks." Earlier the roof, made of shingles in this picture, would also have been made of sod, which was cut in strips and laid over a wooden framework. An oversupply of workers tended to push wages down. Low wages and long hours. During the last quarter of the 1800's, wage earners complained with increasing bitterness about the low wages they were paid. Unskilled workers were not likely to earn more than ten dollars a week, skilled workers no more than twenty dollars. There were a number of reasons why wages tended to be low: the increasing power of employers over employees; the creation of a competitive national labor market; depressions: and the Hooding of the labor market by new workers. Wage earners also complained about the long hours they were required to work. After 1865 an 11-hour day was common in American industry. By the 1880's the textile workers of Massachusetts were exceptional in enjoying a 10- hour day. In many places textile workers toiled from 12 to 14 hours daily at looms and spindles. From 1900 to 1920 the hours of work began to be shortened. The average working hours in factories decreased from 57 per week in 1909 to 50 per week in 1919. But even as late as this, the 12-hour day prevailed in the steel industry, for example. It was indeed a new and rapidly changing world with which the American wage earner had to wrestle in the closing years of the 1800's. The problems wage earners faced w ere complex problems, and neither the workers nor the owners of the industries nor the people in general had any ready answers. And, as you will see, the immigrants who entered the country during this period searching for new opportunities encountered those same problems and others. Immigration, despite problems, adds strength to the nation The immigrant played an essential part in the amazing industrial development of the United States from 1865 to 1900. He came in the first place as a worker seeking larger opportunities than he could hope for in the World World. While many returned to their homelands, a great many stayed and helped to build modern America. In his efforts to find a place for himself in his new homeland and in the industrial age, the immigrant did not always meet with sympathy and understanding. Instead, especially in the last part of the 1800's, the newcomer was often greeted with distrust and suspicion. The problem of numbers. Part of the difficulty was the overwhelming number of immigrants who poured into the country during these years. During the 29 years from 1870 to 1899, a total of more than 11,000,000 men, women, and children entered the country. The changing character of immigration. The changing character of immigration, as well as the swelling tide, alarmed many Americans. Down to the early 1880's the largest number of immigrants came from northwestern Europe— from Great Britain, Ireland, Scandinavia, Germany, anti the Netherlands. But after 1890 an increasingly large number came from southern and eastern Europe. The languages, customs, and ways of living of these immigrants were quite different from those of immigrants from northwestern Europe. Effect of immigration on labor. The great numbers of immigrants had an enormous influence on American life. Although some of the newcomers settled on farms, the great majority moved to the densely crowded slum areas of the cities. Here they competed with established residents for housing, thereby driving up rents and real estate prices. Most immediate of all, however, was their effect upon American workers. They competed with American wage earners for jobs, thereby driving down the existing scale of wages. To be sure, immigrants helped to stimulate the economy by creating new demands for factors' and farm products. But the average wage earner was more disturbed bv the job competition. Many Chinese laborers, after helping build the western railroad, stayed on as track workers, or "gandy dancers." In this painting, Chinese workers are waving as a Central Pacific train puffs along between snowsheds built as a protection against avalanches. The painting was made by the artist Joseph Becker in 1869. immigrants than he was impressed with the stimulating effects of large-scale immigration. Tension on the Pacific coast. Chinese workers on the Pacific coast, particularly in California, were the first victims of the rising feeling against all immigrants. In IS6S the United States had drawn up the Burlingame Treaty with China. This treaty gave the Chinese the right to immigrate to the United States. For a number of years. Chinese laborers had been welcome additions to the labor supply. They had been willing to do the hardest and least profitable jobs for very low wages. They bad furnished the back- hone of the construction gangs that built the western section of the first transcontinental railroad. Most of them had settled in California, where they made up about 20 per cent of all the workers. Such was the situation in 1813 when a depression hit the country. Unemployment mounted in California as in other parts of the United States. Men feared that the Chinese would take their johs at low wages. Fear and insecurity were increased because the Chinese, for reasons not always of their own choosing, lived entirely to themselves, and did not learn American ways. The Chinese are excluded. Ill feeling, alreadv running high, was fanned into violence by crowds of unemployed workmen who gathered on street corners and sand lots. The "sand lotters" began to mutter, and presently fell upon the unfortunate Chinese, killing some, burning the property of others. In co-operation with distressed farmers in California, the workingmen bad enough strength to influence the writing of a new state constitution in 1879, California's new constitution prohibited Chinese from owning property or taking part in certain occupations. The opponents of Chinese immigration were also influential enough to get the national Congress to adopt an "exclusion bill" in 1879. The 1879 bill prohibited all but a few Chinese from settling in the United States in any year. Because this hill violated the Burlingame Treaty of 1868 it was vetoed by President Haves. But under pressure the Chinese government agreed to raise no objections if the United States wished to regulate immigration, and in 1882 Congress enacted a new Chinese Exclusion Act which, with several extensions, continued in effect until World War 11. The Chinese Exclusion Act forbade the immigration of Chinese laborers and denied American citizenship to Chinese born in China. Only students and a few other groups of Chinese could enter the United States. Other immigration restrictions. The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 was the first of a long series of restrictions on immigration, enacted mainly because of pressure from worker groups. The second was the repeal in 1885 of the Contract Labor Law. The Contract Labor Law had been adopted by Congress in 1864, when booming wartime industries were desperate for workers. The law permitted American employers to recruit laborers in Europe. Under the law it was legal for employers to have workmen abroad sign contracts agreeing to come to the United States to work for a specified employer for specified wages for a specified period of time. It was illegal for the workers to leave the job while the contract was in force. American workers objected to the law on the grounds that (1) it came dangerously close to setting up a slave-labor system and (2) it subjected American workers to the unfair competition of cheap foreign labor. With the repeal of the Contract Labor Law behind them, American wage earners brought pressure upon Congress to pass other restrictive measures. One bill that kept coming up for thirty years would have forbidden entry to any immigrant who could not read and write. Congress actually did pass this legislation on several occasions, but each time the President then in office vetoed the bill. In 1917, however. Congress passed a "literacy test" bill over President Woodrow Wilson's veto, and the door to immigration was shut a little further. The role of the immigrants. From 1865 to 1900, the restrictions placed on immigration were relatively minor. And without the more than 11,000,- 000 immigrants who poured into the United States between 1870 and 1900, America's industrial progress would have moved at a much slower tempo. Immigrant muscles, as well as brains, helped to transform the United States from a predominantly agricultural country into a giant industrial power. Wage earners begin to organize to overcome their grievances Faced with numerous problems in the new industrial age, wage earners, like farmers, began increasingly to seek solutions for their problems through organization. The National Labor Union. Labor organizations were not, of course, new. During the war years 1861-65, however, as industry boomed and the cost of living soared, the labor movement gained new momentum. In 1866 representatives of national and local unions and various reform groups met in Baltimore and launched the National Labor Union. The leader was William Sylvis, an experienced and able organizer of iron molders. The National Labor Union met annually for six years and reached a membership of 600,000. In 1868 it helped push through Congress a law establishing an 8-honr working day for laborers and mechanics who were employed by or in behalf of the federal government. But after it had unsuccessfully supported a third-party movement in the election of 1872, the National Labor Union faded away. The Knights of Labor. Far more important than the National Labor Union was the Knights of Labor, founded in 1869 in Philadelphia by Uriah S. Stephens, a tailor. Many of the early attempts to organize labor were made in the railroad industry. One of the oldest unions in existence today, the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, was founded in 1863 under the name of the Brotherhood of the Footboard. The locomotives which the members drove in those days were, in principle, no different from earlier and later ones. Fire generated steam in the long boiler. The steam then drove the pistons which were attached to the rods on the big driving wheels. union—skilled and unskilled workers0; men and women; white and Negro workers; foreign-born and "natives." The Knights aimed "to secure to the toilers a proper share of the wealth that they create; more of the leisure that rightfully belongs to them." Reasons for the Knights' success. In most of their efforts, the Knights of Labor were more * skilled workers: those whose jobs require a certain mount of training and education, such as electricians And carpenters. Contract Labor Law in 1885 (opposite page). The Knights of Labor officially frowned on strikes, preferring to settle disputes between managers and laborers through industrial arbitration. However, it was a successful railroad strike in 1885 that did most to boost the group's membership. For the first time in American labor history, railroad operators met strike leaders on equal terms and conceded labor's chief demands. When the railroad strike occurred, the Knights numbered about 5(X),000 members, but by 1886 their membership had reached the high-water mark of 700. The remarkable growth of the Knights of Labor was only partly the result of successful strikes. It also owed much to the idealism and enthusiasm of Terence V. Organized labor faces opposition in its early efforts to win reforms When American workers began to organize during the latter half of the ISOO's, they encountered numerous setbacks in their efforts to improve the conditions of their labor. Their attempts to form unions and to seek recognition of their unions' right to bargain for them met with widespread opposition. Public opposition to unions. During the late ISOO's public opinion and government usually supported employers whenever they engaged in conflicts with unions or with workers striking for the recognition of their unions. The reasons for this opposition to unions are not hard to understand. Most Americans had grown up in the older, rural America where the individual worker had more control over his fate than he now had in the great industrial plants of giant corporations. They believed that every employer had the right to hire and fire as he pleased. Many Americans, including large numbers of workers themselves, resented union demands for the closed shop. Businesses that had closed-shop agreements with a union could hire only union members. Employers resented this restriction on what they considered their right to hire anyone they pleased. Many workmen also resented closed-shop agreements. Such agreements forced them to join the union whether they wanted to or not. Moreover, many Americans believed that the rank and file of workers were quite content with their lot. The fact that only a small minority of the wage earners had joined unions seemed to support this belief. In fact, as late as 1914 only about one worker out of ten belonged to a labor organization. Many Americans held that the best workers could still climb the ladder to success to become managers and even owners. In the minds of most Americans, the entire labor problem and industrial conflict itself were blamed on "ambitious" and "power-eager" labor leaders interested primarily in personal advancement. Immigrants distrust unions. In addition, many of the immigrants tended to resist the labor movement. It is true that some of the immigrants became union members and even union leaders. The great majority of the first generation, however, were essentially satisfied with conditions in their new' homeland. They were better off in the New World than they had been in the Old. They had left Europe in part because they wanted to be as free as possible from all sorts of restrictions. Thus they did not like unions, with their dues, their rules, and their insistence that no one work for less than a certain wage. Division in the ranks of labor. The mechanization of industrial plants also weakened the overall power of the nation's wage earners to speak on their own behalf. When factories were small and all the workers knew one another, the skilled worker could see that the work of the unskilled worker, however minor, was an essential part of the whole process of production. But when factories grew large and workers became strangers to one another, the skilled worker came to look down on the unskilled worker. The large number of immigrants who came during the late separated the unskilled from the skilled workers even more widely than before. Some of the newcomers had skills, but most of them did not and had to take such unskilled jobs as they could get. Because of differences in language and customs, skilled workers shunned them. Thus the wage earners themselves were divided into two groups: (1) a small number of skilled workers who gained more and more bargaining power with employers, and (2) a great number of unskilled, unorganized laborers whose voices and interests counted very little. Industry opposes the unions. With a majority of Americans generally distrustful of unions, huge industrial enterprises found it not too difficult to influence public opinion and government in their own favor. They hired lawyers to fight their battles in the courts. They spent a great deal of money on advertising and other types of publicity in order to win the sympathies of the public. They paid skillful lobbyists to influence legislation—men who knew how to get laws passed or to defeat bills that employers did not like. Some corporations made it a standard practice to contribute handsomely to the political party most likely to win an election, hoping by this means to secure favors from the government. Employers also developed more direct methods to discourage workers from joining unions. One of these methods was the black list. Rising wages gave American workers greater purchasing power. They were then able to buy more and more of the products of America's expanding industry'. As the years passed, more and more people came to understand that mass production and mass purchasing power are mutually interdependent. This understanding was an essential part of what Frederick Lewis Allen called "the big change" that was transforming America in the opening years of the twentieth century. Gas Lighting. Inflammable gas was led through walls to fixtures. Some fixtures used an "open fishtail flame" (left). Others used "mantles" made of a heat- resisting material which glowed when a flame burned inside of them (right). This announcement swept almost all other news off the front pages of America's newspapers. It was "a bolt out of the blue sky," the New York Sun declared, "flashing its way across the continent and far beyond, something unheard of in the history of business." The New York Herald called it "an epoch in the world's industrial history'." Ford was both warmly applauded and sharply criticized for his action. The first electric street lights consisted of two rods made of carbon, one of which had a positive charge and one a negative charge. Between the points of these rods a bright light appeared when the current was flowing. The carbon rods were encased in a fixture which could be lowered by pulleys for cleaning or repair. The life of the farmer improves in the twentieth century The life of the farmer, like the lives of other Americans, was being transformed during the years between 1900 and 1920. Growing demand for farm produce. One of the most significant developments in the opening years of the 1900's was the startling growth of the urban population. Between 1900 and 1920 the urban population increased by about 24,000,- 000, the rural population by only about 6,000,000. Between 1900 and 1920 urban dwellers increased from about 40 per cent of the total population to more than 50 per cent. Whereas in 1900 there were only 832 communities of 2500 to 5000 persons, by 1920 the number had jumped to 1255, and many of the larger cities had doubled, tripled, and quadrupled in size. The swelling urban population came in part from the nation's farms as farm youths in growing numbers left home to seek their fortunes in the cities. But it came in much larger part from the more than 14,000,000 immigrants who poured into the United States between 1900 and 1920. Regardless of the source, however, the growing urban population meant more mouths to feed and a grow ing demand for farm products. Rising prices and more money. The rapidly growing demand for farm products enabled the farmer to charge higher prices. Indeed, between the years of 1900 and 1920 farm prices increased threefold. "Cheaper" money, as well as the increased demand for farm products, helped to raise prices. In spite of the fact that the Republicans had finnly planted the financial system on the gold standard, new discoveries of gold in the Klondike region of Canada, and in Alaska, in 1897, and the invention of more efficient methods of extracting gold from ore greatly increased the supply of the precious metal. As the supply of gold increased, the value of gold fell. And as the value of gold fell—making money "cheaper"—the prices of all other products rose. Moreover, the value of farm lands increased, rising on the average fourfold between 1900 and 1920. As a result, many farmers were able to sell their surplus acreage for a handsome profit and either retire or buy new farm machines. Reaper and Binder. The early McCormick reaper cut the grain stalks and left them to be raked up by hand and tied in bundles. Many improvements led to the reaper below, which cut the grain stalks and tied them in bundles automatically. stalks of grain gathered. A number of the packaged foods with which we are familiar today were first developed at Battle Creek, Michigan. It all started in 1866 when the Seventh-day Adventists, a religious group that taught vegetarianism, opened the Western Reform Institute on an eight-acre farm. Ten years later. Dr. John Harvey Kellogg became superintendent of the institute, which he soon renamed the Medical and Surgical Sanitarium. Dr. Kellogg, along with his brother W. K. Kellogg, invented and sold a variety of new foods, the most famous of which was Corn Flakes. As the years passed, large numbers of Americans visited the Kellogg sanitarium in search of rest and a formula for more healthful living. In 1893 Charles W. Post came as a patient. Soon after he left, he began to manufacture and sell Postum, a coffee substitute made from grains. In 1898 he put Crape-Nuts, a packaged breakfast food, on the market, and by 1903 his fortune was estimated at ten million dollars. It was another patient at the sanitarium, an insurance man from St. Louis named Charles D, Bolin, who interested W. K. Kellogg in forming a company for the manufacture of Corn Flakes. The two men bought the patent rights from Dr. Kellogg, and formed what in time became the enormously successful Kellogg Company. In 1930, W. K. took his huge fortune and organized the W. K. Kellogg Foundation—one of the largest philanthropic organizations in the United States. Postum, Grape-Nuts, and Com Flakes were only three of the packaged foods that appeared on the market at the turn of the century. These new foods not only brought fame and fortune to their inventors, they also revolutionized the eating habits of the American people. Closing the gates to immigration. During the 1920's the United States reversed one of its oldest traditions by closing its gates to immigration almost completely. Earlier, it is true, the United States had excluded Chinese and most other Asiatics by specific laws. And, in 1907, President Theodore Roosevelt bad negotiated a "Gentle- men's Agreement" with Japan, by which the Japanese agreed to forbid the emigration of laborers to the United States. With such exceptions, however, the historic role of the United States as a haven of refuge and a land of opportunity for worthy immigrants had seldom been seriously questioned by most Americans before the war. Indeed, during the decade before World War I. More Europeans settled in the United States than in any previous ten year period. Reasons for closing the gates. Why did a nation of immigrants and descendants of immigrants suddenly decide to bar its doors to newcomers? One reason was the general anti-Euro- pean feeling that swept over America after the war. But certain groups in the population had special reasons of their own. Organized labor, for example, argued that new immigrants were willing to work for lower wages and thus pulled down the standard of living of American workingmen. Industrialists who had formerly favored immigration as a source of plentiful, cheap, unskilled labor no longer needed masses of unskilled workers, for by 1920 the railroads had been built and the basic industries such as steel were well developed. Finally, there were many established Americans who felt that the newer immigrants, mainly from eastern and southern Europe, did not easily become "Amer- icanized." These Americans thought that it was harmful to the country to admit settlers whose languages and customs were so different from those of older inhabitants. The immigration laws. Responding to these and other arguments. Congress passed three laws m the 1920's that progressively restricted immigration from Europe. The Emergency Quota Act of 1921 introduced a quota system which limited the number of Europeans and others who could be admitted to 3 per cent of the total number of persons of their nationality residing in the United States in tin- year 1910. The 1921 act also set a total yearly limit of about 350,000 immigrants. In 1924 an even more severe law was passed which reduced the annual quota from 3 to 2 per cent, and changed the base year from 1910 to 1890. This change in the base year discriminated against Italian, Austrian, Russian, and other eastern and southern Europeans because people of those nationalities had immigrated to the United States mainly after 1890. Some exceptions were made to the quota restrictions for students, the wives and children of resident American citizens, and immigrants from Canada and the Latin- American countries. Rut immigrants who were barred from American citizenship for any reason were excluded under the law of 1924. Finally, the National Origins Act of 1929 shifted the base year of immigration to 1920, but counterbalanced this more liberal provision by reducing to 150,000 the total number of immigrants to be admitted during any one year. The new immigration policies aroused a great deal of bitterness, especially among those eastern and southern European nationalities that were discriminated against under the quota system. The Japanese were also aroused because the immigration act of 1924 ended the Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907, which Japan had faithfully observed, and closed the doors completely to Japanese immigrants. The war of tariffs. While closing its doors to immigrants, the United States was also, like other nations, raising tariff barriers to keep out foreign products. As you have seen, the Fordnev-Mc- Cumber Tariff of 1922 increased the import duties on hundreds of items. About eight years later, the Hawley-Smoot Tariff of 1930 lifted tariff rates to the highest level in American history. America's high tariff policy proved a cruel blow to many countries in Latin America and in Europe. The economic strength of the countries affected depended in large part upon the sale of products to the United States. When America's high tariffs deprived these countries of their best markets, their economic strength declined. Factories closed, men were thrown out of work, and the surplus of farm products mounted steadily. 