m
I
THE MAKING OF
MODERN AMERICA
Authors: LEON H. CANFIELD
HO WARD B. WILDER
Editors:	HOWARD R. ANDERSON
ELLIS MERTON COULTER
JOHN D. HICKS
NELSON P. MEAD
MAP AND CHART EDITOR: ROBERT M. CHAPIN, JR.
MIFFLIN COMPANY • Cfje ftibeisibc Press tCambritige
ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS
Leon H. Canfield, author, has served for a
number of years as Professor of History and
Head of the Social Science Department, Fair-
leigh Dickinson College, Rutherford, N.J. He
was formerly Supervisor of History, Townsend
Harris High School, College of the City of
New York, and Head of the Upper School and
Master of History at the Brunswick School in
Greenwich, Conn.
Howard B. Wilder, author, made the teaching
of American history his primary concern during
the 15 years he was Head of the Department
of Social Studies, Melrose High School, Mel-
rose, Mass. Subsequently he became Principal
of that school. He is also co-author of This Is
America’s Story.
Howard R. Anderson, general editor, has
served as Provost of the University of Roches-
ter, New York. He was associated for a num-
ber of years with the United States Office of
Education and was formerly Professor of Edu-
cation at Cornell University and Director of
Social Studies in the Ithaca, N.Y., Public
Schools. Prior to that he was Assistant Pro-
fessor of History at the University of Iowa and
Head of Social Studies in the University High
School.
Ellis Merton Coulter, consulting editor, is Pro-
fessor of American History, University of
Georgia. He is co-editor of A History of the
South and author of numerous books on
southern history.
John D. Hicks, consulting editor, has served
for a number of years as A. F. and May T.
Morrison Professor of American History, Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley. He was
formerly Professor of History at the Universi-
ties of Nebraska and Wisconsin. Among his
publications are The Populist Revolt, The
Federal Union, The American Nation, and
A Short History of American Democracy.
Nelson P. Mead, consulting editor, is the
author of The Development of the United
States Since 1865. As Professor of History,
College of the City of New York, he devoted
special attention to the preparation of Ameri-
can history teachers for the secondary schools.
Robert M. Chapin, Jr., map and chart editor,
is map-maker for Time and has prepared
maps for other publications, such as the Look
At America series and The Pacific World. He
has also been a lecturer at Clark University,
Worcester, Massachusetts.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
For specialized assistance at various points in the preparation of the manu-
script or in the illustration of this book, the authors, editors, and publisher
wish to thank the following persons: Richard Bartlett, Harry D. Berg,
Samuel H. Bryant, Duane Decker, William Diez, Jere Donovan, Mary
Pieters Keohane, Dyno Lowenstein, Alastair M. Taylor, and C. Lester
Walker. Permission to reprint passages from other publications is gratefully
acknowledged on page xvi. Picture credits are also listed on pages xv—xvi.
copyright © 1966, 1964 by houghton mifflin company
COPYRIGHT 1950 BY HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED INCLUDING THE RIGHT TO REPRODUCE
THIS BOOK OR PARTS THEREOF IN ANY FORM
HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY • BOSTON
NEW YORK • ATLANTA * GENEVA, ILL. * DALLAS * PALO ALTO
PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.
Contents
f7 ? , /
YOUR AMERICA* Providing a few glimpses of America today	1
Part One- early America develops
EUROPEANS ESTABLISH AN INDEPENDENT
NATION IN THE NEW WORLD
19
CHAPTER 1. Europe Finds and Explores a New World	20
Explaining why and how European nations happened to discover,
then to explore, and finally to colonize the Americas
CHAPTER 2. English Colonies Dominate North America	37
Describing the founding of English settlements and the growth of
English colonial strength in the eastern half of North America
CHAPTER 3. The Colonists Develop a Life of Their Own	61
Telling how the English colonists in North America made their livings,
how they were governed, what they read and enjoyed
CHAPTER 4. England's American Policy Leads to Revolt
Tracing events which caused the feelings of the English colonists to
change from loyalty toward the mother country to open hostility
81
CHAPTER 5. The Thirteen Colonies Win Their Independence
99
Investigating reasons why the colonists declared their independence,
and reporting the long struggle they waged to establish it
UNIT
TWO
UNDER THE CONSTITUTION THE NEW NATION
GROWS STRONG AT HOME AND ABROAD 123
CHAPTER 6. A Strong Union Replaces a Weak Confederation	124
Explaining how thoughtful men brought the new nation through a
critical period to a workable republic under the Constitution
CHAPTER 7. Federalists Launch the New Government	145
Telling about several important steps that were taken to start the
new republic firmly and confidently on the road to success
CHAPTER 8. Republicans Strengthen the Nation at Home and Abroad	162
Relating how the early nation doubled its territory, increased its
effectiveness, and gained respect from other countries
CHAPTER 9. Growing National Unity is Checked by Sectional Differences 181
Explaining why and how such questions as slavery and the tariff
caused differences of opinion to arise between North and South
CHAPTER 10. Andrew Jackson Dominates the Political Scene	202
Describing how a frontier President led the nation along paths which
gave the average citizen a greater share in the conduct of affairs
vi
UNIT THREE
IMPORTANT CHANGES OCCUR IN THE
AMERICAN WAY OF LIFE
223
CHAPTER 11. Changes Occur in American Economic Life	224
Showing how modern America was foreshadowed by important devel-
opments in farming, manufacturing, transportation, and communication
CHAPTER 12. A Growing Population Calls for Social Reforms	239
Telling how certain Americans began to strive for some necessary
improvements in the American way of life
CHAPTER 13. Americans Create an American Culture	251
Explaining why it came about that American citizens began to be
proud of their literature, arts, sciences, and schools
THE EXPANDING NATION IS TORN APART,
THEN REUNITED	267
CHAPTER 14. The Nation Expands to the Pacific	268
Relating events which beckoned Americans to the Far West, fulfilling
the powerful westward urge of the growing nation
CHAPTER 15. The Slavery Issue Leads to Southern Secession	281
Explaining how and why the smoldering differences between southern
and northern states finally burst into flame
CHAPTER 16. North and South Fight a Bitter War	299
Reporting the long war that was fought between North and South to
prove that states do not have the right to withdraw from the Union
vii
320
CHAPTER 17. The Southern States Are Restored to the Union
Describing the tragic era of Reconstruction when North and South
tried with discouraging results to compose their differences
Glancing Back Over Part One	337
Part TlVO* MODERN AMERICA EMERGES
Looking Ahead in Part Two
340
FOUNDATIONS ARE LAID FOR THE
MODERN ECONOMIC SYSTEM
343
CHAPTER 18. Pioneers Settle the Last Frontier
Telling about the settlement of the open spaces of the American West
and how these areas added strength to the Union
CHAPTER 19. Our Modern Business and Industrial System Is Born
Relating how important developments in transportation, communica-
tion, and industry stimulated vigorous economic growth
CHAPTER 20. Expanding Industry Presents Problems to Both Government and
Labor	378
Explaining why and how government began to regulate big business,
and tracing the efforts of labor to strengthen its bargaining power
CHAPTER 21. The Farmer Increases Production but Suffers Hard Times	397
Investigating widespread discontent among farmers and describing
their efforts to gain a fairer share of the nations wealth
viii
UNIT SIX
A GROWING POPULATION FACES
PROBLEMS AND ENRICHES ITS WAY
OF LIFE
417
CHAPTER 22. New Americans Join with Old to Meet New Problems	418
Telling about changing characteristics in our fast-growing population
and of social problems that came with these changes
CHAPTER 23. American Culture Develops Rapidly	429
Describing how American literature, art, science, schools, and amuse-
ments became increasingly more distinctive
POLITICAL PARTIES STRUGGLE FOR
CONTROL
449
CHAPTER 24. Political Abuses Demand Reform as Party Strife Intensifies 450
Recounting developments in politics and government from the start
of President Grant’s administration to the end of President Arthurs
CHAPTER 25. Political Control Shifts from Party to Party	462
Continuing the account of political developments from the start of
President Cleveland’s first administration to the end of his second term
CHAPTER 26. The United States Continues Its Policy of Isolation	472
Explaining why the government still kept aloof from foreign entangle-
ments even though American interests abroad were increasing
ix
Part Three-modern America matures
Looking Ahead in Part Three
488
UNIT EIGHT
MIGHTY ECONOMIC FORCES COMPETE
MASTERY IN MODERN AMERICA
FOR
493
CHAPTER 27. The United States Becomes an Industrial Giant	494
Relating the spectacular growth of American industry and business —
especially of big business — during the twentieth century
CHAPTER 28. The Government Restrains Big Business but Aids Labor	51C
Describing one tug-of-war between governments and big business,
and another between big business and growing labor
CHAPTER 29. Finance and Foreign Trade Affect the Nation’s Prosperity	531
Considering vital problems of government finance and foreign trade,
along with their influence upon American prosperity
CHAPTER 30. Farmers Seek Aid from the Government	548
Returning to the story of discontent among farmers, and explaining
how prosperity finally came to the farms in our own day
CHAPTER 31. Conservation Becomes a National Problem	563
Describing once-wasteful use of our rich resources, and how a far-
reaching program of conservation was gradually undertaken
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE DEVELOP A
MODERN WAY OF LIFE
581
CHAPTER 32. Social Changes Help to Make a New America	582
Relating how our population continued to grow and move about, and
how new solutions were tried for social problems, old and new
X
CHAPTER 33. Modern Times Bring Cultural Changes in American Life	594
Sketching the dramatic intensity of modern American living, and
detailing remarkable progress in education, science, and the arts
UNIT
THE UNITED STATES BECOMES A WORLD
LEADER
615
CHAPTER 34. The United States Adopts a Policy of Imperialism	616
Reporting how the United States began to turn away from its policy
of isolation and to acquire possessions and influence abroad
CHAPTER 35. The United States Extends its Influence in the Western Hemi- 631
sphere
Tracing the extension of our influence in Latin America and in turn
the gradual growth of unity among the Americas
CHAPTER 36. The United States Takes an Active Part in Far Eastern Affairs 650
Investigating reasons for our growing interest in the Far East and
the development of our Far Eastern policy
CHAPTER 37. The United States Fights for Democracy in World War I	659
Reporting trends and events which finally involved the United States
in World War I, and the part we played in winning the war
CHAPTER 38. The United States Rejects World Leadership but Continues to
Work for Peace	676
Telling how the Treaty of Versailles was written, why we rejected it,
but how we kept searching for peace
CHAPTER 39. Aggressor Nations Plunge the World into a Second World War 688
Investigating ambitions and rivalries which thwarted all efforts to keep
the peace and finally involved the world in another terrible war
CHAPTER 40. An Uneasy Peace Follows the Winning of World War II	705
Reporting how the United States helped win the war, and telling
how, after the war, new problems kept the world on edge
XI
POLITICAL LEADERS STRUGGLE
WITH PROBLEMS OF GOVERNMENT 731
CHAPTER 41. The Progressive Movement influences Political Development 732
Tracing efforts to increase the political power of the average voter, from
the administration of President McKinley to the end of World War I
CHAPTER 42. A Conservative Reaction Follows the Era of Progressive Reform 748
Dealing with Republican political control from the start of President
Harding’s administration to the return of the Democrats in 1933
CHAPTER 43. Franklin D. Roosevelt Introduces a New Deal	758
Relating vigorous steps taken during the administration of President
Franklin D. Roosevelt to combat depression and to win World War 11
CHAPTER 44. The United States Faces New Challenges	769
Describing problems, both national and international, since World
War 11, and what the United States has tried to do about them
YOUR GOVERNMENT • Describing How It Works Today	xvii
The Constitution of the United States — With Notes to Help Understand It xxxiii
Important Dates in the Making of Modern America	lii
The States of the United States of America	Ivi
Principal Dependencies of the United States	Ivii
Presidents and Vice-Presidents of the United States	Iviii
Index	Ix
List of Maps
The United States	4-5
A Map of American Industrial Resources 8-9
A Map of American Agricultural Re-
sources	12-13
Our Newest States	16
Europe versus Mohammedan World	22
Early Trade Routes	23
Portuguese All-Water Route to Asia	26
Columbus Discovers the New World	27
Voyage of Magellan and His Crew	29
Spanish Explorations in the New World	
[Ancient Indian Empires]	31
French Explorations in North America	35
Early Land Grants	41
English Explorers and Sea Dogs	43
Early Settlements	53
French and Indian War	57
North America in 1763	58
Life and Work in the Colonies	67
Colonial Government 1752	71
Where the War Began	96
War for Independence in the North	111
War for Independence in the West and	
South	113
North America in 1783	116
Western Claims Ceded to Federal Gov-	
ernment after 1783	127
Americans Explore the Far West	169
Barbary States	170
War of 1812	178
Southeast Boundary Settlement	188
Lxst of
American Industry Leads the World	6
Comparison of Living Standards	7
American Agriculture Leads the World 11
Succession to the English Crown (1485—
1820)	38
Wars Involving England and France 55
Value of English Money in Colonial Times 69
Important Provisions of the Bill of Rights 141
Our Growing Population (1790-1820)	142
Periods of Prosperity and Depression
(1790-1865)	184
Changes in the Tariff (1790-1865)	197
Political Parties and Their Presidents
(1789-1845)	215
Latin America After Wars for Inde-
pendence	191
Slavery Moves West	195
Early Routes to the West	231
Principal Canal Systems	233
Early Railroad System and Overland
Mail Routes	235
Southwest Boundary Settlement	275
Settlement of the Far West [Water
Routes]	278
Growth of the United States: 1783-1853 280
Slavery in the Territories	287
The United States in 1861	301
Union Strategy	301
War Between the States, Major Battles
and Campaigns [Eastern Front]	309
Western Railroads and Cattle Trails	365
Reclamation and Conservation	573
The United States and Possessions	626
1. Philippine Islands, 2. Hawaii, 3. Alaska,
4. Cuba, 5. Puerto Rico	627
Latin America Today	633
The Strategic Caribbean [Canal Zone]	639
Dominion of Canada	647
The Far East About 1939 [Japanese
Mandate 1919]	655
Western Front—1918 [Europe—1915] 673
Counterattack in the West	710
Battle of Germany	711
Counterattack in the East	713
The Department of State — World map xxix
Charts
Principal Canal Systems; Total Canal
Mileage (1810-1860); How a Canal
Lock Works	233
Total Railroad Mileage (1830-1860)	235
Our Growing Population (1820-1860)	242
The Rise and Fall of Immigration (1790-
1870)	243
Travel Time (1800-Present)	280
Northern and Southern Resources
in 1860	302
Political Parties and Their Presidents
(1845-1869)	327
Records of United States Patent Office	358
Rise of Steel Production (1860-1900)	359
62
EUROPEANS ESTABLISH AN INDEPENDENT NATION
colonies people were enthusiastic about
what could be made out of this great new
America.
But just what kind of people had carved
out a new life in the English colonies?
What kind of houses did they live in, and
what kind of churches did they attend?
How did they make their livings? How
were they governed? What did they read,
how did they get along together, and what
did they do in the way of entertainment
and fun? By answering questions like
these, this chapter pictures the way of life
that the colonists grew to cherish. The de-
velopment of colonial civilization is dis-
cussed under the following major points:
1.	Living conditions vary among the
colonists.
2.	Farming, industry, and trade flourish.
3.	The seeds of liberty and self-govern-
ment take root.
4.	The colonists begin to enjoy the arts.
1
Living Conditions Vary Among
the Colonists
Colonists come from many lands. The
settlers along the Atlantic coast came from
many places and had many different back-
grounds. Although the English far outnum-
bered any other single group, other na-
tionalities were well represented. Next to
the English in numbers were tire Scotch-
Irish and Germans, who eagerly turned to
the New World to escape religious persecu-
tion and economic hardship. The hardy
Scotch-Irish — people originally from Scot-
land who had lived for a while in Ireland
— settled chiefly along the frontier of New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia,
and the Carolinas. The Germans not only
pushed into the back country but made
their homes in large numbers in the more
settled parts of Pennsylvania. In addition
there were in the colonies French, Scotch,
Irish, Welsh, Swiss, Dutch, and Swedes.
“From this promiscuous breed,” observed a
French settler, “that race now called
Americans have arisen.” The colonies actu-
ally were a product not only of English
effort but of Old World expansion.
Colonial population increases. After a
slow start, population in the English col-
onies grew swiftly, partly because of immi-
gration and partly because the colonists
often had large families. Benjamin Frank-
lin, for example, was one of a family of
seventeen children. Families of fifteen,
or even twenty children were not unusual,
but the death rate was likewise very high.
Large families were an advantage, because
every member could contribute to the fam-
ily’s support.
In general, the population was scattered
rather thinly along the Atlantic seaboard.
Just before the American Revolution there
were almost 3 million people in the colonies,
but only one tenth of them lived in towns.
Philadelphia had nearly 25,000 people.
Boston and New York were close behind
with about 20,000, and Charleston was
fourth with only about 10,000. Cities and
towns did not then have the conveniences
which later made them very different from
farm sections. As centers of wealth and
progress, however, the cities exerted a great
influence upon the development of learning
and the fine arts.
Social classes develop. When the settlers
came to America, they left behind them the
sharp class distinctions of Europe, where
a man’s position in life was based largely
upon the family into which he had been
bom. But as community life developed
in the colonies, certain distinct groups
emerged. There were three main groups:
(1) An aristocracy based on wealth
was at the top of the social ladder. This
WOODENWARE
group was made up of southern planters,
great landholders of the middle colonies,
rich merchants of the cities, and a few pro-
fessional men like doctors and lawyers.
(2)	Next came the small, independent
farmers who were really the backbone of
the colonial population. Also in this group
were skilled workmen, small shopkeepers,
and laborers.
(3)	The third group included the inden-
tured servants and the Negro slaves.
These early American social groupings
were based upon wealth rather than birth.
With the exception of Negro slaves, anyone
who used his head and worked hard had
a chance to improve his lot, so that it was
reasonably easy to move into a higher social
group.
Colonial homes, food, and dress vary.
When building their homes, the early col-
onists did not follow any one style of archi-
tecture. The kind of house each man lived
in depended upon (1) what he could afford,
(2)	the material available for building, and
(3)	his Old World background.
The homes of the very earliest pioneers,
of course, were crude temporary structures.
These were replaced as soon as possible by
frame houses. The small farmers and
townsmen built simple houses of wood,
but on the great estates, large homes of
stone or brick, as well as of wood, were
erected. During the 1700’s the houses of
the wealthy people grew more elaborate.
Splendid mansions appeared on the south-
ern plantations. Wealthy people in the
cities built spacious and elaborately fur-
nished houses of wood or brick.
There was great variety also in the in-
teriors of colonial homes. In a farmer’s
house, for instance, there was usually noth-
ing but simple, homemade furniture and
utensils. In the homes of the wealthy, on
the other hand, there were tapestries, paint-
ings, fine silver, glass and chinaware, and
good furniture. Many of these articles had
been imported or copied from English
models. All houses had at least one fire-
place. In the northern and middle colonies
this was a necessity, not only for heating
but for cooking meals and drying fruits
and vegetables. Southern plantation houses
Early planter and wiji
had fireplaces for chill evenings, but cook-
ing and drying were often done in small
buildings detached from the main house.
There were also noticeable differences in
the way people ate and dressed. After
the hardships of early settlement had
passed, there was plenty of food for
everyone, but there was not much va-
riety and delicacies were few. The ordi-
nary northern farmer and the poorer peo-
ple of the South ate only what they raised
or caught, except perhaps for a little salt or
tea. But the southern planter and the
northern men of wealth set a lavish table.
As for dress, the small farmer wore plain
homespun cloth or leather, produced in his
own household. On the other hand, the
“gentleman farmer” and the wealthy city
dweller closely followed the fashions of
London, dressing luxuriously in fine fabrics
imported from Europe. George Washing-
ton once wrote to his London agent:
“Whatever goods you send me, let them
be fashionable.”
Frontier life is rugged and democratic.
Very different from this more or less settled
life was that of the colonists on the fron-
tiers. From the beginning of the colonies,
restless settlers were constantly pushing
westward against the virgin forest that
walled in the coastline from Florida to
Maine. The simplest way to break through
it, pioneers found, was to follow the rivers
— the Connecticut, Hudson, Delaware, Sus-
quehanna, and their tributaries. (See map,
page 67.) Along these rivers which
stretched like fingers into the wilderness,
the fur trader and the hunter blazed the
63
textile machinery, ships, steam engine*
clothing, and shoes. But by the middle 0f
the century industrial activity had begun to
spread. The middle states were giving New
England a race for leadership, especially jn
the production of iron and steel. By this
time, too, the western regions were push-
ing forward in the production of farm
machinery, lumber, meat products, and
flour. The South, however, did not build
up industries on a large scale until after
the War Between the States.
Eli Whitney earned little from his cotton
gin, but became wealthy manufacturing fire-
arms. He was the first manufacturer to make
standard parts which could be assembled or
interchanged later.
was speeded up when bituminous, and
later anthracite, coal became available as
fuel. A factory no longer had to be built
beside a stream — it could be built wher-
ever supplies of coal and raw materials
were near at hand. Most factories and
foundries were still clustered in the New
England and middle states, however. Into
them flowed the ever-increasing raw mate-
rials of the growing country — cotton from
the South, wool from the West, apparently
limitless supplies of timber, coal, iron, and
other minerals from various parts of the
country.
Industry becomes firmly established. As
the hum of industry grew louder in the
northeastern and middle states, more and
more people gave up farming to work in
factories. Factories multiplied, and un-
der the factory system (the production
of goods in factories, as opposed to home
industry) towns and cities grew rapidly
too. The urban (city and town) popula-
tion of Rhode Island increased from less
than ten per cent in 1810 to nearly 40 per
cent in 1840. New England led the coun-
try’s industrial development, especially in
the manufacture of textiles. In 1860 the
value of cotton goods produced there was
nearly $80,000,000, as compared with a
third of that amount in the middle states
and only $8,000,000 in the South. The
Northeast also led in the manufacture of
-------- CHECK-UP ---------
What developments marked the beginning of
the Industrial Revolution in America?
1.	How were the first factories started in
America?
2.	What evidence is there of the rapid de-
velopment of the factory system after
1812?
3.	Name several inventions which contributed
to the rise of American industry. What
were the advantages of steam over water
power?
4.	In 1860 what was the position of the
various sections in manufacturing?
The Factory System Brings
New Economic Groups
Capitalism grows strong in America. In
the early 1800’s factories were small. Usu-
ally there was only a little money invested
in the equipment of any one plant. Goods
were turned out slowly and in small quan-
tities, for a limited number of buyers.
As industry grew, however, it offered
golden opportunities to men with keen
business insight who had enough capital
(money or property) to put their ideas into
action. As the factory system took root in
America, a capitalist class began to de-
velop. By the middle of the century, a
group of industrial leaders were in control
of many business ventures. They were
228
ECONOMIC CHANGES OCCUR
ded by the growing popularity of the
Corporation as a form of business organ-
^^corporation was permitted by law to
11 shares of stock (certificates of owner-
sf. \ t0 the general public, and to use the
money gained by the sale to carry on its
business.2 By this means, men who wanted
to start new industries could get together
much larger amounts of capital than any
one, or a few of them, might have been
able to manage alone. With this capital,
they built larger factories, put in more ex-
pensive machinery, bought greater amounts
of raw materials, and developed wider mar-
kets for the goods they produced. The
profits from the business were then split up
among the stockholders, according to the
number of shares of stock owned by each.
Investors who owned a large number of
shares of stock became increasingly
wealthy.
A laboring class emerges. Money and
machines played an important part in the
growth of American industry, but without
a large enough number of workers, the in-
dustrialists could never have carried out
their plans. Luckily, enough good work-
ers could be found. Sons and daughters of
farmers, eager to escape the hard work
and long hours on the farms, joined with
an ever-increasing stream of immigrants to
operate the mines, run the machines, and
do other work in industry. Among the
immigrants, VA million Irish had found
their way to America by 1860. Most of
them went to work in the factories of
the industrial centers, or with the gangs of
workmen building canals and railroads.
About the same time, a million German im-
migrants arrived, many of whom were
skilled factory workers.
The life of the industrial worker changed
greatly from what it had been. As factories
grew larger and corporation managers took
charge, the worker had less and less per-
sonal contact with his “boss.” Managers
simply carried out the orders of owners or
stockholders, who in turn were more con-
cerned with expenses and profits than with
2 For a fuller explanation of the corporation,
turn to pages 369-70.
229
the personal problems of the workers. This
state of affairs did not harm the skilled
worker much, for he was always in de-
mand and as a rule made good wages. But
the unskilled worker had a hard time mak-
ing both ends meet. His average pay in
Massachusetts until 1860 was about five
dollars a week. Women received less than
half that much, while children were even
more poorly paid. All workers labored
from twelve to fifteen hours a day. In some
places they started to work as early as four
thirty in the morning. Women and children
made up a large part of the factory labor
supply. It was estimated in 1832 that two
fifths of the workers in New England tex-
tile mills were children from four to six-
teen years of age, who were “brought up as
ignorant as the Arabs of the desert.”
Labor makes demands. Laboring peo-
ple, separated from their employers by an
ever-widening gulf, began a struggle for
more decent conditions early in the cen-
tury. They formed unions and demanded
shorter hours, higher wages, better working
conditions, more chances for education, po-
litical rights, and social improvement. The
early unions in the United States were lim-
ited largely to skilled workers. Progress in
labor organization was slow because it
had been regarded as illegal for work-
The sewing factory of an early New York
department store shows that workers were
beginning to be supervised by alert foremen.
240
THE AMERICAN WAY OF LIFE CHANGES
The story of the growing nation and the
movements for reform will be told in three
parts:
1.	The population of the country in-
creases.
2.	Some northerners crusade against
slavery.
3.	Reformers try to improve American
life.
1
The Population of the Country
Increases
Important population changes occur.
One of the important social developments
taking place in the United States during the
first half of the 1800’s was the rapid growth
in population. (See chart, page 242.) By
1840 the inhabitants of the United States
numbered 17 million people, and in the
next 20 years the total in the states and
territories increased to nearly 31/2 million.
The western areas grew faster than the
other parts of the country; by the middle of
the century, almost half the population
lived west of the Alleghenies. Another im-
portant trend was the growth of larger
centers of population. In 1840, for instance,
there were 44 communities with a popula-
tion of 8000 or more, making up one
twelfth of the country’s total population.
Twenty years later there were over three
times as many cities and towns of that
size or larger, making up about a sixth of
the total population. By 1860 more than
a million people lived in the combined
areas of New York City and Brooklyn, New
York.
Immigration increases. A large part of
this population increase was caused by
waves of immigration to American shores.
From the beginning, of course, the United
States had been a nation of immigrants.
The flow had started during the colonial
period, as English, Scotch, Irish, Scotch-
Irish, Germans, Swedes, Dutch, and others
came in search of homes, freedom, and
fortunes in the New World. After the neJ
republic was formed, new waves of iirunjjl
gration occurred: for example, during thj
ten-year period from 1821 to 1831, about
150,000 immigrants arrived. From 1841 to
1851 the total immigration figure wjJ
nearly 1% million, and from 1851 to 1861 it
rose to more than 2K million. (See chart!
page 243.)
Many immigrants come from Ireland
and Germany. Most of the immigrants in
the first half of the 1800’s came from the
British Isles and northern and western
Europe. In the years between 1820 and
1850 the greatest number of immigrants
came from Ireland. Many Irishmen emi-
grated to America because they were un-
happy under British rule. Then in 1845
Ireland’s potato crop failed, and a severe
famine swept the country. During the next
few years, hundreds of thousands of Irish-
men were literally starved into leaving their
native land. To them America was the
land of promise. Nearly all the Irish settled
in the East, especially in the cities.
The next largest group of immigrants to
America during these years were the Ger-
mans. Many Germans came because of
poor crops and hard times at home. Others
left their country because of persecutions
after the failure of a revolutionary uprising
in Germany near the mid-century. Most
of the German immigrants turned to the
soil, and at least half of them pushed their
way across the mountains to the rich west-
ern farm lands.
Conditions in America also influenced
the flow of immigrants. Immigration al-
ways rose during prosperous times and fell
off during bad times. Except for the de-
pression years following the Panic of 1837,
the years from 1820 to 1850 were generally
prosperous.
Immigrants meet hostility. As more and
more people came from abroad, some
native-born Americans raised a storm of pro-
test. Most of the newcomers from across
the ocean became laborers, farmers, or
mechanics and were willing to work long
hours for low wages. Employers were more
than willing to hire them. Immigrants who
(Continued on page 242)

. The blacksmith was
* one of the most impor-
tant citizens in early
communities. In addi-
on to shoeing horses,
he repaired tools and
wagons.
THE FRONTIER
Log construction of houses and other build-
ings throughout the wooded frontier is shown
in this detail. This building served as a
general store in Lincoln's day.
.
A frontier store looked
like this in early days. It
stocked only such foods ^
and articles as could not
be grown or made at
home.
In crude homes like these the
frontier settlers made themselves as
comfortable as they could, winter
and summer. The addition at the
left was a shop used for making
knrrolc nnrl	\A/nnrJpn nrticles.
A portrait of Lincoln hangs
over the stone fireplace of
the postoffice where Lincoln
once served as postmaster.
t
New Salem, Illinois, became a frontier community like thousands of others when pioneers
were pushing westward toward the Mississippi River. Most traces of such communities
have vanished, but New Salem has been restored and is visited by many people each year
because it was here that Abraham Lincoln grew to manhood. Simple scenes like these
Were everyday sights to thousands of American citizens only TOO years ago.
i
241
of Immigration
millions
of PEOPLE
POLITICAL DISCONTENT IN GERMANY
FAMINE IN IRELAND
242
THE AMERICAN WAY OF LIFE CHANGES
settled in the cities were likely to make
their homes in wretched tenements and
shanties, because they could afford nothing
better. Since low wage scales tend to
lower the standards of living, native-born
workers resented the threat to their own
higher standards of living.
Opponents of the Democratic Party also
were disturbed because so many of the
new Americans added voting strength to
Democratic political machines, such as the
Tammany Hall machine in New York City.
Some religious groups also objected to the
newcomers because many of the immi-
grants, particularly among the Irish and
Germans, were Roman Catholics. Protest-
ants were alarmed by the increase of Cath-
olic churches, convents, and parochial
schools.
In the early lS50’s the scattered groups
which opposed the immigrants formed a M
semi-secret political organization whiJ|
called itself the American Party. When i
asked about the name and purpose of the
party, its members replied: “I know noth- I
ing.” Soon the party came to be called the
“Know-Nothing” Party.
CHECK-UP
Why did the population of the United States in-
crease rapidly in the second quarter of the
nineteenth century?	H
1.	What evidences were there that our popu-
lation was rapidly increasing?
2.	Why did the Irish migrate to America? the
Germans? Where did these two national-
ities tend to settle?
3.	Why were some Americans hostile to the
immigrants? How did they show their
hostility?
The growth of population in the United States from 1790 to 1960 is shown in charts
on this page, on page 423, and on page 584. About how large was the population in
1820? About how great was the increase from 1 790 to 1 820? What was the approximate
population in 1860? Was the rate of increase more rapid before or after 1820? What
was happening by 1860 to the proportion of people living in urban places?
			
			
			
	□	Li	
Immigration was an important reason for the rise of our population from 1820 to 1860.
About how many million immigrants arrived during this time? Why did so many come
from Ireland and Germany?
Some Northerners Crusade
Against Slavery
Slavery retards southern population
growth. Most immigrants were attracted
to the North and West rather than to the
South. There was little manufacturing in
the South at this time, largely because the
chief economic interest in this area was
the growing of cotton. Mechanics and other
skilled factory workers, therefore, had little
reason to look southward. Nor were there
many attractions for laborers and farmers,
who would have to compete with slave
labor in the cultivation of cotton. An immi-
grant who wanted to become an inde-
pendent farmer was also discouraged by
the prospect of competing with the great
rvl4-„„„ —V./x	1 ci ttTo niimKorc nf
slaves. Few immigrants, therefore, were
attracted to the slave states, and the South
gradually lost ground in population in com-
parison with the North and West.
The South develops social groups. Slav-
ery also helped to create more distinct
social classes in the South than were to be
found in other parts of the country. In 1860
the aristocracy at the top of the social
ladder included about 6000 great planters
and their families, out of a total south-
ern white population of about 6 million.
Then there were the well-to-do townsmen,
the small independent farmers, and me-
chanics and tradesmen, which together
made up the middle class. Still lower
were the “poor whites” of the sand
hills, the pine barrens, and the secluded
mountain regions. Living in isolation on
poor land and lacking opportunities for
education, the “poor whites” endured pov-
erty and hardship. At the bottom of
the social scale were the slaves, who

l—1:____J
l-„ —1_____1.

243
1
‘Bed and
bundle bed
2
Progress Is Slower in Drama,
Fine Arts, and Music
Plays gain in popularity. Before the
Jacksonian Era, the drama had held only a
small place in American life. Now theaters
began to appear in most of the cities.
Thanks to better transportation, such
American actors as Edwin Forrest, Joseph
Jefferson, and James H. Hackett toured the
eastern cities and presented American as
well as English plays. As ocean travel im-
proved, English actors appeared on the
American stage. By the close of the War
Between the States, such American dramas
as Francesca da Rimini, Rip Van Winkle,
Uncle Tom’s Cabin, and The Gladiator had
been presented to enthusiastic audiences.
The outspoken attacks on slavery in the
last two plays undoubted-
ly were partly responsible
for their popularity in the
northern states.
Sculpture, painting, and
architecture develop slow-
ly. While literature and
drama were making lively
progress, the field of art
lagged far behind. Ameri-
cans were too busy with
the practical affairs of life
to give much time to art.
256
Sculpture failed to attract much interest«
America, painting declined, and little
accomplished in architecture. French ardr^
tectural influence continued strong in L0 "1
isiana. In other parts of the country, build
ing generally followed the European revival
of Greek forms of architecture. Contribu
tions to the Greek revival were made bv
Thomas Jefferson, who designed the capitol
at Richmond in the classical style, and bv
Benjamin Latrobe, one of the designers of
the Capitol at Washington. But this style was
merely a borrowed form. It had nothing to
do with American needs, and it was in no
way an expression of American creative
talent. By the 1850’s, the classical style was
giving way to new tastes in architecture.
There followed a jumble of almost every
known style, made worse by a clutter of
machine-made trimmings.
American interest in music grows. The
growth of American interest in music re-
sulted largely from the influence of certain
immigrants, especially the Germans.
.Wound the mid-century, they were leaders
in organizing musical societies and orches-
tras which did much to acquaint Amer-
ica with the music of the Old World.
American composers tried writing operas
and symphonies, but their works had no
lasting success. Appreciation of music, how-
ever, continued to spread, and schools and
colleges began to offer courses in music.
Boston started to give musical instruction
in its public schools, largely through the
efforts of Lowell Mason, an American com-
poser of sacred music. Minstrel shows
popularized American tunes like Stephen
Foster’s “My Old Kentucky Home,” “Oh!
'Duncan jP/iy/c
side chair
n»ah,” and “Old Folks at Home,” and
nan Emmett’s “Dixie.” The Chickering
■ l0 won world-wide reputation for its
P’^ellent construction. Piano playing and
composition became distinctive American
accomplishments.
________ CHECK-UP ----------
What progress was made in the fine arts?
] What were the chief developments in the
theater?
2 What styles of architecture succeeded one
another in America?
3. To what extent did Americans become
more interested in music?
Science and Education Move
Forward
American science begins to be important.
Science at this time moved ahead much
faster than the arts. Among the Americans
who won fame for important scientific con-
tributions were Louis Agassiz (ag' uh-see),
Benjamin Silliman, Asa Gray, and John
Audubon. Agassiz and Silliman made con-
tributions to the knowledge of geology (the
study of the earth), and Agassiz is remem-
bered as well for his work on zoology (study
of animals). Gray was America’s leading
botanist (botany is the science of plant
life), and Audubon
is known for his ob-
servation and de-
scription of bird life.
The public was able
to learn about recent
discoveries through
new periodicals,
scientific publica-
tions, museums, and
scientific associa-
tions. The Smith-
sonian Institution in
Washington was of
particular impor-
tance. It was found-
The Greek revival in American architecture
is shown by the columns and other features
of this old State Capitol in Iowa City. The
sugar urn (lower left) also shows classical
influence.
ed in 1846 through the generosity of an
Englishman, James Smithson, “for the in-
crease and diffusion of knowledge among
men.”
Americans excel in applied science.
Americans took the lead at this time in the
practical use of scientific knowledge to
meet human needs. As one foreign ob-
server put it, “These very Americans who
have not discovered one of the general
laws of mechanics have introduced into
navigation an engine that changes the
aspect of the world.” He went on to say
that the “social conditions and institutions
of democracy” peculiarly fitted men “to
seek the immediate and useful practical re-
sults of the sciences.” By actually putting
science to work in transportation, com-
munication, building, manufacturing, and
the production of the material comforts of
everyday life, Americans started along the
road to leadership in the industrial world.
They borrowed freely from the Old World.
England’s mechanical devices — textile and
other machines, the steam engine, and the
257
Chinese laborers were hired by the Central
Pacific as it drove tunnels, built bridges, and
laid tracks eastward.
$32,000, or $48,000 for each mile of road
they built. The size of the loan depended
on the nature of the territory to be crossed
— prairie, plateau, or mountain area.
The "iron horse" crosses the continent.
The Central Pacific and the Union Pacific,
eager to make the most out of these tempt-
ing government subsidies, began to build
rapidly. They faced great difficulties, how-
ever. The Central Pacific had to transport
many of its materials by sea from the East
Coast. When the Union Pacific began con-
struction in 1865, Omaha was not connected
by rail with Chicago. Rails and equipment
had to be shipped up the Missouri River or
by wagon-train from the nearest railroad.
Even when Chicago was connected by rail
with Council Bluffs, Iowa, in 1867, there
was no bridge across the river connecting
Council Bluffs with Omaha.
During the winter of 1868-1869, the con-
struction race became intense. Thousands
of men — Chinese coolies on the Central
Pacific, and Irish immigrants on the
Union Pacific — battled time, nature, and
the Indians. Finally, on May 10, 1869, the
two lines came together at Promontory
Point near Ogden, Utah. A spike of gold
was driven into the final tie. News of this
event was instantly telegraphed to all par^ 1
of the country, and noisy celebrations were
held in the principal cities.
More transcontinental roads are built
Even before the joining of the Union I
Pacific with the Central Pacific, new lines
were started over other western routes
Construction was interrupted, however, bv 1
the Panic of 1873, and it was not until about
ten years later that the new railroads were
opened to transcontinental traffic. The
Northern Pacific stretched from Duluth
Minnesota, across the fertile prairies of
Dakota and Montana to Portland, Oregon
and Tacoma, Washington. The Southern
Pacific, running from New Orleans across
Texas and through the Gadsden Purchase
to California, tapped the wealth of the
Southwest. At about the same time the
Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe pierced
the Arkansas valley and put the scenic
canyons and deserts of Arizona and New
Mexico within reach of tourists from the
East.
Railroads and settlers help each other.
As the railroads fanned out over the
prairies, they encouraged more settlers to
go West. Homesteaders in territory
through which railroads ran could easily
ship their goods to the markets of the East,
and they avoided many of the dangers and
hardships of the earlier pioneers. At the
same time, the railroads depended for their
prosperity upon a growing western popu-
lation to provide freight and passengers for
them to haul.
The close relationship between railroad
prosperity and the growth of the West was
clearly understood by the outstanding rail-
road promoter, James J. Hill. Hill built the
Great Northern railway system, the lines of
which were completed from the Great Lakes
to Seattle, Washington, early in 1893. He
came on the scene too late to share in the
generous government land grants. He
realized that the success of his railroad
would depend upon the development of
the vast resources of the Northwest. There-
fore Hill organized excursions and con-
ducted trainloads of prospective settlers to
see for themselves what possibilities the
lands in this region offered them.
Even after the settlers arrived, Hill con-
364
Total railroad mileage
constructed and in use
On thousands) /
Western F
and Cattl
mont.
Aiiles Cit,
'oamo y
Virgil
MINN-
"Tov/a
Union
Ogallala.

\Ceou&
^ento
UTAH | COLO.
JM'dntic ft PacTf7<r
Los Angeles
^/ Oi «pt.Vtorth | u’v
I n.m.
Iterr
Railroads
Cattle trail SSSSu
Major Federal land:
grants to railroads
San Antonio,
Railroad mileage multiplied about five times between 1865 and 1896. Included in the
increase were five lines to the Far West. Notice how cattle trails joined them. Notice also
that there was no rail connection with the East when western railroads were started (see
page 364).
tinued to take an interest in their welfare.
To create a new market for what they pro-
duced, he arranged for steamship service
between the Orient and the Pacific termi-
nals of his railroad. Soon American food,
as well as raw materials and manufactured
goods, were flowing in a steady stream to
the ports of China and Japan. Hill’s fore-
sight and boldness helped to establish
prosperous ranches and thriving towns
from Minnesota through the Dakotas,
Montana, and Idaho to the west coast.
Railroad mileage increases throughout
the country. The most spectacular growth
of railroads in the era after 1865 took place
in the West. Yet it would be a mistake to
assume that railroad expansion was con-
fined to any one section. Throughout the
365
Suffragette, 1800’s
NEW AMERICANS JOIN WITH OLD TO
MEET NEW PROBLEMS
So at last I was going to America! The boundaries burst. The arch of
heaven soared. A million suns shone out for every star. The winds rushed
in from outer space, roaring in my ears, “America! America!”
Mary Antin, The Promised Land
I865-I896
The first United States census, completed
in 1790, was taken by 217 men. Riding
through the thinly settled countryside, car-
rying their inkhorns and quill pens in their
saddlebags, they made census records on
odds and ends of paper, for the govern-
ment was too poor to furnish regular
forms. Their totals showed that the popula-
tion of the country was less than 4 million.
Many more census takers were needed
in the year 1860, for by that time the
population had increased to more than 31
million. This figure had doubled 30 years
later — to almost 63 million. With such
swift growth came a number of problems.
The population of the 1890’s did not re-
semble that of 1860 in the way that an en-
largement resembles a snapshot — in every-
thing but size. The pattern had changed.
The proportions of the groups within our
population had shifted. Some groups were
relatively larger, or had gained in pres-
tige and power. Others, important 30 years
418
before, had lost importance. Population
centers had shifted, and living conditions
had changed greatly.
This chapter tells the story of changing
elements in our fast-growing population
and of certain conditions that resulted. The
following topics cover this story:
1.	An increase in immigration brings
many changes.
2.	Extremes of wealth and poverty de-
velop in America.
3.	Social problems demand considera-
tion.
1
An Increase in Immigration
Brings Many Changes
America continues to attract foreigners.
The remarkable growth in our population
between 1860 and 1890 resulted partly
from a high birth rate and partly from the
fact that immigrants from foreign countries
were coming to America in larger numbers
than ever. Over 9 million came from
Europe alone during this period. By 1890
there were more than 12/2 million foreign-
born people in the country. (See chart,
page 421.)
Immigrants come for many reasons.
Conditions in Europe were partly respon-
sible for the migrations. A few persons
were still leaving the lands of their birth
to escape religious persecution. There was
also political unrest; some men came to
this country to escape army service in
European wars. By far the largest number
came in the hope of making a better living
here. Some of them had suffered from the
crop failures in parts of Europe between
1870 and 1880. Men who were thrown out
of work during periods of economic unrest
looked eagerly to America as a land of
opportunity, especially those who were
hearing glowing reports of America from
relatives. The efforts of steamship com-
panies to fill their steerage (lowest class)
accommodations led to lower fares for the
Health officer vaccinating immigrant
ocean voyage. As a result, more and more
immigrants found it possible to break home
ties and to establish new homes across the
sea.
More immigrants arrive in good times.
The number of immigrants arriving in a
single year depended upon economic con-
ditions in America as well as in Europe.
With the growth of American industry,
some manufacturers attempted to recruit
laborers abroad. There was much work to
be done in this country, and there were
not enough workers to do it. Factories had
to be built, forests cut down, railroads con-
structed. Immigrants were more than wel-
come, particularly those who were willing
to work for low wages and to live with
few comforts and no luxuries.
In hard times fewer immigrants came.
During the depression which followed our
Panic of 1873, for example, the number de-
creased until in 1878 less than 140,000
foreign-born came into this country. This
total was the smallest since 1862. But with
the return of good times the flood of new-
comers grew until in 1882 the number was
nearly 800,000 a year.
Northern Europe sends the most immi-
grants. In the period following the War
Between the States, as before the war, a
larger number of new arrivals to this coun-
try came from the British Isles than from
any other part of Europe. More came from
Germany, however, than from any other
single country. During the ’70’s and ’80’s
there was a marked increase in the group
from Norway, Sweden, and Denmark, most
of them hard-working farmers, who found
419
420
A GROWING POPULATION ENRICHES ITS LIFE
homes in Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota,
and the Dakotas. Large numbers of people
continued to come from Ireland, though
the totals never equaled those resulting
from famine during the ’40 s and the ’50 s.
By the early 1890’s there was already a
noticeable rise in the rate of immigration
from southern and eastern Europe — Italy,
Russia, Poland, and the Balkan countries.
This increase in the number of southern
and eastern Europeans was only the begin-
ning of a mighty wave that reached a peak
in the early 1900’s (see pages 586 and 587).
Immigrants are blamed for social evils.
Beginning in the 1870’s there were objec-
tions raised in this country against the im-
migrants. Patriotic societies began to pro-
test the admission of so many foreign ele-
ments to the “melting pot.” They urged
restriction of immigration to America. The
foreign-born were blamed for the increase
in crime in their sections of the great cities.
If the newcomers were at fault, it was
owing in part to their ignorance of Ameri-
can laws and ways of life, in part to the
fact that bad housing and poverty often
lead to crime.
Labor and industry favor restriction.
Organized labor was a second group that
favored restrictions on immigration. Its
leaders were afraid that an unlimited
number of people coming to these shores
would mean ever-lower wages and that
immigrants would furnish a constant sup-
ply of strike-breakers. Captains of industry
made up a third group which began to want
limits put on the number of newcomers.
They had once favored free immigration
because it gave them cheap labor. Now
they began to blame the foreign-born for
increasing labor unrest and growing vio-
lence in strikes. Foreigners were labeled
“radicals.” “The ranks of anarchy and riots
number no Americans,” stated Chauncey
M. Depew in 1887. “The leaders boldly
proclaim that they come here not to enjoy
the blessings of our liberty and to sustain
our institutions but to destroy our govern-
ment, cut our throats, and divide our
property.”
The Chinese are excluded. The first
important attempt to restrict immigration
affected the Chinese. In 1868 the United
States had drawn up the Burlingame
Treaty with China. This agreement
allowed special privileges to Americans in
China and gave Chinese citizens the right
to travel and live in the United States
While the first transcontinental railroad
was being constructed (page 364), the
Chinese were welcomed to this country
because they provided cheap labor. By
1879, however, American labor complained
that it could not compete with the Chinese
coolies who worked for starvation wages
and lived under conditions that Americans
would not endure. Because of such pro-
tests, President Hayes succeeded in modify,
ing the Burlingame Treaty so that the United
States had the right to “regulate, limit, or
suspend” the entry of Chinese laborers.
When even more drastic measures than
this were demanded, a law was passed in
1882 which excluded Chinese laborers for a
period of ten years and denied American
citizenship to all Chinese nationals. In
1892 the period was extended for another
ten years. This restriction continued in
force until World War II. During this time
only students and certain specified classes
of Chinese were admitted to the United
States.
Special groups are barred. In 1882, an-
other law was passed which reflected the
tightening immigration policy of the United
States. Objectionable persons like paupers,
convicts, and the insane were forbidden to
land on our shores, and the steamship com-
panies were required to return to then-
homelands those who were not admitted.
Three years later (1885) the door was
closed to aliens who arrived under contract
to work for an American employer. Re-
strictions were extended in 1891 to exclude
those suffering from contagious and loath-
some diseases. Then a bill requiring all
new arrivals to prove their ability to read
and write was passed by Congress, but it
was vetoed by President Cleveland. Cleve-
land insisted that it was better to “admit a
hundred thousand immigrants who, though
unable to read and write, seek among us a
home and opportunity to work, than to ad-
mit one of those unruly agitators and
Many more immigrants came to America from 1881 to 1890 than came from 1871 to
1880. Can you explain why? Why did immigration decline after 1890? Compare this
chart with the one on page 243. What new reasons for immigration appeared after the
War Between the States?
enemies of governmental control who can
not only read and write, but delight in
arousing by inflammatory speech the illit-
erate and peacefully inclined to discontent
and tumult.”
The center of population shifts. As mil-
lions were added to our population, certain
important changes took place along with
the increase. In the first place, the center
of population shifted 150 miles westward
from 20 miles southeast of Chillicothe,
Ohio (1860), to 20 miles east of Columbus,
Indiana (1890). The shift westward had
been taking place gradually for many
years, but during this postwar period the
rate of change was very rapid. To be sure,
the most densely populated section was still
the one that included New England and
the Middle Atlantic states of New York,
New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. By 1890
this eastern section had an average of
nearly 103 persons per square mile. The
Rocky Mountain and Pacific regions, by
way of contrast, had an average of about
3 persons per square mile.
Some states grow faster than others. A
second trend was that some states grew
very slowly in comparison with others.
When we remember that the population of
the country doubled between 1860 and
1890, the increase in some states may seem
surprisingly low. For example:
1860	1890
Maine	628,279	661,086
Vermont	315,098	332,422
Virginia	1,596,318	1,655,980
The slow growth of such states is evidence
of two facts: (1) they did not attract large
numbers of immigrants; (2) some of their
people moved to industrial centers and to
areas where fertile land was cheap and
plentiful.
Some of the agricultural states of the
Middle West, especially those not far re-
moved from frontier conditions, and the
421
422
A GROWING POPULATION ENRICHES ITS LIFE
huge state of Texas, more than doubled in
population, as shown in the following table:
	1860	1890
Iowa	674,913	1,912,297
Kansas	107,206	1,428,108
Minnesota	172,023	1,310,283
Nebraska	28,841	1,062,656
Texas	604,215	2,235,527
At the same	time, some	states of the
eastern seaboard, like New York and Penn-
sylvania, expanded rapidly because they
were industrial. They provided homes and
employment for hundreds of thousands of
immigrants. Some middle western states —
Illinois, Michigan, and Ohio, for example —
attracted new people because of their
opportunities in both industry and farming.
Cities grow faster than rural sections. A
third trend that accompanied the increase
in population was the slower growth of
rural areas than of towns and cities (see
chart, page 423). Some rural areas actually
declined in population between 1860 and
1890. Such a decline took place particu-
larly in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New
York, and New England, chiefly because
the farmers living in these areas were un-
able to market crops in competition with
the farmers of the Middle West. For one
thing, the middle western farmers had the
advantage of more fertile land. For an-
other, the level open countryside made it
possible for each farmer to cultivate more
extensive areas. Large numbers of rural
folk in the East migrated westward, and
even larger numbers moved to the city.
Western cities grow faster than eastern.
By 1880 about half the people in the region
from Maryland northward to Maine lived
in towns and cities having 4000 or more
inhabitants. The following figures show the
growth of some of the larger cities of the
East:
New York
Philadelphia
Boston
Pittsburgh
Providence
1870	1890
1,478,103	2,507,414
674,022	1,046,964
250,526	448,477
139,256	343,904
68,904	132,146
The growth of middle western cities was
much more striking. In some of them
the rapidly expanding iron and steel in
dustry was responsible for the increase
Others were benefited by milling and meat-
packing. Still others were active trading
centers for large rural areas. Of the 5o
largest cities in 1890, 12 were in the Middle
West. By 1880 Chicago had taken the
place of Philadelphia as the second largest
city in the United States.
	1870	1890
Chicago	298,977	1,099,850
Cleveland	92,829	261,353
Detroit	79,577	205,876
St. Paul	20,030	133,156
Denver	4,759	106,713
-------- CHECK-UP -----------
What changes resulted from increased immi-
gration after 1865?
1.	What areas of Europe contributed large
numbers of immigrants, 1865—1895? Why
was there an uneven flow of immigration,
year by year?
2.	What were the attitudes of labor and in-
dustry on the immigration question?
Why?
3.	What restrictions were placed on immigra-
tion during this period?
4.	What were the trends in population
growth, 1865—1895?
Extremes of Wealth and
Poverty Develop in America
Prosperity follows the war. As you have
already seen, the War Between the States
stimulated American industry. During the
years that followed, it grew by leaps and
bounds. Among the important new indus-
tries which developed during this period
were those centering around steel produc-
tion, petroleum, and meat-packing. Other
older industries, such as the manufacture
of shoes and clothing, adopted machine
methods and large-scale production. Be-
tween 1860 and 1870 the number of
manufacturing establishments in the coun-
try as a whole increased about 80 per cent.
The population of the United States was about how large in 1900? About how many
people lived in rural areas at that time? In urban areas? Why did the proportion of
people living in urban areas begin to increase so rapidly after 1860?
This tremendous growth offered a golden
opportunity to business leaders with vision,
boldness, and executive ability.
More Americans become wealthy. It is
not strange, therefore, that the number of
wealthy Americans increased greatly during
this period. In 1861 there were still com-
paratively few millionaires in the country.
Before the turn of the century, however,
they numbered in the thousands, and about
nine tenths of the country’s wealth was
controlled by one tenth of the population.
Interest on bonds and dividends on stocks
made it unnecessary for members of this
top-income group to work. If they wished,
they could spend their time in summer and
winter resorts, European travel, and their
palatial city residences. The period, called
by Mark Twain the “Gilded Age,” was one
in which ability and success were measured
very largely by wealth.
Under such conditions it is not surprising
to find that many of the newly rich were
spending money in showy ways. They lived
in elaborate, over-ornamented homes and
had many servants to wait on them. One
such man was the financier Jim Fisk, who
lived perhaps more extravagantly than any-
one else in his day. In New Y’ork City he
occupied a great marble home that con-
tained his own opera house. Hundreds of
canary birds in gilded cages sang in the
rooms. He loved showy clothes, and once
he arranged to meet President Grant while
dressed in an admiral’s uniform, decorated
with gold lace.
The poor live in misery. While a hand-
ful of the rich lived in luxury, millions of
the very poor were filling the slums of the
great cities. They lived in wretched tene-
ment houses under crowded conditions that
fostered disease and encouraged crime.
Most of them were unskilled laborers,
working for low wages. Many were newly-
423
The Rise and Fall of Immigration
millions
OF people
WORKERS NEEDED FOR
INDUSTRIAL EXPANSION
DISPLACED PERSON!
2
The Tide of Immigration
Turns
More people came to America between 1901 and 1910 than at any other time. Why?
What caused the sharp drop in immigration after 1930? The slight increase in the '40's?
new immigrants flocked to industrial jobs
in large cities. They accepted work at
low pay. Within the cities they collected
into little national groups, clinging to the
language and customs of the countries from
which they had come. Native-born Ameri-
cans were suspicious of the immigrants’
strange customs. Jacob Riis as early as
1890 described New York as composed of
an Irish West Side, a German East Side, a
“Little Italy,” a Chinatown, and sections
that were mostly Russian, Polish, or Greek.
Under these conditions the process of
Americanization became more difficult.
Immigration reaches a peak. In the first
ten years of our century immigration
reached an all-time high with a total of 8.8
million, and was responsible for more than
half the total increase in population. In
those days the invitation inscribed on the
Statue of Liberty could be taken literally:
Give me your tired, your poor,
Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free.. •
Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed, to me;
1 lift my lamp beside the golden door!
Immigration from southern Europe in-
creases. In the years just before 1900 a
noticeable change began to take place in
the stream of immigrants to the United
States. You will recall (page 419) that up
to about 1890 most of our immigrants had
been coming from northern Europe —
Great Britain, Germany, and the Scandi-
navian countries. But now the stream
shifted to southern and eastern Europe.
It was made up of Poles, Italians, Slovaks,
Rumanians, Czechs, Jews, and Greeks,
whose backgrounds made it more difficult
for them than for the northern Europeans
to adjust to American life. Cheap, fertile
land was no longer available after the
passing of the frontier, and most of the
586
SOCIAL CHANGES MAKE A NEW AMERICA
587
Nevertheless, it is important to note that
until 1910 the number of foreign-born in
proportion to the total population re-
ined at about one seventh.
The Japanese are restricted. You have
seen in Chapter 22 that in the latter half
of the 1800’s there was a loud outcry in
favor of restriction of immigration. This
attitude gained strength after 1900. Early
in the century people began to protest
against the number of Japanese along the
Pacific coast. In 1906 the Japanese became
indignant at a decree of the San Francisco
school board which barred children of
Japanese parentage from the public
schools. President Theodore Roosevelt per-
suaded the school board to withdraw its
decree. Because of the strong anti-Japanese
feeling, however, Roosevelt arranged an in-
formal understanding with Japan known
as the “Gentlemen’s Agreement” (1907).
Oriental pupils under sixteen were to be
admitted to the regular public schools, but
Japan in turn agreed to refuse passports to
Japanese laborers who wanted to enter the
United States. An immigration act in 1907
denied admission to all Japanese who did
not possess proper passports. This law was
interpreted to exclude Japanese who came
from island possessions of the United States
or from any country other than Japan.
Although Japan observed the terms of
the Gentlemen’s Agreement, the Pacific
Coast states continued to make restrictions
on the Japanese. California denied Chinese
and Japanese the right to buy farms or to
lease them for more than three years
(1913). Other states followed California’s
example. Japan found it difficult to under-
stand the powers of the states with which
the federal government could not interfere.
The United States was accused of not
keeping its part of the bargain. The Japa-
nese were well aware that immigrants of
European background were being given
privileges that were denied to Asiatics.
They considered these restrictions an insult
to their national honor.
The sons and daughters of many lands have come to live in America. Once here, after
a period of adjustment, they have added their skills and customs to those of other Ameri-
cans. This is one reason why the United States has become a great power.




© 191(8, General Electric Co,
Charles Steinmetz, son of German-Polish
parents, came to America in 1 889. He gained
fame for research in electricity.
Immigration is further restricted. In spite
of restrictions against Asiatics and a few
others, immigration continued at an aver-
age of nearly a million persons a year until
World War I broke out. In 1917 an im-
portant change in our immigration policy
took place. Over President Wilson’s veto
Congress passed an act which haired illit-
erates, vagrants, chronic alcoholics, persons
believing in the violent overthrow of gov-
ernment, and other undesirable groups.
After World War I ended, immigration
increased to a total of 800,000 in 1921.
Alarmed because of the widespread unem-
ployment in the United States, Congress
passed the Emergency Quota Act (1921).
Under this act the number of immigrants
from each European country was limited
to three per cent of the number from that
country residing in the United States in
1910. This temporary bill was replaced in
1924 by the Lodge-Johnson Act.
Quotas are established. For each for-
eign country the act of 1924 provided a
quota of immigrants (the limited number
of immigrants which would be admitted
from that country). The quota of Euro-
pean immigrants of any nationality to be
admitted each year was to be two per cent
of the number of persons from that nation
living in the United States in 1890. Basing
the quota on the figures for 1890 meant
favoring northwestern Europe. Certain
groups — students, for example, or wiv^
and children of resident American citize^
-were not subject to quota restriction
Neither were citizens of Canada, Mexico*
and the independent republics of Central
and South America. Immigrants barred
from citizenship, including Japanese, Wprc
totally excluded.
Total immigration is limited. After 1929
the total number of quota immigrants was
limited to about 150,000 a year. At that
time each European country was given a
quota based upon the percentage of the
people of that national origin in tire Amer-
ican population in 1920. During the de-
pression of the 1930’s immigration dropped
far below quota limits, partly because
many people who in normal times would
have found employment were rejected on
the grounds that they were “likely to be-
come public charges.” From 1931 to 1945
with the single exception of 1939, less than
one third of the quota was filled each year.
After World War II many people urged
that the immigration laws be modified.
They felt that this country should admit
more people who had lost their homes and
their means of making a living during the
great struggle. Congress therefore passed
legislation to admit a limited number of
displaced persons. Moreover, new quotas
were set up for several countries. Between
1945 and 1960 more than three million im-
migrants came to the United States.
------- CHECK-UP ---------
How have United States immigration policies
changed?
1.	What change in the source of immigrants
took place after 1890? Why did these
newer immigrants tend to settle in the
cities?
2.	What restrictions were adopted with re-
spect to the Japanese? Why did the Jap-
anese feel that the Gentlemen's Agree-
ment was violated?
3.	Why was a quota system introduced after
World War 1? What were the provisions
of the Johnson-Lodge Act? What coun-
tries were not affected by this legislation?
4.	What changes in immigration policies were
made during and after World War II?
588
Immigrants and Their
Descendants Make Valuable
Contributions
We are all immigrants or their descend-
ants. The word immigrant is sometimes
used in an uncomplimentary way by those
whose ancestors arrived in this country
many years ago. We should remember,
however, that everyone in this country
except the American Indian is either an
immigrant or the descendant of an immi-
grant. Those aboard the Mayflower were
immigrants. They came to America under
conditions that do not exist today, but they
too knew what it was to leave home and
friends in order to start a new life in a
strange land.
Immigrants have developed our re-
sources. The United States would not be a
leading nation today if it had not become a
melting pot of all nationalities. Merely to
possess natural resources is of litde benefit
to a country. They must be developed, and
such development calls not only for busi-
ness management and inventive skill but
also for much patient, tiring, and often low-
paid work. Much of that kind of heavy
labor has been done by the foreign-bom.
They dug canals, mined coal, and worked
Serge Koussevitzky, who left Russia for
America in 1924, was for 25 years conductor
of the Boston Symphony Orchestra.
Louis Brandeis, liberal member of the Su-
preme Court, was one of many Jews who have
made lasting contributions to American life.
in the steel mills. Foreign-born plowed
the prairie lands, felled the forest giants,
mixed and poured the concrete for the sky-
scrapers. They mined the iron ore and tbe
silver, and drove the spikes in the heavy
railroad ties.
Immigrants become leaders in many
fields. The foreign-born have also con-
tributed leadership in politics, business, and
the arts. Some of the famous immigrants
who have left a lasting impression on
American life are Carl Schurz and John P.
Altgeld (both bom in Germany) in politics,
Joseph Pulitzer (Hungary) and Jacob Riis
(Denmark) in journalism, James J. Hill
(Canada) in business, Samuel Gompers
(England) in labor organization, Alex-
ander Bell (Scotland) in invention. Augus-
tus Saint-Gaudens, perhaps the outstanding
American sculptor, was born in Ireland.
The great majority of first-rank American
musicians, including the directors of prac-
tically all our great symphony orchestras,
have been immigrants.
Immigrants have settled in many parts
of the country. On nearly every part of the
country the immigrants have left an in-
delible stamp. In southern Pennsylvania,
589
George Washington Carver, botanist and
chemist, studied and taught better farming
methods which have aided southern agri-
culture.
for example, may be found customs and
even a little of the language of the Ger-
mans who settled there before the Revolu-
tionary War. The descendants of these
settlers are still sometimes called “Pennsyl-
vania Germans” or “Pennsylvania Dutch.”
A later German migration sent colonists
to the Middle West in the mid 1800’s; cities
like Milwaukee and St. Louis have profited
from the love of these Germans for freedom
and their interest in democratic govern-
ment. Certain communities in the northern
Middle West have been enriched by the
inflow of thrifty, hard-working Scandi-
navians, many of whom have become pros-
perous farmers and dairymen. Many cities,
particularly industrial ones, have become
the homes of immigrants from southern
and eastern Europe.
French influence is very strong in Lou-
isiana, where French, in addition to Eng-
lish, continues to be spoken. French law
has had a distinct influence on the legisla-
tion of that state, and French customs and
cooking attract many visitors to Louisiana
every year. A wide use of the Spanish
language persists in certain states of the
Southwest, where historic mission build-
ings, Spanish architecture, and many cus-
toms survive to remind us that Spain once
controlled this vast region. Spanish has
contributed many words to our language
The Negro population shifts. There°is
one group of “descendants of immigrants”
which differs from the others in that most
of their ancestors came here unwillingly
and were sold into slavery. In 1790 about
15 per cent of the population was classi-
fied as Negro. By 1960, because of the
more rapid increase of white population
brought about by immigration, Negroes
comprised 10.5 per cent of the population.
Formerly most Negroes lived in the South
and were employed on farms. During the
two World Wars, however, when jobs were
plentiful, millions of Negroes went north
and west, in search of better opportunities
and higher pay. In 1960 almost three
fourths of the Negro population was living
in cities, while about a fourth, almost en-
tirely in the South, lived on farms. In re-
cent years Negroes have continued to move
to northern cities.
Negroes make progress. Following the
War Between the States and for many years
thereafter, Negroes were handicapped by
lack of economic and educational oppor-
tunities. They had great obstacles to over-
come. By the 1940’s there was evidence
that their economic position had improved.
More and more Negroes entered business
and the professions. Amateur and profes-
sional sports were increasingly open to
them, and in 1947 Jackie Robinson became
the first Negro major league baseball
player. In recent Olympic Games, Negro
athletes have won many of the points
scored by American teams.
In no field has the Negro made more
progress than in education. In 1865 a very
large majority of Negroes were illiterate.
By 1950, however, 89 per cent were literate.
In 1900 there were 2600 students in Negro
colleges. Today over 250,000 Negroes
are enrolled in colleges and universities,
most of them in desegregated institutions.
Booker T. Washington, the founder of
Tuskegee Institute in Alabama, favored
vocational education for Negroes. Negro
educators who desired the same higher edu-
cation for Negroes as whites, saw their
ideas carried out at such universities as
Howard, Atlanta, and Fisk. Recently, many
590
SOCIAL CHANGES MAKE A NEW AMERICA
591
new doors to educational opportunity have
been opened. In Chapter 44 you will read
nK)re about Negro efforts to achieve full
rights as American citizens.
Negroes contribute to arts, sciences, and
statecraft. Valuable contributions have
been made to American life by Negroes.
Negro spirituals are America’s most dis-
tinctive gift to religious music. Outstand-
ing Negro concert and entertainment artists
include the singers Marian Anderson and
Leontyne Price, the jazz musicians Duke
Ellington and Louis Armstrong, and the
actor Sidney Poitier. Countee Cullen and
Ralph Ellison are among the successful
Negro authors. The poet Gwendolyn
Brooks was the first Negro to win a Pu-
litzer Prize. George Washington Carver
and Ernest E. Just were outstanding scien-
tists. Ralph J. Bunche has achieved fame
in settling international disputes and won
the Nobel Peace Prize in 1950. The number
of Negroes holding important government
posts has increased in recent years.
------- CHECK-UP -------—
the business world. In 1900 the number of
female breadwinners in the United States
was over 5 million. By 1930 this figure
had more than doubled, and by 1960 about
45 per cent of the women aged 18 and over
were at work outside their homes. Most
employed women worked in domestic and
personal service, factories, clerical occupa-
tions, and the professions.
Woman suffrage becomes nation-wide.
It was inevitable under these circumstances
that women should demand full political
equality with men. The fight for woman
suffrage was a hard struggle; many of its
bitterest opponents were women them-
selves. In the first years of suffrage parades
in New York, the marchers would be met
with cries of “Go home and wash the
dishes!” But after 1910, under the leader-
ship of such women as Anna Howard Shaw
and Carrie Chapman Catt, active campaign-
ing began to meet with real success. In
that year Washington became the fifth state
to give women full political rights. In 1911
California followed this example. Then
What contributions have immigrants and their
descendants made to American culture?
1.	Why can it be said that nearly all Ameri-
cans are immigrants or the descendants of
immigrants?
2.	What are some areas in which the in-
fluence of certain national groups is espe-
cially strong? How have immigrants con-
tributed to the development of America?
3.	What handicaps have Negroes had to
overcome? What contributions have they
made to American culture?
4
Social Reforms Affect
American Life
Women become active outside the home.
An important characteristic of American
tofe in this century is that an increasing
number of women are taking part in activi-
ties outside the home. More and more
young women have found employment in
How many women were employed in 1870?
In 1960? Can you explain the increase?
654
THE UNITED STATES BECOMES A WORLD LEADER
The United States intervenes. Japan’s
policy of aggression in China alarmed the
United States. Secretary of State Bryan
bluntly notified Japan and China that the
United States “cannot recognize any agree-
ment or undertaking . . . [which impairs]
the treaty rights of the United States and
its citizens in China, the political or terri-
torial integrity of the Republic of China,
or the international policy relative to China
commonly known as the open door policy.”
As a result of our protests, Japan gave up
the extreme demands she had made on
China.
Two years later (1917) the United States
and Japan attempted to reach an under-
standing over their aims in China. In the
Lansing-Ishii Agreement the two coun-
tries declared that they would follow the
Open Door policy and guarantee China’s
independence. On the other hand, the
United States gave in to Japan by recog-
nizing that “territorial propinquity [near-
ness] creates special relations between
countries,” and by admitting that “Japan
has special interests in China.”
Japan is allowed to hold her gains. At
the peace conference following World War
I, Japan was able to consolidate her gains
in the Pacific area. The treaty recognized
her conquest of the German holdings in
Shantung province and also her control of
the German islands in the Pacific north of
the equator (see map on next page). Japan
agreed that eventually she would get out of
Shantung, a promise which she later kept.
The Pacific islands were granted to Japan
in 1919 as a mandate under the League
of Nations; that is, Japan was to have full
authority to establish a government and to
develop the islands as she wished, but she
would be responsible to the League of
Nations for her activities there. Japan was
not supposed to fortify the islands, how-
ever.2
President Wilson did not entirely ap-
prove of these terms, but he agreed to
them in order to obtain Japan’s approval
of the peace treaty and the League of Na-
tions. Japan was now a strong power in
2 But Japan violated the mandate and fortified
the islands.
the Pacific, and her aggressive attitude
ward China was a serious threat to tl°
Open Door and China’s independence ^
A disarmament conference is held 1
Washington. Partly because of the situ"1
tion in the Pacific, President Harding called
a disarmament conference to meet
Washington in the autumn of 1921. Naval
rivalry had led to an armament race which
placed a heavy burden on countries al
ready greatly in debt because of World
War I. At first only Great Britain, France
Italy, and Japan were invited to take part
in the conference. Later, invitations were
extended to all of the powers, except
Russia, which were directly interested in
the Far Eastern situation.
A four-power treaty is signed. During
the conference, much serious thought was
given to the situation in the Far East. The
object was to remove, if possible, condi-
tions in that area which might lead to in-
ternational conflict. With this aim in mind
the United States, Great Britain, France,
and Japan signed a treaty “to respect their
rights in relation to their insular posses-
sions and insular dominions in the region
of the Pacific Ocean.” Any disputes arising
among these powers, which could not be
settled by their own diplomatic representa-
tives, were to be considered and adjusted
in a joint conference of the four powers.
Thus the treaty of alliance between Great
Britain and Japan, which had been in effect
for many years, was replaced by a four-
power treaty.3
The Open Door policy is preserved. In
addition, a nine-power treaty among all
the countries represented at the disarma-
ment conference guaranteed the indepen-
dence of China and the continuation of
the Open Door policy. By this treaty equal
opportunity in China was again promised
for all. The nine powers went further and
accepted the principle of China’s control
over her own tariff. They also called for
the creation of a commission which would
3 In case of war, there was no chance that
Canada, Australia, or New Zealand would support
Japan against the United States. They put pres-
sure on Great Britain to get out of the alliance
with Japan, and she was eager to do so.
mu
------------- —
What world powers had important holdings in the Far East in 1939? Why was Japan at
.	_ __ .	. I r ■	.1	,1	___I aI_I I C C D O
«■
study the question of doing away entirely
with extraterritoriality in China (the spe-
cial privileges enjoyed by foreigners).
As a result of these two treaties, the
United States seemed to have acquired
wide support for the principle of the Open
Door and the independence of China. The
United States Senate ratified the various
agreements drawn up at the Washington
Conference, but it did so with a reservation.
The Senate stated that the United States
had no intention of departing from its tra-
ditional policy of staying aloof from en-
tangling alliances and from participation
in the affairs of other nations.
An immigration law brings further
trouble. The immigration law of 1924 had
serious effects upon our relations with
Japan. Since 1907 Japanese immigration
to the United States had been restricted
under the Gentlemen’s Agreement, but
there had been no legal restrictions as such.
Nevertheless, the Japanese population in
the western states continued to grow. Sev-
eral of them passed anti-Japanese laws, and
demanded complete exclusion of the Jap-
anese. In the immigration law of 1924
(page 588), over the objections of Presi-
dent Coolidge and Secretary of State
Hughes, Congress declared that “aliens not
655
eligible for citi-
zenship,” which
included the Jap-
anese, be barred
from admission
into the United
States and its ter-
ritories, except for
certain classes of
individuals.
Japan is an-
gered. Japan was
bitter over this discrimination. Her officials
called attention to “grave consequences”
which would result because the law would
endanger the friendly relations between the
two countries. In spite of this “veiled
threat,” Congress passed the bill by large
majorities. President Coolidge signed the
bill after stating that if the provision calling
for Japanese exclusion had stood by itself,
he would have vetoed it.
Japan placed on record a “solemn pro-
test” against the clause which put her
people in a position less favorable than
that of any Europeans. The day that the
law went into effect was observed in Japan
as a day of national humiliation. It was not
exclusion that they resented; exclusion
might have been accomplished in various
ways. But racial discrimination could
never be forgiven by the proud Japanese.
The militarists in Japan (those who fav-
ored a warlike policy) also held the United
States responsible for checking Japan’s im-
perialistic aims in China. Many Japanese
felt that their country had sufficient excuse
for closing the Open Door in the Far East
permanently, by force if necessary.
-------- CHECK-UP ---------
Why did Japanese imperialism threaten the
Open Door policy?
1.	How did Japan strengthen its position
during World War I? What territories
were acquired? Why did the United States
object to Japan's Twenty-one Demands on
China?
2.	What agreements concerning the Far East
were reached at the Washington Con-
ference?
3.	Why did the United States Immigration
Act of 1924 anger Japan?
Japan Closes the
Open Door
Japan takes advantage of civil war in
China. The march of events in China dur-
ing the 1920’s again played into the hands
of the Japanese militarists. The Manchu
dynasty in China had been overthrown in
1911 and a republic established. Beginning
in 1923, a new nationalist government in
China (called the Kuomintang) tried to
build China into a modern state. The Kuo-
mintang (gwo'min-tahng) was first headed
by Dr. Sun Yat-sen and later by Cliiang
Kai-shek (chee-ahng' kye-shek'). It was not
long before the nationalist government
clashed with Japanese interests in Man-
churia. In 1928 a militarist government in
Japan notified both the nationalist govern-
ment in Nanking and a rival government in
Peking that it would not allow the civil war
to spread into Manchuria and Mongolia. In
Japan the army and navy were responsible,
not to the civil government, but directly to
the Emperor. The militarists were there-
fore able to carry out a “positive policy” in
China, leaving the civil government to pro-
test its peaceful intentions and its desire to
carry out its international obligations. It
was the Japanese army and navy that now
took over in Manchuria and proceeded to
carry out a policy which challenged the
League of Nations, the nine-power treaty,
the four-power treaty, and the Pact of Paris
(page 685).
Japan takes advantage of world con-
ditions. World conditions at the time also
favored Japan’s policy of aggression. Be-
ginning at the end of 1929, depression
gradually enveloped Europe and America.
The whole economic structure seemed
about to collapse, leaving the leading pow-
ers with too many problems at home to
permit them to carry out a vigorous policy
in the Far East. At the same time, the
League of Nations was too weak to deal
effectively with a crisis in China. In the
656
THE UNITED STATES IN FAR EASTERN AFFAIRS
657
United States public opinion seemed to
favor a policy of peace. Certainly, the
American people would not have been in
favor of using force to preserve the Open
Door policy or the independence of China.
Manchuria becomes a puppet state. The
Japanese war lords late in 1931 took ad-
vantage of this situation to invade Man-
churia. Soon all of Manchuria was over-
run. China appealed to the League of Na-
tions, but received no effective aid. Mean-
while, in 1932 Secretary of State Henry L.
Stimson issued the so-called Stimson Doc-
trine. This repeated the Bryan warning
(page 654) and informed Japan and
China that the United States did not in-
tend to “recognize any situation, treaty,
or agreement which may be brought about
by means contrary to the covenants and
obligations of the Pact of Paris of August
27, 1928, to which treaty both China and
Japan, as well as the United States, are
parties.”
In spite of the Stimson Doctrine, Man-
churia was promptly proclaimed the
sovereign state of Manchukuo — a Japanese
puppet state. Secretary Stimson then issued
a warning that Japan’s violation of the
nine-power treaty might release the other
powers from the limitation of the naval
treaty and fortifications agreement (page
686). Somewhat later (1936), Japan re-
sponded by notifying the powers that she
no longer considered herself bound by the
provisions of the naval treaty.
Japan leaves the League of Nations. In
October, 1932, a League committee of in-
vestigation (the Lytton Commission) con-
demned the Japanese attack upon Man-
churia and the establishment of the puppet
state of Manchukuo. It recommended that
Manchuria be established as an independ-
ent state within the Chinese republic. It
further suggested that the special rights
and interests of Japan in Manchuria be
recognized and that the nations of the
world co-operate to further the internal re-
covery of China.
When the League Assembly adopted the
report of the Lytton Commission, Japan
walked out of the Assembly and soon after-
ward resigned from the League. Japan
then insisted that she had the right to act
as she saw fit to keep peace and order in
eastern Asia. She opposed all attempts on
China’s part to use the influence of any
other nation or nations to resist Japan.
When Japan established an oil monopoly
in Manchukuo and began to extend her
conquests outside of that province, it was
evident that the Open Door was closed.
Japan claimed that by refusing to recog-
nize Manchukuo the United States had
given up any claim to Open Door treatment
in that country.
The American Far Eastern policy is re-
laxed. The administration of President
Franklin D. Roosevelt, faced with serious
social and economic problems at home, at
first adopted a hands-off attitude toward
Japanese expansion in China. At the time,
the Far Eastern situation did not seem to
affect American interests seriously. The
Stimson Doctrine was not modified, but
the President was not inclined to make the
Japanese attitude a matter of international
concern. American capital represented only
about 6 per cent of all foreign investments
in China. Our trade with China amounted
to only 2 per cent of our foreign trade,
while about 25 per cent of our foreign
trade was with Japan. It was to our eco-
nomic advantage not to provoke Japan, and
strong popular feeling against war was at
its height in the United States.
Under the circumstances, Secretary of
State Cordell Hull agreed with Japanese
Foreign Minister Hirota that “no question
exists between our two countries that is in-
capable of amicable solution.” Secretary
Hull insisted that American treaty rights be
recognized but notified the Japanese For-
eign Minister in 1934, “The American gov-
ernment has dedicated the United States to
774
PROBLEMS OF GOVERNMENT
sational hearings on organized crime in
interstate commerce. In foreign affairs the
Congress generally went along with the
administration. To supervise all foreign aid,
it set up the Mutual Security Agency, and
in a two-year period appropriated more
than 13 billion dollars for this program.
Congress greatly stepped up appropriations
for defense, and voted a tax increase to help
meet the increased expenses. It strength-
ened the draft law and extended it to 1955.
On the home front, Congress raised Social
Security old age benefits and pay for the
armed forces. Over a strong presidential
veto it passed (1952) the McCarran Immi-
gration Act, which kept the quota system
but tightened the curbs on immigration in
order to keep out subversives.
CHECK-UP ----------
What problems challenged the Truman admin-
istration in the years following World War II?
1.	How did the Truman administration deal
with the problems of (a) demobilization,
(b) prices, wages, and controls, and (c)
labor disputes?
2.	What did the Eightieth Congress accom-
plish? Why was it criticized? What new
parties took part in the 1948 election?
Why was President Truman's victory a
personal triumph?
3.	Why did relations with Russia become
strained in the postwar years? What
developments took place in Korea?
4.	How did the United States strengthen the
free world's defenses against aggression?
5.	What was the "Fair Deal" and why was it
opposed? What did the Eighty-first and
Eighty-second Congresses accomplish?
2
The Republicans Return to Power
under President Eisenhower
Candidates are nominated for the elec-
tion of 1952. The approaching national
election of 1952 aroused great public in-
terest. Senator Robert A. Taft, Republican,
and Senator Estes Kefauver, Democrat, en-
tered actively into the contest for delegates
to the national conventions. In those states
where presidential preferential primaries
were held, however. Republican voters dis-
played marked preference for General of
the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower. At the
Republican convention early in July, Eisen-
hower was nominated on the first ballot.
Senator Richard M. Nixon of California was
chosen as his running mate.
When President Truman announced that
he would not be a candidate for another
term, Democratic attention turned to Adlai
E. Stevenson, the Governor of Illinois. At
the Democratic convention, Stevenson was
nominated on the third ballot, with Senator
John Sparkman of Alabama as candidate for
Vice-President.
The Republicans win the election. Both
parties carried on energetic campaigns. The
Democrats pressed the issue of prosperity;
the Republicans attacked the Truman ad-
ministration’s record and, in particular, its
Korean policy. Near the end of the cam-
paign, General Eisenhower came out with
the telling statement, “I shall go to Korea
and try to end the war.”
On election day more than 61J4 million
voters went to the polls. General Eisen-
hower received a plurality of more than 6!/L,
million. The electoral vote was 442 for the
Republican ticket to 89 for the Democrats.
The Republicans even invaded the Solid
South, winning the electoral votes of
Florida, Texas, and Virginia. But the Re-
publicans won control of the Eighty-third
Congress by the narrowest of margins —
48 to 47 in the Senate with one inde-
pendent, and 221 to 213 in the House of
Representatives. Senator Taft served as
Senate Majority Leader until illness forced
him to give up the post. His death in
July, 1953, removed an able and fearless
leader from the Washington scene.
General Eisenhower takes over as Presi-
dent. On January 20, General Eisenhower
took the oath of office as thirty-fourth Presi-
dent of the United States. In his inaugural
address the President gave notice that his
administration would “develop the strength
that will deter the forces of aggression.
On the other hand, the United States would
stand ready to join in any “effort to remove
THE UNITED STATES FACES NEW CHALLENGES
775
the causes of fear and distrust among na-
tions, so as to make possible drastic reduc-
tion of armaments.” To deal with the
nation’s foreign problems, the new Presi-
dent appointed John Foster Dulles Secre-
tary of State. Exercising the power
conferred upon the President by Congress
to reorganize the administration, Eisen-
hower soon transformed the Federal Se-
curity Agency into a new cabinet depart-
ment of Health, Education, and Welfare.
Tension remains high in the Far East.
Of immediate concern to the new admin-
istration was the negotiation of a truce in
Korea. The thorniest problem developed
over the return of war prisoners, but in
July, 1953, a truce was finally signed.
The storm center now moved to Southeast
Asia, where the French were gradually be-
ing driven out of northeast Indo-China by
rebel Communist forces. Also, Communist
China was becoming more belligerent in its
announced determination to “liberate” For-
mosa from control by the Chinese National-
ists. A mutual security pact was soon
arranged between the United States and
Chiang Kai-slick for the defense of Formosa
and the Pescadores Islands. To prevent
further Communist expansion in the Pacific
area, the United States in 1954 entered into
an eight-nation Southeast Asia defense pact
(SEATO). Though SEATO had no armed
forces of its own, its members agreed to
respond to attacks by aggressors.
Western Europe is strengthened. Mean-
time some progress was made in the matter
of European defense. In 1954 agreements
were drawn up at Paris which (1) granted
sovereignty to West Germany, (2) provided
for German rearmament, and (3) admitted
Germany to membership in a new Western
European Union (WEU) and in NATO.
The Paris agreements were duly ratified,
and in 1955 West Germany became a sov-
ereign nation.
The Republicans move toward a freer
economy. The policy of the new Republican
administration was to move away from price
and wage controls and from government
participation in business. Early in 1953
wage controls were abolished, and price
controls were removed one by one. Rent
controls remained only in areas with severe
housing shortages. Carrying out a cam-
paign pledge, the Republicans also turned
over to the states control of offshore oil
deposits.
The A. F. of L. and CIO are merged. On
the labor front, new leadership prepared
the way for a merger of the rival CIO and
A. F. of L. (page 526). Both presidents
Philip Murray and William Green had died
in November, 1952. Three years later a new
unified federation was formed, represent-
ing some 15 million workers. President
George Meany of the A. F. of L. became
president of the new AFL-CIO, and Walter
Reuther, the CIO president, became vice-
president.
The Supreme Court declares segregation
illegal. Meanwhile there were important
developments involving the Supreme Court,
now headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren.
In May, 1954, the Court rendered a his-
toric decision. It set aside the doctrine of
“separate but equal” facilities, and declared
that enforced segregation of Negro children
in public schools violated the provisions of
the Fourteenth Amendment. This decision
was the climax of a number of Supreme
Court decisions favorable to the Negro in
such matters as voting in primary elections,
the sale of real property to Negroes, segre-
gation in public carriers in interstate com-
merce, and segregation in state university
graduate schools. In June, 1955, the Court
laid down provisions for putting desegre-
gation into effect: Federal district courts
were to require a “prompt and reasonable
start” by local school authorities toward
desegregation.
Response to the Court’s decision was
mixed. In some parts of the South, desegre-
gation proceeded steadily. In other areas,
opposition was outspoken and attempts to
integrate the schools met firm resistance.
In Arkansas and Virginia school boards
closed some schools rather than carry out
court rulings ordering desegregation.
The Eighty-third Congress makes a sub-
stantial record. During 1953-1954 the Re-
publican Congress moved slowly in carrying
out the Eisenhower legislative program.
The Republican Party lacked unity, and it
was President Eisenhower’s belief that the
President should follow a “hands off” policy
: REPUBLICAN-
REPUBLICAN
PARTY
T. Roosevelt

Political Parties
AND THEIR PRESIDENTS
ie„
1901-
19054vJ
1909
McKinley
Roosevelt 1901
1913
		Socialist Party ^ begins to nominate
	DEMOCRATIC	own candidates.
	PARTY	
		Progressive Party 4 splits From
Republican Party.
1917
92
Farmer-Labor Party
4 nominates

IIS1
1925
candidate.
DEMOCRAT C
PARTY
iiMi
F. D. Roosevelt
F. D. Roosevelt
F. D. Roosevelt
Communist Party
4 begins to nominate
1937
own candidates.
in-
states’ Rights
1945
Roosevelt
Truman 1945
Democratic Party
splits from
^Democratic Party.
Progressive Party
nominates
1953
own candidate.
DEMOCRATIC
PARTY
961
|§f «
The Democratic Party remained in power
from 1933 to 1953. Why? Why were so
many Republican Presidents elected from
1868 to 1912? (See chart, page 466.)
which put little pressure on Congress. To
the credit of this Congress, however, were
measures providing for the St. Lawrence
Seaway (page 648), increased Social Se-
curity benefits and coverage (page 593),
flexible price supports for basic farm prod-
ucts to replace fixed 90 per cent supports,
and extension of the reciprocal trade pro-
gram (page 546). In addition, over 5 bil-
lion dollars were appropriated for foreign
aid, an anti-Communist measure was en-
acted, and taxes were revised downward.
An Atomic Energy Act was passed which
opened the way for the development of
atomic power by private industry.
During 1954, the Senate became involved
in a long-drawn-out struggle over Senator
Joseph McCarthy from Wisconsin. To
many Americans, McCarthy was a lone
crusader against communism and disloyalty
in high places. Others felt that his methods
of investigation seemed to violate the very
rights which he declared he was fighting to
preserve. After the elections of 1954, Sen-
ator McCarthy was “condemned” by the
Senate (1) for failure to co-operate with
a Senate committee investigating charges
against him involving his finances, and (2)
for his denunciation of a special Senate in-
vestigating committee.
The Democrats take control of Congress.
Control of Congress was at stake in the
mid-term elections of 1954. Campaign
issues centered around communism in
government, taxation, farm policy, unem-
ployment, and public power policy. After
a spirited campaign the Democrats regained
control of both houses of Congress — the
Senate by a single vote, 48 to 47, with one
independent who voted with the Demo-
crats, and the House by 232 to 203.
A middle-of-the-road combination of Re-
publicans and Democrats in the Eighty-
fourth Congress proceeded to carry out
much of the President’s program. The Sen-
ate ratified a number of treaties: the Paris
treaties affecting Germany and NATO, the
Austrian treaty (page 719), and the
SEATO and Formosa agreements. Con-
gress also approved the President’s request
for authority to use force in the defense of
Fonnosa. The foreign aid program was
continued, though at a lower figure than
the one requested by the President.
The Trade Agreements Act was extended
for three years. Congressional salaries were
raised, and increases were voted for the
Vice-President and the Supreme Court Jus-
tices, as well as for postal and other gov-
ernment employees. Congress continued
the program of flexible farm supports, and
in addition provided a “soil bank” plan to
776
THE UNITED STATES FACES NEW CHALLENGES
777
pay farmers to withdraw acres from pro-
duction. Social Security benefits were ex-
tended, and the minimum wage rate was
raised to one dollar. Provision was also
made for a national highway system and for
70,000 low-rent public housing units.
Eisenhower is re-elected in 1956. Though
the President’s health became an issue in
1956, the Republican convention unani-
mously renominated Eisenhower as well as
Vice-President Nixon. Two weeks earlier
the Democrats, on the first ballot, had again
placed Adlai Stevenson in nomination, and
then nominated Estes Kefauver as his run-
ning mate.
Three “P’s” — popularity, prosperity, and
peace — proved too much for the Demo-
crats. Eisenhower won the election by an
overwhelming majority — 35L million to 26
million in the popular vote, and 457 to 74
electoral votes. But the President’s popu-
larity did not carry over to the congres-
sional elections. For the first time since
1848 a winning President failed to carry
cither house for his party.
The President's foreign aid program meets
resistance. In its first session, the Eighty-
fifth Congress (1957) approved the so-
called “Eisenhower Doctrine,” granting to
the President the authority to use force if
necessary against Communist aggression in
the Middle East, and to spend 200 million
dollars in aid to the Arab states.
Congress, however, was economy-minded,
and the President’s peacetime budget of
71.8 billions ran into outspoken opposition.
The President defended his foreign aid
program by pointing out that the mutual
security program contributed to the col-
lective defense of the free world. Congress
reluctantly authorized 3.4 billion dollars for
foreign aid.
Congress enacts important measures.
Legislation passed by Congress in 1957 en-
abled the United States to join in the Inter-
national Atomic Energy Agency, thus
furthering the President’s atoms-for-peace
program. An immigration measure eased
restrictions somewhat and provided for the
admission of about 60,000 additional per-
sons. Congress also passed a bill intended
to uphold the right of Negroes to vote. This
civil rights law (1) created a bi-partisan
Civil Rights Commission, (2) provided for
a new Assistant Attorney General for civil
rights, and (3) gave the government power
to obtain court orders against interference
with the right to vote. In 1960 Congress
adopted another civil rights law, designed
to protect still further the right of Negroes
to vote.
Soviet Russia's Sputniks arouse Congress.
In January, 1958, the Eighty-fifth Congress
met for its second session in an atmosphere
of urgency. In the previous October, Russia
had launched its first Sputnik, a man-made
satellite, into space. A month later it sent
into orbit Sputnik II, a satellite weighing
more than a thousand pounds, which
reached an altitude of more than a thou-
sand miles. The United States launched its
first successful satellite late in January,
1958. Because Russia appeared to be ahead
in the development of rocket power and
intercontinental missiles. Congress appro-
priated some 40 billion dollars for defense.
Congress also authorized the President to
reorganize the Defense Department, and
created the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration for the exploration of outer
space. Federal aid was extended to the
states to encourage education in science,
mathematics, and languages (page 599).
Congress fights recession. Congress also
took measures to check the downward
trend of business activity which had begun
in 1957. Public works construction and
federally aided housing and highway pro-
grams were speeded up. Funds were ad-
vanced to the states to enable them to
continue unemployment pay to jobless
people who had used up their benefit rights.
Social Security benefits were increased by 7
per cent. To cut down the deficit in the
Post Office Department, and to provide for
postal pay increases, postal rates were
raised for the first time since the 1930’s.
The demand for labor reform grows.
Meanwhile, a Senate committee, headed by
Senator John L. McClellan of Arkansas, had
been carrying on an investigation of
racketeering in certain labor unions. The
McClellan investigation led to attempts at
labor reform. A measure requiring union
reports to the Secretary of Labor on em-
ployee pension and welfare funds was




Astronauts Cooper and Conrad come "down
to earth" after the record-breaking flight of
Gemini 5. Its most important accomplishment
was to prove that men could stay in space
long enough to go to the moon and back.
(1.9 million dollars after 1955), together
with the business brought by the Canal,
supplied the life-blood of Panama’s econ-
omy. Panama, however, had long pro-
tested her loss of sovereignty in the Canal
Zone itself. President Kennedy had agreed
that the flags of the two countries should
fly together in the Zone. But Americans
living there resented this concession. When
American students hoisted a United States
flag at their school without the Panama-
nian flag alongside, rioting broke out, and
Panama broke off diplomatic relations with
the United States. President Johnson agreed
to discuss the terms of the 1903 treaty, but
Panama demanded the negotiation of a new
treaty.
Actually the present canal is outmoded.
The United States’ two-ocean navy has les-
sened the Canal’s military value; and new
carriers, tankers, and some freighters are
too large to use the Canal. Early in 1964
President Johnson announced that the gov-
ernment was investigating the best route
for the construction of a new Central Amer-
ican canal.
South Vietnam presents a problem. A
much more difficult situation faced the
United States in South Vietnam, where
little dependence could be placed upon the
unstable government. As the situation went
from bad to worse, there was a growing
demand for withdrawal of American forces.
But withdrawal, or even negotiation, could
mean a Communist take-over of South Viet-
nam and eventually perhaps of all South-
east Asia. On the other hand, an attack on
Communist supply bases in North Vietnam
might “escalate” the struggle into a full-
scale war. In August, 1964, a North Viet-
namese attack on American destroyers in
the open waters of the Gulf of Tonkin
brought swift American action against
coastal bases in North Vietnam.
Johnson becomes President in his own
right. The presidential campaign of 1964
was the bitterest in recent years. The Re-
publican convention, meeting in San Fran-
cisco, overwhelmingly favored Senator
Barry Goldwater of Arizona, leader of the
conservative wing. Such moderate Re-
publicans as Governors Scranton of Penn-
sylvania and Rockefeller of New York
received little attention, as did the amend-
ments they proposed to the Goldwater plat-
form. Representative William Miller of
New York was named as Goldwater’s run-
ning mate. Because Goldwater seemed far
to the right of the mainstream of Republican
thought, his nomination left the party
deeply divided. A month later at Atlantic
City, the Democratic convention nominated
President Johnson by acclamation. His
choice for the vice-presidency was Senator
Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota.
As the campaign progressed, charges and
countercharges were hurled on television
and radio and in the press. Civil rights,
foreign policy, and big government were
among the major issues.
On election day, the Democrats won a
victory of record-breaking proportions.
Johnson received more than 60 per cent of
the popular vote, winning 15.8 million more
votes than the Republican candidate. The
President’s electoral vote was 486 from 44
states and the District of Columbia (which
was voting for the first time). Five states
of the old Solid South, together with Gold-
water’s home state of Arizona, gave the
Republicans 52 electoral votes. The Demo-
crats gained two seats in the Senate and
almost 40 in the House.
The Eighty-ninth Congress supports the
President. In the new Congress which as-
sembled in January, 1965, President John-
son could count not only on Democrats but
also on leading Republicans to support his
788
■
President Johnson
confers with top gov-
ernment officials on
the difficult situation
in Vietnam. On the
left is Secretary of
State Dean Rusk, and
on the right is Sec-
retary of Defense
Robert McNamara.
proposals. As a result, the outlook was
bright for the enactment of many recom-
mendations included in the President’s
“Great Society” program. Early in March,
a billion-dollar program was adopted for
the economic rehabilitation of depressed
areas in the Appalachian region. Congress
approved another billion-dollar measure to
aid primary and secondary education in
low-income areas. Congress also passed
the Medicare bill, providing hospital and
related medical aid for the aged as part of
the Social Security system. In addition,
Congress approved a voting rights bill, de-
signed to prevent racial discrimination in
the application of voting requirements, and
voted a reduction in excise taxes. It also
passed an immigration act abolishing na-
tional origins quotas and created a new
Department of Housing and Urban De-
velopment.
Still another action of Congress was to
approve a Twenty-fifth Amendment to the
Constitution and send it to the states for
ratification. This Amendment would au-
thorize the President to name a Vice-
President if that office should become
vacant. It would also enable a Vice-
President to assume the duties of the presi-
dency in case of the serious disability of the
President.
The passage of these and additional
measures resulted in the greatest volume of
legislation within a single congressional
session for many years.
The Vietnam conflict enters a new phase.
In 1965 the United States became more
deeply involved in Vietnam. American
ground forces took a more active part in
fighting the Communist guerrillas, while
American planes bombed North Vietnamese
military depots, supply lines, bridges, and
radar installations. President Johnson re-
peatedly expressed a willingness to enter
into “unconditional discussions.” But the
North Vietnamese government insisted on
complete withdrawal of American forces
before any discussions could take place. By
mid-1965, the United States had sharply
increased its forces in Vietnam and the
tempo of the fighting became more intense.
No early solution, however, was in sight for
the trouble in Southeast Asia.
The United States becomes involved in
the Dominican Republic. Another trouble
area erupted in the spring of 1965 when a
revolt broke out in the Dominican Republic.
To rescue Americans caught in the street
fighting, some 4000 American troops were
sent into the capital city of Santo Domingo.
Because the administration feared that
Communists might take over the revolt,
another 25,000 troops were sent in to pre-
vent the establishment of a second Com-
munist government in the Western Hemi-
sphere.
Meanwhile, the United States sought the
co-operation of the Organization of Ameri-
can States. The OAS sent in a mission which
arranged a cease-fire between the opposing
sides. After an OAS military force took
over, a provisional government was estab-
lished and American military forces were
gradually reduced.
Thus, as the President and Congress
dealt swiftly with a number of pressing
domestic issues, it was clear late in 1965
that important problems affecting the peace
and welfare of the entire world were yet
unresolved.
789
