Dangers they faced, the men and women who first reached America were simply coping with their environment, just as we do, They probably were not more venturesome or any braver than we are. Very likely they had no sense of doing anything remarkable, and they had no knowledge that they had reached a new continent. ! They were merely looking for more favorable homesites—even as we might. The first Americans seemed to follow animal trails southward along the east side of the Rocky Mountains into our present- day Southwest and eventually into the southernmost part of South America. This southward migration is understandable. Geologists, scientists who study the formation of the earth, say that at different times during the Ice Age parts of North America were free of ice for several thousand years. How long did it take the Ice Age hunters to spread throughout North and South America? We do not know. There had to be time for the migrants to adapt to the changing conditions they met as they moved southward. There had to be a large enough increase in numbers to permit descendants of the earliest arrivals to begin widely scattered settlements. The migrations must have taken a very long time. One scientist thinks they could not have taken less than twenty-five thousand years. Unsolved mysteries. For convenience and {because they knew no better, the Spanish who came to the New World in 1492 called descendants of the people who had crossed over from Asia "Indians." Actually we do not know what the earliest spear-throwing people called themselves or the land of the New World or its rivers, lakes, and mountains. All of those names are lost to us forever in the mists of the American beginnings. We must accept the fact that we shall always be without knowledge of the men and women who were the earliest American heroes and heroines. We shall not know how many or what kind of communities flourished, because few remains have been found. Works of art, styles of language, and ways of living and playing also existed about which we shall never have any information. You can see here how close Asia is to North America at the place where Asians crossed to our continent, beginning new lives as Americans, [map shows how close northern Asia, northern Europe, and northern North America are. Call ntion to the area once covered by ice. Review latitude and longitude. The map grid helps suits visualize the extent of the migrations. It also helps the class to relate history and geography. The current meaning of the Mason-Dixon line began before the Civil War, when people used the term to indicate the dividing line between the free and the slave states. dence was written in Philadelphia, it was the second largest city in the British Empire. Only London was bigger. Few of the lowly Quakers would have dreamed of such rapid growth or of the personal prosperity they were going to enjoy. The "starv- ing time" for newcomers in America now seemed done. Personal disappointments. Sad to say, Penn himself was not personally successful. He spent his fortune trying to make Pennsylvania take root. As a result, he landed in debtor's prison despite his powerful friends. His son, who was a spendthrift, disappointed him—as he himself had disappointed his father. Furthermore, Penn became involved in a hot dispute over the location of the boundary line between Maryland and Pennsylvania. For a time it appeared that the line might even place Philadelphia itself in Maryland. This dispute was not settled until 1767, when the proprietors of the two colonies accepted a line established by two surveyors, Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon. The Mason-Dixon line placed the southern boundary of Pennsylvania where it is today. Later its extension westward also settled a boundary dispute with Virginia. Penn became so absorbed in defending himself and his colony in England that he did not return to America until another fifteen years had passed. He reached Pennsylvania again in December, 1699. However, shortly learning that a move was afoot in England to place proprietary colonies (see page 100) under the king, he went home to fight. He never came back. A mixed population. From the time the first settlers arrived in 1681, Pennsylvanians included a variety of Europeans, not just Englishmen. You will remember that long before Penn arrived. Swedes, Finns, and Dutchmen were living along the Delaware. After Pennsylvania's establishment, other non-English settlers began to arrive. In part, no doubt, the newcomers were attracted by the generosity shown dissenting religious groups, of which there were many on the European continent. In part, also, they were attracted by the skillful advertising campaign carried on by Penn throughout western Europe. Among the non-English the Welsh were numerous. They arrived from Wales and settled west of Philadelphia. For a long time they tried to maintain their language. But in the end, as every small group was sooner or later to learn, they could not do so. Their descendants spoke the tongue of their English neighbors. The German Quakers have maintained their identity until the present day. Their Note the number of different groups in Pennsylvania. Discuss the problems and advantages resulting from a variety of peoples. Robert's Old Mill, built in 1683, the first flour mill in Germantown, Pennsylvania. Water running on the waterwheel provided power for grinding the grain. Germantown. In 1683 Pastorius officially established Germantown. Laid out like Philadelphia, a two hours' walk away, it was a fertile area in which its industrious people could find ample reward for their labors. Other German immigrants joined these original arrivals. In the early part of the eighteenth century a second wave of Germans came. These were followed shortly by Scotch Presbyterians who had moved previously from Scotland to Ireland. They are usually known as Scotch-Irish. More than any other colony, Pennsylvania was the symbol of how men and women might systematically remake their lives amid abundance and freedom. Pennsylvania's location and growing opportunities, both cultural and commercial, made it the leading settlement in America. By the middle of the eighteenth century, its greatest citizen, Benjamin Franklin, had become the first American to be known everywhere in the Western world. Fifth, railroads greatly stimulated the building of factories in the North, because goods and markets were brought together. Without railroads factories could not have continued to grow in number and prosper. Newcomers at the "Golden Door" A second major development of the 1840's was increased immigration. As factories multiplied, the poor, the unfortunate, and the adventurous people of Europe were attracted to the North. Two shattering events on the other side of the Atlantic added to the number of immigrants coming to America. Famine in Ireland. The first was the "Great Hunger" in Ireland in 1845, caused by the failure of the Irish potato crop. Reading about the famine and its horrors chills the blood. When disease was added to the misery of the Irish in the spring of 1847, they began a headlong flight to America. An In what section of the country were most of the railroads located in 1850? What cities were railroad terminals? How does the map help explain why New York City doubled its population between 1840 and 1850? Railroads in 1850 Museum of the City of New York Why could America readily absorb large lumbers of immigrants? A large group of Irish immigrants arrive with all their possessions in New York Harbor in 1847. By then oceangoing steamboats were rapidly driving out the sailing vessels —the packets and clippers—which had made the American flag familiar throughout the world. official report from Ireland said, "All with means are emigrating, only the utterly destitute are left behind, and enfeebled la- bourers." In 1847 over 105,000 Irish men and women came to these shores. In 1848 the number was even greater. Settlers in the city. Although the Irish immigrants were almost always farmers, they became city dwellers in the United States. Usually they remained in the American ports where they landed—Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and others—because they did not have the money to go farther and purchase land. They found out that although they lived in slums and worked chiefly with picks and shovels (they helped to build the first railroads), their children would "have it better." Often people harshly and sometimes violently opposed Irish immigration because the Irish were Catholic and because some were paupers. But in a few years the Irish were strengthening the North by working in the factories, building railroads, and have a group of students report on the conditions in Ireland and Germany that gave rise to Emigration. What contributions did the Irish and German immigrants make to American nltuie? Where did Irish and German emigrants go other than to America? helping police and govern the great cities. German refugees. A second event in Europe also pushed to our shores a large number of German immigrants. This was the failure in their homeland of an uprising in 1848 against their king, which had aimed to establish the beginnings of democratic government. The "forty-eighters," as they were often called, included professional men as well as farmers. The German immigrants, having more money than the Irishmen, settled not only in the bigger cities of the East but also on farms throughout the midwestern states. They brought with them a driving ambition for a better way of living and a love of freedom that had been deepened by their personal experiences. Sharpened Sectional Differences The railroads and the immigration, then, were having an important effect on the North. Combined with the reform movements and the beginning of industry. Nine years after the decision of 1877, however, the Supreme Court seemed to change its mind—at least about the railroads. It decided that a state could not regulate a railroad line which ran in more than one state, because such a railroad was engaged in interstate commerce. Under the provisions of the Constitution, only Congress can regulate interstate commerce. Since all important railroads ran in more than one state, the decision meant an end to railroad regulation by the states. The ICC. Congress now took steps. In 1887 it created the Interstate Commerce Commission, a body of five men with the power to regulate railroad rates. For a long time the ICC was not permitted to regulate railroads fully, but the establishment of the commission proved to be a landmark in American history. In the twentieth century regulatory commissions like the ICC would be set up in many other fields. The farmers, therefore, had had a hand in bringing about an important change in American life. They had led the federal government to accept responsibility for maintaining the just treatment of citizens by private enterprise. New Unions Aim to Help Working People Laboring men had problems, too. They, also, were caught up in changes to which they had to adjust. From the start, however, they were in a different position from that of the farmers. Farmers long had had a reputation for being nature's noblemen. Workingmen were scorned, chiefly because they lived in cities, depending closely on others and owning no land. Background Conditions The opportunity to organize did not come easily to unskiUed factory workers. They were increasingly ignored by the skilled workers, who looked down upon them. The unskilled immigrant. One reason was that the unskilled from the 1840's on were usually immigrants, often only recently arrived. Their foreign ways, often made many Americans feel superior. Also, skilled Americans had the feeling that as "master craftsmen" they had earned privileges they did not need to share easily with anybody, particularly newcomers. Newly arrived immigrants were at a disadvantage as workers. Often they had to agree to conditions of employment that were terrible. The men very frequently hoped to send money back to the old country to bring other members of their families here. Consequently, some immigrants seemed more interested in merely having jobs than in the conditions of work. Possibly these circumstances slowed down the growth of labor unions in the 1850's. Local strikes. But some important strikes took place, too. For instance, the shoemakers in Massachusetts called one in order to win higher wages. Among the twenty thousand strikers were many women. The fierceness of this strike and others including a foreign language or accent Review the positions of skilled and unskilled, native and immigrant, organized and unorganized workers. What power did each group have to determine its wages and working conditions? Like die farmers in the Grange, working people found that organizing themselves brought strength. The first championship game in baseball is being played here between the New Yorks and the Knickerbockers at Hoboken, New Jersey, in 1846. This was the beginning of today's Major League baseball. In 1869 the first professional baseball team was formed—the Cincinnati Red Stockings. Seven years later the National League was organized, and the American League was begun in 1900. In time baseball became known as the national pastime, and its stadiums were favorite gathering places for leisure hours. In 1882 John L. Sullivan, "the Boston strong boy," became the first modern heavyweight champion. Professional boxing never approached baseball in popular appeal, but it created a new kind of public hero—the triumphant athlete. Moreover, it often provided a quick rise to fame and riches for children of poor parents. A Refuge for Newcomers A chief source of strength for the cities before 1900 was the immigration from Europe. Between 1820 and 1930 over sixty- two million people left their homes in Europe and went to other continents. About thirty-two million of them came to the United States, bringing various languages, ways of doing things, and outlooks with them. It seems safe to guess that many of the brightest and most ambitious Euro- fl peans were among those who left their native lands. The "old immigration." The newcomers who came to America before the Civil War are today referred to as the old immigration. They came here in the largest numbers in the 1850's, having left homelands chiefly in northern and western Europe— England, France, the Low Countries, Germany, and Scandinavia. Also, a very large group of immigrants arrived from Ireland after the failure of the potato crop there in 1845. Why they came. People came to the United States for many different reasons. #This paragraph provides another opportunity to emphasize that American culture has been enriched by the contributions of many immigrants and for that reason is called plural. Some of these countries had long sent people here; Americans were used to this immigration. these people frequently lived in crowded quarters in cities because they had little money for traveling elsewhere, and much of the desirable land had already been settled anyway. A great many Germans who wanted political freedom—like Carl Schurz, for exam- ple-fled to American shores in 1848 or shortly afterward. For a long time they took pride in being referred to as forty- eighters. Other people came for other reasons, including the scarcity of opportunities to make a living in Europe. Samuel Gompers, who arrived here in 1863, wrote in his autobiography that he had learned as a child to sing joyfully a song entitled "To the West." He said it expressed the feeling of most English wage earners. Gompers also wrote that Andrew Carnegie many years later told him that he, too, had known the song and that it had inspired his own father to come to America. The words go: To the west, to the west, to the land of the free Where mighty Missouri rolls down to the sea; Where a man is a man if he's willing to toil. And the humblest may gather the fruits of the soil. Where children are blessings and he who hath most Has aid for his fortunes and riches to boast. Where the young may exult and the aged may rest. Away, far away, to the land of the west. The "new immigration." The opportunities for personal freedom, better jobs, and better homes continued to attract people to America after the Civil War—and still do. But two changes in immigration occurred after 1880. First, more immigrants than ever came to America (as you see on the graph on page 520). Second, they came from countries of eastern and southern Europe instead of northern and western Europe. Among them were Italians, Greeks, Poles, and Russians (including Jews). The people of the "new immigration" differed greatly in ways and languages from the northern and western Europeans. These differences led to much bad feeling on the part of earlier arrivals living in the new land. Help from city machines. The only people who seemed interested in helping the immigrants were the bosses of the city political machines. These machines were usually corrupt, but they provided the downtrodden newcomers with many badly needed services. A local machine might find jobs for a political party's faithful supporters, take care of hospital bills, or arrange for necessary legal help. To very poor families it might donate turkey baskets at Thanksgiving and supplies of coal during the winter. Sometimes local politicians sponsored boat rides or "June walks" (outings in the park). These offered welcome relief from the summer's heat for young people and older ones alike. The best-known machine was Tweed's Tammany Hall, which controlled New York City. Call attention to the graph: students will especially notice the drop in immigration in the Civil War years, the rise afterward, and the huge drop after 1910--caused by war and immigration legislation. such organizations, it held its power by winning votes through the favors it could distribute. Feelings about the old country. Understandably many immigrants longed for the easy acceptance they had known "back home." This feeling kept alive a certain affection for the old country—a fact that American politicians often kept in mind as they sought support for various foreign policies. Of course, sometimes immigrants were appealed to by politicians who knew they could make themselves popular by attacking the old country. For instance, Irishmen were delighted to hear anti-British talk, for they blamed Britain for their troubles. And after years of persecution in Russia, Jewish voters rejoiced to hear anti- Russian opinions. Politicians were quick to recognize, however, that immigrants were more interested in improving their lot in America than in hearing about their former countries. Comforts and Discomforts Mingled together in every urban community were the exciting advantages of living close to large numbers of other peo- ple—and all the terrible disadvantages. Each city dweller had to decide for himself if the advantages and disadvantages balanced each other. The electric trolleys. A lucky event that made the modern-type city livable, as we have seen (page 478), was the discovery of new uses for electricity. One of the most important of these was to furnish power for trolley cars. After the trolley first appeared in 1887, in Richmond, Virginia, a network of electric wires hung over the streets of every major city. Before the electric trolley car was developed, the usual vehicle for transporting people had been the horse-drawn car—lit by oil at night and dirty, smelly, and somewhat uncertain. Trolleys were such an im- Left: The completed Statue of Liberty, dedicated in 1886 (see page 448), in time thrilled many immigrants arriving in New York Harbor. Below: Which were peak years? Before beginning this section, discuss the meaning of "intolerance." Students are familiar with the idea of religious intolerance, but the intolerance discussed here was not only of different religions but also of other races and other nationalities. Emphasize the word minorities. Fear Leads to a Wave of Intolerance Beneath the playfulness and the exciting novelty of the 1920's, there were some distressing signs, too. One of these was intolerance toward minorities—groups of people whose race, religion, or national background differs from that of the majority of Americans. Immigration Restriction For many years there had been criticism of unrestricted immigration into the United States. Labor unions especially had wanted to cut down on this flow of people. The claims. One claim frequently heard about immigration was that war-tom Europe was about to dump new millions of people onto American shores to be looked after by those here. A second claim was that many recent arrivals were disloyal people who "ought to go back where they came from." Nevertheless, the main reason for the feeling against immigrants was, sadly, intolerance. Those coming to this country continued to be largely from southern and eastern Europe. Many were Jews, to whom some Americans were unfriendly. The time had come, said a Congressman from Minnesota in 1920, to pass "a genuine 100 percent American immigration law." What he meant was a law that would limit the number of new arrivals and favor immigrants from the British Isles and northern Europe. New laws. The laws passed in the 1920's accomplished what the Congressman had wanted. The result was that before the 1920's were over, immigration to America had been severely cut down. In defending this legislation, the president of the United States said in 1923, "America must be kept American." By this he seemed to mean that minorities would not be welcomed. The Ku Klux Klan About the same time, a powerful and dangerous effort arose to keep control of the country in the hands of "native, white, and Protestant" people. A leader in the effort, often violent, was the Ku Klux Klan— a new organization formed in 1915, using the name and methods of the old post Civil War Klan. The Klan was against Negroes, Catholics, and Jews. 