Working Conditions As you might guess, the nineteenth-cen- tury worker had a considerably harder life than today's worker. This was true of almost every phase of his life. First, the worker's wages were low. In order to feed and clothe the family, his wife also worked, for much lower wages. And, at any time after age five, his children might go to work for the lowest possible pay. Factory owners claimed that, if they paid more, the price of their product would have to go up and their competitors would undersell them. They would be ruined. Then what would the worker do? There would be no jobs at all. This same reasoning resulted in long hours, sometimes fourteen or fifteen hours a day. If the work was seasonal, hours were at times even longer, and the work week was seven days in rush periods. Then, for weeks or months, there might be no work at all. During such a slack time, the members of the family lived on what the women and children earned. Or they went into debt. It might be the employer to whom they were in debt. Quite often, after he built his factory or drove his mine shaft, he put up rows of houses for the workers. Built as cheaply as possible, they soon became shabby. Industrial smoke gave them a coat of grime. Rents were kept as high as possible. Then, too, the employer might build a store where the workers must buy food and other necessities. In some cases, wages were paid not in money but in certificates good only at the store. The store was thus another means by which the worker was kept in debt to his employer. In many occupations, the work was dangerous and unhealthful. Safety devices for machines cost money that employers did not care to spend. Workers sometimes lost arms or legs and were even blinded or killed. They might develop tuberculosis in some industries because of working long hours in damp, crowded, and unventilated rooms. When a worker was injured or ill, his wages stopped. His family might go hungry and be dependent upon charity. In addition, few workers could save enough to provide for their old age. Particularly discouraging was the lack of better prospects for the young. Having to go to work at an early age, they obtained little or no schooling. Many could not read or write. Remember the reformers of the Jackson era? They worked for free schools along with better working conditions. By the 1870's, there were many free elementary schools. It is true that academy education was not generally free. Also, comparatively few public high schools had been established. But even a free school could not educate a child properly if he was working fourteen hours a day in a mine or factory. Immigrant Labor. Why did the workers put up with such conditions? Why didn't they move west and take up the free land? Many did. But for all the jobs left vacant, a stream of immigrants poured in from Europe eager to take them over. This was particularly true after 1840. Revolutions in their own country drove thousands of Germans to our shores. Potato blight and crop failure brought the Irish. All through the years prior to the start of World War I. You have learned how Americans spanned the continent. You know how we reached out to gain land and influence abroad. While these great moves were going on, vast changes were also taking place in all parts of the country. Thousands of people were crowding into the cities, creating all sorts of difficult problems. As a nation, we were still carelessly using up our natural resources. Workers and farmers continued to feel that their incomes should be greater. Women were asking for the right to vote. And, in spite of medical progress, diseases still took a great toll of human life. All these problems grew more acute whenever hard times came. This unit discusses some of these changes and problems, and tells how our people met them. Driven by poor economic and/or social conditions in their European homelands, they came to get jobs in the new factories and to take advantage of the other great opportunities America offered. Most of them were young, strong, and eager to work. Many had valuable skills the country needed. This was the time when the grandparents and great-grandparents of many of todays Americans came here. Without their contributions, the rate of progress in America might have been considerably slower. Nevertheless, the arrival of these immigrants necessarily created many problems for our country. The trouble was that no one was ready for such an increase in population. Most American cities were small, with narrow streets and one-family houses. They simply lacked places for the newcomers to live. Nor did they have a big enough water supply or adequate means of removing the increased garbage and waste. Houses had to be built rapidly. Some big old houses were made into apartment houses or tenements. How did the great waves of immigrants increase our city problems, and what was done to solve these problems? Between 1880 and 1920, millions of immigrants (people who come into a country of which they are not natives to live permanently) poured into the United States. United States health officers, aboard an incoming ship, vaccinate immigrants entering the United States at the Port of New York. Immigrants wait with some of their possessions as they prepare to fie ferried to Manhattan Island. People crowded in wherever they could. Many of the immigrants had never lived in a city before. Many also could speak little or no English, and had difficulty understanding American customs. Lonely and afraid, ,y wanted to stay close to people they known in their home country. Some Americans whose families had come in earlier times looked down on the foreigners. They made fun of the way they talked, and called them "greens." The people who came to America about 1885 had a much harder time in ways than those who had arrived. There were, then, three basic reasons for difficulties experienced by the new arrivals: 1. Lack of room. The free land was nearly all gone, and there were few opportunities in farming. (The year 1890 is often designated as marking the end of the land fron- tier.) Most of the new immigrants had to settle in the cities and pay high rents for a little space in old buildings. 2. A strange language. As we have noted, many of the new immigrants came with an uncertain grasp of our language; many, too, found English hard to learn. Past immigra- tions had included mostly people who spoke English or a language enough like it to enable them to learn it easily. 3. Strange customs. Past immigrations had come mostly from Northern and Western European countries such as England, Ireland, France, Germany, and Sweden. Their customs and standards of living were much like those of people already living in the United States. The new immigrants came mostly from Southern and Eastern European countries such as Italy, Poland, and Russia. Their customs were different and it took them longer to learn those of the America they had chosen as their new home. It was easy to take advantage of the newcomers, and some people did so. Many immigrants who came with a fair amount of money were tricked into parting with it shortly after their arrival. Others were hired to work long hours for a few pennies a day. Disease swept through the crowded places where they lived. Bad water, poor food, and lack of sunlight made many of them sick. Fires were another danger. The ugly, dirty, crowded neighborhoods where some of the newcomers lived came to be called slums. Many Natives Inhabit Slums Of course, many people besides the recent immigrants lived in the city slums. These drab areas had developed as our cities grew up around the factories and mines. Large numbers of workers were needed and they moved into crowded neighborhoods near their work. As the areas became more and more shabby, those who could afford to do so moved away and into new and better homes. Workers whose wages were small or those who were poor for such reasons as health had no choice but to stay in the older, run-down areas. Many Negroes, arriving from the rural South, had to live in slums. An interracial social work agency, now named the National Urban League, was formed to advise them and help them find housing and jobs. The Search for Solutions What could be done during the later im- migrations about the slums? How could the newcomers from foreign lands—as well as those who had left farm for city—be helped to improve their homes and their way of life? "It's hopeless," some people said. "That's the way these folks want to live. It's their own fault." Other Americans rejected this attitude. They felt that people in the slums wanted In many cities, thousands of people lived in crowded tenements like these in New York City. They pointed out that the slums were a danger to everyone. Fires and disease that started in crowded tenements often spread to other parts of the city. Criminals who came out of the slums might attack honest citizens anywhere. City tax rates were high partly because the slums made it necessary' to have many policemen and firemen. To these Americans, helping the slum dwellers meant helping the whole nation. Jane Addams of Hull House Among the first who tried to help people in the slums was Jane Addams of Chicago. From the time she was a small child, "Jenny" I longed to help the poor and unfortunate. Her father, an Illinois state senator, was wealthy, and she could have lived an idle, I self-centered life. Instead, she bought a big old house in the middle of Chicago's slums and named it Hull House after a family that had owned it. In 1889, Miss Addams opened the house to the poor, and tried to help them help themselves. For the women, she held classes In sewing, cooking, and baby care. She offered music classes for the children. She red families how to buy wisely. Many young people came to help Miss Addams in her work. Hull House was a proper settlement house. The young people who worked with Miss Addams started settlement houses in other cities. This was the ining of the profession of social service, or social work, which has helped so many rieans in time of need. Jane Addams did much more than settle- ment-house work. She convinced many citizens of Chicago and of the state of Illinois tslum conditions could be improved. She bring about one state law against d labor and another to reduce the number of working hours for women. She worked for better housing and was influential in establishing a separate court to handle young offenders. Settlement houses like Hull House helped thousands of families to better their way of life. Some of America's leading musicians received their first training in settlement- house music classes. Hundreds of babies who might have died from disease or the wrong foods grew up to lie healthy citizens. Youngsters who might have learned crime on the city streets learned instead the joy of handling tools or playing basketball at a nearby settlement house. It was the settlement house, too, that often helped the for- eign-born to learn English and to become citizens. . . . how immigrants become naturalized citizens? An alien, if he is at least eighteen years old, may begin by filing with a naturalization office a declaration that he intends to give up his allegiance to his native land and become a citizen of the United States. This first step is now usually omitted, although some aliens still file such a declaration in order to get certain jobs. Usually, after living in this country at least five years, he files a petition for citizenship with a naturalization court. He is required to appear with two citizens who will testify that he is of good character and will be a loyal American. The applicant is examined to find out whether he speaks English and whether he has a knowledge of the United States Constitution and basic operations of the Government. If the petition is granted, he receives what are called his "first papers." The final step in becoming a citizen is to appear in court, usually a Federal court, before a judge and take the oath of allegiance to the United States. Many judges make this granting of "final papers" an important ceremony. Patriotic and civic groups in the community often join in to do honor to the new citizens. Usually each group of citizens to he naturalized includes both men and women. The process by which women become citizens is today the same as that for men. Before the law was changed in 1922, a married woman's citizenship depended upon that of her husband. . . . about social settlement houses in cities other than Chicago? Today, most American cities have one or more social settlement centers modeled after Hull House in Chicago. One of the most famous is the I lenry Street Settlement in New York City. It was started by a young social worker named Lillian Wald. A trained nurse. Miss Wald tried to improve the health of the people in the slums. Most of them could not afford nursing care The work of Jacob Riis in improving conditions for the poor has been commemorated in a New York City settlement house and a Long Island park, both named in his honor. And they did not want to go to the hospitals. Miss Wald got the idea of spending a few minutes or an hour a day with a person who was ill, and then moving on to another. She would bathe each patient, give him the necessary medicine, and generally try to make him more comfortable. In this way she was able to help many people. Miss Wald found other nurses who were interested in helping her. Out of their efforts came the Visiting Nurses' Service, which enables people who are ill to get some nursing care at home at low cost. You can read Lillian Wald's own story in her autobiography. The House on Henry Street. In 1961, a wealthy man and his wife expressed their gratitude for help given them by the Henry Street Settlement when they were children in the neighborhood. They donated half a million dollars to pay for a new building. The Writings of Jacob Riis Another person who did much to help the slum dwellers was Jacob Riis. As a young man, Riis came to America from Denmark. While getting a start in his new land, he had to live in the slums of New York City. Because he was well-educated, strong, and alert, he did not stay in the slums very long. But he never forgot how people lived there. He became a friend of Theodore Roosevelt and strongly supported governmental efforts to help the poor. Riis wrote articles about the slums for leading newspapers and magazines. Later his writings were collected in several books. The most famous is How the Other Half Lives, published in 1890 but still timely reading today. Riis contended that half of the people, those who were rich or at least fairly comfortable, did not know how people making up the other half, the very poor, lived. Riis invited the reader to imagine he was visiting in a New York tenement. He wrote: Be a little careful, please! The hall is dark and you might stumble over the children pitching pennies back there. Not that it would hurt them; kicks and cuffs are their daily diet. They have little else. Here where the hall turns and dives into utter darkness is a step, and another, another. A flight of stairs. You can feel your way, if you cannot see it. Close? Yes! What would you have? All the fresh air that ever enters these stairs comes from the hall-door that is forever slamming. . . . The sinks are in the hallway. . . . Hear the pump squeak! It is the lullaby of tenement-house babies. Come over here. Step carefully over this baby—it is a baby, in spite of its rags and dirt—under these iron bridges called fire escapes, lint loaded down, despite the incessant watchfulness of the firemen, with broken household goods, with wash tubs and barrels, over which no man could climb from a fire. Pulitzer, an immigrant from Hungary, made influential newspapers of the St. Louis Post- Dispatch and, later, the New York World. Augustus Saint-Gaudens, born in Ireland, became one of America's foremost sculptors. Carl Schurz, a German, became a supporter of Abraham Lincoln. Later he worked against the use of harsh Reconstruction policies toward the South. He worked hard, too, for passage of the Civil Service Act. Besides these four immigrants who helped build America, you have already read about a number of others. There was Albert Gal- latin, the Swiss statesman who was Jefferson's secretary of the treasury. And the German immigrant, John Jacob Astor, whose fur company helped the United States claim Oregon. You recall the colorful John James Audubon, who had a French background, and the superb life-sized pictures in his Birds of America. Another immigrant, John Ericsson of Sweden, you know as the inventor of the Monitor, the ironclad ship that fought the Mirrimac during the War Between the States. Ericsson also developed the successful screw propeller, which became standard equipment on steamships. Then there was Andrew Carnegie, the boy from Scotland who built the steel industry. And Alexander Graham Bell, also born in Scotland, who invented the telephone. There is almost no end to the list of distinguished immigrants who have come to this country in more recent years. In the field of science there was Albert Einstein from Germany, whose mathematical formula laid the basis for atomic research. Italy gave us Enrico Fermi, who worked to produce the atomic bornb. From Russia came Igor Sikorsky, the aircraft designer whose work helped perfect the helicopter. Many of the actors and actresses in our motion pictures and stage plays have come from abroad. Some well-known examples are Marlene Dietrich from Germany, Greta Garbo from Sweden, and Rudolph Valentino from Italy. Russian-born Irving Berlin has written a number of our most popular songs, including "Alexander's Ragtime Band" and "God Bless America." The late distinguished orchestra conductor Serge Koussevitsky also came from Russia. He was known for leading the Boston Symphony Orchestra and for organizing the Berkshire Festival, a famous series of concerts held each summer in Massachusetts. As immigrants entered the United States in larger and larger numbers, many Americans began to ask for rules to keep some of them out. When the railroads were being extended across the nation to the Pacific, thousands of Chinese were brought here to work on building the tracks, tunnels, and railroad bridges. After a particular railroad was finished, the Chinese who had been working on it turned to other industries for jobs, often working for lower wages than American laborers were receiving. Laws Exclude Certain Groups In 1882, during President Chester Alan Arthur's term of office. Congress passed a law forbidding the entrance of Chinese laborers into the country for a ten-year period. This law was renewed and remained the regular policy of the nation until the year 1943. In the same year as this Chinese Exclusion Act, another law was passed to keep out criminals, paupers, and insane persons. Japanese laborers were not excluded by law but by a "Gentleman's Agreement." Under this arrangement, made by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1907, Japan promised not to allow laborers to come to the United States. During the Wilson Administration, a literacy law was added requiring the immigrant to be able to read from thirty to eighty words in some language. President Wilson vetoed this measure because he felt that there might be immigrants of fine character and ability who had never had an opportunity to learn to read. The law was passed, however, over the President's veto. General Controls Follow First War A more general limitation on the number of immigrants was made in the 1920's, after World War I. There was concern to prevent a Hood of immigrants from war-tom Europe. Actually, more than 8(X),(XX) immigrants did arrive on our shores in 1921. Quotas were set up for different nationalities. This meant that only a limited number of people could come from any nation during each year. In 1921, a three-per-cent quota, based upon the number of each nationality living here according to the 1910 census, was established. Three years later, in 1924, the law was changed to admit two per cent of the number from a nation living here according to the census of 1890. The reason for the change was to admit more people from Northern Europe. Both of these quota arrangements were temporary'. But the 1924 law provided for a permanent annual quota of 150,000 immigrants. This was to take effect in 1927, but opposition caused a delay until 1929. The number from each nation was to be based upon the number of people of a given national origin living here in 1920. These quotas did not apply to immigrants from Canada and Latin America. The 1924 law did, however, exclude Orientals. The Japanese, who had kept their promise made in the Gentleman's Agreement of 1907, were furious. They regarded the law as a national insult to Japan and said it would have "grave consequences.' 546 meetings dealing with labor matters. People who knew little else about Madame Secretary recognized her from her pictures, in which the point of her three-cornered hat was always pulled down on her forehead. At President Roosevelt's death in 1945, Harry Truman, the new President, told Miss Perkins he would be happy to have her continue in her position. But she decided to resign. Later she lectured and wrote about her long career. An immigrant boy who became United States senator from New York... Robert F. Wagner, Sr. What was it like to come to America years ago without money and without knowing any English? "It was no fun!" Robert Wagner would have told you. He arrived in New York from Germany when he was only eight. His parents were poor working people. Like other foreigners, they had to learn by experience how to protect themselves from heartless people who took advantage of them. Young "Dutch" Wagner grew up in the slums. He learned to fight for his rights, but he never became cruel or selfish. All his life he tried to help the underprivileged. America, he felt, was rich and great enough to offer everyone a chance to live decently. He hated slums and poverty, and he did his best to get rid of them. The Wagners had great respect for learning. Somehow Robert managed to finish high school and college by studying nights and working days. Then he went to law school. Later he entered politics and served as a judge of the New York State Supreme Court. From there Wagner went to Washington to serve in the United States Senate. He worked closely with Franklin Roosevelt. It was Wagner who introduced the Social Security Act and other proposals to help working people. But he is chiefly remembered for his successful fight for the National Labor Relations Act, or Wagner Act. Harry Truman's background for the presidency was quite different from Roosevelt's. He was born into a middle-class family in Missouri. lie managed the family farm and later a retail clothing store, which failed. He fought in World War I as an artillery captain. After the war, he studied law in night school and went into local politics. In 1934, he was elected to the United States Senate. Truman was still a senator in 1944 when he was chosen to run for Vice-President with Roosevelt. The problem of developing a vaccine for polio was especially hard because of all the varieties of the disease. The Salk Vaccine A young New Yorker, Dr. Jonas Edward Salk, decided to specialize in the study of viruses for polio and influenza. He worked at the University of Michigan and in 1947 became a teacher and researcher at the University of Pittsburgh. There he developed a killed-vims vaccine that, while not entirely satisfactory, seemed promising. It was tested nationally in 1954. The next year, it was given to all school children whose parents signed requests that they be given the injections. Polio was not wiped out, but the results were most hopeful. By 1957, there were eighty per cent fewer cases than before the vaccine program began. Indeed, not one child who had received the recommended three shots of the Salk vaccine had died of polio in all of 1956. Dr. Salk and other researchers continued to work on improving the vaccine. Their success was attested to by the fact that, from 1960 to 1961, cases of paralytic polio dropped by another fifty per cent. The Sabin Vaccine An outstanding new advance in the battle against polio was made in 1961 when a live-virus vaccine was licensed for use against certain types of the disease by the United States Public Health Service. The new vaccine was developed by Dr. Albert B. Sabin, a University of Cincinnati scientist who was born in an area of Russia that is now part of Poland and who came to the United States at the age of fifteen. Dr. Sabin's vaccine was tested extensively abroad. It was also put to the test in the United States in Syracuse, New York (where it was first widely used). Unlike the Salk vaccine, which is injected, the Sabin vaccine is taken orally. Like Dr. Salk, Dr. Sabin carried on his research with financial help from The National Foundation, which was founded at Franklin Roosevelt's request and which uses the March of Dimes as a means of raising funds. They also tried to get machinery, guns, ammunition, and other supplies into these ports for the use of the Confederacy. The raiders, like the famous Alabama, did extensive damage to Northern shipping. When the war ended, the United States claimed that Great Britain should pay for this damage. By a treaty signed in Washington in 1871, Great Britain agreed to settle the Alabama claims by arbitration, or the decision of a third party. Italy, Brazil, and Switzerland, nations not involved in the controversy, served on the arbitration board, which finally awarded the United States $15.5 million in damages. After the War Between the States, relations between Canada and the United States continued to be rather strained. However, there were no troops along the border or warships on the Great Lakes. In the agreements beginning with the Rush-Bagot Agreement of 1817, the parties arranged to "demilitarize" the border and to forbid armed ships on the lakes. For thousands of miles, the boundary between the two big countries was left without guards or fortifications. This showed that basically the two nations trusted each other. The Fenian Raids. However, at times there was plenty of excitement on the border. After 1849, large numbers of Irish came to the United States. They had strong feelings against England and longed to see Ireland freed from English rule. Some of them fought in Northern armies during the War Between the States. In 1866 and again in 1870, the Fenians, a secret Irish brotherhood organized in the 1850's, launched "in- vasions" of Canada from New York State, believing that, if they could start a war between England and the United States, it might lead to the freeing of Ireland. Although the "Fenian raids" were carried on by no more than a few hundred men and never posed a serious threat to Canada, many Canadians were frightened. Most of them were angry at the United States for permitting such acts. Conflict Over Atlantic Fisheries. There were further causes of trouble. By the Treaty of Paris, signed in 1783 at the end of the American Revolution, Americans had the right to fish on the Grand Banks, the great Atlantic fishing grounds in eastern Canada near Newfoundland. They also had the right to dry and cure the fish along uninhabited Canadian shores. Canadian fishermen did not like this. Sometimes there were fights, especially if American fishermen fished near the shore in what Canada claimed as her territorial waters. The conflict over the fisheries led to threats of war between the two nations in the 1880 s. Treaties were made, then canceled or revised. Finally, in 1912, a treaty compromised the major points of disagreement. It also set up a commission to settle future disputes. Now that we have floating canneries and fishing ships that can travel long distances, the two countries will probably need to draw. Bering Sea Fisheries Dispute. Another clash with Canada and Great Britain grew out of our attempt to protect the seal herds in the Bering Sea. Canadian and some other sealing ships were taking so many female seals that they soon would have been entirely wiped out. The United States' protests against the slaughter were ignored. Then, in the year 1886, we began to seize Canadian seal-fishing vessels engaged in pelagic sealing, which means shooting seals as they float or swam in the water. In this type of sealing many seals were never recovered from the sea. When we seized the War I, the Japanese leaders had made up their minds on the necessity of war with the United States. Our Anti-Japanese Policies. The immigration policy of the United States also made Japan angry'. The population of Japan was growing rapidly. Thousands of Japanese left their native land every year because Japan's little farms could not support them. Farm and industrial workers alike were eager to come to the United States. But we did not welcome them. The Japanese had learned to live so cheaply that Americans feared they could not compete with them in either the farm or the industrial labor market. Many Japanese settled in California. Bad feeling against the Japanese there grew rapidly. In 1906, the Sail Francisco Board of Education ruled that all Oriental pupils (that is, children born in China, Japan, or other Eastern Asiatic lands) must go to a special school set aside for them. The Japanese took this as a deep insult, but their leaders at home wanted to avoid trouble. Worried that Congress would pass a law forbidding any Japanese to come to the United States, they hastened to make an arrangement with President Theodore Roosevelt to "save face." You read about this Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907-1908 in Unit 9. It provided that Japan would not issue passports to laborers to come to the United States. The San Francisco school board canceled its order, and the matter seemed settled. Japan kept her word and issued no passports to laborers who wanted to come to America. But some Americans were not satisfied. They wanted to make sure no more Japanese could come here. In 1924, they persuaded Congress to write into the immigration law a section forbidding Japanese to enter the United States except for short periods of study or travel. This was part of the general law excluding Asiatics and was a terrible blow to Japanese pride. It made them more determined than ever to fight the United States. One Japanese admiral is said to have boasted that he would ride a white horse down Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, D. C., and dictate peace terms in the White House! Revolution Brings Dictatorship to Russia Moderates Replace Czar. What was happening in Russia while dictators were taking control in Italy, Germany, and Japan? Russia, too, had become a dictatorship. You recall that during World War I the Government of the Russian czar, or emperor, practically collapsed, and that, following a revolution in March, 1917, a group of moderate leaders set up a democratic government. Unfortunately, most of the Russian people were very poor, lacked education, and had had no experience in governing themselves. They were sick of the war, in which the Germans defeated Russian armies time after time. Realizing all this. Communist agents worked hard to stir up distrust of the men who were trying to build a new government. Tire Germans, desiring Russia out of the war, made an agreement with the Russian Communist leader, Lenin, who was living in Switzerland. The Germans agreed to smuggle Lenin into Russia; in return, he agreed to make peace as soon as he and his friends got control. Soon Lenin was speeding across Central Europe to Russia, hidden in a sealed railway car. Communists Overthrow Moderate Government. Lenin succeeded in starting a second revolution in Russia in November, 1917. Driving out the moderates, the Communist clues about conditions in space and about the surface of the moon. The earliest moon probes were made by the USSH in 1959 when their Lunik II hit the moon and Lunik III photographed the far side. The first clear photographs were made by our Ranger 7 in 1964. However, a big breakthrough came in 1966, when both the USSR and the USA succeeded in making "soft landings" of cameras and instruments on the moon, indicating the know-how and providing the data preparatory for the landing of the first man. The nation that triumphs in this race will gain enormous prestige, scientific knowledge, and military advantage. Many people credited Russia's early success in space exploration largely to the emphasis they put on scientific education. Russian boys and girls who show outstanding ability must study very hard. They learn a great deal of mathematics and science in elementary school and high school. Perhaps American scientific progress has lagged because a better quality of instruction has been needed in some schools. Public opinion became much more critical of American schools after the Russians launched their Sputniks. National Defense Education Act, The Federal Government acted by appropriating many millions of dollars to help students obtain a college education, making special provisions, for example, for war orphans. In September, 1958, the National Defense Education Act was passed, providing the states with money to help improve instruction in several fields, including mathematics, science, and foreign languages. The Act was later expanded to include history, geography, civics, English, reading, and economics. Still the overcrowded schools needed more money, equipment, and teachers. President Lyndon Johnson's administration worked hard to gain passage for its big program of Federal aid to education. In 1965 Congress passed the Elementary' and Secondary Education Act, which granted over $1 billion to elementary and secondary' schools in 1966. It also passed a $2.3 billion three-year program for higher education, including scholarships for college students who need them. The Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 was expanded to include Federal aid for adult basic education, youth corps camps, and job retraining. Discrimination Against Negroes One hundred years after the end of the Civil War, most Negroes were far from having achieved equality in educational op- portunity', housing, health services, the use of public accommodations, jobs, voting, or legal protection and rights. In 1963, over 200,000 people joined a "March on Washington," organized by Bayard Rustin, in support of President Kennedy's proposal that Congress pass a major civil rights bill. The March called the nation's attention to the great need of insuring equal rights for all people. At right is A. Philip Randolph, director of the March. Next to him is Roy Wilkins, Executive Secretary of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. The Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., is seventh from the right. The most serious and open discrimination has been in the South. The lynching era passed, but "Jim Crow" segregation by law and terror continued, supported by the Ku Klux Klan, which was revived during World War I. In the cities of the North, to which there has been mass Negro migration, the Negro has been the lowest paid and the "last hired, first fired." He has been compelled to live in overpriced, overcrowded, substandard housing. Moves Toward Negro Rights. Improvements in the status of the Negro have resulted from the work of individual citizens and of numerous civic and social organizations representing all races. Work of Negro Leaders. Much of the progress has come from the work of outstanding Negro leaders. Mary McLeod Bethune, founder in 1904 of Betlmne-Cook- man College in Daytona Beach, Florida, directed Negro affairs in the National Youth Administration of the New Deal period. Thurgood Marshall, formerly a United States circuit court judge and now Solicitor General of the United States Department of Justice, and Roy Wilkins, executive secretary of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, have led in the struggle for legal rights for Negroes. Robert C. Weaver, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and Carl Rowan, formerly ambassador to Finland and director of the United States Information Agency, have achieved leadership roles in government. The Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. has led a nonviolent campaign for civil rights, which included a Negro boycott of buses in Birmingham, Alabama, to enforce bus desegregation. For his efforts Reverend King was awarded the 1964 international Nobel Peace Prize. In August 1965, he led marchers, including white clergymen and civil rights sympathizers from all over the country, from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama, to protest the denial of voting rights for Negroes. President Johnson federalized the Alabama national guard and ordered 4,000 regular troops to Alabama to protect Reverend King's marchers. In connection with the murder of one of these civil rights workers, President Johnson announced that the FBI had implicated the Ku Klux Klan. He promised legislation to bring Klan activities under control of the law. Young Negro students, too, have been courageous leaders in their communities, withstanding jeers and threats of violence to attend school. James Meredith, who enrolled in the University of Mississippi in 1962 under the protection of Federal troops, became the first Negro to be graduated from that university. In 1966 he was wounded while on a march through Mississippi to encourage Negro voting. Other Negroes continued his "march against fear," registering voters as they went. Civil Rights Organizations Help. Many organizations have worked for Negro rights, including the National Urban League, the Southern Regional Council, and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), all founded ox er fifty years ago. More recently, the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) have gained national prominence. Desegregation, ordered by legal action, has been tested by boycotts, demonstrations, "freedom riders," and "sit-ins" in eating places, on construction sites, and in other places of public accommodation. This action Young people of various races, creeds, and backgrounds benefit from educational opportunities. Volunteer groups and individuals of all races and creeds, including clergymen and students, have continued to conduct drives to encourage Negroes to register and vote. Civil Rights Action by Government The principle of equal rights has long been advanced by government. Many states have taken measures to end discrimination, and the Federal government has taken steps to bring about equality for all citizens. Supreme Court Rulings. For example, the Supreme Court in 1915 outlawed the "grand- father clauses" used by Southern states to keep Negroes from voting. (Only pre-Civil War voters or their own sons or grandsons had been able to vote.) In 1944, the Court ordered the end to "white primaries," in which Negroes had been barred from nominating candidates for office in states where one party almost always won. One of the most important Supreme Court decisions was handed down in 1954, in Brown os the Board of Education of Topeka. The Brown decision declared separate schools for white and Negro students unconstitutional, overturning an earlier ruling. The justices, speaking unanimously, ruled further that although the change from segregated to integrated schools need not be accomplished overnight, it should be done "with all deliberate speed." However, in the ten years following the Supreme Court Decision, fewer than ten percent of the Negro students attended public elementary and high schools with white students in the Southern and border states. Northern communities, too, were faced with school-integration problems, often caused by the existence of segregated neighborhoods. Executive Orders. Negro rights have been promoted by executive order, too. Franklin D. Roosevelt, in 1941, created the Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC). Presidents since Roosevelt have issued executive orders to eliminate racial injustice: President Truman's with respect to the armed services (see page 669), President Kennedy's with respect to housing. President Kennedy and President Johnson made passage of a comprehensive civil rights law a primary goal of their legislative programs. Congressional Action. Congress has passed many laws to insure racial justice. One outstanding example is the establishment of the United States Commission on Civil Rights, in 1957. The Commission was formed to make investigations and studies related to certain aspects of civil rights throughout the nation. Laws pertaining to voting rights were passed in 1960. A voting rights law passed in 1965 removed literacy and character tests in areas where voting problems existed (where less than fifty per cent of the voting-age population had voted in November, 1964). It provided for Federal registrars to enforce the Fifteenth Amendment's guarantee of the right to vote, and for legal action against any poll tax. In 1964, a Civil Rights Act was passed after more than a year of debate and after an eighty-seven-day Southern filibuster ending with a vote (if cloture. This law gives to Negroes strong legal protection against discrimination in the fields of education, public accommodations, employment, and voting rights. New civil rights legislation introduced in 1966 aimed at removing housing restrictions, among its goals toward full equality. Three trends have marked our recent immigration policies. We continue to admit refugees above the annual quota, or number allowed by law. Also, we take measures to exclude people belonging to such groups as Communist or Fascist organizations. Finally, there has been a change toward a more liberal policy concerning formerly less-favored nationalities. Several hundred thousands of displaced persons have entered the United States since World War II. Although the numbers from a nation are charged against that nation's future quotas, the admission often relieves a hardship at a specific time. Anti-Subversive Measures The ndes to keep out persons whom we call subversives, meaning those who might try to overthrow our Government, followed the discovery of several plots against our nation. Spies were caught and convicted of selling secrets to Soviet agents. The McCar- ran Internal Security Act of 1950 said that anyone who had belonged to any totalitarian (chiefly Fascist and Communist) organization would be barred from entering the United States. Later the law was changed to admit those who might have been compelled to join, perhaps when they were under sixteen years of age. The 1952 McCarran-Walter Act incorporated these rules against possible subversives. It went further and made it possible to deport anyone who had been a Communist Party member, even after he had become a citizen. Such restrictions were criticized by many. Bar Against Orientals Dropped One liberalizing feature of the 1952 Mc- Carran-Walter Act was the dropping of the bar against orientals, who are now admitted on the quota system. Residence Restrictions Ended In 1964 the Supreme Court declared unconstitutional the law that had denied naturalized citizens the right to live abroad as long as they wished without losing American citizenship. Immigration Law of 1965 In 1965 Congress passed a law that abolished the forty-one year old National Origins system, which had favored immigration from Northern Europe. As of June 30, 1968, the quota is set at 170,000 immigrants from outside the Western Hemisphere, with a limit of 20,000 from each country. Preference is given refugees, professionals, relatives of American citizens, and skilled persons needed in the economy. Immigration from this Hemisphere is set at 120,000 with no limit for individual countries. Not all the anti-subversive measures applied to immigrants. Most immigrants have made fine records in the United States. To name only a few, Charles Steinmetz, Enrico Fermi, and Vladimir Zworykin had distinguished careers in science, Walter Damrosch and Gian-Carlo Menotti contributed significantly to our musical heritage. It was clear that to single out immigrants as dangerous subversives was unfair. An act of Congress in 1940 made it illegal for anyone to join a group teaching the overthrow of our Government. During President Truman's term of office, eleven members of the American Communist Party were convicted under this law, known as the Smith Act. The Supreme Court, in 1951, declared the law to be constitutional. The McCarran Internal Security Act of 1950 was not limited to provisions regarding immigrants. One of its terms required a "Communist-action organization" in this country to register with the Government, list its members, and make a statement of its finances. In June, 1961, the Supreme Court upheld this part of the law as legal. The Communist Party was ordered to register within six months. It refused, and in 1962 was convicted and fined. Two "Years" to remember . . . the International Geophysical Year and the World Refugee Year. The first, known as IGY, began July 1, 1957; the second, July 1, 1959. During the eighteen months of IGY, scientists from all over the world exchanged information and worked to learn more about the oceans, about Antarctica, and about many phases of biology, medicine, and other sciences. The World Refugee Year focused on the problems of the fifteen million people who have no real homes but live in makeshift villages and camps. The United Nations General Assembly approved the World Refugee Year. President Eisenhower proclaimed its observance in the United States. In 1952, the Puerto Ricans voted to adopt a new constitution, already approved by the United States Congress. Puerto Rico became a commonwealth, almost completely self-governing in her local affairs. Puerto Ricans continued to be United States citizens with their own legislature and system of taxation. They use the same currency we do and need no passport to travel to the United States mainland. Puerto Rico has an elective governor with powers similar to those of the governors of the fifty states. Every four years the voters choose a resident commissioner, who represents Puerto Rico in our House of Representatives. He may join in debate but has no vote. Puerto Ricans, who are exempted from Federal taxes, do not vote for the President of the United States except through eligible residents living here. Puerto Rico progressed rapidly after World War II. Her famous "Operation Bootstrap" included a program of hydroelectric development. 